{"id": "18456", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18456", "title": "Literacy", "text": "Literacy\n\nLiteracy is traditionally defined by dictionaries as the ability to read and write, although broader interpretations insist that any particular instance of reading and writing is always taking place in a specific context, as the proliferation of concepts like \"conventional or basic literacy, functional literacy, digital literacy, media literacy, legal literacy, computer literacy, medical literacy and information literacy\" suggest. The general consensus among researchers that literacy always includes social and cultural elements is reflected by UNESCO's inclusion of numbers, images, digital media, cultural consciousness, and other means of understanding, communicating, gaining useful knowledge, problem-solving, and using the dominant symbol systems of a culture in its definition of literacy. The concept of literacy is expanding across OECD countries to include skills to access knowledge through technology and ability to assess complex contexts. \n\nThe key to literacy is reading development, a progression of skills which begins with the ability to understand spoken words and decode written words, and which culminates in the deep understanding of text. Reading development involves a range of complex language-underpinnings including awareness of speech sounds (phonology), spelling patterns (orthography), word meaning (semantics), grammar, (syntax) and patterns of word formation (morphology), all of which provide a necessary platform for reading fluency and comprehension.\n\nOnce these skills are acquired, a reader can attain full language literacy, which includes the abilities to apply to printed material critical analysis, inference and synthesis; to write with accuracy and coherence; and to use information and insights from text as the basis for informed decisions and creative thought. The inability to do so is called \"illiteracy\" or \"analphabetism\".\n\nExperts at a UNESCO meeting have proposed defining literacy as the \"ability to identify, understand, interpret, create, communicate and compute, using printed and written materials associated with varying contexts\". The experts note: \"Literacy involves a continuum of learning in enabling individuals to achieve their goals, to develop their knowledge and potential, and to participate fully in their community and wider society\".\n\nLiteracy emerged with the development of numeracy and computational devices as early as 8000 BCE. Script developed independently at least five times in human history Mesopotamia, Egypt, the Indus civilization, lowland Mesoamerica, and China.\nThe earliest forms of written communication originated in Sumer, located in southern Mesopotamia about 3500-3000 BCE. During this era, literacy was \"a largely functional matter, propelled by the need to manage the new quantities of information and the new type of governance created by trade and large scale production\". Writing systems in Mesopotamia first emerged from a recording system in which people used impressed token markings to manage trade and agricultural production. The token system served as a precursor to early cuneiform writing once people began recording information on clay tablets. Proto-cuneiform texts exhibit not only numerical signs, but also ideograms depicting objects being counted.\n\nEgyptian hieroglyphs emerged from 3300-3100 BCE and depicted royal iconography that emphasized power amongst other elites. The Egyptian hieroglyphic writing system was the first notation system to have phonetic values.\n\nWriting in lowland Mesoamerica was first put into practice by the Olmec and Zapotec civilizations in 900-400 BCE. These civilizations used glyphic writing and bar-and-dot numerical notation systems for purposes related to royal iconography and calendar systems.\n\nThe earliest written notations in China date back to the Shang Dynasty in 1200 BCE. These systematic notations were found inscribed on bones and recorded sacrifices made, tributes received, and animals hunted, which were activities of the elite. These oracle-bone inscriptions were the early ancestors of modern Chinese script and contained logosyllabic script and numerals.\n\nIndus script is largely pictorial and has not been deciphered yet. It may or may not include abstract signs. It is thought that they wrote from right to left and that the script is thought to be logographic. Because it has not been deciphered, linguists disagree on whether it is a complete and independent writing system; however, it is genuinely thought to be an independent writing system that emerged in the Harappa culture.\n\nThese examples indicate that early acts of literacy were closely tied to power and chiefly used for management practices, and probably less than 1% of the population was literate, as it was confined to a very small ruling elite.\n\nAccording to social anthropologist Jack Goody, there are two interpretations that regard the origin of the alphabet. Many classical scholars, such as historian Ignace Gelb, credit the Ancient Greeks for creating the first alphabetic system (c. 750 BCE) that used distinctive signs for consonants and vowels. But Goody contests, \"The importance of Greek culture of the subsequent history of Western Europe has led to an over-emphasis, by classicists and others, on the addition of specific vowel signs to the set of consonantal ones that had been developed earlier in Western Asia\".\n\nThus, many scholars argue that the ancient Semitic-speaking peoples of northern Canaan (modern-day Syria) invented the consonantal alphabet as early as 1500 BCE. Much of this theory's development is credited to English archeologist Flinders Petrie, who, in 1905, came across a series of Canaanite inscriptions located in the turquoise mines of Serabit el-Khadem. Ten years later, English Egyptologist Alan Gardiner reasoned that these letters contain an alphabet, as well as references to the Canaanite goddess Asherah. In 1948, William F. Albright deciphered the text using additional evidence that had been discovered subsequent to Goody's findings. This included a series of inscriptions from Ugarit, discovered in 1929 by French archaeologist Claude F. A. Schaeffer. Some of these inscriptions were mythological texts (written in an early Canaanite dialect) that consisted of a 32-letter cuneiform consonantal alphabet.\n\nAnother significant discovery was made in 1953 when three arrowheads were uncovered, each containing identical Canaanite inscriptions from twelfth century BCE. According to Frank Moore Cross, these inscriptions consisted of alphabetic signs that originated during the transitional development from pictographic script to a linear alphabet. Moreover, he asserts, \"These inscriptions also provided clues to extend the decipherment of earlier and later alphabetic texts\".\n\nThe consonantal system of the Canaanite script inspired alphabetical developments in subsequent systems. During the Late Bronze Age, successor alphabets appeared throughout the Mediterranean region and were employed for Phoenician, Hebrew and Aramaic.\n\nAccording to Goody, these cuneiform scripts may have influenced the development of the Greek alphabet several centuries later. Historically, the Greeks contended that their writing system was modeled after the Phoenicians. However, many Semitic scholars now believe that Ancient Greek is more consistent with an early form Canaanite that was used c. 1100 BCE. While the earliest Greek inscriptions are dated c. eighth century BCE, epigraphical comparisons to Proto-Canaanite suggest that the Greeks may have adopted the consonantal alphabet as early as 1100 BCE, and later \"added in five characters to represent vowels\".\n\nPhoenician, which is considered to contain the first \"linear alphabet\", rapidly spread to the Mediterranean port cities in northern Canaan. Some archeologists believe that Phoenician scripture had some influence on the developments of the Hebrew and Aramaic alphabets based on the fact that these languages evolved during the same time period, share similar features, and are commonly categorized into the same language group.\n\nWhen the Israelites migrated to Canaan between 1200 and 1001 BCE, they also adopted a variation of the Canaanite alphabet. Baruch ben Neriah, Jeremiah's scribe, used this alphabet to create the later scripts of the Old Testament. The early Hebrew alphabet was prominent in the Mediterranean region until Chaldean Babylonian rulers exiled the Jews to Babylon in the sixth century BCE. It was then that the new script (\"Square Hebrew\") emerged and the older one rapidly died out.\n\nThe Aramaic alphabet also emerged sometime between 1200 and 1000 BCE. As the Bronze Age collapsed, the Aramaeans moved into Canaan and Phoenician territories and adopted their scripts. Although early evidence of this writing is scarce, archeologists have uncovered a wide range of later Aramaic texts, written as early as the seventh century BCE. Due to its longevity and prevalence in the region, Achaemenid rulers would come to adopt it as a \"diplomatic language\". The modern Aramaic alphabet rapidly spread east to the Kingdom of Nabataea, then to Sinai and the Arabian Peninsula, eventually making its way to Africa. Aramaean merchants carried older variations of Aramaic as far as India, where it later influenced the development of the Brahmi script. It also led to the developments of Arabic and Pahlavi (an Iranian adaptation), \"as well as for a range of alphabets used by early Turkish and Mongol tribes in Siberia, Mongolia and Turkestan\". Literacy at this period spread with the merchant classes and may have grown to number 15-20% of the total population.\n\nThe Aramaic language declined with the spread of Islam, which was accompanied by the spread of Arabic.\n\nUntil recently it was thought that the majority of people were illiterate in ancient times. However, recent work challenges this perception. Anthony DiRenzo asserts that Roman society was \"a civilization based on the book and the register\", and \"no one, either free or slave, could afford to be illiterate\". Similarly Dupont points out, \"The written word was all around them, in both public and private life: laws, calendars, regulations at shrines, and funeral epitaphs were engraved in stone or bronze. The Republic amassed huge archives of reports on every aspect of public life\". The imperial civilian administration produced masses of documentation used in judicial, fiscal and administrative matters as did the municipalities. The army kept extensive records relating to supply and duty rosters and submitted reports. Merchants, shippers, and landowners (and their personal staffs) especially of the larger enterprises must have been literate.\n\nIn the late fourth century the Desert Father Pachomius would expect literacy of a candidate for admission to his monasteries:\nthey shall give him twenty Psalms or two of the Apostles' epistles or some other part of Scripture. And if he is illiterate he shall go at the first, third and sixth hours to someone who can teach and has been appointed for him. He shall stand before him and learn very studiously and with all gratitude. The fundamentals of a syllable, the verbs and nouns shall all be written for him and even if he does not want to he shall be compelled to read.\n\nIn the course of the 4th and 5th century the Churches made efforts to ensure a better clergy in particular among the bishops who were expected to have a classical education, which was the hallmark of a socially acceptable person in higher society (and possession of which allayed the fears of the pagan elite that their cultural inheritance would be destroyed). Even after the remnants of the Western Roman Empire fell in the 470s literacy continued to be a distinguishing mark of the elite as communications skills were still important in political and Church life (bishops were largely drawn from the senatorial class) in a new cultural synthesis that made \"Christianity the Roman religion,\". However, these skills were less needed than previously in the absence of the large imperial administrative apparatus whose middle and top echelons the elite had dominated as if by right. Even so, in pre-modern times it is unlikely that literacy was found in more than about 30-40% of the population. The highest percentage of literacy during the Dark Ages was among the clergy and monks who supplied much of the staff needed to administer the states of western Europe.\n\nPost-Antiquity illiteracy was made much worse by the lack of a suitable writing medium. When the Western Roman Empire collapsed, the import of papyrus to Europe ceased. Since papyrus perishes easily and does not last well in the wetter European climate, parchment was used, which was expensive and accessible only by the Church and the wealthy. Paper was introduced into Europe in Spain in the 11th century. Its use spread north slowly over the next four centuries. Literacy saw a resurgence as a result, and by the 15th century paper had largely replaced parchment except for luxury manuscripts.\n\nThe Reformation stressed the importance of literacy and being able to read the Bible. The Protestant countries were the first to attain full literacy; Scandinavian countries were fully literate in the early 17th century. The Church demanded literacy as the pre-requisite for marriage in Sweden, further propagating full literacy.\n\nLiteracy data published by UNESCO displays that since 1950, the adult literacy rate at the world level has increased by 5 percentage points every decade on average, from 55.7 per cent in 1950 to 86.2 per cent in 2015. However, for four decades, the population growth was so rapid that the number of illiterate adults kept increasing, rising from 700 million in 1950 to 878 million in 1990. Since then, the number has fallen markedly to 745 million in 2015, although it remains higher than in 1950 despite decades of universal education policies, literacy interventions and the spread of print material and information and communications technology (ICT). However, these trends have been far from uniform across regions.\n\nAvailable global data indicates significant variations in literacy rates between world regions. North America, Europe, West Asia, and Central Asia have achieved almost full adult literacy (individuals at or over the age of 15) for both men and women. Most countries in East Asia and the Pacific, as well as Latin America and the Caribbean, are above a 90% literacy rate for adults. Illiteracy persists to a greater extent in other regions: 2013 UNESCO Institute for Statistics (UIS) data indicates adult literacy rates of only 67.55% in South Asia and North Africa, 59.76% in Sub-Saharan Africa.\n\nIn much of the world, high youth literacy rates suggest that illiteracy will become less and less common as younger generations with higher educational attainment levels replace older ones. However, in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia, where the vast majority of the world's illiterate youth live, lower school enrollment implies that illiteracy will persist to a greater degree. According to 2013 UIS data, the youth literacy rate (individuals ages 15 to 24) is 84.03% in South Asia and North Africa, and 70.06% in Sub-Saharan Africa.\n\nThat being said, literacy has rapidly spread in several regions in the last twenty-five years (see image).\n\nAccording to 2015 UIS data collected by the UNESCO Institute for Statistics, about two-thirds (63%) of the world's illiterate adults are women. This disparity was even starker in previous decades: from 1970 to 2000, the global gender gap in literacy would decrease by roughly 50%. In recent years, however, this progress has stagnated, with the remaining gender gap holding almost constant over the last two decades. In general, the gender gap in literacy is not as pronounced as the regional gap; that is, differences between countries in overall literacy are often larger than gender differences within countries. However, the gap between men and women would narrow from 1990 onwards, after the increase of male adult literacy rates at 80 per cent (see image).\n\nSub-Saharan Africa, the region with the lowest overall literacy rates, also features the widest gender gap: just 52% of adult females are literate, and 68% among adult men. Similar gender disparity persists in two other regions, North Africa (86% adult male literacy, 70% adult female literacy) and South Asia (77% adult male literacy, 58% adult female literacy).\n\nThe 1990 World Conference on Education for All, held in Jomtien, Thailand, would bring attention to the literacy gender gap and prompt many developing countries to prioritize women's literacy.\n\nIn many contexts, female illiteracy co-exists with other aspects of gender inequality. Martha Nussbaum suggests illiterate women are more vulnerable to becoming trapped in an abusive marriage, given that illiteracy limits their employment opportunities and worsens their intra-household bargaining position. Moreover, Nussbaum links literacy to the potential for women to effectively communicate and collaborate with one another in order \"to participate in a larger movement for political change.\"\n\nSocial barriers prevent expanding literacy skills among women and girls. Making literacy classes available can be ineffective when it conflicts with the use of the valuable limited time of women and girls. School age girls, in many contexts, face stronger expectations than their male counterparts to perform household work and care after younger siblings. Generational dynamics can also perpetuate these disparities: illiterate parents may not readily appreciate the value of literacy for their daughters, particularly in traditional, rural societies with expectations that girls will remain at home.\n\nA 2015 World Bank and the International Center for Research on Women review of academic literature would conclude that child marriage, which predominantly impacts girls, tends to reduce literacy levels. A 2008 analysis of the issue in Bangladesh found that for every additional year of delay in a girl's marriage, her likelihood of literacy would increase by 5.6 percent. Similarly, a 2014 study found that in sub-Saharan Africa, marrying early would significantly decrease a girl's probability of literacy, holding other variables constant. A 2015 review of the child marriage literature therefore would recommend marriage postponement as part of a strategy to increase educational attainment levels, including female literacy in particular.\n\nWhile women and girls comprise the majority of the global illiterate population, in many developed countries a literacy gender gap exists in the opposite direction. Data from the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) has consistently indicated the literacy underachievement of boys within member countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). In view of such findings, many education specialists have recommended changes in classroom practices to better accommodate boys' learning styles, and to remove any gender stereotypes that may create a perception of reading and writing as feminine activities.\n\nMany policy analysts consider literacy rates as a crucial measure of the value of a region's human capital. For example, literate people can be more easily trained than illiterate people, and generally have a higher socioeconomic status; thus they enjoy better health and employment prospects. The international community has come to consider literacy as a key facilitator and goal of development. In regard to the Sustainable Development Goals adopted by the UN in 2015, the UNESCO Institute for Lifelong Learning has declared the \"central role of literacy in responding to sustainable development challenges such as health, social equality, economic empowerment and environmental sustainability.\" A majority of prisoners have been found to be illiterate: In Edinburgh prison, winner of the 2010 Libraries Change Lives Award, \"the library has become the cornerstone of the prison's literacy strategy\" and thus recidivism and reoffending can be reduced, and incarcerated persons can work toward attaining higher socioconomic status once released.\n\nIlliterate people are generally less knowledgeable about hygiene and nutritional practices, an unawareness which can exacerbate a wide range of health issues. Within developing countries in particular, literacy rates also have implications for child mortality; in these contexts, children of literate mothers are 50% more likely to live past age 5 than children of illiterate mothers. Public health research has thus increasingly concerned itself with the potential for literacy skills to allow women to more successfully access health care systems, and thereby facilitate gains in child health.\n\nFor example, a 2014 descriptive research survey project correlates literacy levels with the socioeconomic status of women in Oyo State, Nigeria. The study claims that developing literacy in this area will bring \"economic empowerment and will encourage rural women to practice hygiene, which will in turn lead to the reduction of birth and death rates.\"\n\nLiteracy can increase job opportunities and access to higher education. In 2009, the National Adult Literacy agency (NALA) in Ireland commissioned a cost benefit analysis of adult literacy training. This concluded that there were economic gains for the individuals, the companies they worked for, and the Exchequer, as well as the economy and the country as a whole—for example, increased GDP. Korotayev and coauthors have revealed a rather significant correlation between the level of literacy in the early 19th century and successful modernization and economic breakthroughs in the late 20th century, as \"literate people could be characterized by a greater innovative-activity level, which provides opportunities for modernization, development, and economic growth\".\n\nWhile informal learning within the home can play an important role in literacy development, gains in childhood literacy often occur in primary school settings. Continuing the global expansion of public education is thus a frequent focus of literacy advocates. These kinds of broad improvements in education often require centralized efforts undertaken by national governments; alternatively, local literacy projects implemented by NGOs can play an important role, particularly in rural contexts.\n\nFunding for both youth and adult literacy programs often comes from large international development organizations. USAID, for example, steered donors like the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and the Global Partnership for Education toward the issue of childhood literacy by developing the Early Grade Reading Assessment. Advocacy groups like the National Institute of Adult Continuing Education have frequently called upon international organizations such as UNESCO, the International Labour Organization, the World Health Organization, and the World Bank to prioritize support for adult women's literacy. Efforts to increase adult literacy often encompass other development priorities as well; for example, initiatives in Ethiopia, Morocco, and India have combined adult literacy programs with vocational skills trainings in order to encourage enrollment and address the complex needs of women and other marginalized groups who lack economic opportunity.\n\nIn 2013, the UNESCO Institute for Lifelong Learning published a set of case studies on programs that successfully improved female literacy rates. The report features countries from a variety of regions and of differing income levels, reflecting the general global consensus on \"the need to empower women through the acquisition of literacy skills.\" Part of the impetus for UNESCO's focus on literacy is a broader effort to respond to globalization and \"the shift towards knowledge-based societies\" that it has produced. While globalization presents emerging challenges, it also provides new opportunities: many education and development specialists are hopeful that new ICTs will have the potential to expand literacy learning opportunities for children and adults, even those in countries that have historically struggled to improve literacy rates through more conventional means.\n\nThe Human Development Index, produced by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), uses education as one of its three indicators; originally, adult literacy represented two-thirds of this education index weight. In 2010, however, the UNDP replaced the adult literacy measure with mean years of schooling. A 2011 UNDP research paper framed this change as a way to \"ensure current relevance,\" arguing that gains in global literacy already achieved between 1970 and 2010 meant that literacy would be \"unlikely to be as informative of the future.\" Other scholars, however, have since warned against overlooking the importance of literacy as an indicator and a goal for development, particularly for marginalized groups such as women and rural populations.\n\nUnlike medieval times, when reading and writing skills were restricted to a few elites and the clergy, these literacy skills are now expected from every member of a society. Literacy is a human right essential for lifelong learning and social change. As supported by the 1996 Report of the International Commission on Education for the Twenty-First Century, and the 1997 Hamburg Declaration: ‘Literacy, broadly conceived as the basic knowledge and skills needed by all in a rapidly changing world, is a fundamental human right. (...) There are millions, the majority of whom are women, who lack opportunities to learn or who have insufficient skills to be able to assert this right. The challenge is to enable them to do so. This will often imply the creation of preconditions for learning through awareness raising and empowerment. Literacy is also a catalyst for participation in social, cultural, political and economic activities, and for learning throughout life’.\n\nThe public library has long been a force promoting literacy in many countries. In the U.S. context, the American Library Association promotes literacy through the work of the Office for Literacy and Outreach Services. This committee's charge includes ensuring equitable access to information and advocating for adult new and non-readers. The Public Library Association recognizes the importance of early childhood in the role of literacy development and created, in collaboration with the Association for Library Service to Children, Every Child Ready to Read @your library in order to inform and support parents and caregivers in their efforts to raise children who become literate adults. The release of the National Assessment of Adult Literacy (NAAL) report in 2005 revealed that approximately 14% of U.S. adults function at the lowest level of literacy; 29% of adults function at the basic functional literacy level and cannot help their children with homework beyond the first few grades. The lack of reading skills hinders adults from reaching their full potential. They might have difficulty getting and maintaining a job, providing for their families, or even reading a story to their children. For adults, the library might be the only source of a literacy program.\n\nDia! Which stand for Diversity in Action and is also known as \"El Dia de los Ninos/El dia de los libros (Children's Day/Book Day)\" is a program which celebrates the importance of reading to children from all cultural and linguistic backgrounds. Dia! is celebrated every year on 30 April in schools, libraries, and homes and this website provides tools and programs to encourage reading in children. Parents, caregivers, and educators can even start a book club.\n\nThis community literacy program was initiated in 1992 by the Orange County Public Library in California. The mission of READ/Orange County is to \"create a more literate community by providing diversified services of the highest quality to all who seek them.\" Potential tutors train during an extensive 23-hour tutor training workshop in which they learn the philosophy, techniques and tools they will need to work with adult learns. After the training, the tutors invest at least 50 hours a year to tutoring their student.The organization builds on people's experience as well as education rather than trying to make up for what has not been learned. The program seeks to equip students with skills to continue learning in the future. The guiding philosophy is that an adult who learns to read creates a ripple effect in the community. The person becomes an example to children and grandchildren and can better serve the community.\n\nLocated in Boulder, Colorado, the program recognized the difficulty that students had in obtaining child care while attending tutoring sessions, and joined with the University of Colorado to provide reading buddies to the children of students. Reading Buddies matches children of adult literacy students with college students who meet with them once a week throughout the semester for an hour and a half. The college students receive course credit to try to enhance the quality and reliability of their time. Each Reading Buddies session focuses primarily on the college student reading aloud with the child. The goal is to help the child gain interest in books and feel comfortable reading aloud. Time is also spent on word games, writing letters, or searching for books in the library. Throughout the semester the pair work on writing and illustrating a book together. The college student's grade is partly dependent on the completion of the book. Although Reading Buddies began primarily as an answer to the lack of child care for literacy students, it has evolved into another aspect of the program. Participating children show marked improvement in their reading and writing skills throughout the semester.\n\nApproximately 120,000 adults in Hillsborough County are illiterate or read below the fourth-grade level; According to 2003 Census statistics, 15 percent of Hillsborough County residents age 16 and older lacked basic prose literacy skills. Since 1986, the Hillsborough Literacy Council is \"committed to improving literacy by empowering adults through education\". Sponsored by the statewide Florida Literacy Coalition and affiliated with Tampa-Hillsborough Public Library System, HLC strives to improve the literacy ability of adults in Hillsborough County, Florida. Using library space, the HLC provides tutoring for English for speakers of other languages (ESOL) in small groups or one-on-one tutoring. Through one-on-one tutoring, the organization works to help adult students reach at least the fifth-grade level in reading. The organization also provides volunteer-run conversation groups for English practice.\n\nTraditionally, literacy is the ability to use written language actively and passively; one definition of literacy is the ability to \"read, write, spell, listen, and speak\". Since the 1980s, some have argued that literacy is ideological, which means that literacy always exists in a context, in tandem with the values associated with that context. Prior work viewed literacy as existing autonomously.\n\nSome have argued that the definition of literacy should be expanded. For example, in the United States, the National Council of Teachers of English and the International Reading Association have added \"visually representing\" to the traditional list of competencies. Similarly, in Scotland, literacy has been defined as: \"The ability to read, write and use numeracy, to handle information, to express ideas and opinions, to make decisions and solve problems, as family members, workers, citizens and lifelong learners\". It is argued that literacy includes the cultural, political, and historical contexts of the community in which communication takes place.\n\nA basic literacy standard in many places is the ability to read the newspaper. Increasingly, communication in commerce and in general requires the ability to use computers and other digital technologies. Since the 1990s, when the Internet came into wide use in the United States, some have asserted that the definition of literacy should include the ability to use tools such as web browsers, word processing programs, and text messages. Similar expanded skill sets have been called computer literacy, information literacy, and technological literacy. Some scholars propose the idea multiliteracies which includes Functional Literacy, Critical Literacy, and Rhetorical Literacy.\n\n\"Arts literacy\" programs exist in some places in the United States. Visual literacy also includes the ability to understand visual forms of communication such as body language, pictures, maps, and video. (An inability to \"read\" body language is one of the features of autism.) Evolving definitions of literacy often include all the symbol systems relevant to a particular community.\n\nOther genres under study by academia include critical literacy, media literacy, ecological literacy and health literacy With the increasing emphasis on evidence-based decision making, and the use of statistical graphics and information, statistical literacy is becoming a very important aspect of literacy in general. The International Statistical Literacy Project is dedicated to the promotion of statistical literacy among all members of society.\n\nGiven that a large part of the benefits of literacy can be obtained by having access to a literate person in the household, some recent literature in economics, starting with the work of Kaushik Basu and James Foster, distinguishes between a \"proximate illiterate\" and an \"isolated illiterate\". The former refers to an illiterate person who lives in a household with literates and the latter to an illiterate who lives in a household of all illiterates. What is of concern is that many people in poor nations are not proximate illiterates but rather isolated illiterates.\n\nTeaching English literacy in the United States is dominated by a focus on a set of discrete decoding skills. From this perspective, literacy—or, rather, reading—comprises a number of subskills that can be taught to students. These skill sets include phonological awareness, phonics (decoding), fluency, comprehension, and vocabulary. Mastering each of these subskills is necessary for students to become proficient readers.\n\nFrom this same perspective, readers of alphabetic languages must understand the alphabetic principle to master basic reading skills. For this purpose a writing system is \"alphabetic\" if it uses symbols to represent individual language sounds, though the degree of correspondence between letters and sounds varies between alphabetic languages. Syllabic writing systems (such as Japanese kana) use a symbol to represent a single syllable, and logographic writing systems (such as Chinese) use a symbol to represent a morpheme.\n\nThere are any number of approaches to teaching literacy; each is shaped by its informing assumptions about what literacy is and how it is best learned by students. Phonics instruction, for example, focuses on reading at the level of the word. It teaches readers to observe and interpret the letters or groups of letters that make up words. A common method of teaching phonics is synthetic phonics, in which a novice reader pronounces each individual sound and \"blends\" them to pronounce the whole word. Another approach is embedded phonics instruction, used more often in whole language reading instruction, in which novice readers learn about the individual letters in words on a just-in-time, just-in-place basis that is tailored to meet each student's reading and writing learning needs. That is, teachers provide phonics instruction opportunistically, within the context of stories or student writing that feature many instances of a particular letter or group of letters. Embedded instruction combines letter-sound knowledge with the use of meaningful context to read new and difficult words. Techniques such as directed listening and thinking activities can be used to aid children in learning how to read and reading comprehension.\n\nIn a 2012 proposal, it has been claimed that reading can be acquired naturally if print is constantly available at an early age in the same manner as spoken language. If an appropriate form of written text is made available before formal schooling begins, reading should be learned inductively, emerge naturally, and with no significant negative consequences. This proposal challenges the commonly held belief that written language requires formal instruction and schooling. Its success would change current views of literacy and schooling. Using developments in behavioral science and technology, an interactive system (Technology Assisted Reading Acquisition, TARA) would enable young pre-literate children to accurately perceive and learn properties of written language by simple exposure to the written form.\n\nIn Australia a number of State governments have introduced Reading Challenges to improve literacy. The Premier's Reading Challenge in South Australia, launched by Premier Mike Rann has one of the highest participation rates in the world for reading challenges. It has been embraced by more than 95% of public, private and religious schools.\n\nPrograms have been implemented in regions that have an ongoing conflict or in a post-conflict stage. The Norwegian Refugee Council Pack program has been used in 13 post-conflict countries since 2003. The program organizers believe that daily routines and other wise predictable activities help the transition from war to peace. Learners can select one area in vocational training for a year-long period. They complete required courses in agriculture, life skills, literacy and numeracy. Results have shown that active participation and management of the members of the program are important to the success of the program. These programs share the use of integrated basic education, e.g. literacy, numeracy, scientific knowledge, local history and culture, native and mainstream language skills, and apprenticeships.\n\nAlthough there is considerable awareness that language deficiencies (lacking proficiency) are disadvantageous to immigrants settling in a new country, there appears to be a lack of pedagogical approaches that address the instruction of literacy to migrant English language learners (ELLs). Harvard scholar Catherine Snow (2001) called for a gap to be addresses: \"The TESOL field needs a concerted research effort to inform literacy instruction for such children ... to determine when to start literacy instruction and how to adapt it to the LS reader's needs\". The scenario becomes more complex when there is no choice in such decisions as in the case of the current migration trends with citizens from the Middle East and Africa being relocated to English majority nations due to various political or social reasons. Recent developments to address the gap in teaching literacy to second or foreign language learners has been ongoing and promising results have been shown by Pearson and Pellerine (2010) which integrates Teaching for Understanding, a curricular framework from the Harvard Graduate School of Education. A series of pilot projects had been carried out in the Middle East and Africa (see Patil, 2016). In this work significant interest from the learners perspective have been noticed through the integration of visual arts as springboards for literacy oriented instruction. In one case migrant women had been provided with cameras and a walking tour of their local village was provided to the instructor as the women photographed their tour focusing on places and activities that would later be used for writings about their daily life. In essence a narrative of life. Other primers for writing activities include: painting, sketching, and other craft projects (e.g. gluing activities).\n\nA series of pilot studies were carried out to investigate alternatives to instructing literacy to migrant ELLs, starting from simple trials aiming to test the teaching of photography to participants with no prior photography background, to isolating painting and sketching activities that could later be integrated into a larger pedagogical initiative. In efforts to develop alternative approaches for literacy instruction utilising visual arts, work was carried out with Afghan labourers, Bangladeshi tailors, Emirati media students, internal Ethiopian migrants (both labourers and university students), and a street child.\nIt should be pointed out that in such challenging contexts sometimes the teaching of literacy may have unforeseen barriers. The \"EL Gazette\" reported that in the trials carried out in Ethiopia, for example, it was found that all ten of the participants had problems with vision. In order to overcome this, or to avoid such challenges, preliminary health checks can help inform pre-teaching in order to better assist in the teaching/learning of literacy.\n\nIn a visual arts approach to literacy instruction a benefit can be the inclusion of both a traditional literacy approach (reading and writing) while at the same time addressing 21st Century digital literacy instruction through the inclusion of digital cameras and posting images onto the web. Many scholars feel that the inclusion of digital literacy is necessary to include under the traditional umbrella of literacy instruction specifically when engaging second language learners. (Also see: Digital literacy.) \n\nOther ways in which visual arts have been integrated into literacy instruction for migrant populations include integrating aspects of visual art with the blending of core curricular goals.\n\nA more pressing challenge in education is the instruction of literacy to Migrant English Language Learners (MELLs), a term coined by Pellerine. It is not just limited to English. “Due to the growing share of immigrants in many Western societies, there has been increasing concern for the degree to which immigrants acquire language that is spoken in the destination country” (Tubergen 2006). Remembering that teaching literacy to a native in their L1 can be challenging, and the challenge becomes more cognitively demanding when in a second language (L2), the task can become considerably more difficult when confronted with a migrant who has made a sudden change (migrated) and requires the second language upon arrival in the country of destination. In many instances a migrant will not have the opportunity, for many obvious reasons, to start school again at grade one and acquire the language naturally. In these situations alternative interventions need to take place.\n\nIn working with illiterate people (and individuals with low-proficiency in an L2) following the composition of some artifact like in taking a photo, sketching an event, or painting an image, a stage of orality has been seen as an effective way to understand the intention of the learner.\n\nIn the accompanying image from left to right a) an image taken during a phototour of the participant's village. This image is of the individual at her shop, and this is one of her products that she sells, dung for cooking fuel. The image helps the interlocutor understand the realities of the participants daily life and most importantly it allows the participant the opportunity to select what they feel is important to them. b) This is an image of a student explaining and elaborating the series of milestones in her life to a group. In this image the student had a very basic ability and with some help was able to write brief captions under the images. While she speaks a recording of her story takes place to understand her story and to help develop it in the L2. The third image is of a painting that had been used with a composite in Photoshop. With further training participants can learn how to blend images they would like to therefore introducing elements of digital literacies, beneficial in many spheres of life in the 21st century.\n\nIn the following image (see right) you can see two samples 1) One in Ethiopia from stencil to more developed composition based on a village tour, photography, and paintings. 2) In the Middle East at a tailor's shop focusing English for Specific Purposes (ESP) and in this example the writing has evolved from photography, sketching, and in situ exposure for the instructor (much like the village tour in sample one).\n\nFrom the work based in Ethiopia, participants were asked to rate preference of activity, on a scale of 1-10. The survey prompt was: On a scale of 1 - 10 how would you rate photography as an activity that helped you get inspiration for your writing activities (think of enjoyment and usefulness). The following activities were rated, in order of preference - activities used as primers for writing:\n\nBULLET::::- Photography 97%\nBULLET::::- Oral presentations sharing your art 92%\nBULLET::::- Process painting 84%\nBULLET::::- Painting 82%\nBULLET::::- Sketching 78%\nBULLET::::- Gluing activities 72%\nBULLET::::- Stencil/tracing activities 60%\n\nMore research would need to be conducted to confirm such trends.\n\nIn bringing work together from students in culminating projects, authorship programs have been successful in bringing student work together in book format. Such artifacts can be used to both document learning, but more importantly reinforce language and content goals.\n\nThe culmination of such writings, into books can evoke both intrinsic and extrinsic motivation. Form feedback by students involved in such initiatives the responses have indicated that the healthy pressures of collective and collaborative work was beneficial.\n\nTeaching people to read and write, in a traditional sense of the meaning (literacy) is a very complex task in a native language. To do this in a second language becomes increasingly more complex, and in the case of migrants relocating to another country there can be legal and policy driven boundaries that prohibit the naturalization and acquisition of citizen ship based on language proficiency. In Canada for example despite a debate, language tests are required years after settling into Canada. Similar exists globally, see:, and for example.\n\nThe \"EL Gazette\" reviewed Pellerine's work with migrant English language learners and commented: \"Handing English language learners a sponge and some paint and asking them to ‘paint what comes’ might not appear like a promising teaching method for a foreign language. But Canadian EL instructor and photographer Steve Pellerine has found that the technique, along with others based around the visual arts, has helped some of his most challenging groups to learn\". Visual arts have been viewed as an effective way to approach literacy instruction - the art being primers for subsequent literacy tasks within a scaffolded curricular design, such at Teaching for Understanding (TfU) or Understanding by Design (UbD).\n\nNearly one in ten young adult women have poor reading and writing skills in the UK in the 21st century. This seriously damages their employment prospects and many are trapped in poverty. Lack of reading skill is a social stigma and women tend to hide their difficulty rather than seeking help. Girls on average do better than boys at English in school. A quarter of British adults would struggle to read a bus timetable.\n\nLiteracy is first documented in the area of modern England on 24 September 54 BCE, on which day Julius Caesar and Quintus Cicero wrote to Cicero \"from the nearest shores of Britain\". Literacy was widespread under Roman rule, but became very rare, limited almost entirely to churchmen, after the fall of the Western Roman Empire. In 12th and 13th century England, the ability to recite a particular passage from the Bible in Latin entitled a common law defendant to the so-called benefit of clergy: i.e. trial before an ecclesiastical court, where sentences were more lenient, instead of a secular one, where hanging was a likely sentence. Thus literate lay defendants often claimed benefit of clergy, while an illiterate person who had memorized the psalm used as the literacy test, Psalm 51 (\"O God, have mercy upon me...\"), could also claim benefit of clergy. Despite lacking a system of free and compulsory primary schooling, England reached near universal literacy in the 19th century as a result of shared, informal learning provided by family members, fellow workers, and/or benevolent employers. Even with near universal literacy rates, the gap between male and female literacy rates persisted until the early 20th century. Many women in the West during the 19th century were able to read, but unable to write.\n\nFormal higher education in the arts and sciences in Wales, from the Middle Ages to the 18th century, was the preserve of the wealthy and the clergy. As in England, Welsh history and archaeological finds dating back to the Bronze Age reveal not only reading and writing, but also alchemy, botany, advanced maths and science. Following the Roman occupation and the conquest by the English, education in Wales was at a very low ebb in the early modern period; in particular, formal education was only available in English while the majority of the population spoke only Welsh. The first modern grammar schools were established in Welsh towns such as Ruthin, Brecon, and Cowbridge. One of the first modern national education methods to use the native Welsh language was started by Griffith Jones in 1731. Jones was the rector of Llanddowror from 1716 and remained there for the rest of his life. He organized and introduced a Welsh medium circulating school system, which was attractive and effective for Welsh speakers, while also teaching them English, which gave them access to broader educational sources. The circulating schools may have taught half the country's population to read. Literacy rates in Wales by the mid-18th century were one of the highest.\nThe ability to read did not necessarily imply the ability to write. The 1686 church law (\"kyrkolagen\") of the Kingdom of Sweden (which at the time included all of modern Sweden, Finland, Latvia and Estonia) enforced literacy on the people, and by 1800 the ability to read was close to 100%. This was directly dependent on the need to read religious texts in the Lutheran faith in Sweden and Finland. As a result, literacy in these countries was inclined towards reading, specifically. But as late as the 19th century, many Swedes, especially women, could not write. The exception to this rule were the men and women of Iceland who achieved widespread literacy without formal schooling, libraries, or printed books via informal tuition by religious leaders and peasant teachers. That said, the situation in England was far worse than in Scandinavia, France, and Prussia: as late as 1841, 33% of all Englishmen and 44% of Englishwomen signed marriage certificates with their mark as they were unable to write (government-financed public education was not available in England until 1870 and, even then, on a limited basis).\n\nHistorian Ernest Gellner argues that Continental European countries were far more successful in implementing educational reform precisely because their governments were more willing to invest in the population as a whole. Government oversight allowed countries to standardize curriculum and secure funding through legislation thus enabling educational programs to have a broader reach.\n\nAlthough the present-day concepts of literacy have much to do with the 15th-century invention of the movable type printing press, it was not until the Industrial Revolution of the mid-19th century that paper and books became affordable to all classes of industrialized society. Until then, only a small percentage of the population were literate as only wealthy individuals and institutions could afford the materials. Even , the cost of paper and books is a barrier to universal literacy in some less-industrialized nations.\n\nOn the other hand, historian Harvey Graff argues that the introduction of mass schooling was in part an effort to control the type of literacy that the working class had access to. According to Graff, literacy learning was increasing outside of formal settings (such as schools) and this uncontrolled, potentially critical reading could lead to increased radicalization of the populace. In his view, mass schooling was meant to temper and control literacy, not spread it. Graff also points out, using the example of Sweden, that mass literacy can be achieved without formal schooling or instruction in writing.\n\nResearch on the literacy rates of Canadians in the colonial days rested largely on examinations of the proportion of signatures to marks on parish acts (birth, baptismal, and marriage registrations). Although some researchers have concluded that signature counts drawn from marriage registers in nineteenth century France corresponded closely with literacy tests given to military conscripts, others regard this methodology as a \"relatively unimaginative treatment of the complex practices and events that might be described as literacy\" (Curtis, 2007, p. 1-2). But censuses (dating back to 1666) and official records of New France offer few clues of their own on the population's levels of literacy, therefore leaving few options in terms of materials from which to draw literary rate estimates.\n\nIn his research of literacy rates of males and females in New France, Trudel found that in 1663, of 1,224 persons in New France who were of marriageable age, 59% of grooms and 46% of brides wrote their name; however, of the 3,000-plus colony inhabitants, less than 40% were native born. Signature rates were therefore likely more reflective of rates of literacy among French immigrants. Magnuson's (1985) research revealed a trend: signature rates for the period of 1680–1699 were 42% for males, 30% for females; in 1657-1715, they were 45% for males and 43% for females; in 1745-1754, they were higher for females than for males. He believed that this upward trend in rates of females’ ability to sign documents was largely attributed to the larger number of female religious orders, and to the proportionately more active role of women in health and education, while the roles of male religious orders were largely to serve as parish priests, missionaries, military chaplains and explorers. 1752 marked the date that Canada's first newspaper—the \"Halifax Gazette\"—began publication.\n\nThe end of the Seven Years' War in 1763 allowed two Philadelphia printers to come to Québec City and to begin printing a bilingual \"Quebec Gazette\" in 1764, while in 1785 Fleury Mesplet started publication of the \"Montreal Gazette\", which is now the oldest continuing newspaper in the country.\n\nIn the 19th century, everything about print changed, and literature in its many forms became much more available. But educating the Canadian population in reading and writing was nevertheless a huge challenge. Concerned about the strong French Canadian presence in the colony, the British authorities repeatedly tried to help establish schools that were outside the control of religious authorities, but these efforts were largely undermined by the Catholic Church and later the Anglican clergy.\n\nFrom the early 1820s in Lower Canada, classical college curriculum, which was monopolized by the Church, was also subject to growing liberal and lay criticism, arguing it was fit first and foremost to produce priests, when Lower Canadians needed to be able to compete effectively with foreign industry and commerce and with the immigrants who were monopolizing trade (Curtis, 1985). Liberal and lay attempts to promote parish schools generated a reaction from the Catholic and later the Anglican clergy in which the dangers of popular literacy figured centrally. Both churches shared an opposition to any educational plan that encouraged lay reading of the Bible, and spokesmen for both warned of the evil and demoralizing tendencies of unregulated reading in general. Granted the power to organize parish schooling through the Vestry School Act of 1824, the Catholic clergy did nothing effective.\n\nDespite this, the invention of the printing press had laid the foundation for the modern era and universal social literacy, and so it is that with time, \"technologically, literacy had passed from the hands of an elite to the populace at large. Historical factors and sociopolitical conditions, however, have determined the extent to which universal social literacy has come to pass\".\n\nIn 1871 only about half of French Canadian men in Canada self-reported that they were literate, whereas 90 percent of other Canadian men said they could read and write, but information from the Canadian Families Project sample of the 1901 Census of Canada indicated that literacy rates for French Canadians and other Canadians increased, as measured by the ability of men between the ages of 16 and 65 to answer literacy questions. Compulsory attendance in schools was legislated in the late 19th century in all provinces but Quebec, but by then, a change in parental attitudes towards educating the new generation meant that many children were already attending regularly. Unlike the emphasis of school promoters on character formation, the shaping of values, the inculcation of political and social attitudes, and proper behaviour, many parents supported schooling because they wanted their children to learn to read, write, and do arithmetic. Efforts were made to exert power and religious, moral, economic/professional, and social/cultural influence over children who were learning to read by dictating the contents of their school readers accordingly. But educators broke from these spheres of influence and also taught literature from a more child-centred perspective: for the pleasure of it.\n\nEducational change in Québec began as a result of a major commission of inquiry at the start of what came to be called the \"Quiet Revolution\" in the early 1960s. In response to the resulting recommendations, the Québec government revamped the school system in an attempt to enhance the francophone population's general educational level and to produce a better-qualified labour force. Catholic Church leadership was rejected in favour of government administration and vastly increased budgets were given to school boards across the province.\n\nWith time, and with continuing inquiry into the literacy achievement levels of Canadians, the definition of literacy moved from a dichotomous one (either a person could, or couldn't write his or her name, or was literate or illiterate), to ones that considered its multidimensionality, along with the qualitative and quantitative aspects of literacy. In the 1970s, organizations like the Canadian Association for Adult Education (CAAE) believed that one had to complete the 8th grade to achieve functional literacy. Examination of 1976 census data, for example, found that 4,376,655, or 28.4% of Canadians 15 years of age and over reported a level of schooling of less than grade 9 and were thus deemed not functionally literate. But in 1991, UNESCO formally acknowledged Canada's findings that assessment of educational attainment as proxy measure of literacy was not as reliable as was direct assessment. This dissatisfaction manifested itself in the development of actual proficiency tests that measure reading literacy more directly.\n\nCanada conducted its first literacy survey in 1987 which discovered that there were more than five million functionally illiterate adults in Canada, or 24 per cent of the adult population. Statistics Canada then conducted three national and international literacy surveys of the adult population — the first one in 1989 commissioned by the Human Resources and Skills Development Canada (HRSDC) department.\n\nThis first survey was called the \"Literacy Skills Used in Daily Activities\" (LSUDA) survey, and was modeled on the 1985 U.S. survey of young adults (YALS). It represented a first attempt in Canada to produce skill measures deemed comparable across languages. Literacy, for the first time, was measured on a continuum of skills. The survey found that 16% of Canadians had literacy skills too limited to deal with most of the printed material encountered in daily life whereas 22% were considered \"narrow\" readers.\n\nIn 1994-95, Canada participated in the first multi-country, multi-language assessment of adult literacy, the International Adult Literacy Survey (IALS). A stratified multi-stage probability sample design was used to select the sample from the Census Frame. The sample was designed to yield separate samples for the two Canadian official languages, English and French, and participants were measured on the dimensions of prose literacy, document literacy and quantitative literacy. The survey found that 42.2%, 43% and 42.2% of Canadians between the ages of 16 and 65 scored at the lowest two levels of Prose Literacy, Document Literacy and Quantitative Literacy, respectively. The survey presented many important correlations, among which was a strong plausible link between literacy and a country's economic potential.\n\nIn 2003, Canada participated in the Adult Literacy and Life Skills Survey (ALL). This survey contained identical measures for assessing the prose and document literacy proficiencies, allowing for comparisons between survey results on these two measures and found that 41.9% and 42.6% of Canadians between the ages of 16 and 65 scored at the lowest two levels of Prose Literacy and document literacy respectively. Further, Canadians’ mean scores also improved on both the prose and the document literacy scales. Energy production:36%, transportation: 24%, homes and businesses: 12%, industry: 11%, agriculture: 10%, and waste: 7%.\n\nThe OECD's Programme for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies (PIAAC) is expected to produce new comparative skill profiles in late 2013.\n\nIn the last 40 years, the rate of illiteracy in Mexico has been steadily decreasing. In the 1960s, because the majority of the residents of the federal capital were illiterate, the planners of the Mexico City Metro designed a system of unique icons to identify each station in the system in addition to its formal name. However, The INEGI's census data of 1970 showed a national average illiteracy rate of 25.8%; the last census data puts the national average at 6.9%. Mexico still has a gender educational bias. The illiteracy rate for women in the last census was 8.1% compared with 5.6% for men. Rates differ across regions and states. Chiapas, Guerrero and Oaxaca, the states with the highest poverty rate, had greater than 15% illiteracy in 2010(17.8%, 16.7% and 16.3 respectively). In contrast, the illiteracy rates in the Federal District (D.F. / Mexico City) and in some northern states like Nuevo León, Baja California, and Coahuila were below 3% in the 2010 census (2.1%, 2.2%, 2.6% and 2.6% respectively).\n\nBefore the 20th century white illiteracy was not uncommon and many of the slave states made it illegal to teach slaves to read. By 1900 the situation had improved somewhat, but 44% of black people remained illiterate. There were significant improvements for African American and other races in the early 20th century as the descendants of former slaves, who had had no educational opportunities, grew up in the post Civil War period and often had some chance to obtain a basic education. The gap in illiteracy between white and black adults continued to narrow through the 20th century, and in 1979 the rates were about the same.\n\nFull prose proficiency, as measured by the ability to process complex and challenging material such as would be encountered in everyday life, is achieved by about 13% of the general, 17% of the white, and 2% of the African American population. However 86% of the general population had basic or higher prose proficiency as of 2003, with a decrease distributed across all groups in the full proficiency group vs. 1992 of more than 10% consistent with trends, observed results in the SAT reading score to the present (2015).\n\nBefore colonization, oral storytelling and communication composed most if not all Native American literacy. Native people communicated and retained their histories verbally—it was not until the beginning of American Indian boarding schools that reading and writing forms of literacy were forced onto Native Americans. While literacy rates of English increased, forced assimilation exposed Native children to physical and sexual abuse, unsanitary living conditions, and even death. Many students ran away in an attempt to hold on to their cultural identity and literary traditions that were relevant to their community. While these formalized forms of literacy prepared Native youth to exist in the changing society, they destroyed all traces of their cultural literacy. Native children would return to their families unable to communicate with them due to the loss of their indigenous language. In the 20th and 21st century, there is still a struggle to learn and maintain cultural language. But education initiatives and programs have increased overall—according to the 2010 census, 86 percent of the overall population of Native Americans and Alaska Natives have high school diplomas, and 28 percent have a bachelor's degree or higher.\n\nIn 1964 in Brazil, Paulo Freire was arrested and exiled for teaching peasants to read. Since democracy returned to Brazil, however, there has been a steady increase in the percentage of literate people. Educators with the Axé project within the city of Salvador, Bahía attempt to improve literacy rates among urban youth, especially youth living on the streets, through the use of music and dances of the local culture. They are encouraged to continue their education and become professionals.\n\nThe literacy rates in Africa vary significantly between countries. The highest registered literacy rate in the region is in Equatorial Guinea and Libya (both 94.2%), while the lowest literacy rate is in South Sudan (27%). Poorer youth in sub-Saharan Africa have fewer educational opportunities to become literate compared with wealthier families. They often must leave school because of being needed at home to farm or care for siblings.\n\nIn sub-Saharan Africa, the rate of literacy has not improved enough to compensate for the effects of demographic growth. As a result, the number of illiterate adults has risen by 27% over the last 20 years, reaching 169 million in 2010. Thus, out of the 775 million illiterate adults in the world in 2010, more than one fifth were in sub- Saharan Africa – in other words, 20% of the adult population. The countries with the lowest levels of literacy in the world are also concentrated in this region. These include Niger (28.7%), Burkina Faso (28.7%), Mali (33.4%), Chad (35.4%) and Ethiopia (39%), where adult literacy rates are well below 50%. There are, however, certain exceptions, like Equatorial Guinea, with a literacy rate of 94%.\n\nThe literacy rate of Algeria is around 70%: education is compulsory and free in Algeria up to age of 17.\n\nBotswana has among the highest literacy rates in the developing world with around 85% of its population being literate.\n\nBurkina Faso has a very low literacy rate of 28.7%. The government defines literacy as anyone at least 15 years of age and up who can read and write. To improve the literacy rate, the government has received at least 80 volunteer teachers. A severe lack of primary school teachers causes problems for any attempt to improve the literacy rate and school enrollment.\n\nEgypt has a relatively high literacy rate. The adult literacy rate in 2010 was estimated at 72%.\nEducation is compulsory from ages 6 to 15 and free for all children to attend. 93% of children enter primary school today, compared with 87% in 1994.\n\nDjibouti has an estimated literacy rate of 70%.\n\nAccording to the Ministry of Information of Eritrea, the nation has an estimated literacy rate of 80%.\n\nThe Ethiopians are among the first literate people in the world, having written, read, and created manuscripts in their ancient language of Ge'ez (Amharic) since the second century CE. All boys learned to read the Psalms around the age of 7. National literacy campaign introduced in 1978 increased literacy rates to between 37% (unofficial) and 63% (official) by 1984.\n\nGuinea has a literacy rate of 41%. The Guinea government defines literacy as anyone who can read or write who is at least 15 years old. Guinea was the first to use the Literacy, Conflict Resolution, and Peacebuilding project. This project was developed to increase agriculture production, develop key skills, resolve conflict, improve literacy, and numeracy skills. The LCRP worked within refugee camps near the border of Sierra Leone, however this project only lasted from 1999 to 2001. There are several other international projects working within the country that have similar goals.\n\nThe literacy rate in Kenya among people below 20 years of age is over 70%, as the first 8 years of primary school are provided tuition-free by the government. In January 2008, the government began offering a restricted program of free secondary education. Literacy is much higher among the young than the old population, with the total being about 53% for the country. Most of this literacy, however, is elementary—not secondary or advanced.\n\nMali has one of the lowest literacy rates in the world, at 33.4%, with males having a 43.1% literacy rate and females having a 24.6% literacy rate. In 2015, the adult literacy rate was 33%. The government defines literacy as anyone who is at least 15 and over who can read or write. The government of Mali and international organizations in recent years has taken steps to improve the literacy rate. The government recognized the slow progress in literacy rates and began created ministries for basic education and literacy for their national languages in 2007. To also improve literacy the government planned to increase its education budget by 3%, when this was purposed it was at 35% in 2007. The lack of literate adults causes the programs to be slowed. The programs need qualified female trainers is a major problem because most men refuse to send female family members to be trained under male teachers.\n\nFree education in Mauritius didn't proceed beyond the primary level until 1976, so many women now in their 50s or older left school at age 12. The younger generation (below 50) are however extremely well educated with very high educational expectations placed upon pupils. Education is today free from pre-primary to tertiary (only admission fees remain at University level). Most professional people have at least a bachelor's degree. Mauritian students consistently rank top in the world each year for the Cambridge International O Level, International A and AS level examinations. Most Mauritian children, even at primary level, attend tuition after school and at weekends to cope with the highly competitive public school system where admission to prestigious public colleges (secondary) and most sought after university courses depend on merit based academic performance.\n\nThe adult literacy rate was estimated at 89.8% in 2011. Male literacy was 92.3% and Female literacy 87.3%.\n\nNiger has an extremely low literacy rate at 28.7%. However, the gender gap between males and females is a major problem for the country, men have a literacy rate of 42.9% and women a literacy rate of 15.1%. The Nigerien government defines literacy as anyone who can read or write over the age of 15. The Niass Tijaniyya, a predominant group of the Sufi brotherhoods, has started anti-poverty, empowerment, and literacy campaigns. The women in Kiota had not attempted to improve their education, or economic standing. Saida Oumul Khadiri Niass, known as Maman, through talking to men and women throughout the community changed the community's beliefs on appropriate behavior for women because the community recognized she was married to a leader of the Niass Tijaniyya. Maman's efforts has allowed women in Kiota to own small businesses, sell in the market place, attend literacy classes, and organize small associations that can give micro loans. Maman personally teaches children in and around Kiota, with special attention to girls. Maman has her students require instructor permission to allow the girls' parents to marry their daughters early. This increases the amount of education these girls receive, as well as delaying marriage, pregnancy, and having children.\n\nSenegal has a literacy rate of 49.7%; the government defines literacy as anyone who is at least 15 years of age and over who can read and write. However, many students do not attend school long enough to be considered literate. The government did not begin actively attempting to improve the literacy rate until 1971 when it gave the responsibility to Department for Vocational Training at the Secretariat for Youth and Sports. This department and subsequent following departments had no clear policy on literacy until the Department of Literacy and Basic Education was formed in 1986. The government of Senegal relies heavily on funding from the World Bank to fund its school system.\n\nThere is no reliable data on the nationwide literacy rate in Somalia. A 2013 FSNAU survey indicates considerable differences per region, with the autonomous northeastern Puntland region having the highest registered literacy rate at 72%.\n\nThe Sierra Leone government defines literacy as anyone over the age of 15 who can read and write in English, Mende, Temne, or Arabic. Official statics put the literacy rate at 43.3%. Sierra Leone was the second country to use the Literacy, Conflict Resolution and Peacebuilding project. However, due to fighting near the city where the project was centered causing the project to be delayed until an arms amnesty was in place.\n\nUganda has a literacy rate of 72.2%.\n\nZimbabwe has a high literacy rate of 86.5% (2016 est.).\n\n! Country\n! Adult Literacy Rate\n! Youth Literacy Rate<br>15-24 age\n\n<nowiki> </nowiki>Afghanistan has one of the lowest literacy rates in the world at 28.1% with males having a literacy rate of 43.1% and females with a literacy rate of 12.6%. The Afghan government considers someone literate if they are 15 years of age or older, and if they can read and write. To improve the literacy rate U.S. military trainers have been teaching Afghan Army recruits how to read before teaching to fire a weapon. U.S. commanders in the region estimate that as many as 65% of recruits may be illiterate.\n\nThe PRC conducts standardized testing to assess proficiency in Standard Chinese, known as \"putonghua,\" but it is primarily for foreigners or those needing to demonstrate professional proficiency in the Beijing dialect. Literacy in languages like Chinese can be assessed by reading comprehension tests, just as in other languages, but historically has often been graded on the number of Chinese characters introduced during the speaker's schooling, with a few thousand considered the minimum for practical literacy. Social science surveys in China have repeatedly found that just more than half the population of China is conversant in spoken putonghua.\n\nLiteracy is defined by the Registrar General and Census Commissioner of India, as \"[the ability of] a person aged 7 years and above [to]... both write and read with understanding in any language.\" According to the 2011 census, 74.04 percent.\n\nLaos has the lowest level of adult literacy in all of Southeast Asia other than East Timor.\n\nObstacles to literacy vary by country and culture as writing systems, quality of education, availability of written material, competition from other sources (television, video games, cell phones, and family work obligations), and culture all influence literacy levels. In Laos, which has a phonetic alphabet, reading is relatively easy to learn—especially compared to English, where spelling and pronunciation rules are filled with exceptions, and Chinese, with thousands of symbols to be memorized. But a lack of books and other written materials has hindered functional literacy in Laos, where many children and adults read so haltingly that the skill is hardly beneficial.\n\nA literacy project in Laos addresses this by using what it calls \"books that make literacy fun!\" The project, Big Brother Mouse, publishes colorful, easy-to-read books, then delivers them by holding book parties at rural schools. Some of the books are modeled on successful western books by authors such as Dr. Seuss; the most popular, however, are traditional Lao fairy tales. Two popular collections of folktales were written by Siphone Vouthisakdee, who comes from a village where only five children finished primary school.\n\nBig Brother Mouse has also created village reading rooms, and published books for adult readers about subjects such as Buddhism, health, and baby care.\n\nIn Pakistan, the National Commission for Human Development (NCHD) aims to bring literacy to adults, especially women.\nISLAMABAD - UNESCO Islamabad Director Kozue Kay Nagata has said, \"Illiteracy in Pakistan has fallen over two decades, thanks to the government and people of Pakistan for their efforts working toward meeting the Millennium Development Goals\". \"Today, 70 percent of Pakistani youths can read and write. In 20 years, illiterate population has been reduced significantly\", she said while speaking at a function held in connection with International Literacy Day.\n\nHowever, she also emphasised on the need to do more to improve literacy in the country and said, \"The proportion of population in Pakistan lacking basic reading and writing is too high. This is a serious obstacle for individual fulfillment, to the development of societies, and to mutual understanding between peoples.\" Referring to the recent national survey carried out by the Ministry of Education, Trainings and Standards in Higher Education with support of UNESCO, UNICEF, and provincial and areas departments of education, Nagata pointed out that, in Pakistan, although primary school survival rate is 70 percent, gender gap still exists with only 68 percent of girls’ survival rate compared to 71 percent for boys. Specifically in the case of Punjab, she said, primary school survival rate today is better with 76 percent, but not without a gender gap of 8 percent points with 72 percent girls’ survival rate compared to 80 percent for boys. She also pointed out that average per student spending in primary level (age 5-9) was better in Punjab: Rs 6,998, compared to the national average. In Balochistan, although almost the same amount (Rs 6,985) as in Punjab is spent per child, the primary school survival rate is only 53 percent. Girls’ survival rate is slightly better with 54 percent than that of boys which is 52 percent. Literate Pakistan Foundation, a non-profit organization, which was established in 2003, is a case study, which brings to light the solutions for removing this menace from its roots. It works to improve rate of literacy in Pakistan.\n\nThe data of the survey shows that in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, primary school survival rate is 67 percent which is lower than the national average of 70 percent. Furthermore, gender gap also exists with only 65 percent of girls’ survival rate compared to that of boys which is 68 percent. Per-student education expenditure in primary level (age 5-9) in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa is Rs 8,638. In Sindh, primary school survival rate is 63percent, with a gender gap of only 67 percent of girls’ survival rate compared to 60 percent for boys. Per student education expenditure in primary level (age 5-9) in Sindh is Rs 5,019. Nagata made reference to the survey report and mentioned that the most common reason in Pakistan for children (both boys and girls) of age 10 to 18 years leaving school before completing primary grade is \"the child not willing to go to school\", which may be related to quality and learning outcome. She said, however, and sadly, for the girls living in rural communities the second highest reason for dropout is \"parents did not allow\" which might be related to prejudice and cultural norm against girls.\n\nEarly Filipinos devised and used their own system of writings from 300 BC, which derived from the Brahmic family of scripts of Ancient India. Baybayin became the most widespread of these derived scripts by the 11th century.\n\nEarly chroniclers, who came during the first Spanish expeditions to the islands, noted the proficiency of some of the natives, especially the chieftain and local kings, in Sanskrit, Old Javanese, Old Malay, and several other languages.\n\nDuring the Spanish colonization of the islands, reading materials were destroyed to a far much less extent compared to the Spanish colonization of the Americas. Education and literacy was introduced only to the Peninsulares and remained a privilege until the Americans came.\n\nThe Americans introduced the public schools system to the country which drove literacy rates up. English became the lingua franca in the Philippines. It was only during a brief period in the Japanese occupation of the Philippines that the Japanese were able to teach their language in the Philippines and teach the children their written language.\n\nAfter World War II, the Philippines had the highest literacy rates in Asia. It nearly achieved universal literacy once again in the 1980s and 1990s. Ever since then, the literacy rate has plummeted only to start regaining a few percentage years back.\n\nThe DepEd, CHED, and other academic institutions encourage children to improve literacy skills and knowledge. The government has a program of literacy teaching starting in kindergarten. New reforms are being brought in shifting to a K-12 system which will teach children their regional languages before English, as opposed to the ten-year basic education program which teaches English and Filipino, the country's two official languages, from Grade 1.\n\nWith a literacy rate of 92.5%, Sri Lanka has one of the most literate populations amongst developing nations. Its youth literacy rate stands at 98%, computer literacy rate at 35%, and primary school enrollment rate at over 99%. An education system which dictates 9 years of compulsory schooling for every child is in place. The free education system established in 1945, is a result of the initiative of C. W. W. Kannangara and A. Ratnayake. It is one of the few countries in the world that provide universal free education from primary to tertiary stage.\n\nApproximately 56% of Australians aged 15 to 74 achieve Level 3 literacy or above Australian Bureau of Statistics 2011-2012 and 83% of five-year-olds are on track to develop good language and cognitive skills Australian Early Development Census 2012 summary report. In 2012-2013, Australia had 1515 public library service points, lending almost 174 million items to 10 million members of Australian public library services, at an average per capita cost of just under AU$45 Australian Public Library Statistics 2012-2013.\n\nBULLET::::- List of countries by literacy rate\nBULLET::::- International Literacy Day\nBULLET::::- International Literacy Foundation\nBULLET::::- Functional illiteracy\nBULLET::::- Legal literacy\nBULLET::::- Numeracy\nBULLET::::- Postliterate society\nBULLET::::- Book desert\n\n\nBULLET::::- UNESCO Literacy Portal\nBULLET::::- UNESCO Effective Literacy Practice Database\nBULLET::::- Our World In Data – Visualizations of how literacy around the world has changed historically (by Max Roser and Esteban Ortiz-Ospina). Includes literacy rates for different age groups. Charts for all countries, world maps, and links to more data sources.\nBULLET::::- Literacy Assessment\nBULLET::::- The National Strategies for Primary Literacy\nBULLET::::- The Digital Archive of Literacy Narratives\nBULLET::::- National Literacy Trust\n"}
{"id": "18457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18457", "title": "Local-loop unbundling", "text": "Local-loop unbundling\n\nLocal loop unbundling (LLU or LLUB) is the regulatory process of allowing multiple telecommunications operators to use connections from the telephone exchange to the customer's premises. The physical wire connection between the local exchange and the customer is known as a \"local loop\", and is owned by the incumbent local exchange carrier (also referred to as the \"ILEC\", \"local exchange\", or in the United States either a \"Baby Bell\" or an independent telephone company). To increase competition, other providers are granted unbundled access.\n\nLLU is generally opposed by the ILECs, which in most cases are either former investor-owned (North America) or state-owned monopoly enterprises forced to open themselves to competition. ILECs argue that LLU amounts to a regulatory taking, that they are forced to provide competitors with essential business inputs, that LLU stifles infrastructure-based competition and technical innovation because new entrants prefer to 'parasitise' the incumbent's network instead of building their own and that the regulatory interference required to make LLU work (e.g., to set the LLU access price) is detrimental to the market.\n\nNew entrants, on the other hand, argue that since they cannot economically duplicate the incumbent's local loop, they cannot actually provide certain services, such as ADSL without LLU, thus allowing the incumbent to monopolise the respective potentially competitive market(s) and stifle innovation. They point out that alternative access technologies, such as wireless local loop, have proven uncompetitive and/or impractical, and that under current pricing models, the incumbent is in many cases, depending on the regulatory model, guaranteed a fair price for the use of its facilities, including an appropriate return on investment. Finally, they argue that the ILECs generally did not construct their local loop in a competitive, risky, market environment, but under legal monopoly protection and using taxpayer's money, which means, according to the new entrants, that ILECs ought not to be entitled to continue to extract regulated rates of return, which often include monopoly rents from the local loop.\n\nMost industrially developed nations, including the USA, Australia and the European Union Member States, and India have introduced regulatory frameworks providing for LLU. Given the above-mentioned problems, regulators face the challenging task of regulating a market that is changing very rapidly, without stifling any type of innovation, and without improperly disadvantaging any competitor.\n\nThe process has been long - the first action in the EU resulted from a report written for the European Commission in 1993. It took several years for the EU legislation to require unbundling and then in individual EU countries the process took further time to mature to become practical and economic rather than simply being a legal possibility.\n\nIn 1996 the United States Telecommunication Act (in section 251) defined the unbundled access as: \nThe 1993 report referred to the logical requirement to unbundle optical fibre access but recommended deferral to a later date when fibre access had become more common. In 2006 there were the first signs that (as a result of the municipal fibre networks movement and example such as Sweden where unbundled local loop fibre is commercially available from both the incumbent and competitors) policy may yet evolve in this direction.\n\nSome provisions of WTO telecommunications law can be read to require unbundling:\nBULLET::::- Sect. 5(a) of the GATS Annex on Telecommunications requires WTO Members to guarantee service suppliers \"access to and use of public telecommunications transport networks ... for the supply of a service\". New entrants argue that without LLU they cannot supply services such as ADSL.\nBULLET::::- Sect. 2.2(b) of the 1998 Reference Paper, to which some Members have subscribed, requires \"sufficiently unbundled interconnection\" with major providers. However, the Paper's definition of interconnection appears to exclude LLU.\nBULLET::::- Sect. 1 of the Reference Paper requires Members to maintain \"appropriate measures ... for the purpose of preventing [major] suppliers ... from engaging in or continuing anti-competitive practices.\" New entrants argue that such practices include not giving competitors access to facilities essential to market entry, such as the local loop.\n\nThe question has not been settled before a WTO judicial body, and, at any rate, these obligations only apply where the respective WTO Member has committed itself to open its basic telecommunications market to competition. About 80 (mostly developed) Members have done so since 1998.\n\nLLU has not been implemented in Indian cities yet. However, BSNL recently stated that it will open up its copper loops for private participation. In addition to this, the proliferation of WiMax and cable broadband has increased broadband penetration and market competition. By 2008 the price war had reduced basic broadband prices to INR 250 (USD 6), including line rental without any long term contracts. In rural areas, the state player, BSNL, is still the leading, and often the only supplier.\nAlthough BSNL is a monopoly, it is used as a tool to ensure competition by the government.\n\nThe implementation of local loop unbundling is a requirement of European Union policy on competition in the telecommunications sector and has been introduced, at various stages of development, in all member states (Operators with Significant Market Power shall publish (from 31 December 2000, and keep updated) a postreference offer for unbundled access to their local loops and related facilities. The offer shall be sufficiently unbundled so that the beneficiary does not have to pay for network elements or facilities which are not necessary for the supply of its services, and shall contain a description of the components of the offer, associated terms and conditions, including charges).\n\nEuropean States that have been approved for membership to the EU have an obligation to introduce LLU as part of the liberalisation of their communications sector.\n\nBy 14 January 2006, 210,000 local loop connections had been unbundled from BT operation under local loop unbundling. Ofcom had hoped that 1 million local loop connections would be unbundled by June 2006. However, as reported by The Register, on 15 June 2006, the figure had reached only 500,000, but was growing by 20,000 a week. Ofcom announced in November 2006 that 1,000,000 connections had been unbundled. By April 2007, the figure was 2,000,000.\n\nBy June 2006, AOL UK had unbundled 100,000 lines through its £120 million investment, making it the largest single LLU operator in the UK market.\n\nOn 10 October 2006, Carphone Warehouse announced the purchase of AOL UK, the leading LLU operator, for £370m.\nThis made Carphone Warehouse the third largest broadband provider and the largest LLU operator with more than 150,000 LLU customers.\n\nOn 8 May 2009, TalkTalk, who were owned by Carphone Warehouse, announced that they would purchase ailing Tiscali UK's assets for £235 million. On 30 June 2009, Tiscali sold its UK subsidiary to Carphone Warehouse following regulatory approval from the European Union. This purchase made TalkTalk the biggest home broadband supplier in the UK, with 4.25 million home broadband subscribers, compared with BT's 3.9 million. The service was rebranded as TalkTalk in January 2010.\n\nMost LLU operators only unbundle the broadband service leaving the traditional telephone service using BT's core equipment (with or without the provision of carrier preselect). Where the traditional telephone service is also unbundled (full LLU), operators usually prohibit the facility where selected calls can be made using the networks of other telephone providers (i.e. accessed using a three- to five-digit prefix beginning with '1'). These calls can usually still be made by using an 0800 or other non-geographic (NGN) access code.\n\nAlthough regulators in the UK admitted that the market could provide competitive offerings in due time, the purpose of mandatory local loop unbundling in the United Kingdom was to speed the delivery of advanced services to consumers.\n\nPursuant to the Telecommunications Act of 1996, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) requires that ILECs lease local loops to competitors (CLECs). Prices are set through a market mechanism.\n\nThe Commerce Commission recommended against local loop unbundling in late 2003 as Telecom New Zealand (now Spark New Zealand) offered a market-led solution. In May 2004 this was confirmed by the Government, despite the intense \"call4change\" campaign by some of Telecom's competitors. Part of Telecom's commitment to the Commerce Commission to avoid unbundling was a promise to deliver 250,000 new residential broadband connections by the end of 2005, one-third of which were to be wholesaled through other providers. Telecom failed to achieve the number of wholesale connections required, despite an attempt by management to claim that the agreement had been for only one-third of the growth rather than one-third of the total. That claim was rejected by the Commerce Commission, and the publicised figure of 83,333 wholesale connections out of 250,000 was held to be the true target. The achieved number was less than 50,000 wholesale connections, despite total connections exceeding 300,000.\n\nOn 3 May 2006 the Government announced it would require the unbundling of the local loop. This was in response to concerns about the low levels of broadband uptake. Regulatory action such as information disclosure, the separate accounting of Telecom New Zealand business operations, and enhanced Commerce Commission monitoring was announced.\n\nOn 9 August 2007 Telecom released the keys to exchanges in Glenfield and Ponsonby in Auckland. In March 2008 Telecom activated ADSL 2+ services from five Auckland exchanges – Glenfield, Browns Bay, Ellerslie, Mt Albert and Ponsonby – with further plans for the rest of Auckland and other major centres, allowing other ISPs to take advantage.\n\nSwitzerland is one of the last OECD nations to provide for unbundling, because the Swiss Federal Supreme Court held in 2001 that the 1996 Swiss Telecommunications Act did not require it. The government then enacted an ordinance providing for unbundling in 2003, and Parliament amended the act in 2006. While infrastructure-based access is now generally available, unbundled fast bitstream access is limited to a period of four years after the entry into force of the act.\n\nUnbundling requests tend to be tied up before the courts, however, because unlike in the EU, Swiss law does not provide for an \"ex ante\" regulation of access conditions by the regulator. Instead, under the Swiss \"ex post\" regulation system, each new entrant must first try to reach an individual agreement with Swisscom, the state-owned ILEC.\n\nMandatory local loop unbundling policy (termed Type II Interconnection (Traditional Chinese:第二類互連) in Hong Kong) started on July 1, 1995 (the same day of telephone market liberalisation), to ensure choice to customers. After 10 years, new operators have built their networks covering a large region of Hong Kong; the government considered it a good time to withdraw mandatory local loop unbundling policy, to persuade operators to build their own networks and let businesses run themselves with a minimum of government intervention. At the meeting of the Executive Council on 6 July 2004, the government decided that the regulatory intervention under the current Type II interconnection policy applicable to telephone exchanges for individual buildings covered by such exchanges should be withdrawn, subject to conditions documented in this Statement of the Telecommunications Authority. After that, the terms of interconnection will be negotiated between telephone operators. Hong Kong is the only advanced economy that has withdrawn the mandatory local loop unbundling policy.\n\nOn 25 May 2006 the Minister of Communications of South Africa Dr Ivy Matsepe-Casaburri established the Local Loop Unbundling Committee chaired by Professor Tshilidzi Marwala to recommend the appropriate local loop unbundling models. The Local Loop Unbundling Committee submitted a report to Minister Matsepe-Casaburri on 25 May 2007. This report recommends that models that permit customers to access both voice and data be offered by many different companies. The models recommended are Full Unbundling, Line Sharing and Bitstream Access. It is recommended that customers should exercise carrier pre-selection and thus be able to switch between service providers. It is also recommended that an organisation be created to manage the local loop and that this organisation should be under the guidance of the regulator Icasa and that Icasa be capacitated in terms of resources. The committee recommended that service providers approved by Icasa should have access to the telephone exchange infrastructure whenever necessary. The committee recommended that a regulatory guideline be established and be managed by Icasa to guarantee that strategic issues like quality of the local loop be optimised for regulation and delivery of services. Based on this report the Minister has issued policy directives to Icasa to move swiftly with the unbundling process. At the end of March 2010 nothing has happened yet, however a deadline of November 1, 2011 was set by the Minister of Communications for monopoly holder, Telkom SA to finalise the unbundling process.\n\nBULLET::::- Forced-access regulation\nBULLET::::- Local number portability\nBULLET::::- Loop Management System\nBULLET::::- Mobile number portability\nBULLET::::- Product bundling\nBULLET::::- Sub-loop unbundling\n\nBULLET::::- OECD, \"Universal Service and Rate Restructuring in Telecommunications\", Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Publishing, 1991.\n\nBULLET::::- OECD, Developments in Local Loop Unbundling\nBULLET::::- LLU Exchange List\nBULLET::::- EU telecommunications liberalization framework\nBULLET::::- Local Loop Unbundling - What is it?\nBULLET::::- LLU Availability\nBULLET::::- MAC Codes - UK Guide for obtaining your MAC code\n"}
{"id": "18459", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18459", "title": "Leda", "text": "Leda\n\nLeda and similar may refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- Leda (river), tributary of the Ems in Germany\nBULLET::::- Leda, Western Australia, a suburb of Perth, Western Australia\nBULLET::::- Leda, Burkina Faso\nBULLET::::- Leda Ridge, Antarctica\n\nBULLET::::- Leda (moon), a moon of Jupiter\nBULLET::::- 38 Leda, an asteroid\nBULLET::::- Leda, the original proposed name for exoplanet Thestias\nBULLET::::- Lyon-Meudon Extragalactic Database, an astronomical catalog of galaxies\nBULLET::::- Large Aperture Experiment to Detect the Dark Ages, a radio interferometer\n\nBULLET::::- LEDA, the Library of Efficient Data types and Algorithms\n\nBULLET::::- \"Leda, the Swiss Milkmaid\", a \"Demi-Caractère ballet\"\nBULLET::::- Leda Serene Films, a film, television, and theatre production company based in Toronto, Canada\nBULLET::::- \"\", a 1985 Japanese OVA\nBULLET::::- \"Web of Passion\", a French film released in the US as \"Leda\"\n\nBULLET::::- \"Leda-class frigate\", a type of frigate in the British Royal Navy\nBULLET::::- HMS \"Leda\", the name of six ships of the British Royal Navy\nBULLET::::- TS \"Leda\", North Sea ferry\n\nBULLET::::- Leda (mythology), queen of Sparta\nBULLET::::- Leda Cosmides (born 1957), American psychologist\nBULLET::::- Ferdinando Leda (born 1980), Brazilian football player\nBULLET::::- Leda Gloria (1912–1997), Italian film actress\nBULLET::::- Leda Luss Luyken (born 1952), Greek/American conceptual artist, who lives and works in German\nBULLET::::- Leda Mileva (1920–2013), Bulgarian writer, translator and diplomat\nBULLET::::- Leda Sanford (born 1933), author, speaker, former publisher and former advertising director\nBULLET::::- Leda clay, also called quick clay, a unique form of marine clay\nBULLET::::- LEDA — ICAO code for Lleida–Alguaire Airport\nBULLET::::- Project Leda, a set of female clones in the TV series \"Orphan Black\"\n\nBULLET::::- leader\nBULLET::::- Leda and the Swan (disambiguation)\n"}
{"id": "18460", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18460", "title": "Lysithea (moon)", "text": "Lysithea (moon)\n\nLysithea ( , ; ) is a prograde irregular satellite of Jupiter. It was discovered by Seth Barnes Nicholson in 1938 at Mount Wilson Observatory and is named after the mythological Lysithea, daughter of Oceanus and one of Zeus' lovers.\n\nLysithea did not receive its present name until 1975; before then, it was simply known as . It was sometimes called \"Demeter\" from 1955 to 1975.\n\nIt belongs to the Himalia group, five moons orbiting between 11 and 13 Gm from Jupiter at an inclination of about 28.3°. Its orbital elements are as of January 2000. They are continuously changing due to solar and planetary perturbations.\n\nBULLET::::- Irregular satellites\nBULLET::::- Jupiter's moons in fiction\n\nBULLET::::- Lysithea: Overview by NASA's Solar System Exploration\nBULLET::::- David Jewitt pages\nBULLET::::- Jupiter's Known Satellites (by Scott S. Sheppard)\n"}
{"id": "18461", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18461", "title": "Leda and the Swan", "text": "Leda and the Swan\n\nLeda and the Swan is a story and subject in art from Greek mythology in which the god Zeus, in the form of a swan, seduces (or in some versions, rapes) Leda. According to later Greek mythology, Leda bore Helen and Polydeuces, children of Zeus, while at the same time bearing Castor and Clytemnestra, children of her husband Tyndareus, the King of Sparta. In the W. B. Yeats version, it is subtly suggested that Clytemnestra, although being the daughter of Tyndareus, has somehow been traumatized by what the swan has done to her mother (see below). According to many versions of the story, Zeus took the form of a swan and seduced Leda on the same night she slept with her husband King Tyndareus. In some versions, she laid two eggs from which the children hatched. In other versions, Helen is a daughter of Nemesis, the goddess who personified the disaster that awaited those suffering from the pride of Hubris.\n\nThe subject was rarely seen in the large-scale sculpture of antiquity, although a representation of Leda in sculpture has been attributed in modern times to Timotheus (\"compare illustration, below left\"); small-scale sculptures survive showing both reclining and standing poses, in cameos and engraved gems, rings, and terracotta oil lamps. Thanks to the literary renditions of Ovid and Fulgentius it was a well-known myth through the Middle Ages, but emerged more prominently as a classicizing theme, with erotic overtones, in the Italian Renaissance.\n\nThe subject undoubtedly owed its sixteenth-century popularity to the paradox that it was considered more acceptable to depict a woman in the act of copulation with a swan than with a man. The earliest depictions show the pair love-making with some explicitness—more so than in any depictions of a human pair made by artists of high quality in the same period.\nThe fate of the erotic album \"I Modi\" some years later shows why this was so. The theme remained a dangerous one in the Renaissance, as the fates of the three best known paintings on the subject demonstrate. The earliest depictions were all in the more private medium of the old master print, and mostly from Venice. They were often based on the extremely brief account in the \"Metamorphoses\" of Ovid (who does not imply a rape), though Lorenzo de' Medici had both a Roman sarcophagus and an antique carved gem of the subject, both with reclining Ledas.\n\nThe earliest known explicit Renaissance depiction is one of the many woodcut illustrations to \"Hypnerotomachia Poliphili\", a book published in Venice in 1499. This shows Leda and the Swan making love with gusto, despite being on top of a triumphal car, being pulled along and surrounded by a considerable crowd. An engraving dating to 1503 at the latest, by Giovanni Battista Palumba, also shows the couple in coitus, but in deserted countryside. Another engraving, certainly from Venice and attributed by many to Giulio Campagnola, shows a love-making scene, but there Leda's attitude is highly ambiguous. Palumba made another engraving, perhaps in about 1512, presumably influenced by Leonardo's sketches for his earlier composition, showing Leda seated on the ground and playing with her children.\n\nThere were also significant depictions in the smaller decorative arts, also private media. Benvenuto Cellini made a medallion, now in Vienna, early in his career, and Antonio Abondio one on the obverse of a medal celebrating a Roman courtesan.\n\nLeonardo da Vinci began making studies in 1504 for a painting, apparently never executed, of Leda seated on the ground with her children. In 1508 he painted a different composition of the subject, with a nude standing Leda cuddling the Swan, with the two sets of infant twins (also nude), and their huge broken egg-shells. The original of this is lost, probably deliberately destroyed, and was last recorded in the French royal Château de Fontainebleau in 1625 by Cassiano dal Pozzo. However it is known from many copies, of which the earliest are probably the \"Spiridon Leda\", perhaps by a studio assistant and now in the Uffizi, and the one at Wilton House in England (illustrated).\n\nAlso lost, and probably deliberately destroyed, is Michelangelo's tempera painting of the pair making love, commissioned in 1529 by Alfonso d'Este for his palazzo in Ferrara, and taken to France for the royal collection in 1532; it was at Fontainebleau in 1536. Michelangelo's cartoon for the work—given to his assistant Antonio Mini, who used it for several copies for French patrons before his death in 1533—survived for over a century. This composition is known from many copies, including an by Cornelis Bos, c. 1563; the marble sculpture by Bartolomeo Ammanati in the Bargello, Florence; two copies by the young Rubens on his Italian voyage, and the painting after Michelangelo, ca. 1530, in the National Gallery, London. The Michelangelo composition, of about 1530, shows Mannerist tendencies of elongation and twisted pose (the \"figura serpentinata\") that were popular at the time. In addition, a sculptural group, similar to the Prado Roman group illustrated, was believed until at least the 19th century to be by Michelangelo.\n\nThe last very famous Renaissance painting of the subject is Correggio's elaborate composition of c. 1530 (Berlin); this too was damaged whilst in the collection of Philippe II, Duke of Orléans, the Regent of France in the minority of Louis XV. His son Louis, though a great lover of painting, had periodic crises of conscience about his way of life, in one of which he attacked the figure of Leda with a knife. The damage has been repaired, though full restoration to the original condition was not possible. Both the Leonardo and Michelangelo paintings also disappeared when in the collection of the French Royal Family, and are believed to have been destroyed by more moralistic widows or successors of their owners.\n\nThere were many other depictions in the Renaissance, including cycles of book illustrations to Ovid, but most were derivative of the compositions mentioned above. The subject remained largely confined to Italy, and sometimes France – Northern versions are rare. After something of a hiatus in the 18th and early 19th centuries (apart from a very sensuous Boucher,), Leda and the Swan became again a popular motif in the later 19th and 20th centuries, with many Symbolist and Expressionist treatments.\n\nAlso from that era were sculptures of the theme by Antonin Mercié and Max Klinger.\n\nCy Twombly executed an abstract version of \"Leda and the Swan\" in 1962. It was purchased by Larry Gagosian for $52.9 million at Christie's May 2017 Post-War and Contemporary Art Evening Sale.\n\nAvant-garde filmmaker Kurt Kren along with other members of the Viennese Actionist movement, including Otto Muehl and Hermann Nitsch, made a film-performance called \"7/64 Leda mit der Schwan\" in 1964. The film retains the classical motif, portraying, for most of its duration, a young woman embracing a swan.\n\nPhotographer Charlie White included a portrait of Leda in his \"And Jeopardize the Integrity of the Hull\" series. Zeus, as the swan, only appears metaphorically.\n\nThere is a life-sized marble statue of \"Leda and the Swan\" at the Jai Vilas Palace Museum in Gwalior, Northern Madhya Pradesh, India.\n\nAmerican artist and photographer Carole Harmel created the \"Bird\" series (1983), a Jean Cocteau-influenced collection of photographs that explored the \"Leda and the Swan\" myth in tightly cropped, voyeuristic images of a nude female and an undefinable birdlike creature hinting at intimacy. \n\nBristol Museum and Art Gallery currently exhibits Karl Weschke's \"Leda and the Swan\", painted in 1986.\n\nThe Winnipeg Art Gallery in Canada has, in its permanent collection, a ceramic \"Leda and the Swan\" by Japanese-born American artist Akio Takamori.\n\nThere is a sculpture in neon lights depicting Leda and the Swan in Berlin, near Sonnenallee metro station and the Estrel hotel, opposite Griessmühle.\n\nRonsard wrote a poem on \"La Défloration de Lède\", perhaps inspired by the Michelangelo, which he may well have known. Like many artists, he imagines the beak penetrating Leda's vagina.\n\n\"Leda and the Swan\" is a sonnet by William Butler Yeats first published in the \"Dial\" in 1923. Combining psychological realism with a mystic vision, it describes the swan's rape of Leda. It also alludes to the Trojan war, which will be provoked by the abduction of Helen, who will be begotten by Zeus on Leda (along with Castor and Pollux, in some versions of the myth). Clytaemnestra, who killed her husband, Agamemnon, leader of the Greeks at Troy, was also supposed to have hatched from one of Leda's eggs. The poem is regularly praised as one of Yeats's masterpieces. Camille Paglia, who called the poem \"the greatest poem of the twentieth century,\" and said \"all human beings, like Leda, are caught up moment by moment in the 'white rush' of experience. For Yeats, the only salvation is the shapeliness and stillness of art.\" See external links for a bas relief arranged in the position as described by Yeats.\n\nNicaraguan poet Rubén Darío's 1892 poem \"Leda\" contains an oblique description of the rape, watched over by the god Pan.\n\nH.D. (Hilda Doolittle) also wrote a poem called \"Leda\" in 1919, suggested to be from the perspective of Leda. The description of the sexual action going on makes it seem almost beautiful, as if Leda had given her consent.\n\nIn the song \"Power and Glory\" from Lou Reed's 1992 album \"Magic and Loss\", Reed recalls the experience of seeing his friend dying of cancer and makes reference to the myth, \"I saw isotopes introduced into his lungs / trying to stop the cancerous spread / And it made me think of Leda and The Swan / and gold being made from lead\"\n\nSylvia Plath alludes to the myth in her radio play \"Three Women\" written for the BBC in 1962. The play features the voices of three women. The first is a married woman who keeps her baby. The second is a secretary who suffers a miscarriage. The third voice, a girl who is pregnant and leaves her baby, mentions \"the great swan, with its terrible look,/ Coming at me,\" insinuating that the girl was raped. The play is about the disconnection of women in society and challenges societal expectations of childbirth.\n\nSeveral references to the myth are presented in novels by Angela Carter, including \"Nights at the Circus\" and \"The Magic Toyshop\". In the latter novel, the myth is brought to life in the form of a performance in which a frightened young girl is forced to act as Leda in accompaniment with a large mechanical swan.\n\nThere is a reference to Leda and the Swan in Dorothea Benton Frank's book \"All Summer Long\" published in 2016.\n\nA version of the Leda and the Swan story is the foundation myth in the Canadian futuristic thriller television series \"Orphan Black\" which aired over 5 seasons from 2013 to 2017. A corporation uses genetic engineering to create a series of female clones (Leda) and a series of male clones (Castor) who are also brothers and sisters clones as they derive from one mother who is a chimera with male and female genomes. \n\nIn April 2012 an art gallery in London, England, was instructed by the police to remove a modern exhibit of Leda and the Swan. The law concerned was Section 63 of the Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008, condemning 'violent pornography', brought in by the Labour Party government of 2005–2010.\n\nBULLET::::- Bull, Malcolm, \"The Mirror of the Gods, How Renaissance Artists Rediscovered the Pagan Gods\", Oxford UP, 2005,\n\nBULLET::::- Version of Leda and the Swan myth, in the \"Fabulae\" of Hyginus\nBULLET::::- Bas relief from the British Museum that appears as the scene does in the Yeats sonnet\nBULLET::::- Ovid Illustrated – large site from the University of Virginia, where many depictions of Leda and the Swan from Renaissance and later editions of the Metamorphoses will (eventually) be found.\nBULLET::::- Yeats' \"Leda and the Swan\": an image's coming of age\nBULLET::::- Greek vase from the Getty\nBULLET::::- Samuelson blog with thoughts and pictures\nBULLET::::- 16th century Venetian painting by Il Padovanino\nBULLET::::- Alternative detail view of the Getty vase\nBULLET::::- Roman statue from the Getty\nBULLET::::- Baroque bronze from the Getty\nBULLET::::- Sculpture c 1900\nBULLET::::- \"Leda and the swan\" – Bronze miniature\nBULLET::::- \"Leda and the Swan\", by Tintoretto, from the Galleria degli Uffizi, Florence; explore other depictions of \"Leda and the Swan\" and compare to similar themes\nBULLET::::- Jai Vilas Palace Museum, Gwalior, India\n"}
{"id": "18463", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18463", "title": "Lions Clubs International", "text": "Lions Clubs International\n\nLions Clubs International (LCI) is an international non-political service organization established originally in 1917 in Chicago, Illinois, by Melvin Jones. It is now headquartered in Oak Brook, Illinois. , it had over 46,000 local clubs and more than 1.4 million members (Lions & LEO) in more than 200 countries around the world. \n\nLions Clubs International, a service membership organization of over 1.7 million members worldwide (as of June 2019), was founded in Evansville, Indiana on 24 October 1916 by Dr. William Perry Woods and subsequently evolved as an international service organization under the guidance and supervision of its Secretary, Melvin Jones.\n\nIn 1917, Melvin Jones, was a 38-year-old Chicago business leader who told members of his local business club they should reach beyond business issues and address the betterment of their communities and the world. Jones' group, the Business Circle of Chicago, agreed. After contacting similar groups around the United States, an organizational meeting was held on June 7, 1917, in Chicago, Illinois, US. The Business Circle subsequently joined one of the invited groups, the \"International Association of Lions Clubs\" and at a national convention held in Dallas, Texas, later that year, those who were assembled: (1) adopted a Constitution, By-Laws, Code of Ethics and an Emblem; (2) established as a main tenet \"unselfish service to others\", (3) unanimously elected Dr. William Perry Woods as its first President effectively securing his leadership for the first two years of the existence of the International Association of Lions, and (4) selected Melvin Jones to serve as the Organization's Secretary-Treasurer.\nThe Lions motto is \"We Serve\". Local Lions Club programs include sight conservation, hearing and speech conservation, diabetes awareness, youth outreach, international relations, environmental issues, and many other programs. The discussion of politics and religion is forbidden. The LIONS acronym also stands for Liberty, Intelligence, Our Nations' Safety.\n\nThe stated purposes of Lions Clubs International are:\nBULLET::::- To Organize, charter and supervise service clubs to be known as Lions clubs.\nBULLET::::- To Coordinate the activities and standardize the administration of Lions clubs.\nBULLET::::- To Create and foster a spirit of understanding among the peoples of the world.\nBULLET::::- To Promote the principles of good government and good citizenship.\nBULLET::::- To Take an active interest in the civic, cultural, social and moral welfare of the community.\nBULLET::::- To Unite the clubs in the bonds of friendship, good fellowship and mutual understanding.\nBULLET::::- To Provide a forum for the open discussion of all matters of public interest; provided, however, that partisan politics and sectarian religion shall not be debated by club members.\nBULLET::::- To Encourage service-minded people to serve their community without personal financial reward, and to encourage efficiency and promote high ethical standards in commerce, industry, professions, public works and private endeavors.\n\nMuch of the focus of Lions Clubs International work as a service club organization is to raise money for worthy causes. All funds raised by Lions Clubs from the general public are used for charitable purposes, and administrative costs are kept strictly separate and paid for by members. Some of the money raised for a club’s charity account goes toward projects that benefit the local community of an individual club.\n\nLions Clubs plan and participate in a wide variety of service projects that meet the international goals of Lions Clubs International as well as the needs of their local communities. Examples include donations to hospices, or community campaigns such as \"Message in a bottle\", a United Kingdom and Ireland initiative which places a plastic bottle with critical medical information inside the refrigerators of vulnerable people. Money is also raised for international purposes. Some of this is donated in reaction to events such as the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and the 2013 Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda) where Lions and LCIF provided disaster relief locally and from around the world, with donations and commitments surpassing US$1 million. Other money is used to support international campaigns, coordinated by the Lions Clubs International Foundation (LCIF), such as Sight First and Lions World Sight Day, which was launched in 1998 to draw world media attention to the plight of sight loss in the third world. Lions take on all sorts of various fundraisers to fund these projects. For example, the Dublin, Virginia Lions Club host two flea markets a year, and sell their famous Lion Dog, a fresh prepared variation of a corn dog.\n\nLions focus on work for the blind and visually impaired began when Helen Keller addressed the international convention at Cedar Point, Ohio, on 30 June 1925 and charged Lions to be \"Knights of the Blind\".\n\nLions also have a strong commitment to community hearing- and cancer-screening projects. In Perth, Western Australia, they have conducted hearing screening for over 30 years and provided seed funding for the Lions Ear and Hearing Institute established September 9, 2001, a center of excellence in the diagnosis, management, and research of ear and hearing disorders. In Perth, Lions have also been instrumental in the establishment of the Lions Eye Institute. In Brisbane, Queensland, the Lions Medical Research Foundation provides funding to a number of researchers. Ian Frazer's initial work, leading to the development of a HPV vaccine for the human papillomavirus which could lead to cervical cancer, was funded by the Lions Medical Research Foundation.\n\nLions Clubs International has supported the work of the United Nations since that organization's inception in 1945, when it was one of the non-governmental organizations invited to assist in the drafting of the United Nations Charter in San Francisco, California.\n\nLions Clubs International Foundation is \"Lions helping Lions serve the world\". Donations provide funding in the form of grants to financially assist Lions districts with large-scale humanitarian projects that are too expensive and costly for Lions to finance on their own.\nThe Foundation aids Lions in making a greater impact in their local communities, as well as around the world. Through LCIF, Lions ease pain and suffering and bring healing and hope to people worldwide. Major initiatives of the foundation include the following:\nBULLET::::- SightFirst programs\nBULLET::::- Childhood Blindness Project\nBULLET::::- Lions Eye Health Program (LEHP, pronounced \"leap\")\nBULLET::::- River blindness/Trachoma\nBULLET::::- SightFirst China Action\nBULLET::::- Sight for Kids\nBULLET::::- Other sight programs\nBULLET::::- Core 4 Preschool\nBULLET::::- Vision Screening\nBULLET::::- Disability programs\nBULLET::::- Lions World Services for the Blind\nBULLET::::- Diabetes Prevention/Treatment\nBULLET::::- Habitat for Humanity Partnership\nBULLET::::- Lions Affordable Hearing Aid Project\nBULLET::::- Low Vision\nBULLET::::- Special Olympics Opening Eyes\nBULLET::::- Youth Programs\nBULLET::::- LEO Clubs\nBULLET::::- Lions Quest\nBULLET::::- Lion Cubs\n\nUpon endorsing the biggest ever collaborative disease eradication programme called the London Declaration on Neglected Tropical Diseases launched on 30 January 2012 in London, the organization has implemented SightFirst program by which it aims to eradicate blindness due to trachoma, one of the neglected tropical diseases. It has allocated over US$11 million in 10 countries for eye surgeries, medical training, distribution of Zithromax and tetracycline, and sanitary services. It has also announced US$6.9 million funding to support the Government of China for the same cause.\n\nMembership in the Lions Club is by \"invitation only\" as mandated by its constitution and by-laws. All member applicants need a sponsor who is an active member and of good standing in the club they intend to join. While sponsorship may be obtained by an applicant in order to become a legitimate member, sponsorship is no guarantee of membership. Acceptance of membership is still subject to the approval of the majority of the club's board of directors. Several clubs are even difficult for applicants to join in. A Lions Club chooses its members diligently as it requires time and financial commitments. Prospective applicants must be a person of good moral character in his or her community. Attendance at meetings is encouraged on a monthly or fortnightly basis. Due to the hierarchical nature of Lions Clubs International, members have the opportunity to advance from a local club to an office at the zone, district, multiple district, and international levels.\n\nIn 1987 the constitution of Lions Clubs International was amended to allow for women to become members. Since then many clubs have admitted women, but some all-male clubs still exist. In 2003, 8 out of 17 members at the Lions Club in Worcester, England, resigned when a woman joined the club. Despite this setback the club has managed to rebuild and now has 19 members, 7 of whom are women. Women's membership numbers continue to grow throughout the association. Lions club 318d is also a member of the international club.\n\nAmong the famous and noteworthy members of Lions International are former U.S. President, Jimmy Carter; Her Royal Highness Sophie, Countess of Wessex, a member of the Wokingham Lions Club and Royal Patron of the Lions Clubs of the British Isles and Ireland;; Amelia Earhart, pioneer U. S. aviator, author, and advocate for women's rights; Richard E. Byrd, deputy admiral of the United States Navy, aviator, pioneer and polar explorer; and Helen Keller, American writer, lecturer and social activist.\n\nLions Clubs International gives various awards for outstanding merits.\n\nThe Medal of Merit (MM) is the highest award from \"Lions Clubs International\" to non-members for outstanding contributions to Lions Clubs International and its goals.\n\nThe District Governor Award (DGA) is one of the highest awards from Lions Clubs International to its members having done exceptional services.\n\nThe President's Appreciation Award (PAA) is the highest award that can be awarded to an outstanding club.\n\nThe Melvin Jones Fellowship (MJF) Award is the highest recognition from the \"Lions Clubs International Foundation\" being given to members who have rendered outstanding community services.\n\nThe organization became international on 12 March 1920, when the first club in Canada was established in Windsor, Ontario. Lions Clubs have since spread across the globe and have a current membership roster of 1.4 million members worldwide.\n\nIn addition to adult Lions Clubs, the Lions family includes Lioness Clubs, Leo Clubs, Campus Lions Clubs and Lion Cubs. These divisions are parts of Lions Clubs International.\n\nLioness Club Membership is generally for women, with exceptions of men also becoming Lioness members nowadays. They are formed under a parent Lions Club. The Lions Club thus becomes the Parent Club for the Lioness Club. Naming of the Club is also like that of the Lions Club—e.g., Lions Club of Satara United Dist 323D-1 forming and sponsoring a Lioness Club Satara United District 323D-1. In many areas, particularly the United States, Lioness clubs have disbanded and merged into their parent clubs to make a more effective club as a whole.\n\nLeo Clubs are an extension of the Lions service organization which aims to encourage community service and involvement from a young age. Much like Lioness Clubs, Leo Clubs are sponsored by a parent Lions Club. Leo Clubs are a common school-based organization with members between the ages of 12 and 18 from the same school, these are commonly referred to as \"Alpha Leo Clubs\". Community based clubs also exist; these generally cater for 18- to 30-year-olds, and are referred to as \"Omega Leo Clubs\". Leo Clubs are required to have a Leo Club Advisor, a member of the sponsoring Lions Club who attends meetings and provides general advice to the club. Lions International includes more than 250,000 Leo club members in over 150 countries.\n\nMany Leos join a Campus Lions Club if they attend a university or college after high school graduation. There are more than 600 Campus Lions clubs in the world including nearly 13,000 members on college and university campuses in Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, England, Ethiopia, Germany, India, Indonesia, Italy, Mongolia, Nepal, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Russia, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Uganda, United States, Venezuela, Kenya, Zimbabwe, Legon Lions Club in University of Ghana, KNUST Campus Lions and the University of KwaZulu-Natal Campus Lions Club which is the only active Campus Lions Club currently operating in the Republic of South Africa.\n\nSpecialty Lions Clubs\nThese are chartered to focus on a specific need. For instance, Diabetes Clubs, Champion Lions Clubs (Special Olympics), Vision, hearing, homeless/hunger etc. Specialty clubs may also be ethnic based or its members may have similar interestes - for instance a gardening Lions Club whose members all have interests in gardening.\n\nLion Cubs is a youth service organization for the elementary aged students (ages eight to twelve). The first club was chartered in the Owen J. Roberts School District in Pottstown, Pennsylvania, United States. It was developed for students in 4th through 6th grade, and therefore too young to be a Leo Club member. The clubs (one club in each of five elementary schools) started their meetings and activities in September 2008 and were officially chartered March 24, 2009. The club is sponsored by the Coventry Lions Club of District 14P. The Lion Cubs first year (2008–09) had 179 charter members.\n\nAn international convention is held annually in cities across the globe for members to meet other Lions, elect the coming year's officers, and partake in the many activities planned. At the convention, Lions can participate in elections and parades, display and discuss fundraisers and service projects, and trade pins and other souvenirs. The first convention was held in 1917, the first year of the club's existence, in Dallas, Texas. The 2006 convention was due to be held in New Orleans, but damage sustained during Hurricane Katrina meant that the convention had to be relocated to Boston.\n\nIndonesian Islamic hardliners have called for a ban on the Lions Club, saying it is part of a Zionist conspiracy. The club has been called an \"infidel\" front for Freemasonry and the world Zionist movement and threatened Islam in the world's most populous Muslim country.\n\nGiven that many Freemasons are members of Lions Clubs, and its founder, Melvin Jones, was also a Freemason, modern conspiracy theories have claimed that the Lions are connected to and act cohesively with Freemasonry. One example is found on Martha F. Lee's \"Conspiracy Rising: Conspiracy Thinking and American Public Life\". It says that the \"Freemasons are apparently in cahoots with the Lions Clubs and involved in plots ranging from the distribution of aspartame to control the human mind, to the death of John Paul I, to an apparent plot to spread Zionism.\"\n\nThis perception, according to a Freemasonry website, can be traced to John Robison and the Abbé Barruel's unfounded writings on the causes of the French Revolution, Léo Taxil's late 19th-century hoax and the debunked \"Protocols of the Elders of Zion\".\n\nWhile there is no direct link between the Lions and the Masons, they are compatible and may have overlapping membership, as evidenced by a speech delivered in 2004 to a Lions Club by a Mason named James F. Kirk-White. The topic of the talk was \"Sharing Freemasonry Within Your Community\". Their compatibility, moreover, is evidenced by the Masons in Albion, New York offering space for the Lions at a Masonic Lodge. Others also believe that the Lions Clubs actually are a \"secret society\" that has a great deal of secret ritual within its structure. According to them the Lions are one of those social groups belonging to a secret society that demand an oath of allegiance to join.\n\nControversial German Author, Jan Udo Holey, often known by his penname Jan van Helsing, wrote in his 1995 book \"Geheimgesellschaften und ihre Macht im 20. Jahrhundert\" (Secret Societies and Their Power in the 20th Century) that the Lions was founded by the B'nai B'rith in Chicago in 1917 and that, like the Freemasons and other secret societies, 90% of its members are used by the elites and have no inkling of what happens in the upper echelons. Holey explained that in the lower degrees of the hierarchy these organizations are much into social work and present really good programs.\n\n"}
{"id": "18465", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18465", "title": "Laches (equity)", "text": "Laches (equity)\n\nLaches ( \"latches\", }; Law French: \"remissness\", \"dilatoriness\", from Old French \"laschesse\") refers to a lack of diligence and activity in making a legal claim, or moving forward with legal enforcement of a right, particularly in regard to equity; hence, it is an \"unreasonable\" delay that can be viewed as prejudicing the opposing [defending] party. When asserted in litigation, it is an equity defense, that is, a defense to a claim for an equitable remedy. The person invoking laches is asserting that an opposing party has \"slept on its rights\", and that, as a result of this delay, circumstances have changed, witnesses or evidence may have been lost or no longer available, etc., such that it is no longer a just resolution to grant the plaintiff's claim. Laches is associated with the maxim of equity, \"Equity aids the vigilant, not the sleeping ones [that is, those who sleep on their rights].\" Put another way, failure to assert one’s rights in a timely manner can result in a claim being barred by laches.\n\nLaches is a legal term derived from the Old French \"laschesse,\" meaning \"remissness\" or \"dilatoriness,\" and is viewed as the opposite of \"vigilance.\" The United States Supreme Court case \"Costello v. United States\" 365 US 265, 282 (1961) is often cited for a definition of laches. Invoking laches is a reference to a lack of diligence and activity in making a legal claim, or moving forward with legal enforcement of a right, in particular with regard to equity, and so is an \"unreasonable delay pursuing a right or claim, in a way that prejudices the [opposing] party\". When asserted in litigation, it is an equitable defense, that is, a defense to a claim for an equitable remedy. The essential element of \"laches\" is an unreasonable delay by the plaintiff in bringing the claim; because laches is an equitable defense, it is ordinarily applied only to claims for equitable relief (such as injunctions), and not to claims for legal relief (such as damages). The person invoking laches is asserting that an opposing party has \"slept on its rights\", and that, as a result of this delay, witnesses and/or evidence may have been lost or no longer available, and circumstances have changed such that it is no longer just to grant the plaintiff's original claim; hence, laches is associated with the maxim of equity: \"Vigilantibus non dormientibus æquitas subvenit\" (\"Equity aids the vigilant, not the sleeping ones [that is, those who sleep on their rights]\"). Put another way, failure to assert one’s rights in a timely manner can result in a claim being barred by laches. Sometimes courts will also require that the party invoking the doctrine has changed its position as a result of the delay, but that requirement is more typical of the related (but more stringent) defense and equally cause of action of estoppel.\n\nA claim of laches requires the following components:(1) a delay in bringing the action, (2) a delay that is unreasonable and (3) that prejudices the defendant.\n\nThe period of delay begins when the plaintiff knew, or reasonably ought to have known, that the cause of action existed; the period of delay ends only when the legal action is formally filed. Informing or warning the defendant of the cause of action (for example by sending a cease-and-desist letter or merely \"threatening\" a lawsuit) does \"not\", by itself, end the period of delay.\n\nTo invoke laches the delay by the opposing party in initiating the lawsuit must be unreasonable. The courts have recognized the following causes of delay as reasonable:\nBULLET::::- the exhaustion of remedies through the administrative process\nBULLET::::- the evaluation and preparation of a complicated claim\nBULLET::::- to determine whether the scope of proposed infringement will justify the cost of litigation\n\nBy contrast, it is \"not\" reasonable to delay a lawsuit to \"capitalize on the value of the infringer's labor\". In \"Danjaq v. Sony\", the Ninth Circuit decided that a screenwriter who waited for a film studio to publicize and distribute a film based on a script he allegedly owned had delayed his lawsuit unreasonably.\n\nUnreasonable delay must prejudice the defendant. Examples of such prejudice include:\nBULLET::::- evidence favorable to the defendant becoming lost or degraded\nBULLET::::- witnesses favorable to the defendant dying or losing their memories\nBULLET::::- the defendant making economic decisions (e.g. investing in a movie or a manufacturing process) that it would not have done, had the lawsuit been filed earlier.\nUnreasonable delay may also prejudice the rights of third-parties who were unknown in the case, earlier but whose rights got created in the intervening period of the delay (e.g.: the defendant inducts new persons on a disputed property by sale, or by lease)\n\nA defense lawyer raising the defense of \"laches\" against a motion for injunctive relief (a form of equitable relief) might argue that the plaintiff comes \"waltzing in at the eleventh hour\" when it is now too late to grant the relief sought, at least not without causing great harm that the plaintiff could have avoided. In certain types of cases (for example, cases involving time-sensitive matters, such as elections), a delay of even a few days is likely to be met with a defense of \"laches\", even where the applicable statute of limitations might allow the type of action to be commenced within a much longer time period. In courts in the United States, laches has often been applied even where a statute of limitations exists, although there is a division of authority on this point.\n\nIf a court does accept the laches defense, it can decide either to deny the request for equitable relief or to narrow the equitable relief that it would otherwise give. Even if the court denies equitable relief to a plaintiff because of laches, the plaintiff may still have a claim for legal relief if the statute of limitations has not run out.\n\nUnder the United States Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, \"laches\" is an affirmative defense, which means that the burden of asserting \"laches\" is on the party responding to the claim to which it applies.\n\nThe \"laches\" defense does not apply if the claimant was a minor during the time that the claim was not brought, so a party can bring a claim against an historical injustice when they reach their majority.\n\nThe defense of \"laches\" resembles a statute of limitations since both are concerned with ensuring that plaintiffs bring their claims in a timely fashion.\n\nHowever, a statute of limitations is concerned only with the time that has passed. Laches is concerned with the reasonableness of the delay in a particular situation and so is more case-specific and more focused on the equitable conduct of the plaintiff. Those considerations are not unique to the laches defense because they are characteristic of equitable reasoning and equitable remedies. Whereas, limitation is a statutory remedy.\n\nIn the US, the proper disposal of claims in light of those two areas of law has required attention through to the Supreme Court. In \"Petrella v. Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer\" (2014), the US Supreme Court rebuffed a defendant's claim that laches barred a copyright infringement suit because Congress had established a detailed statutory scheme, including a statute of limitations.\n\nIn the Virginia Republican primary for the 2012 US presidential election, several candidates did not appear on the ballot because they failed to obtain sufficient petition signatures in time; four of the unsuccessful candidates—Rick Perry, Jon Huntsman, Newt Gingrich, and Rick Santorum—sued, claiming that restrictions on the persons allowed to gather signatures were unconstitutional. Their claim was dismissed by the district court on the grounds of laches, because, in the words of the appellate court: The appeals court upheld the dismissal on grounds of laches, but it added that the challenge would likely have succeeded if it had been brought in a timely fashion.\n\nIn Grand Haven, Michigan, the Northwest Ottawa Community Health System sued Grand Haven Township and Health Pointe, which was in the process of building a competing medical facility in the township, arguing that the township ignored its own zoning ordinance in approving the project. On March 24, 2017, as part of the ruling dismissing the lawsuit, Circuit Court Judge Jon A. Van Allsburg noted that the Northwest Ottawa Community Health System delayed more than eight months from the date the project was approved before filing the lawsuit and that during that time, plaintiff Health Pointe had purchased construction materials. Therefore, the doctrine of laches invalidated a lawsuit that was filed so long after the fact.\n\nBULLET::::- Adverse possession\nBULLET::::- Estoppel by acquiescence\nBULLET::::- Equitable tolling\nBULLET::::- Submarine patent\n\nBULLET::::- Nair, Manisha Singh (2006) \"Laches and Acquiescence\" in Indian intellectual property law\n"}
{"id": "18467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18467", "title": "Legion", "text": "Legion\n\nLegion may refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- Roman legion, the basic military unit of the ancient Roman army\nBULLET::::- Spanish Legion, an elite military unit within the Spanish Army\nBULLET::::- Legion of the United States, a reorganization of the United States Army from 1792 to 1796\nBULLET::::- French Foreign Legion, a military service wing of the French Army, created for foreign nationals willing to serve in the French Armed Forces\nBULLET::::- Various military legions, often composed of soldiers from a specific ethnic, national, religious or ideological background\nBULLET::::- HMS \"Legion\", a British Royal Navy shipname\nBULLET::::- HMS \"Legion\" (1914), a Royal Navy ship sold for scrapping in 1921\nBULLET::::- HMS \"Legion\" (G74), a L-class destroyer of the Royal Navy sunk in March 1942\n\nBULLET::::- American Legion, an organization of United States veterans\nBULLET::::- American Legion Auxiliary, a woman's service organization affiliated with the American Legion\nBULLET::::- Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States, a post-Civil War fraternity of loyal service members\nBULLET::::- The Royal British Legion, the United Kingdom's leading charity providing support for members of the British Armed Forces and their dependents\nBULLET::::- Royal Canadian Legion, a non-profit Canadian ex-service organization (veterans organization) founded in 1925, with more than 400,000 members worldwide\nBULLET::::- South African Legion of Military Veterans, the oldest veterans organization organisation in South Africa formed at the 1921 Empire Conference\nBULLET::::- Society of the Cavaliers of the Order of Lāčplēsis & Freedom Fighters, also known as the Legion, a right-wing veterans organisation Voldemārs Ozols (1884–1949)\n\nBULLET::::- Iron Guard or the Legion of Michael the Archangel, a nationalist 'fascist inspired' anti-communist, anti-Jewish, and Christian Legionary movement active in România\nBULLET::::- Silver Legion, an American fascist organization\nBULLET::::- Black Legion (disambiguation)\n\nBULLET::::- Legion, the collective name of the demon in the gospel account of the Gerasene demoniac\nBULLET::::- Legion in popular culture\nBULLET::::- Legion of Mary, a Catholic church organisation\nBULLET::::- National Legion of Decency, American Catholic organisation\n\nBULLET::::- I Am Legion (comics), a French comic book series.\nBULLET::::- Legion (Marvel Comics), an antihero in Marvel Comics\nBULLET::::- Legion (DC Comics), a supervillain in DC Comics\nBULLET::::- Legion of Super-Heroes, a superhero team in DC Comics\nBULLET::::- The Legion (comics), one of the comic books where the Legion of Super-Heroes was published\nBULLET::::- Legion, a group of characters from the \"Spawn\" series\nBULLET::::- \"Legion\" (IDW Publishing), a comic book based on the 2010 film of the same name\nBULLET::::- Legion, a member of the Special Executive\nBULLET::::- \"L.E.G.I.O.N.\", a 1989 DC Comics title and a team of superheroes, the 20th Century forerunners to the Legion of Superheroes\nBULLET::::- \"\", a 2004 comic book series\n\nBULLET::::- , the eighteenth episode in the second season of \"Law & Order: Criminal Intent\"\nBULLET::::- \"Legion\" (\"Red Dwarf\"), the second episode of \"Red Dwarf\" Series VI\nBULLET::::- \"Legion\" (1998 film) a 1998 made-for-television film\nBULLET::::- \"Legion\" (2010 film) a 2010 apocalyptic supernatural action film\nBULLET::::- \"Legion\" (TV series), an FX TV series based on the Marvel Comics character\nBULLET::::- \"Legion\", an eighth-season episode of the television series \"Smallville\"\nBULLET::::- Legion, the alien kaiju seen in the film \"\"\nBULLET::::- Legion, a fictional company in the 2019 film \"\"\n\nBULLET::::- \"Legion Gold\", or simply Legion, is a turn-based strategy game with a historical setting of the European conquests by Rome\nBULLET::::- , a set of cards in the game \"Magic: The Gathering\"\nBULLET::::- Legion (Mass Effect), the adopted name of a synthetic intelligence in \"Mass Effect 2\"\nBULLET::::- Legion, central villain of the video game \"Shadow Man\"\nBULLET::::- Legion, an artificial intelligence unit in \"\"\nBULLET::::- Legion, a faction of slavers in the video game series \"Fallout\"\nBULLET::::- \"\", the sixth \"World of Warcraft\" expansion set\nBULLET::::- The Legion, a group of killer characters in the horror video game \"Dead by Daylight\"\n\nBULLET::::- \"Legion\", a play by Hal Corley\nBULLET::::- \"Legion\" (novel series), a 2012 novella by Brandon Sanderson\nBULLET::::- \"Legion\", a unit in the army of the fictional The Domination\nBULLET::::- \"Legion\" (Blatty novel), a 1983 novel by William Peter Blatty\nBULLET::::- Legion (demon), a group of demons referred to in the Christian Bible\nBULLET::::- \"Legion\", by Dan Abnett, Book 7 in the \"Horus Heresy\" book series\nBULLET::::- \"The Legion\" (novel), 2010 historical novel by Simon Scarrow\n\nBULLET::::- \"Legion\" (album), a 1992 album by Deicide\nBULLET::::- Legion (band) a deathcore band from Columbus, Ohio\nBULLET::::- \"Legion\", a 1985 album by Mark Shreeve\nBULLET::::- Legion, stage name of Erik Hagstedt, Swedish vocalist in the black metal band Marduk\nBULLET::::- The Legion, a hip hop group from the mid-1990s associated with Black Sheep\nBULLET::::- Legion Records, started in 1997 by Michael Brosnan under the name Goatboy Records then changed to Goatboy Farms Recordings\nBULLET::::- \"Legion\" is a song by VNV Nation from the album \"Empires\"\nBULLET::::- \"Legion\", a song by Junkie XL from the album \"Big Sounds of the Drags\"\nBULLET::::- \"Legion\", a song by Saviour Machine from the album \"Saviour Machine I\"\nBULLET::::- \"Legion\", a song by HammerFall from the album \"No Sacrifice, No Victory\"\nBULLET::::- \"Legion\", a song by Slaughter Lord, covered by At the Gates in the 2002 re-issue of the album \"Slaughter of the Soul\"\nBULLET::::- \"Legions\", a 2013 album by the Danish band Artillery\n\nBULLET::::- Legion Field, a stadium in Birmingham, Alabama\nBULLET::::- Legion Park, a stadium in Great Falls, Montana\nBULLET::::- Legion Sports Complex, a complex in Wilmington, North Carolina\nBULLET::::- Legion Stadium, the main stadium in the Legion Sports Complex\nBULLET::::- Legion State Park, located in the red hill country of Louisville, Mississippi, and area originally inhabited by the Choctaw Indian Nation\nBULLET::::- Lajjun, Palestinian village whose name was derived from \"Legion\"\n\nBULLET::::- Legion (taxonomy), a taxonomic rank in biology\nBULLET::::- Legion (software), a computer software system\nBULLET::::- Legion Interactive, an Australian telecommunications company\nBULLET::::- Racine Legion/Tornadoes, an American football team\n\nBULLET::::- \"Legionella\", a bacterium\nBULLET::::- Lajjun, Palestinian village whose name is derived from \"Legion\"\nBULLET::::- Legionnaire (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Legion of Honor (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- I Am Legion (disambiguation)\n\nBULLET::::- British Legion (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- French Legion, several organizations\nBULLET::::- German Legion (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Polish Legions (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Roman legion (disambiguation)\n"}
{"id": "18470", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18470", "title": "Lyman Abbott", "text": "Lyman Abbott\n\nLyman J. Abbott (December 18, 1835 – October 22, 1922) was an American Congregationalist theologian, editor, and author.\n\nLyman J. Abbott was born at Roxbury, Massachusetts on December 18, 1835, the son of the prolific author, educator and historian Jacob Abbott. Lyman Abbott grew up in Farmington, Maine and later in New York City. Abbott's ancestors were from England, and came to America roughly twenty years after Plymouth Rock.\n\nHe graduated from the New York University in 1853, where he was a member of the Eucleian Society, studied law, and was admitted to the bar in 1856. Abbott soon abandoned the legal profession, however, and after studying theology with his uncle, John Stevens Cabot Abbott, was ordained a minister of the Congregational Church in 1860.\n\nHe was pastor of the Congregational Church in Terre Haute, Indiana from 1860 to 1865 and of the New England Church in New York City in 1865–1869. From 1865 to 1868 he was secretary of the American Union Commission (later called the American Freedmen's Bureau). In 1869 he resigned his pastorate to devote himself to literature.\n\nAbbot worked variously in the publishing profession as an associate editor of \"Harper's Magazine\", and was the founder of a publication called the \"Illustrated Christian Weekly,\" which he edited for six years. He was also the co-editor of \"The Christian Union\" with Henry Ward Beecher from 1876 to 1881. Abbott later succeeded Beecher in 1888 as pastor of Plymouth Church, Brooklyn. He also wrote the official biography of Beecher and edited his papers.\n\nFrom 1881 Abbott was editor-in-chief of \"The Christian Union\", renamed \"The Outlook\" in 1893; this periodical reflected his efforts toward social reform, and, in theology, a liberality, humanitarianism and nearly unitarian. The latter characteristics marked his published works also.\n\nAbbott's opinions differed from those of Beecher. Abbott was a constant advocate of Industrial Democracy, and was an advocate of Theodore Roosevelt's progressivism for almost 20 years. He would later adopt a pronouncedly liberal theology. He was also a pronounced Christian Evolutionist. In two of his books, \"The Evolution of Christianity\" and \"The Theology of an Evolutionist\", Abbott applied the concept of evolution in a Christian theological perspective. Although he himself objected to being called an advocate of Darwinism, he was an optimistic advocate of evolution who thought that \"what Jesus saw, humanity is becoming.\"\n\nAbbott was a religious figure of some public note and was called upon on October 30, 1897, to deliver an address in New York at the funeral of economist, Henry George. He ultimately resigned his pastorate in November 1898.\n\nHis son, Lawrence Fraser Abbott, accompanied President Roosevelt on a tour of Europe and Africa (1909–10). In 1913 Lyman Abbott was expelled from the American Peace Society because military preparedness was vigorously advocated in the \"Outlook\", which he edited, and because he was a member of the Army and Navy League. During the World War I he was a strong supporter of the government's war policies.\n\nLyman Abbott died on October 22, 1922 and was buried in the New Windsor Cemetery in Cornwall-on-Hudson, New York.\n\nThe editors of \"The Outlook\" kept their normal routine, publishing without “departure from the normal course of publication” since that was what their departed colleague would have wanted. The issue asked readers for understanding as the paper “wait[ed] until [the] next week to give to his friends, known and unknown, a record of his life and of the tributes which marked his passing.” A brief tribute appeared in that issue, but the November 8th edition contained the official remembrance and tributes. Fifteen pages in that issue dealt with Abbott, and the publishers included \"several long essays in Abbott’s honor from close relatives, shorter tributes from friends and past associates, and blurbs from many American press companies.\" \n\nThe many diverse and prominent author who contributed tributes \"demonstrated the scope and magnitude of Lyman Abbott’s influence within American religious and intellectual culture during his long career.\" Prominent examples include a re-published 1915 tribute from former United States president Theodore Roosevelt and articles from prestigious newspapers such as \"The New York Times\" and the \"New York Herald\". Roosevelt praised Abbott for being “one of those men whose work and life give strength to all who believe in this country,” and the New York Herald recalled Abbott’s ability to “convey his valuable opinions to the entire intellectual public.” Dr. Henry Sloane Coffin noted at a later memorial service, \"Measured by the number of people he reached, Dr. Abbott was unquestionably the greatest teacher of religion of this generation.” \n\nAbbott's lasting influence and widespread appeal is readily apparent in later evaluations of his life. Abbott’s one biographer, Ira V. Brown, confirmed Abbott’s importance via “testimonials by the dozen,” and added that Abbott “directly reached several hundred thousands of people” through his work as a “minister, lecturer, author, and editor.” Abbott was “something of a national patriarch” by the time of his death, and according to Brown, he was “no less than a modern oracle” to thousands of followers. Abbott influenced hundreds every week through his sermons at the prestigious Plymouth Avenue Congregationalist Church. He also gave speeches at many American colleges, published several books that sold between five and ten thousand copies, and edited the Outlook that, at its peak, sold “about 125,000 copies a week.” The magazine \"was a prominent news source for Protestant ministers and laypeople all over the United States, demonstrating Abbott's lasting influence.\"\n\nBULLET::::- \"Sermons of Henry Ward Beecher\" (Editor). (2 vols., 1868)\nBULLET::::- \"Jesus of Nazareth\" (1869)\nBULLET::::- \"Illustrated Commentary on the New Testament\" (4 vols., 1875)\nBULLET::::- \"A Study in Human Nature\" (1885)\nBULLET::::- \"What is Christianity?\" in: \"The Arena\" (1891)\nBULLET::::- \"Life of Christ\" (1894)\nBULLET::::- \"The Evolution of Christianity\" (1896) (Lowell Lectures, reissued by Cambridge University Press, 2009, )\nBULLET::::- \"The Theology of an Evolutionist\" (1897)\nBULLET::::- \"Christianity and Social Problems\" (1897)\nBULLET::::- \"Life and Letters of Paul\" (1898)\nBULLET::::- \"The Life that Really is\" (1899)\nBULLET::::- \"Why Go To Church?\" (1900) (Published in \"The Day's Work Series\" by L. C. Page)\nBULLET::::- \"Problems of Life\" (1900)\nBULLET::::- \"The Rights of Man\" (1901)\nBULLET::::- \"Henry Ward Beecher\" (1903)\nBULLET::::- \"The Other Room\" (1903)\nBULLET::::- \"The Great Companion\" (1904) (New edition published September 1906)\nBULLET::::- \"The Christian Ministry\" (1905)\nBULLET::::- \"The Personality of God\" (1905)\nBULLET::::- \"Industrial Problems\" (1905)\nBULLET::::- \"Impressions of a Careless Traveler\" (1907)\nBULLET::::- \"Christ's Secret of Happiness\" (1907)\nBULLET::::- \"The Home Builder\" (1908)\nBULLET::::- \"The Temple\" (1909)\nBULLET::::- \"The Spirit of Democracy\" (1910)\nBULLET::::- \"America in the Making\" (1911) (Yale Lectures on the Responsibility of Citizenship)\nBULLET::::- \"Letters to Unknown Friends\" (1913)\nBULLET::::- \"Reminiscences\" (1915)\nBULLET::::- \"The Twentieth Century Crusade\" (1918)\nBULLET::::- \"What Christianity Means to Me\" (1921)\n\nBULLET::::- Brown, Ira V. \"Lyman Abbott, Christian Evolutionist: A Study in Religious Liberalism\". Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1953.\nBULLET::::- Lagerwey, Caleb. \"Chaplain of Progress: The Role of Progress and Evolution in Lyman Abbott's Justification for American Expansion in 1898–1900.\" Thesis, Calvin College, 2012. Retrieved December 18, 2012.\nBULLET::::- Reid, Daniel G., et al. \"Dictionary of Christianity in America\". Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1990.\nBULLET::::- Wetzel, Benjamin James. \"A 'Scourge and Minister': Lyman Abbott, Liberal Protestantism, and American Warfare, 1861–1920\" Master’s thesis, Baylor University, 2011. Retrieved from PDF – Baylor University Retrieved December 18, 2012.\nBULLET::::- Wetzel, Benjamin James. \"Onward Christian Soldiers: Lyman Abbott's Justification of the Spanish–American War.\" \"Journal of Church and State\" 53, no. 3 (Summer 2012): 406–425. PDF Retrieved January 22, 2013.\n\nBULLET::::- Appleton's Cyclopedia of American Biography, edited by James Grant Wilson, John Fiske and Stanley L. Klos. Six volumes, New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1887–1889\n"}
{"id": "18472", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18472", "title": "Leap second", "text": "Leap second\n\nA leap second is a one-second adjustment that is occasionally applied to Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), to accommodate the difference between precise time (as measured by atomic clocks) and imprecise observed solar time (known as UT1 and which varies due to irregularities and long-term slowdown in the Earth's rotation). The UTC time standard, which is widely used for international timekeeping and as the reference for civil time in most countries, uses precise \"atomic time\" and consequently would run ahead of observed solar time unless it is reset to UT1 as needed. The leap second facility exists to provide this adjustment. \n\nBecause the Earth's rotation speed varies in response to climatic and geological events, UTC leap seconds are irregularly spaced and unpredictable. Insertion of each UTC leap second is usually decided about six months in advance by the International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service (IERS), to ensure that the difference between the UTC and UT1 readings will never exceed 0.9 seconds. \n\nThis practice has proved disruptive, particularly in the twenty-first century and especially in services that depend on precise time stamping or time-critical process control. The relevant international standards body has been debating whether or not to continue the practice with an increasing number of nations supporting its abolition.\n\nAbout 140 AD, Ptolemy, the Alexandrian astronomer, sexagesimally subdivided both the mean solar day and the true solar day to at least six places after the sexagesimal point, and he used simple fractions of both the equinoctial hour and the seasonal hour, none of which resemble the modern second. Muslim scholars, including al-Biruni in 1000, subdivided the mean solar day into 24 equinoctial hours, each of which was subdivided sexagesimally, that is into the units of minute, second, third, fourth and fifth, creating the modern second as of the mean solar day in the process. With this definition, the second was proposed in 1874 as the base unit of time in the CGS system of units. Soon afterwards Simon Newcomb and others discovered that Earth's rotation period varied irregularly, so in 1952, the International Astronomical Union (IAU) defined the second as a fraction of the sidereal year. In 1995, considering the tropical year to be more fundamental than the sidereal year, the IAU redefined the second as the fraction of the 1900.0 mean tropical year. In 1956, a slightly more precise value of was adopted for the definition of the second by the International Committee for Weights and Measures, and in 1960 by the General Conference on Weights and Measures, becoming a part of the International System of Units (SI).\n\nEventually, this definition too was found to be inadequate for precise time measurements, so in 1967, the SI second was again redefined as 9,192,631,770 periods of the radiation emitted by a caesium-133 atom in the transition between the two hyperfine levels of its ground state. That value agreed to 1 part in 10 with the astronomical (ephemeris) second then in use. It was also close to of the mean solar day as averaged between years 1750 and 1892.\n\nHowever, for the past several centuries, the length of the mean solar day has been increasing by about 1.4–1.7 ms per century, depending on the averaging time. By 1961, the mean solar day was already a millisecond or two longer than SI seconds. Therefore, time standards that change the date after precisely SI seconds, such as the International Atomic Time (TAI), will get increasingly ahead of time standards tied to the mean solar day, such as Universal Time (UT1).\n\nWhen the Coordinated Universal Time standard was instituted in 1961, based on atomic clocks, it was felt necessary to maintain agreement with the GMT time of day, which, until then, had been the reference for broadcast time services. Thus, from 1961 to 1971, the rate of (some) atomic clocks was constantly slowed to remain synchronised with GMT. During that period, therefore, the \"seconds\" of broadcast services were actually slightly longer than the SI second and closer to the GMT seconds.\n\nIn 1972, the leap-second system was introduced so that the UTC seconds could be set exactly equal to the standard SI second, while still maintaining the UTC time of day and changes of UTC date synchronized with those of UT1 (the solar time standard that superseded GMT). By then, the UTC clock was already 10 seconds behind TAI, which had been synchronized with UT1 in 1958, but had been counting true SI seconds since then. After 1972, both clocks have been ticking in SI seconds, so the difference between their displays at any time is 10 seconds plus the total number of leap seconds that have been applied to UTC (37 seconds ).\n\n+ Announced leap seconds to date\n! Year !! Jun 30 !! Dec 31\n! 1972\nbgcolor=\"lime\" +1 bgcolor=\"lime\" +1\n! 1973\n! 1974\n! 1975\n! 1976\n! 1977\n! 1978\n! 1979\n! 1980\n! 1981\nbgcolor=\"lime\" +1  0\n! 1982\nbgcolor=\"lime\" +1  0\n! 1983\nbgcolor=\"lime\" +1  0\n! 1984\n! 1985\nbgcolor=\"lime\" +1  0\n! 1986\n! 1987\n! 1988\n! 1989\n! 1990\n! 1991\n! 1992\nbgcolor=\"lime\" +1  0\n! 1993\nbgcolor=\"lime\" +1  0\n! 1994\nbgcolor=\"lime\" +1  0\n! 1995\n! 1996\n! 1997\nbgcolor=\"lime\" +1  0\n! 1998\n! 1999\n! 2000\n! 2001\n! 2002\n! 2003\n! 2004\n! 2005\n! 2006\n! 2007\n! 2008\n! 2009\n! 2010\n! 2011\n! 2012\nbgcolor=\"lime\" +1  0\n! 2013\n! 2014\n! 2015\nbgcolor=\"lime\" +1  0\n! 2016\n! 2017\n! 2018\n! 2019\n! Year !! Jun 30 !! Dec 31\n!rowspan=\"2\" Total\ncolspan=\"2\" 27\n!colspan=\"3\" Current TAI − UTC\ncolspan=\"3\" 37\n\nThe scheduling of leap seconds was initially delegated to the Bureau International de l'Heure (BIH), but passed to the International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service (IERS) on January 1, 1988. IERS usually decides to apply a leap second whenever the difference between UTC and UT1 approaches 0.6 s, in order to keep the difference between UTC and UT1 from exceeding \n\nThe UTC standard allows leap seconds to be applied at the end of any UTC month, with first preference to June and December and second preference to March and September. , all of them have been inserted at the end of either June 30 or December 31. IERS publishes announcements every six months, whether leap seconds are to occur or not, in its \"Bulletin C\". Such announcements are typically published well in advance of each possible leap second date – usually in early January for June 30 and in early July for December 31. Some time signal broadcasts give voice announcements of an impending leap second.\nBetween 1972 and 2018, a leap second has been inserted about every 20 months, on average. However, the spacing is quite irregular and apparently increasing: there were no leap seconds in the six-year interval between January 1, 1999 and December 31, 2004, but there were nine leap seconds in the eight years 1972–1979.\n\nUnlike leap days, UTC leap seconds occur simultaneously worldwide; for example, the leap second on December 31, 2005 23:59:60 UTC was December 31, 2005 18:59:60 (6:59:60 p.m.) in U.S. Eastern Standard Time and January 1, 2006 08:59:60 (a.m.) in Japan Standard Time.\n\nWhen it is mandated, a positive leap second is inserted between second 23:59:59 of a chosen UTC calendar date and second 00:00:00 of the following date. The definition of UTC states that the last day of December and June are preferred, with the last day of March or September as second preference, and the last day of any other month as third preference. All leap seconds (as of 2019) have been scheduled for either June 30 or December 31. The extra second is displayed on UTC clocks as 23:59:60. On clocks that display local time tied to UTC, the leap second may be inserted at the end of some other hour (or half-hour or quarter-hour), depending on the local time zone. A negative leap second would suppress second 23:59:59 of the last day of a chosen month, so that second 23:59:58 of that date would be followed immediately by second 00:00:00 of the following date. Since the introduction of leap seconds, the mean solar day has outpaced atomic time only for very brief periods, and has not triggered a negative leap second.\n\nLeap seconds are irregularly spaced because the Earth's rotation speed changes irregularly. Indeed, the Earth's rotation is quite unpredictable in the long term, which explains why leap seconds are announced only six months in advance.\n\nA mathematical model of the variations in the length of the solar day was developed by F. R. Stephenson and L. V. Morrison, based on records of eclipses for the period 700 BC to 1623 AD, telescopic observations of occultations for the period 1623 until 1967 and atomic clocks thereafter. The model shows a steady increase of the mean solar day by per century, plus a periodic shift of about 4 ms amplitude and period of about 1,500 yr. Over the last few centuries, the periodic component reduced the rate of lengthening of the mean solar day to about per century.\n\nThe main reason for the slowing down of the Earth's rotation is tidal friction, which alone would lengthen the day by 2.3 ms/century. Other contributing factors are the movement of the Earth's crust relative to its core, changes in mantle convection, and any other events or processes that cause a significant redistribution of mass. These processes change the Earth's moment of inertia, affecting the rate of rotation due to conservation of angular momentum. Some of these redistributions increase Earth's rotational speed, shorten the solar day and oppose tidal friction. For example, glacial rebound shortens the solar day by 0.6 ms/century and the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake is thought to have shortened it by 2.68 microseconds. It is evident from the figure that the Earth's rotation has slowed at a decreasing rate since the initiation of the current system in 1971, and the rate of leap second insertions has therefore been decreasing.\n\nThe TAI and UT1 time scales are precisely defined, the former by atomic clocks (and thus independent of Earth's rotation) and the latter by astronomical observations (that measure actual planetary rotation and thus the solar time at the Greenwich meridian). UTC (on which civil time is usually based) is a compromise, stepping with atomic seconds but periodically reset by a leap second to match UT1. \n\nThe irregularity and unpredictability of UTC leap seconds is problematic for several areas, especially computing (see below). With increasing requirements for accuracy in automation systems and high-speed trading, this raises a number of issues, since a leap second represents a jump as much as a million times larger than the accuracy required for industry clocks. Consequently, the long-standing practice of inserting leap seconds is under review by the relevant international standards body.\n\nOn July 5, 2005, the Head of the Earth Orientation Center of the IERS sent a notice to IERS Bulletins C and D subscribers, soliciting comments on a U.S. proposal before the ITU-R Study Group 7's WP7-A to eliminate leap seconds from the UTC broadcast standard before 2008 (the ITU-R is responsible for the definition of UTC). It was expected to be considered in November 2005, but the discussion has since been postponed. Under the proposal, leap seconds would be technically replaced by leap hours as an attempt to satisfy the legal requirements of several ITU-R member nations that civil time be astronomically tied to the Sun.\n\nA number of objections to the proposal have been raised. Dr. P. Kenneth Seidelmann, editor of the Explanatory Supplement to the Astronomical Almanac, wrote a letter lamenting the lack of consistent public information about the proposal and adequate justification. Steve Allen of the University of California, Santa Cruz cited what he claimed to be the large impact on astronomers in a \"Science News\" article. He has an extensive online site devoted to the issues and the history of leap seconds, including a set of references about the proposal and arguments against it.\n\nAt the 2014 General Assembly of the International Union of Radio Scientists (URSI), Dr. Demetrios Matsakis, the United States Naval Observatory's Chief Scientist for Time Services, presented the reasoning in favor of the redefinition and rebuttals to the arguments made against it. He stressed the practical inability of software programmers to allow for the fact that leap seconds make time appear to go backwards, particularly when most of them do not even know that leap seconds exist. The possibility of leap seconds being a hazard to navigation was presented, as well as the observed effects on commerce.\n\nThe United States formulated its position on this matter based upon the advice of the National Telecommunications and Information Administration and the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), which solicited comments from the general public. This position is in favor of the redefinition.\n\nIn 2011, Chunhao Han of the Beijing Global Information Center of Application and Exploration said China had not decided what its vote would be in January 2012, but some Chinese scholars consider it important to maintain a link between civil and astronomical time due to Chinese tradition. The 2012 vote was ultimately deferred. At an ITU/BIPM-sponsored workshop on the leap second, Dr. Han expressed his personal view in favor of abolishing the leap second, and similar support for the redefinition was again expressed by Dr. Han, along with other Chinese timekeeping scientists, at the URSI General Assembly in 2014.\n\nAt a special session of the Asia-Pacific Telecommunity Meeting on February 10, 2015, Chunhao Han indicated China was now supporting the elimination of future leap seconds, as were all the other presenting national representatives (from Australia, Japan, and the Republic of Korea). At this meeting, Bruce Warrington (NMI, Australia) and Tsukasa Iwama (NICT, Japan) indicated particular concern for the financial markets due to the leap second occurring in the middle of a workday in their part of the world. Subsequent to the CPM15-2 meeting in March/April 2015 the draft gives four methods which the WRC-15 might use to satisfy Resolution 653 from WRC-12.\n\nArguments against the proposal include the unknown expense of such a major change and the fact that universal time will no longer correspond to mean solar time. It is also answered that two timescales that do not follow leap seconds are already available, International Atomic Time (TAI) and Global Positioning System (GPS) time. Computers, for example, could use these and convert to UTC or local civil time as necessary for output. Inexpensive GPS timing receivers are readily available, and the satellite broadcasts include the necessary information to convert GPS time to UTC. It is also easy to convert GPS time to TAI, as TAI is always exactly 19 seconds ahead of GPS time. Examples of systems based on GPS time include the CDMA digital cellular systems IS-95 and CDMA2000. In general, computer systems use UTC and synchronize their clocks using Network Time Protocol (NTP). Systems that cannot tolerate disruptions caused by leap seconds can base their time on TAI and use Precision Time Protocol. However, the BIPM has pointed out that this proliferation of timescales leads to confusion.\n\nAt the 47th meeting of the Civil Global Positioning System Service Interface Committee in Fort Worth, Texas in September 2007, it was announced that a mailed vote would go out on stopping leap seconds. The plan for the vote was:\nBULLET::::- April 2008: ITU Working Party 7A will submit to ITU Study Group 7 project recommendation on stopping leap seconds\nBULLET::::- During 2008, Study Group 7 will conduct a vote through mail among member states\nBULLET::::- October 2011: The ITU-R released its status paper, \"Status of Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) study in ITU-R\", in preparation for the January 2012 meeting in Geneva; the paper reported that, to date, in response to the UN agency's 2010 and 2011 web based surveys requesting input on the topic, it had received 16 responses from the 192 Member States with \"13 being in favor of change, 3 being contrary.\"\nBULLET::::- January 2012: The ITU makes a decision.\nIn January 2012, rather than decide yes or no per this plan, the ITU decided to postpone a decision on leap seconds to the World Radiocommunication Conference in November 2015. At this conference, it was again decided to continue using leap seconds, pending further study and consideration at the next conference in 2023.\n\nIn October 2014, Dr. Włodzimierz Lewandowski, chair of the timing subcommittee of the Civil GPS Interface Service Committee and a member of the ESA Navigation Program Board, presented a CGSIC-endorsed resolution to the ITU that supported the redefinition and described leap seconds as a \"hazard to navigation\".\n\nSome of the objections to the proposed change have been answered by its opponents. For example, Dr. Felicitas Arias, who, as Director of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM)'s Time, Frequency, and Gravimetry Department, is responsible for generating UTC, noted in a press release that the drift of about one minute every 60–90 years could be compared to the 16-minute annual variation between true solar time and mean solar time, the one hour offset by use of daylight time, and the several-hours offset in certain geographically extra-large time zones.\n\nTo compute the elapsed time in seconds between two given UTC dates requires the consultation of a table of leap seconds, which needs to be updated whenever a new leap second is announced. Such a table is currently not available from an official, secure source. Since leap seconds are known only 6 months in advance, time intervals for UTC dates farther in the future cannot be computed. \n\nAlthough BIPM announces a leap second 6 months in advance, most time distribution systems (SNTP, IRIG-B, PTP) announce leap seconds at most 12 hours in advance, sometimes only in the last minute and some even not at all (DNP 03). Clocks that are not regularly synchronized can miss a leap second, but still can claim to be perfectly synchronized.\n\nNot all clocks implement leap seconds in the same manner. Leap seconds in Unix time are commonly implemented by repeating the last second of the day, or adding a 61st second to the last minute. Network Time Protocol (SNTP) freezes time during the leap second, some time servers declare \"alarm condition\". Other schemes smear time in the vicinity of a leap second.\n\nWhile the textual representation of leap seconds is defined by BIPM as \"23:59:60\", most computer operating systems and most time distribution systems derive this human-readable text from a binary counter indicating the number of seconds elapsed since an arbitrary epoch; for instance, since 1970-01-01 00:00:00 in Unix machines or since 1900-01-01 00:00:00 in NTP. This counter has no indicator that a leap second has been inserted, therefore two seconds in sequence will have the same counter value. Some computer operating systems, in particular Linux, assign to the leap second the counter value of the preceding, 23:59:59 second (59-59-0 sequence), while other computers (and the IRIG-B time distribution) assign to the leap second the counter value of the next, 00:00:00 second (59-0-0 sequence). Since there is no standard governing this sequence, the time stamp of values sampled at exacty the same time can vary by one second. This may explain flaws in time-critical systems that rely on time-stamped values.\nThe textual representation is not always accepted. Entering \"2016-12-31 23:59:60\" in a POSIX converter will fail and XML will reject such entry as \"invalid time\". This can cause an exception status in application programs.\n\nA number of organizations reported problems caused by flawed software following the June 30, 2012, leap second. Among the sites which reported problems were Reddit (Apache Cassandra), Mozilla (Hadoop), Qantas, and various sites running Linux.\n\nOlder versions of Motorola Oncore VP, UT, GT, and M12 GPS receivers had a software bug that would cause a single timestamp to be off by a day if no leap second was scheduled for 256 weeks. On November 28, 2003, this happened. At midnight, the receivers with this firmware reported November 29, 2003 for one second and then reverted to November 28, 2003.\n\nOlder Trimble GPS receivers had a software flaw that would insert a leap second immediately after the GPS constellation started broadcasting the next leap second insertion time (some months in advance of the actual leap second), rather than waiting for the next leap second to happen. This left the receiver's time off by a second in the interim.\n\nOlder Datum Tymeserve 2100 GPS receivers and Symmetricom Tymeserve 2100 receivers also have a similar flaw to that of the older Trimble GPS receivers, with the time being off by one second. The advance announcement of the leap second is applied as soon as the message is received, instead of waiting for the correct date. A workaround has been described and tested, but if the GPS system rebroadcasts the announcement, or the unit is powered off, the problem will occur again.\n\nOn January 21, 2015, several models of GPS receivers implemented the leap second as soon as the announcement was broadcast by GPS, instead of waiting until the implementation date of June 30.\n\nThe NTP packet includes a flag that informs the user that a leap second is imminent. However, NTP servers have never all set their flags correctly on a December 31 or June 30 since monitoring began in 2008. Some NTP servers responded with the wrong time for up to a day after a leap second insertion. Hackers may have exploited this vulnerability.\nDetailed studies of the leap seconds of 2015 and 2016 show widespread errors in flags and times, even on the Stratum-1 servers that anchor the NTP server network.\n\nFour different brands of marketed navigational receivers that use data from GPS or Galileo along with the Chinese BeiDou satellites, and even some receivers that use BeiDou satellites alone, were found to implement leap seconds one day early. This was traced to the fact that BeiDou numbers the days of the week from 0 to 6, while GPS and Galileo number them from 1 to 7. The problem was found to exist in commercial simulators that are used by manufacturers to test their equipment.\n\nThe effect of leap seconds on the commercial sector has been described as \"a nightmare\". Because financial markets are vulnerable to both technical and legal leap second problems, the Intercontinental Exchange, parent body to 7 clearing houses and 11 stock exchanges including the New York Stock Exchange, ceased operations for 61 minutes at the time of the June 30, 2015 leap second.\n\nDespite the publicity given to the 2015 leap second, Internet network failures occurred due to the vulnerability of at least one class of router. Also, interruptions of around 40 minutes' duration occurred with Twitter, Instagram, Pinterest, Netflix, Amazon, and Apple's music streaming series Beats 1.\n\nSeveral versions of the Cisco Systems NEXUS 5000 Series Operating System NX-OS (versions 5.0, 5.1, 5.2) are affected.\n\nThe 2015 leap second also affected the Altea airlines reservation system used by Qantas and Virgin Australia.\n\nCloudflare was affected by the 2016 leap second. Its DNS resolver implementation calculated a negative number when subtracting two timestamps obtained from the Go programming language's codice_1 function, which then used only a real-time clock source. This could have been avoided by using a monotonic clock source, which has since been added to Go 1.9.\n\nThere were concerns that farming equipment using GPS during harvests occurring on December 31, 2016, would be affected by the 2016 leap second. GPS navigation uses the linear GPS time scale, as a one-second leap would cause a location error of up to .\n\nThe most obvious workaround is to use the TAI scale for all operational purposes and convert to UTC for human-readable text. UTC can always be derived from TAI with a suitable table of leap seconds, the reverse is unsure. The SMTPE video/audio industry standards body selected TAI for deriving time stamps of media. \nIEC/IEEE 60802 (Time sensitive networks) specifies TAI for all operations. Grid automation is planning to switch to TAI for global distribution of events in electrical grids. Bluetooth mesh networking also\nuses TAI.\n\nInstead of inserting a leap second at the end of the day, Google servers implement a \"leap smear\", extending seconds slightly over a time window prior to the leap second. Amazon followed a similar, but slightly different, pattern for the introduction of the June 30, 2015 leap second, leading to another case of the proliferation of timescales. They later released an NTP service for EC2 instances which performs leap smearing.\n\nIt has been proposed that media clients using the Real-time Transport Protocol inhibit generation or use of NTP timestamps during the leap second and the second preceding it.\n\nNIST has established a special NTP time server to deliver UT1 instead of UTC. Such a server would be particularly useful in the event the ITU resolution passes and leap seconds are no longer inserted. Those astronomical observatories and other users that require UT1 could run off UT1 – although in many cases these users already download UT1-UTC from the IERS, and apply corrections in software.\n\nBULLET::::- Clock drift, phenomenon where a clock gains or loses time compared to another clock\nBULLET::::- DUT1, which describes the difference between coordinated universal time (UTC) and universal time (UT1)\nBULLET::::- Dynamical time scale\nBULLET::::- Leap year, a year containing one extra day or month\n\nBULLET::::- Ahuja, Anjana (October 30, 2005). \"Savouring the last leap second in history\". \"New Straits Times\", p. F10.\nBULLET::::- Grossman, Wendy M. (November 2005). \"Wait a Second\". \"Scientific American\", pp. 12–13.\nBULLET::::- McCarthy, Dennis D. & Seidelmann, P. Kenneth. (2009). \"TIME From Earth Rotation to Atomic Physics\". Weinheim: Wiley-VCH.\n\nBULLET::::- IERS Bulletin C (leap second announcements)\nBULLET::::- LeapSecond.com – A web site dedicated to precise time and frequency\nBULLET::::- NIST FAQ about leap year and leap second\nBULLET::::- The leap second: its history and possible future\nBULLET::::- Leap Seconds, U.S. Naval Observatory\n"}
{"id": "18473", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18473", "title": "Luca Pacioli", "text": "Luca Pacioli\n\nFra Luca Bartolomeo de Pacioli (sometimes \"Paccioli\" or \"Paciolo\"; 1447 – 19 June 1517) was an Italian mathematician, Franciscan friar, collaborator with Leonardo da Vinci, and an early contributor to the field now known as accounting. He is referred to as \"The Father of Accounting and Bookkeeping\" in Europe and he was the second person to publish a work on the double-entry system of book-keeping on the continent. He was also called Luca di Borgo after his birthplace, Borgo Sansepolcro, Tuscany.\n\nLuca Pacioli was born between 1446 and 1448 in the Tuscan town of Sansepolcro where he received an abbaco education. This was education in the vernacular (\"i.e.\", the local tongue) rather than Latin and focused on the knowledge required of merchants. His father was Bartolomeo Pacioli; however, Luca Pacioli was said to have lived with the Befolci family as a child in his birth town Sansepolcro. He moved to Venice around 1464, where he continued his own education while working as a tutor to the three sons of a merchant. It was during this period that he wrote his first book, a treatise on arithmetic for the boys he was tutoring. Between 1472 and 1475, he became a Franciscan friar. Thus, he could be referred to as Fra ('Friar') Luca.\n\nIn 1475, he started teaching in Perugia as a private teacher before becoming first chair in mathematics in 1477. During this time, he wrote a comprehensive textbook in the vernacular for his students. He continued to work as a private tutor of mathematics and was instructed to stop teaching at this level in Sansepolcro in 1491. In 1494, his first book, \"Summa de arithmetica, geometria, Proportioni et proportionalita\", was published in Venice. In 1497, he accepted an invitation from Duke Ludovico Sforza to work in Milan. There he met, taught mathematics to, collaborated, and lived with Leonardo da Vinci. In 1499, Pacioli and da Vinci were forced to flee Milan when Louis XII of France seized the city and drove out their patron. Their paths appear to have finally separated around 1506. Pacioli died at about the age of 70 on 19 June 1517, most likely in Sansepolcro, where it is thought that he had spent much of his final years.\n\nPacioli published several works on mathematics, including:\nBULLET::::- \"Tractatus mathematicus ad discipulos perusinos\" (Ms. Vatican Library, Lat. 3129), a nearly 600-page textbook dedicated to his students at the University of Perugia where Pacioli taught from 1477 to 1480. The manuscript was written between December 1477 and 29 April 1478. It contains 16 sections on merchant arithmetic, such as barter, exchange, profit, mixing metals, and algebra, though 25 pages from the chapter on algebra are missing. A modern transcription was published by Calzoni and Cavazzoni (1996) along with a partial translation of the chapter on partitioning problems.\nBULLET::::- \"Summa de arithmetica, geometria. Proportioni et proportionalita\" (Venice 1494), a textbook for use in the schools of Northern Italy. It was a synthesis of the mathematical knowledge of his time and contained the first printed work on algebra written in the vernacular (\"i.e.\", the spoken language of the day). It is also notable for including one of the first published descriptions of the bookkeeping method that Venetian merchants used during the Italian Renaissance, known as the double-entry accounting system. The system he published included most of the accounting cycle as we know it today. He described the use of journals and ledgers and warned that a person should not go to sleep at night until the debits equalled the credits. His ledger had accounts for assets (including receivables and inventories), liabilities, capital, income, and expenses — the account categories that are reported on an organization's balance sheet and income statement, respectively. He demonstrated year-end closing entries and proposed that a trial balance be used to prove a balanced ledger. Additionally, his treatise touches on a wide range of related topics from accounting ethics to cost accounting. He introduced the Rule of 72, using an approximation of 100*ln 2 more than 100 years before Napier and Briggs.\nBULLET::::- \"De viribus quantitatis\" (Ms. Università degli Studi di Bologna, 1496–1508), a treatise on mathematics and magic. Written between 1496 and 1508, it contains the first reference to card tricks as well as guidance on how to juggle, eat fire, and make coins dance. It is the first work to note that Leonardo was left-handed. \"De viribus quantitatis\" is divided into three sections: Mathematical problems, puzzles, and tricks, along with a collection of proverbs and verses. The book has been described as the \"Foundation of modern magic and numerical puzzles,\" but it was never published and sat in the archives of the University of Bologna, where it was seen by only a small number of scholars during the Middle Ages. The book was rediscovered after David Singmaster, a mathematician, came across a reference to it in a 19th-century manuscript. An English translation was published for the first time in 2007.\nBULLET::::- \"Geometry\" (1509), a Latin translation of Euclid's \"Elements\".\nBULLET::::- \"Divina proportione\" (written in Milan in 1496–98, published in Venice in 1509). Two versions of the original manuscript are extant, one in the Biblioteca Ambrosiana in Milan, the other in the Bibliothèque Publique et Universitaire in Geneva. The subject was mathematical and artistic proportion, especially the mathematics of the golden ratio and its application in architecture. Leonardo da Vinci drew the illustrations of the regular solids in \"Divina proportione\" while he lived with and took mathematics lessons from Pacioli. Leonardo's drawings are probably the first illustrations of skeletal solids, which allowed an easy distinction between front and back. The work also discusses the use of perspective by painters such as Piero della Francesca, Melozzo da Forlì, and Marco Palmezzano.\n\nThe majority of the second volume of \"Summa de arithmetica, geometria. Proportioni et proportionalita\" was a slightly rewritten version of one of Piero della Francesca's works. The third volume of Pacioli's \"Divina proportione\" was an Italian translation of Piero della Francesca's Latin writings \"On [the] Five Regular Solids\". In neither case did Pacioli include an attribution to Piero. He was severely criticized for this and accused of plagiarism by sixteenth-century art historian and biographer Giorgio Vasari. R. Emmett Taylor (1889–1956) said that Pacioli may have had nothing to do with the translated volume \"Divina proportione\", and that it may just have been appended to his work. However, no such defense can be presented concerning the inclusion of Piero della Francesca's material in Pacioli's Summa.\n\nPacioli dramatically affected the practice of accounting by describing the double-entry accounting method used in parts of Italy. This revolutionized how businesses oversaw their operations, enabling improved efficiency and profitability. The \"Summa\"'s section on accounting was used internationally as an accounting textbook up to the mid-16th century. The essentials of double-entry accounting have for the most part remain unchanged for over 500 years. \"Accounting practitioners in public accounting, industry, and not-for-profit organizations, as well as investors, lending institutions, business firms, and all other users for financial information are indebted to Luca Pacioli for his monumental role in the development of accounting.\"\n\nThe ICAEW Library's rare book collection at Chartered Accountants' Hall holds the complete published works of Luca Pacioli. Sections of two of Pacioli's books, 'Summa de arithmetica' and 'Divina proportione' can be viewed online using Turning the Pages, an interactive tool developed by the British Library.\n\nLuca Pacioli also wrote an unpublished treatise on chess, \"De ludo scachorum\" (\"On the Game of Chess\"). Long thought to have been lost, a surviving manuscript was rediscovered in 2006, in the 22,000-volume library of Count Guglielmo Coronini-Cronberg in Gorizia. A facsimile edition of the book was published in Pacioli's home town of Sansepolcro in 2008. Based on Leonardo da Vinci's long association with the author and his having illustrated \"Divina proportione\", some scholars speculate that Leonardo either drew the chess problems that appear in the manuscript or at least designed the chess pieces used in the problems.\n\nBULLET::::- List of Roman Catholic scientist-clerics\nBULLET::::- Della mercatura e del mercante perfetto\n\nFootnotes\nCitations\nBULLET::::- Calzoni, Giuseppe and Gianfranco Cavazzoni (eds.) (1996) \"Tractatus Mathematicus ad Discipulos Perusinos\", Città di Castello, Perugia.\nBULLET::::- Galassi, Giuseppe. \"Pacioli, Luca (c. 1445-c.1517).\" In \"History of Accounting: an International Encyclopedia,\" edited by Michael Chatfield and Richard Vangermeersch. New York: Garland Publishing, 1996. pp. 445–447.\nBULLET::::- Gleeson-White, Jane, \"Double Entry: How the Merchants of Venice Created Modern Finance,\" New York: Norton, 2012.\nBULLET::::- Heeffer, Albrecht, \"Algebraic partitioning problems from Luca Paccioli’s Perugia manuscript (Vat. Lat. 3129)\" in \"Sources and Commentaries in Exact Sciences\", (2010), 11, pp. 3–52.\nBULLET::::- Pacioli, Luca. \"De divina proportione\" (English: \"On the Divine Proportion\"), (Antonio Capella) Venice: Paganino Paganini (1509).\nBULLET::::- Smith, Murphy, Luca Pacioli: The Father of Accounting (2018). Available at SSRN: <nowiki>https://ssrn.com/abstract=2320658</nowiki> or https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2320658.\nBULLET::::- Taylor, Emmet, R. \"No Royal Road: Luca Paccioli and his Times\" (1942)\nBULLET::::- Full Biography of Pacioli (St.Andrews)\nBULLET::::- Lucas Paccioli - Catholic Encyclopedia article\nBULLET::::- \"Libellus de quinque corporibus regularibus\", corredato della versione volgare di Luca Paccioli [facsimile del Codice Vat. Urb. Lat. 632]; eds. Cecil Grayson... Marisa Dalai Emiliani, Carlo Maccagni. Firenze, Giunti, 1995. 3 vol. (68 ff., XLIV-213, XXII-223 pp.).\nBULLET::::- Varisco, Alessio, \"Borgo Sansepolcro. Città di cavalieri e pellegrini\" Pessano con Bornago, Mimep-Docete (2012).\n\nBULLET::::- Palladio's Literary Predecessors\nBULLET::::- The Enigma of Luca Paccioli's Portrait\nBULLET::::- Outline of Paccioli's Treatise - Particularis de Computis et Scripturis\nBULLET::::- Full text of \"De divina proportione\"\nBULLET::::- Luca Paccioli's economic research programme\nBULLET::::- Pacioli Institute for a true and fair view of the knowledge-based economy\nBULLET::::- Online Galleries, History of Science Collections, University of Oklahoma Libraries High resolution images of works by and/or portraits of Luca Pacioli in .jpg and .tiff format.\nBULLET::::- \"Diuina proportione\", Venice, 1509, digitized at , Biblioteca Nacional de España\nBULLET::::- Lauwers, Luc & Willekens, Marleen: \"Five Hundred Years of Bookkeeping: A Portrait of Luca Pacioli\" (Tijdschrift voor Economie en Management, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, 1994, vol. XXXIX issue 3 p. 289–304) pdf\n"}
{"id": "18474", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18474", "title": "Lower Mainland", "text": "Lower Mainland\n\nThe Lower Mainland is a name commonly applied to the region surrounding and including Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. As of 2016, 2,759,365 people (60% of British Columbia's total population) lived in the region; sixteen of the province's thirty most populous municipalities are located there. Islands contained within rivers in the region are considered to be part of the Lower Mainland.\n\nWhile the term \"Lower Mainland\" has been recorded from the earliest period of non-native settlement in British Columbia, it has never been officially defined in legal terms. The British Columbia Geographical Names Information System (BCGNIS) comments that most residents of Vancouver might consider it to be only areas west of Mission and Abbotsford, while residents in the rest of the province consider it to be the whole region south of Whistler and west of Hope. However, the term has historically been in popular usage for over a century to describe a region that extends from Horseshoe Bay south to the Canada–United States border and east to Hope at the eastern end of the Fraser Valley.\n\nThe climate, ecology and geology of the Lower Mainland are consistent enough that it has been classified as a separate ecoregion (the Lower Mainland Ecoregion) within the ecological framework of Canada, used by both the federal and provincial environment ministries. The region is the traditional territory of the , a Halkomelem-speaking people of the Coast Salish linguistic and cultural grouping. There are two regional districts within the region, Metro Vancouver and the Fraser Valley.\n\nThe region is bounded to the north by the Coast Mountains and to the southeast by the Cascade Mountains, and is traversed from east to west by the Fraser River. Due to its consistency of climate, flora and fauna, geology and land use, \"Lower Mainland\" is also the name of an ecoregion—a biogeoclimatic region—that comprises the eastern part of the Georgia Depression and extends from Powell River on the Sunshine Coast to Hope at the eastern end of the Fraser Valley.\n\nOne of the mildest climates in Canada, the region has a mean annual temperature of with a summer mean of and a winter mean of . Annual precipitation ranges from an annual mean of in the west end to in the eastern end of the Fraser Valley and at higher elevations. Maximum precipitation occurs as rain in winter. Less than ten percent falls as snow at sea level but the amount of snowfall increases significantly with elevation.\n\nAs of the 2016 census, the population of the Lower Mainland totals 2,759,385:\nBULLET::::- 295,934 in the Fraser Valley Regional District\nBULLET::::- 2,463,431 in Metro Vancouver Regional district\n\nThese figures are slightly inflated due to the inclusion of areas within the Regional Districts which are not normally considered to be part of the Lower Mainland, notably the lower Fraser Canyon and the heads of Harrison and Pitt Lakes, which are within the FVRD, and Lions Bay and Bowen Island, which are within the Greater Vancouver Regional District.\n\nThe population of the Lower Mainland was up 9.2 percent from the 2006 census. This is among the highest growth rates in the continent.\n\nThe Lower Mainland is among the most diverse regions in Canada. Europeans form just over 50% of the population, while other significant ethnic groups which dominate the Lower Mainland include Chinese (17.6%) and South Asians (12.2%).\n! colspan=2  Ethnic groups in the Lower Mainland (2016)<br>!! Population !! %\n\nRegional districts were first created across British Columbia in 1966–1967 to form bodies for inter-municipal coordination and to extend municipal-level powers to areas outside existing municipalities. Today, the Lower Mainland includes two regional districts: the Metro Vancouver Regional District (MVRD) and the Fraser Valley Regional District (FVRD). Both regional districts, however, include areas outside the traditional limits of the Lower Mainland. Metro Vancouver includes areas like Surrey and Langley that are geographically in the Fraser Valley.\n\nThe Metro Vancouver Regional District is made up of 21 municipalities. The MVRD is bordered on the west by the Strait of Georgia, to the north by the Squamish-Lillooet Regional District, on the east by the Fraser Valley Regional District, and to the south by Whatcom County, Washington, in the United States.\n\nThe Fraser Valley Regional District lies east of the Greater Vancouver Regional District, and comprises the cities of Abbotsford and Chilliwack, the district municipalities of Mission, Kent, and Hope, and the village of Harrison Hot Springs. It also includes many unincorporated areas in the Fraser Valley and along the west side of the Fraser Canyon (the Fraser Canyon is not in the Lower Mainland).\n\nRegional district powers are very limited and other localized provincial government services are delivered through other regionalization systems.\n\nThe traditional territories of the Musqueam and Tsleil'waututh lie completely within the region; the southern portion of Squamish traditional territory is also in the region. Its claims overlap those of the Tsleil-waututh, Musqueam, and Kwikwetlem. Other peoples whose territories lie within the region are the , Chehalis, Katzie, Kwantlen, Tsawwassen, and Semiahmoo; many of their territories overlap with those of the Musqueam, and with each other. Many other peoples of the Georgia Strait region also frequented the lower Fraser, including those from Vancouver Island and what is now Whatcom County, Washington.\n\nSto:lo traditional territory, known as \"Solh Temexw\" in Halkomelem, more or less coincides with the traditional conception of the Lower Mainland, except for the inclusion of Port Douglas at the head of Harrison Lake, which is in In-SHUCK-ch territory, and the lands around Burrard Inlet.\n\nHealth system services and governance in the Lower Mainland are provided by Vancouver Coastal Health, serving Vancouver, Richmond and the North Shore, and the mainland coast as far north as the Central Coast region, and Fraser Health, which serves the area of the Lower Mainland east of Vancouver and Richmond.\n\nThe Lower Mainland is considered to have a high vulnerability to flood risk. There have been two major floods, the largest in 1894 and the second largest in 1948. According to the Fraser Basin Council, scientists predict a one-in-three chance of a similar-sized flood occurring in the next 50 years.\n\nIn the spring of 2007, the Lower Mainland was on high alert for flooding. Higher than normal snow packs in the British Columbia Interior prompted municipal governments to start taking emergency measures in the region. Dikes along the Fraser River are regulated to handle about 8.5 m at the Mission Gauge (the height above sea level of the dykes at Mission). Warmer than normal weather in the interior caused large amounts of snow to melt prematurely, resulting in higher than normal water levels, which, nevertheless, remained well below flood levels.\n\nFlooding can cover much of the Lower Mainland. Cloverdale, Barnston Island, low-lying areas of Maple Ridge, areas west of Hope, White Rock, Richmond, parts of Vancouver, and parts of Surrey are potentially at risk. In 2007, the Lower Mainland was largely spared, although northern regions of the province, along the Skeena and Nechako Rivers, experienced floods. Climate scientists predict that increasing temperatures will mean wetter winters and more snow at the high elevations. This will increase the likelihood of snowmelt floods.\n\nThe provincial government maintains an integrated flood hazard management program and extensive flood protection infrastructure in the Lower Mainland. The infrastructure consists of dikes, pump stations, floodboxes, riprap, and relief wells.\n\nWhile earthquakes are common in British Columbia and adjacent coastal waters, most are minor in energy release or are sufficiently remote to have little effect on populated areas. Nevertheless, earthquakes with a magnitude of up to 7.3 have occurred within of the Lower Mainland.\n\nBased on geological evidence, however, stronger earthquakes appear to have occurred at approximately 600-year intervals. Therefore, there is a probability that there will be a major earthquake in the region within the next 200 years.\n\nIn April 2008, the United States Geological Survey released information concerning a newly found fault line south of downtown Abbotsford, called the Boulder Creek Fault. Scientists now believe this fault line is active and capable of producing earthquakes in the 6.8 magnitude range.\n\nMuch of the Lower Mainland is vulnerable to explosive eruptions from the Garibaldi Volcanic Belt. Volcanoes in this zone are capable of producing large quantities of volcanic ash that may cause short and long term water supply problems for Lower Mainland communities. All airports covered by the accompanying eruption column would be closed, heavy ash falls would damage electrical equipment and weak structures could collapse under the weight of the ash.\n\nThe Lower Mainland's communities includes large cities in Metro Vancouver, and smaller cities, towns and villages along both banks of the Fraser River. Neighbourhoods within cities are not listed unless historically or otherwise notable and/or separate. Only some of the many Indian Reserves are listed.\n\nBULLET::::- Upper Fraser Valley\n\nBULLET::::- Agassiz\nBULLET::::- Bridal Falls\nBULLET::::- Chehalis\nBULLET::::- Chilliwack\nBULLET::::- Cultus Lake\nBULLET::::- Greendale\nBULLET::::- Lake Errock\nBULLET::::- Kent\nBULLET::::- Harrison Hot Springs\nBULLET::::- Harrison Mills\nBULLET::::- Hope\nBULLET::::- Flood\nBULLET::::- Laidlaw\nBULLET::::- Popkum\nBULLET::::- Rosedale\nBULLET::::- Ruby Creek\nBULLET::::- Sardis\nBULLET::::- Yarrow\nBULLET::::- Central Fraser Valley\n\nBULLET::::- Abbotsford\nBULLET::::- Aldergrove\nBULLET::::- Bradner\nBULLET::::- Clayburn\nBULLET::::- Clearbrook\nBULLET::::- Deroche\nBULLET::::- Dewdney\nBULLET::::- Durieu\nBULLET::::- Hatzic\nBULLET::::- Huntingdon\nBULLET::::- Matsqui\nBULLET::::- Mission\nBULLET::::- Mount Lehman\nBULLET::::- Nicomen Island\nBULLET::::- Ruskin\nBULLET::::- Silverdale\nBULLET::::- Silverhill\nBULLET::::- Squamish\nBULLET::::- Stave Falls\nBULLET::::- Steelhead\nBULLET::::- Sumas (Sumas Prairie)\nBULLET::::- Whonnock\nBULLET::::- Lower Fraser Valley/Metro Vancouver\n\nBULLET::::- Albion\nBULLET::::- Anmore\nBULLET::::- Annieville\nBULLET::::- Barnston Island\nBULLET::::- Belcarra\nBULLET::::- Boundary Bay\nBULLET::::- Bridgeport\nBULLET::::- Brighouse\nBULLET::::- Burnaby\nBULLET::::- Burquitlam\nBULLET::::- Cloverdale\nBULLET::::- Coquitlam\nBULLET::::- Crescent Beach\nBULLET::::- Derby (\"Old Derby\")\nBULLET::::- Douglas\nBULLET::::- Delta\nBULLET::::- Fort Langley\nBULLET::::- Haney\nBULLET::::- Kanaka Creek\nBULLET::::- Langley City\nBULLET::::- Langley District\nBULLET::::- Lions Bay\nBULLET::::- Maillardville\nBULLET::::- Maple Ridge\nBULLET::::- New Westminster\nBULLET::::- Newton\nBULLET::::- North Vancouver City\nBULLET::::- North Vancouver District\nBULLET::::- Pitt Meadows\nBULLET::::- Port Coquitlam\nBULLET::::- Port Hammond (Hammond)\nBULLET::::- Port Kells\nBULLET::::- Port Moody\nBULLET::::- Queensborough\nBULLET::::- Richmond\nBULLET::::- Sapperton\nBULLET::::- Scottsdale\nBULLET::::- Steveston\nBULLET::::- Surrey\nBULLET::::- Tsawwassen\nBULLET::::- Vancouver\nBULLET::::- West Vancouver\nBULLET::::- Whalley\nBULLET::::- White Rock\nBULLET::::- Yennadon\nBULLET::::- Fraser Lowland\nBULLET::::- List of provincial parks of the Lower Mainland\n"}
{"id": "18475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18475", "title": "Lucius Afranius (poet)", "text": "Lucius Afranius (poet)\n\nLucius Afranius was an ancient Roman comic poet, who lived at the beginning of the 1st century BC. \n\nAfranius' comedies described Roman scenes and manners (the genre called \"comoediae togatae\") and the subjects were mostly taken from the life of the lower classes (\"comoediae tabernariae\"). They were considered by some ancients to be frequently polluted with disgraceful amours, which, according to Quintilian, were only a representation of the conduct of Afranius. He depicted, however, Roman life with such accuracy that he is classed with Menander, from whom indeed he borrowed largely. He imitated the style of Gaius Titius, and his language is praised by Cicero. His comedies are spoken of in the highest terms by the ancient writers, and under the Empire they not only continued to be read, but were even acted, of which an example occurs in the time of Nero. They seem to have been well known even at the latter end of the 4th century AD. \n\nThe Spanish-Roman teacher of rhetoric Quintilian wrote of Afranius's plays:\n\nSuch is the generally accepted interpretation of this sentence. An alternative view is proposed by Welsh (2010), who, noting that there is no trace of pederasty or any lewdness in any of the quoted fragments of Afranius, proposed to translate the sentence \"if only he hadn't polluted his plots with disreputable love affairs (conducted) by boys\", something which Quintilian perhaps thought unsuited to the moralising tone of Roman comedies. A problem with this interpretation, as Welsh himself admits, is that in Roman literature the word \"pueri\" is usually used for the boys who are object of love affairs, not the young men who conduct them.\n\nAfranius wrote many comedies. The titles of forty-two of his plays are still preserved, along with associated fragments and quotations:\n\nBULLET::::- \"Abducta\" (Abducted Woman)\nBULLET::::- \"Aequales\" (Just Alike)\nBULLET::::- \"Auctio\" (Auction)\nBULLET::::- \"Augur\" (The Augur)\nBULLET::::- \"Brundisiae\" (Women from Brundisium)\nBULLET::::- \"Cinerarius\" (Male Hair-Curler)\nBULLET::::- \"Compitalia\" (The Compitalia Festival)\nBULLET::::- \"Consobrini\" (Cousins)\nBULLET::::- \"Crimen\" (Crime)\nBULLET::::- \"Deditio\" (The Surrender)\nBULLET::::- \"Depositum\" (Deposit)\nBULLET::::- \"Divortium\" (Divorce)\nBULLET::::- \"Emancipatus\" (The Emancipated Man)\nBULLET::::- \"Epistula\" (The Letter)\nBULLET::::- \"Exceptus\"\nBULLET::::- \"Fratriae\" (Sisters-in-Law)\nBULLET::::- \"Incendium\" (Fire)\nBULLET::::- \"Inimici\" (Enemies)\nBULLET::::- \"Libertus\" (Freedman)\nBULLET::::- \"Mariti\" (Married Couple)\nBULLET::::- \"Matertertae\" (Maternal Aunts)\nBULLET::::- \"Megalensia\" (The Megalensia Festival)\nBULLET::::- \"Omen\" (The Omen)\nBULLET::::- \"Pantelius\"\nBULLET::::- \"Pompa\" (Procession, or Parade)\nBULLET::::- \"Privignus\" (The Stepson)\nBULLET::::- \"Prodigus\" (The Prodigal)\nBULLET::::- \"Proditus\" (The Betrayed Man)\nBULLET::::- \"Promus\" (The Steward)\nBULLET::::- \"Prosa\"\nBULLET::::- \"Purgamentum\" (Filth)\nBULLET::::- \"Repudiatus\" (The Divorced Man)\nBULLET::::- \"Sella\" (The Chair)\nBULLET::::- \"Simulans\" (The Pretender)\nBULLET::::- \"Sorores\" (Sisters)\nBULLET::::- \"Suspecta\" (The Suspected Woman)\nBULLET::::- \"Talio\" (Retaliation)\nBULLET::::- \"Temerarius\" (The Thoughtless Man)\nBULLET::::- \"Thais\" (Thais)\nBULLET::::- \"Titulus\" (Notice of Sale)\nBULLET::::- \"Virgo\" (Virgin)\nBULLET::::- \"Vopiscus\" (Surviving Twin)\n}\n\n"}
{"id": "18476", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18476", "title": "London Post Office Railway", "text": "London Post Office Railway\n\nThe Post Office Railway, known as Mail Rail since 1987, is a narrow gauge, driverless underground railway in London that was built by the Post Office with assistance from the Underground Electric Railways Company of London, to transport mail between sorting offices. Inspired by the Chicago Tunnel Company, it opened in 1927 and operated for 76 years until it closed in 2003. A museum within the former railway was opened in September 2017.\n\nThe line ran from Paddington Head District Sorting Office in the west to the Eastern Head District Sorting Office at Whitechapel in the east, a distance of . It had eight stations, the largest of which was underneath Mount Pleasant, but by 2003 only three stations remained in use because the sorting offices above the other stations had been relocated.\n\nIn 1911, a plan evolved to build an underground railway long from Paddington to Whitechapel serving the main sorting offices along the route; road traffic congestion was causing unacceptable delays. The contract to build the tunnels was won by John Mowlem and Co. Construction of the tunnels started in February 1915 from a series of shafts. Most of the line was constructed using the Greathead shield system, with limited amounts of hand-mining for connecting tunnels at stations.\n\nThe main line has a single diameter tube with two tracks. Just before stations, tunnels diverge into two single-track diameter tunnels leading to two parallel diameter station tunnels. The main tube is at a depth of around . Stations are at a much shallower depth, with a 1-in-20 gradient into the stations. The gradients assist in slowing the trains when approaching stations, and accelerating them away. There is also less distance to lift mail from the stations to the surface. At Oxford Circus the tunnel runs close to the Bakerloo line tunnel of the London Underground.\nDuring 1917, work was suspended due to the shortage of labour and materials. By June 1924, track laying had started. In February 1927, the first section, between Paddington and the West Central District Office, was made available for training. The line became available for the Christmas parcel post in 1927 and letters were carried from February 1928.\n\nIn 1954, plans were developed for a new Western District Office at Rathbone Place, which required a diversion, opening in 1958. It was not until 3 August 1965 that the new station and office were opened by the Postmaster General, Anthony Wedgwood-Benn. The disused section was used as a store tunnel; some parts of it still have the track in place.\n\nA Royal Mail press release in April 2003 said that the railway would be closed and mothballed at the end of May that year. Royal Mail had earlier stated that using the railway was five times more expensive than using road transport for the same task. The Communication Workers Union (CWU) claimed the actual figure was closer to three times more expensive but argued that this was the result of a deliberate policy of running the railway down and using it at only one-third of its capacity. A local governmental report by the Greater London Authority was in support of continued use and criticized the increase of lorries on local roads, estimated to be 80 more trucks per week. The railway was closed on 31 May 2003.\n\nIn April 2011, an urban exploration group called the \"Consolidation Crew\" published accounts of illicit access to the tunnels. Detailed photography and text revealed that the railway is still largely in good condition, despite some natural decay. More recently, media have been admitted to the tunnels as part of the pre-launch publicity for the Postal Museum. Photographs show much of the infrastructure in place.\n\nA team from the University of Cambridge has taken over a short, double track section of unused Post Office tunnel near Liverpool Street Station, where a newly built tunnel for Crossrail is situated some two metres beneath. The study is to establish how the original cast-iron lining sections, which are similar to those used for many miles of railway under London, resist possible deformation and soil movement caused by the new works. Digital cameras, fibre optic deformation sensors, laser scanners and other low-cost instruments, reporting in real time, have been installed in the vacated tunnel. As well as providing information about the behaviour of the old construction materials, the scheme can also provide an early warning if the new tunnel bores are creating dangerous soil movement.\n\nIn October 2013, the British Postal Museum & Archive announced that it intended opening part of the network to the public. After approval was granted by Islington Council, work on the new museum and the railway began in 2014. Special tourist trains were installed in late 2016. It was planned to open a circular route, running beneath the depot at Mount Pleasant with a journey time of around 15 minutes, by mid-2017. The museum opened on 5 September. \n\nIn its first year of operation (2017–2018), the trains performed 9,000 trips totalling , with the railway and museum hosting over 198,000 visitors.\n\nThe first stock was delivered in 1926 with the opening of the system. All stock used was electrically powered.\nBULLET::::- 1926 Electric Locomotives — Original locomotives\n\nBULLET::::- 1927 Stock — Original stock\nBULLET::::- 1930 & 1936 Stock — Replacement stock for 1927 Stock\nBULLET::::- 1962 Stock — Prototype stock\nBULLET::::- 1980 Stock — Replacement stock\n\nSome trains have been preserved at the Launceston Steam Railway.\n\nBULLET::::- The railway features in the novel \"The Horn of Mortal Danger\" by Lawrence Leonard in which there is a connecting tunnel to a secret railway to the North London network. The only other known connection is in the disused tunnel between Highgate and the disused Cranley Gardens.\nBULLET::::- A version of the railway is featured in the novel \"The Great Game\" by Lavie Tidhar. It takes mail to Buckingham Palace, and is run by the book's featured Simulacra.\nBULLET::::- The railway appears in the film \"Hudson Hawk\" as 'Poste Vaticane' in the Vatican City. Bruce Willis (as Hawk) stows away in one of the mail containers.\nBULLET::::- A mail train system closely based on the railway is in Charlie Higson's third Young Bond book, \"Double or Die\".\nBULLET::::- The railway is prominent in Oliver Harris's 2014 book \"Deep Shelter\".\nBULLET::::- The railway features in Mark Leggatt's 2016 novel \"The London Cage,\" as a means for Connor Montrose to move about London. The International Thriller, a follow up to \"Names of the Dead\",\" was\" published by Scottish-based publisher Fledgling Press in June 2016.\n\nA pneumatic underground railway was used by the Post Office in London between 1863 and 1874 using individual wheeled capsules, operated by the London Pneumatic Despatch Company.\n\nIn 1910, a tunnel railway opened in Munich, Germany between München Hauptbahnhof and the nearby Post office. The tunnels were damaged in World War II, restored in 1948 and partially rebuilt in 1966 to allow for the first Munich S-Bahn tunnel. Operations ceased in 1988.\n\nPostal Telegraph and Telephone (Switzerland) () opened the Post-U-Bahn (underground railway) in Zürich in 1938. It ran between Zürich Hauptbahnhof and the Sihlpost (), Zürich's main post office. The track gauge was 60 cm, and the small electric railcar, which could carry 250 kg of mail, collected power from wires between the tracks. Operations ceased on 11 October 1980 when a rubber-tired system replaced the train.\n\nThe Chicago Tunnel Company, in operation between 1906 and 1959, delivered freight, parcels, and coal, and disposed of ash and excavation debris. It operated an elaborate network of narrow gauge track in tunnels running under the streets throughout the central business district including and surrounding the \"Loop\".\n\nThe only known instance of a human travelling on the London Post Office Railway is that of the cricket commentator and entertainer Brian Johnston, who presented the radio show \"In Town Tonight\" in which he was \"travelling as a parcel\" on one of the trains on the railway.\n\nBULLET::::- Subterranean London\nBULLET::::- List of British heritage and private railways\nBULLET::::- Munich Post-U-Bahn ()\nBULLET::::- Zürich Post-U-Bahn ()\n\nBULLET::::- Bradley Garrett (2013). \"Explore Everything: Place-Hacking the City.\" Verso Books, London.\n\nBULLET::::- The British Postal Museum & Archive\nBULLET::::- Place Hacking A collective report of the trespass into the network by urban explorers in 2011.\nBULLET::::- Guardian article on proposed mothballing.\nBULLET::::- BBC article A video from the mothballed railway, detailing plans for future use.\nBULLET::::- Mail rail in openstreetmap.org\n"}
{"id": "18477", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18477", "title": "Lulach", "text": "Lulach\n\nLulach mac Gille Coemgáin (Modern Gaelic: \"Lughlagh mac Gille Chomghain\", known in English simply as Lulach, and nicknamed Tairbith, \"the Unfortunate\" and Fatuus, \"the Simple-minded\" or \"the Foolish\"; before 1033 – 17 March 1058) was King of Scots between 15 August 1057 and 17 March 1058.\n\nLulach was the son of Gruoch of Scotland, from her first marriage to Gille Coemgáin, Mormaer of Moray, and thus the stepson of Macbeth (Mac Bethad mac Findlaích). Following the death of Macbeth at the Battle of Lumphanan on 15 August 1057, the king's followers placed Lulach on the throne. He has the distinction of being the first king of Scotland of whom there are coronation details available: he was crowned, probably on 8 September 1057 at Scone. Lulach appears to have been a weak king, as his nicknames suggest, and ruled only for a few months before being assassinated and usurped by Malcolm III.\n\nLulach's son Máel Snechtai was Mormaer of Moray, while Óengus of Moray was the son of Lulach's daughter. \n\nHe is believed to be buried on Saint Columba's Holy Island of Iona in or around the monastery. The exact position of his grave is unknown.\n\nLulach is an important secondary character in Dorothy Dunnett's historical novel \"King Hereafter\", where he is portrayed as a seer. In the novel, Dunnett used Lulach as a mouthpiece for researched information about the real Macbeth.\n\nLulach is also one of the protagonists in Jackie French's children's novel \"Macbeth and Son\" and in Susan Fraser King's novel \"Lady MacBeth\".\n"}
{"id": "18483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18483", "title": "Lexicography", "text": "Lexicography\n\nLexicography is divided into two separate but equally important groups:\n\nBULLET::::- Practical lexicography is the art or craft of compiling, writing and editing dictionaries.\nBULLET::::- Theoretical lexicography is the scholarly discipline of analyzing and describing the semantic, syntagmatic, and paradigmatic relationships within the lexicon (vocabulary) of a language, developing theories of dictionary components and structures linking the data in dictionaries, the needs for information by users in specific types of situations, and how users may best access the data incorporated in printed and electronic dictionaries. This is sometimes referred to as 'metalexicography'.\n\nThere is some disagreement on the definition of lexicology, as distinct from lexicography. Some use \"lexicology\" as a synonym for theoretical lexicography; others use it to mean a branch of linguistics pertaining to the inventory of words in a particular language.\n\nA person devoted to lexicography is called a lexicographer.\n\nGeneral lexicography focuses on the design, compilation, use and evaluation of general dictionaries, i.e. dictionaries that provide a description of the language in general use. Such a dictionary is usually called a general dictionary or LGP dictionary (Language for General Purpose). Specialized lexicography focuses on the design, compilation, use and evaluation of specialized dictionaries, i.e. dictionaries that are devoted to a (relatively restricted) set of linguistic and factual elements of one or more specialist subject fields, e.g. legal lexicography. Such a dictionary is usually called a specialized dictionary or Language for specific purposes dictionary and following Nielsen 1994, specialized dictionaries are either multi-field, single-field or sub-field dictionaries.\n\nIt is now widely accepted that lexicography is a scholarly discipline in its own right and not a sub-branch of applied linguistics, as the chief object of study in lexicography is the dictionary (see e.g. Bergenholtz/Nielsen/Tarp 2009).\n\nCoined in English 1680, the word \"lexicography\" derives from the Greek λεξικογράφος \"lexikographos\", \"lexicographer\", from λεξικόν \"lexicon\", neut. of λεξικός \"lexikos\", \"of or for words\", from λέξις \"lexis\", \"speech\", \"word\", (in turn from λέγω \"lego\", \"to say\", \"to speak\") and γράφω \"grapho\", \"to scratch, to inscribe, to write\".\n\nPractical lexicographic work involves several activities, and the compilation of well-crafted dictionaries requires careful consideration of all or some of the following aspects:\nBULLET::::- profiling the intended users (i.e. linguistic and non-linguistic competences) and identifying their needs\nBULLET::::- defining the communicative and cognitive functions of the dictionary\nBULLET::::- selecting and organizing the components of the dictionary\nBULLET::::- choosing the appropriate structures for presenting the data in the dictionary (i.e. frame structure, distribution structure, macro-structure, micro-structure and cross-reference structure)\nBULLET::::- selecting words and affixes for systematization as entries\nBULLET::::- selecting collocations, phrases and examples\nBULLET::::- choosing lemma forms for each word or part of word to be lemmatized\nBULLET::::- defining words\nBULLET::::- organizing definitions\nBULLET::::- specifying pronunciations of words\nBULLET::::- labeling definitions and pronunciations for register and dialect, where appropriate\nBULLET::::- selecting equivalents in bi- and multi-lingual dictionaries\nBULLET::::- translating collocations, phrases and examples in bi- and multilingual dictionaries\nBULLET::::- designing the best way in which users can access the data in printed and electronic dictionaries\n\nOne important goal of lexicography is to keep the lexicographic information costs incurred by dictionary users as low as possible. Nielsen (2008) suggests relevant aspects for lexicographers to consider when making dictionaries as they all affect the users' impression and actual use of specific dictionaries.\n\nTheoretical lexicography concerns the same aspects as lexicography, but aims to develop principles that can improve the quality of future dictionaries, for instance in terms of access to data and lexicographic information costs. Several perspectives or branches of such academic dictionary research have been distinguished: 'dictionary criticism' (or evaluating the quality of one or more dictionaries, e.g. by means of reviews (see Nielsen 1999), 'dictionary history' (or tracing the traditions of a type of dictionary or of lexicography in a particular country or language), 'dictionary typology' (or classifying the various genres of reference works, such as dictionary versus encyclopedia, monolingual versus bilingual dictionary, general versus technical or pedagogical dictionary), 'dictionary structure' (or formatting the various ways in which the information is presented in a dictionary), 'dictionary use' (or observing the reference acts and skills of dictionary users), and 'dictionary IT' (or applying computer aids to the process of dictionary compilation).\n\nOne important consideration is the status of 'bilingual lexicography', or the compilation and use of the bilingual dictionary in all its aspects (see e.g. Nielsen 1894). In spite of a relatively long history of this type of dictionary, it is often said to be less developed in a number of respects than its unilingual counterpart, especially in cases where one of the languages involved is not a major language. Not all genres of reference works are available in interlingual versions, e.g. LSP, learners' and encyclopedic types, although sometimes these challenges produce new subtypes, e.g. 'semi-bilingual' or 'bilingualised' dictionaries such as Hornby's \"(Oxford) Advanced Learner's Dictionary English-Chinese\", which have been developed by translating existing monolingual dictionaries (see Marello 1998).\n\nBULLET::::- Linguistic description\nBULLET::::- Dictionary\nBULLET::::- Bilingual dictionary\nBULLET::::- Monolingual learner's dictionary\nBULLET::::- Specialized dictionary (Picture dictionary, Multi-field dictionary, Single-field dictionary, Sub-field dictionary, LSP dictionary)\nBULLET::::- Glossary (defining dictionary, Core glossary)\nBULLET::::- List of lexicographers\nBULLET::::- Lexicology\nBULLET::::- Lexicon\nBULLET::::- Lexical definition\nBULLET::::- Vocabulary\nBULLET::::- Idioms Lexicon\nBULLET::::- Specialised lexicography\nBULLET::::- English lexicology and lexicography\nBULLET::::- Terminology\nBULLET::::- Dictionary Society of North America\nBULLET::::- Atkins, B.T.S. & Rundell, Michael (2008) \"The Oxford Guide to Practical Lexicography\", Oxford U.P.\nBULLET::::- Béjoint, Henri (2000) \"Modern Lexicography: An Introduction\", Oxford U.P.\nBULLET::::- Bergenholtz, H., Nielsen, S., Tarp, S. (eds.): \"Lexicography at a Crossroads: Dictionaries and Encyclopedias Today, Lexicographical Tools Tomorrow\". Peter Lang 2009.\nBULLET::::- Bergenholtz, Henning & Tarp, Sven (eds.) (1995) \"Manual of Specialised Lexicography: The Preparation of Specialised Dictionaries\", J. Benjamins.\nBULLET::::- Green, Jonathon (1996) \"Chasing the Sun: Dictionary-Makers and the Dictionaries They Made\", J. Cape.\nBULLET::::- Hartmann, R.R.K. (2001) \"Teaching and Researching Lexicography\", Pearson Education.\nBULLET::::- Hartmann, R.R.K. (ed.) (2003) \"Lexicography: Critical Concepts\", Routledge/Taylor & Francis, 3 volumes.\nBULLET::::- Hartmann, R.R.K. & James, Gregory (comps.) (1998/2001) \"Dictionary of Lexicography\", Routledge.\nBULLET::::- Inglis, Douglas (2004) Cognitive Grammar and lexicography. Payap University Graduate School Linguistics Department.\nBULLET::::- Kirkness, Alan (2004) \"Lexicography\", in \"The Handbook of Applied Linguistics\" ed. by A. Davies & C. Elder, Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 54–81.\nBULLET::::- Landau, Sidney (2001) \"Dictionaries: The Art and Craft of Lexicography\", Cambridge U.P. 2nd ed.\nBULLET::::- Marello, Carla (1998) \"Hornby's bilingualized dictionaries\", in \"International Journal of Lexicography\" 11,4, pp. 292–314.\nBULLET::::- Nielsen, Sandro (1994) \"The Bilingual LSP Dictionary\", G. Narr.\nBULLET::::- Nielsen, Sandro (2008) \"The effect of lexicographical information costs on dictionary making and use\", in \"Lexikos\" (AFRILEX-reeks/series 18), pp. 170–189.\nBULLET::::- Nielsen, Sandro (2009): \"Reviewing printed and electronic dictionaries: A theoretical and practical framework\". In S. Nielsen/S. Tarp (eds): \"Lexicography in the 21st Century. In honour of Henning Bergenholtz\". Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins, 23-41.\nBULLET::::- Ooi, Vincent (1998) \"Computer Corpus Lexicography\", Edinburgh U.P.\nBULLET::::- Zgusta, Ladislav (1971) \"Manual of lexicography\" (Janua Linguarum. Series maior 39). Prague: Academia / The Hague, Paris: Mouton.\n\nBULLET::::- \"International Journal of Lexicography\"\nBULLET::::- \"Lexicographica. International Annual for Lexicography - Revue Internationale de Lexicographie - Internationales Jahrbuch für Lexikographie\"\n\nBULLET::::- Centre for Lexicography EN version\nBULLET::::- Dictionary Society of North America\nBULLET::::- Euralex – European Association for Lexicography\nBULLET::::- Afrilex – African Association for Lexicography\nBULLET::::- Australex – Australasian Association for Lexicography\nBULLET::::- Nordic Federation for Lexicography\nBULLET::::- Asialex – Asian Association for Lexicography\n"}
{"id": "18486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18486", "title": "Law enforcement", "text": "Law enforcement\n\nLaw enforcement is any system by which some members of society act in an organized manner to enforce the law by discovering, deterring, rehabilitating, or punishing people who violate the rules and norms governing that society. Although the term encompasses entities such as courts and corrections, it is most frequently applied to those who directly engage in patrols or surveillance to dissuade and discover criminal activity, and those who investigate crimes and apprehend offenders, a task typically carried out by the police, Sheriff or another law enforcement organization. Furthermore, although law enforcement may be most concerned with the prevention and punishment of crimes, organizations exist to discourage a wide variety of non-criminal violations of rules and norms, effected through the imposition of less severe consequences. There are also different units out there in different police departments, including but not limited to, “Undercover”, “Detective”, “CID”, “Gang Task Force”, “Drug Task Force”, this varies state by state and department by department.\n\nMost law enforcement is conducted by some type of law enforcement agency, with the most typical agency fulfilling this role being the police. Social investment in enforcement through such organizations can be massive, both in terms of the resources invested in the activity, and in the number of people professionally engaged to perform those functions.\n\nLaw enforcement agencies tend to be limited to operating within a specified jurisdiction. In some cases, jurisdiction may overlap inbetween organizations; for example, in the United States, each state has its own statewide law enforcement arms, but the Federal Bureau of Investigation is able to act against certain types of crimes occurring in any state. Various specialized segments of society may have their own internal law enforcement arrangements. For example, military organizations may have military police.\n\nBULLET::::- Outline of law enforcement – structured list of topics related to law enforcement, organized by subject area\nBULLET::::- Criminal law\nBULLET::::- Superhero\n"}
{"id": "18488", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18488", "title": "Libido", "text": "Libido\n\nLibido (; colloquial: sex drive) is a person's overall sexual drive or desire for sexual activity. Libido is influenced by biological, psychological, and social factors. Biologically, the sex hormones and associated neurotransmitters that act upon the nucleus accumbens (primarily testosterone and dopamine, respectively) regulate libido in humans. Social factors, such as work and family, and internal psychological factors, such as personality and stress, can affect libido. Libido can also be affected by medical conditions, medications, lifestyle and relationship issues, and age (e.g., puberty). A person who has extremely frequent or a suddenly increased sex drive may be experiencing hypersexuality, while the opposite condition is hyposexuality.\n\nA person may have a desire for sex, but not have the opportunity to act on that desire, or may on personal, moral or religious reasons refrain from acting on the urge. Psychologically, a person's urge can be repressed or sublimated. Conversely, a person can engage in sexual activity without an actual desire for it. Multiple factors affect human sex drive, including stress, illness, pregnancy, and others. A 2001 review found that, on average, men have a higher desire for sex than women.\n\nSexual desires are often an important factor in the formation and maintenance of intimate relationships in humans. A lack or loss of sexual desire can adversely affect relationships. Changes in the sexual desires of any partner in a sexual relationship, if sustained and unresolved, may cause problems in the relationship. The infidelity of a partner may be an indication that a partner's changing sexual desires can no longer be satisfied within the current relationship. Problems can arise from disparity of sexual desires between partners, or poor communication between partners of sexual needs and preferences.\n\nSigmund Freud, who is considered the originator of the modern use of the term, defined libido as \"the energy, regarded as a quantitative magnitude... of those instincts which have to do with all that may be comprised under the word 'love'.\" It is the instinct energy or force, contained in what Freud called the id, the strictly unconscious structure of the psyche. He also explained that it is analogous to hunger, the will to power, and so on insisting that it is a fundamental instinct that is innate in all humans.\n\nFreud developed the idea of a series of developmental phases in which the libido fixates on different erogenous zones—first in the oral stage (exemplified by an infant's pleasure in nursing), then in the anal stage (exemplified by a toddler's pleasure in controlling his or her bowels), then in the phallic stage, through a latency stage in which the libido is dormant, to its reemergence at puberty in the genital stage. (Karl Abraham would later add subdivisions in both oral and anal stages.)\n\nFreud pointed out that these libidinal drives can conflict with the conventions of civilised behavior, represented in the psyche by the superego. It is this need to conform to society and control the libido that leads to tension and disturbance in the individual, prompting the use of ego defenses to dissipate the psychic energy of these unmet and mostly unconscious needs into other forms. Excessive use of ego defenses results in neurosis. A primary goal of psychoanalysis is to bring the drives of the id into consciousness, allowing them to be met directly and thus reducing the patient's reliance on ego defenses.\n\nFreud viewed libido as passing through a series of developmental stages within the individual. Failure to adequately adapt to the demands of these different stages could result in libidinal energy becoming 'dammed up' or fixated in these stages, producing certain pathological character traits in adulthood. Thus the psychopathologized individual for Freud was an immature individual, and the goal of psychoanalysis was to bring these fixations to conscious awareness so that the libido energy would be freed up and available for conscious use in some sort of constructive sublimation.\n\nAccording to Swiss psychiatrist Carl Gustav Jung, the libido is identified as the totality of psychic energy, not limited to sexual desire. As Jung states in \"The Concept of Libido,\" \"[libido] denotes a desire or impulse which is unchecked by any kind of authority, moral or otherwise. Libido is appetite in its natural state. From the genetic point of view it is bodily needs like hunger, thirst, sleep, and sex, and emotional states or affects, which constitute the essence of libido.\" The Duality (opposition) creates the energy (or libido) of the psyche, which Jung asserts expresses itself only through symbols: \"It is the energy that manifests itself in the life process and is perceived subjectively as striving and desire.\" (Ellenberger, 697) These symbols may manifest as \"fantasy-images\" in the process of psychoanalysis which embody the contents of the libido, otherwise lacking in any definite form. Desire, conceived generally as a psychic longing, movement, displacement and structuring, manifests itself in definable forms which are apprehended through analysis.\n\nDefined more narrowly, libido also refers to an individual's urge to engage in sexual activity, and its antonym is the force of destruction termed mortido or destrudo.\n\nLibido is governed primarily by activity in the mesolimbic dopamine pathway (ventral tegmental area and nucleus accumbens). Consequently, dopamine and related trace amines (primarily phenethylamine) that modulate dopamine neurotransmission play a critical role in regulating libido.\n\nOther neurotransmitters, neuropeptides, and sex hormones that affect sex drive by modulating activity in or acting upon this pathway include:\nBULLET::::- Testosterone (directly correlated) – and other androgens\nBULLET::::- Estrogen (directly correlated) – and related female sex hormones\nBULLET::::- Progesterone (inversely correlated)\nBULLET::::- Oxytocin (directly correlated)\nBULLET::::- Serotonin (inversely correlated)\nBULLET::::- Norepinephrine\nBULLET::::- Acetylcholine\n\nA woman's desire for sex is correlated to her menstrual cycle, with many women experiencing a heightened sexual desire in the several days immediately before ovulation, which is her peak fertility period, which normally occurs two days before until two days after the ovulation. This cycle has been associated with changes in a woman's testosterone levels during the menstrual cycle. According to Gabrielle Lichterman, testosterone levels have a direct impact on a woman's interest in sex. According to her, testosterone levels rise gradually from about the 24th day of a woman's menstrual cycle until ovulation on about the 14th day of the next cycle, and during this period the woman's desire for sex increases consistently. The 13th day is generally the day with the highest testosterone levels. In the week following ovulation, the testosterone level is the lowest and as a result women will experience less interest in sex.\n\nAlso, during the week following ovulation, progesterone levels increase, resulting in a woman experiencing difficulty achieving orgasm. Although the last days of the menstrual cycle are marked by a constant testosterone level, women's libido may get a boost as a result of the thickening of the uterine lining which stimulates nerve endings and makes a woman feel aroused. Also, during these days, estrogen levels decline, resulting in a decrease of natural lubrication.\n\nAlthough some specialists disagree with this theory, menopause is still considered by the majority a factor that can cause decreased sex desire in women. The levels of estrogen decrease at menopause and this usually causes a lower interest in sex and vaginal dryness which makes intercourse painful. However, the levels of testosterone increase at menopause and this may be why some women may experience a contrary effect of an increased libido.\n\nCertain psychological or social factors can reduce the desire for sex. These factors can include lack of privacy or intimacy, stress or fatigue, distraction or depression. Environmental stress, such as prolonged exposure to elevated sound levels or bright light, can also affect libido. Other causes include experience of sexual abuse, assault, trauma, or neglect, body image issues, and anxiety about engaging in sexual activity.\n\nIndividuals with PTSD may find themselves with reduced sexual desire. Struggling to find pleasure, as well as having trust issues, many with PTSD experience feelings of vulnerability, rage and anger, and emotional shutdowns, which have been shown to inhibit sexual desire in those with PTSD. Reduced sex drive may also be present in trauma victims due to issues arising in sexual function. For women, it has been found that treatment can improve sexual function, thus helping restore sexual desire. Depression and libido decline often coincide, with reduced sex drive being one of the symptoms of depression. Those suffering from depression often report the decline in libido to be far reaching and more noticeable than other symptoms. In addition, those with depression often are reluctant to report their reduced sex drive, often normalizing it with cultural/social values, or by the failure of the physician to inquire about it.\n\nPhysical factors that can affect libido include endocrine issues such as hypothyroidism, the effect of certain prescription medications (for example flutamide), and the attractiveness and biological fitness of one's partner, among various other lifestyle factors.\n\nIn males, the frequency of ejaculations affects the levels of serum testosterone, a hormone which promotes libido. A study of 28 males aged 21–45 found that all but one of them had a peak (145.7% of baseline [117.8%–197.3%]) in serum testosterone on the 7th day of abstinence from ejaculation.\n\nAnemia is a cause of lack of libido in women due to the loss of iron during the period.\n\nSmoking, alcohol abuse, and the use of certain drugs can also lead to a decreased libido. Moreover, specialists suggest that several lifestyle changes such as exercising, quitting smoking, lowering consumption of alcohol or using prescription drugs may help increase one's sexual desire.\n\nSome people purposefully attempt to decrease their libido through the usage of anaphrodisiacs. Aphrodisiacs, such as dopaminergic psychostimulants, are a class of drugs which can increase libido. On the other hand, a reduced libido is also often iatrogenic and can be caused by many medications, such as hormonal contraception, SSRIs and other antidepressants, antipsychotics, opioids and beta blockers.\n\nMany SSRIs can cause a long term decrease in libido and other sexual functions, even after users of those drugs have shown improvement in their depression and have stopped usage. Multiple studies have shown that with the exception of bupropion (Wellbutrin), trazodone (Desyrel) and nefazodone (Serzone), antidepressants generally will lead to lowered libido. SSRIs that typically lead to decreased libido are fluoxetine (Prozac), paroxetine (Paxil), fluvoxamine (Luvox), citalopram (Celexa) and sertraline (Zoloft). There are several ways to try and reap the benefits of the antidepressants while maintaining high enough sex drive levels. Some antidepressant users have tried decreasing their dosage in the hopes of maintaining an adequate sex drive. Results of this are often positive, with both drug effectiveness not reduced and libido preserved. Other users try enrolling in psychotherapy to solve depression-related issues of libido. However, the effectiveness of this therapy is mixed, with lots reporting that it had no or little effect on sexual drive.\n\nPSSD, otherwise known as Post SSRI Sexual Dysfunction, is the condition diagnosed to those experiencing the long term decreased libido after usage of SSRIs. The exact causes of PSSD have not been determined. Symptoms of PSSD in both sexes include genital anesthesia (most common symptom), weak/pleasure-lacking orgasm, and decreased libido. Symptoms for men include erectile dysfunction and delayed ejaculation, while women may experience decreased or loss of vaginal lubrication, nipple insensitivity, and anorgasmia. PSSD is generally classified in two conditions. The first is early onset, with symptoms first being reported during SSRI usage and continuing after treatment, with the second classification occurring after the user stops usage of SSRIs. It is highly recommended by researchers that doctors inform patients well about the potential impact to sexual health/function before prescribing SSRIs. There are currently no recognized treatments for PSSD. In May 2019 the European Medicines Agency officially recognized the existence of PSSD as a medical condition. \n\nTestosterone is one of the hormones controlling libido in human beings. Emerging research is showing that hormonal contraception methods like oral contraceptive pills (which rely on estrogen and progesterone together) are causing low libido in females by elevating levels of sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG). SHBG binds to sex hormones, including testosterone, rendering them unavailable. Research is showing that even after ending a hormonal contraceptive method, SHBG levels remain elevated and no reliable data exists to predict when this phenomenon will diminish.\n\nOral Contraceptives lower androgen levels in users, and lowered androgen levels generally lead to a decrease in sexual desire. However, usage of oral contraceptives has shown to typically not have a connection with lowered libido in women. Multiple studies have shown that usage of oral contraceptives is associated with either a small increase or decrease in libido, with most users reporting a stable sex drive.\n\nMales reach the peak of their sex drive in their teenage years, while females reach it in their thirties. The surge in testosterone hits the male at puberty resulting in a sudden and extreme sex drive which reaches its peak at age 15–16, then drops slowly over his lifetime. In contrast, a female's libido increases slowly during adolescence and peaks in her mid-thirties.\nActual testosterone and estrogen levels that affect a person's sex drive vary considerably.\n\nSome boys and girls will start expressing romantic or sexual interest by age 10-12. The romantic feelings are not necessarily sexual, but are more associated with attraction and desire for another. For boys and girls in their preteen years (ages 11–12), at least 25% report \"thinking a lot about sex\". By the early teenage years (ages 13–14), however, boys are much more likely to have sexual fantasies than girls. In addition, boys are much more likely to report an interest in sexual intercourse at this age than girls. Masturbation among youth is considered developmentally normal and healthy, with prevalence among the population generally increasing until the late 20s and early 30s. Boys generally start masturbating earlier, with less than 10% boys masturbating around age 10, around half participating by age 11-12, and over a substantial majority by age 13-14. This is in sharp contrast to girls where virtually none are engaging in masturbation before age 13, and only around 20% by age 13-14.\n\nPeople in their 60s and early 70s generally retain a healthy sex drive, but this may start to decline in the early to mid 70s. Older adults generally develop a reduced libido due to declining health and environmental or social factors. In contrast to common belief, postmenopausal women often report an increase in sexual desire and an increased willingness to satisfy their partner. Women often report family responsibilities, health, relationship problems, and well-being as inhibitors to their sexual desires. Aging adults often have more positive attitudes towards sex in older age due to being more relaxed about it, freedom from other responsibilities, and increased self-confidence. Those exhibiting negative attitudes generally cite health as one of the main reasons. Stereotypes about Aging adults and sexuality often regard seniors as asexual beings, doing them no favors when they try to talk about sexual interest with caregivers and medical professionals. Non-western cultures often follow a narrative of older women having a much lower libido, thus not encouraging any sort of sexual behavior for women. Residence in retirement homes has affects on residents libidos. In these homes, sex occurs, but it is not encouraged by the staff or other residents. Lack of privacy and resident gender imbalance are the main factors lowering desire. Generally, for older adults, being excited about sex, good health, sexual self-esteem and having a sexually talented partner.\n\nThere is no widely accepted measure of what is a healthy level for sex desire. Some people want to have sex every day, or more than once a day; others once a year or not at all. However, a person who lacks a desire for sexual activity for some period of time may be experiencing a hypoactive sexual desire disorder or may be asexual. A sexual desire disorder is more common in women than in men. Erectile dysfunction may happen to the penis because of lack of sexual desire, but these two should not be confused. For example, large recreational doses of amphetamine or methamphetamine can simultaneously cause erectile dysfunction and significantly increase libido. However, men can also experience a decrease in their libido as they age.\n\nThe American Medical Association has estimated that several million US women suffer from a female sexual arousal disorder, though arousal is not at all synonymous with desire, so this finding is of limited relevance to the discussion of libido. Some specialists claim that women may experience low libido due to some hormonal abnormalities such as lack of luteinising hormone or androgenic hormones, although these theories are still controversial. Also, women commonly lack sexual desire in the period immediately after giving birth. Moreover, any condition affecting the genital area can make women reject the idea of having intercourse. It has been estimated that half of women experience different health problems in the area of the vagina and vulva, such as thinning, tightening, dryness or atrophy. Frustration may appear as a result of these issues and because many of them lead to painful sexual intercourse, many women prefer not having sex at all. Surgery or major health conditions such as arthritis, cancer, diabetes, high blood pressure, coronary artery disease or infertility may have the same effect in women. Surgery that affects the hormonal levels in women include oophorectomies.\n\nBULLET::::- Ellenberger, Henri (1970). \"The Discovery of the Unconscious: The History and Evolution of Dynamic Psychiatry\". New York: Basic Books. Hardcover , softcover .\nBULLET::::- Froböse, Gabriele, and Froböse, Rolf. \"Lust and Love: Is It More than Chemistry?\" Michael Gross (trans. and ed.). Royal Society of Chemistry, (2006)\nBULLET::::- Giles, James, \"The Nature of Sexual Desire\", Lanham, Maryland: University Press of America, 2008.\n"}
{"id": "18490", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18490", "title": "Larissa", "text": "Larissa\n\nLarissa (; ) is the capital and largest city of the Thessaly region in Greece. It is the fourth-most populous city in Greece with a population of 144,651 according to the 2011 census. It is also capital of the Larissa regional unit. It is a principal agricultural centre and a national transport hub, linked by road and rail with the port of Volos, the cities of Thessaloniki and Athens. The municipality of Larissa has 162,591 inhabitants, while the regional unit of Larissa reached a population of 284,325 ().\n\nLegend has it that Achilles was born here. Hippocrates, the \"Father of Medicine\", died here. Today, Larissa is an important commercial, transportation, agricultural and industrial centre of Greece.\n\nThere are a number of highways including E75 and the main railway from Athens to Thessaloniki (Salonika) crossing through Thessaly. The region is directly linked to the rest of Europe through the International Airport of Central Greece located in Nea Anchialos a short distance from Larissa (about 60 km). Larissa lies on the river Pineios.\n\nThe municipality Larissa has an area of , the municipal unit Larissa has an area of , and the community Larissa has an area of .\n\nThe Larissa Chasma, a deep gash in the surface of Dione, a natural satellite of Saturn, was named after Larissa.\n\nThe climate of Larissa is semi-arid in the cool version (Köppen: \"BSk\") but it is close to a hot summer Mediterranean climate (\"Csa\"). The winter is fairly mild, and some snowstorms may occur. The summer is particularly hot, and temperatures of may occur. Thunderstorms or heavy rain may cause agricultural damage. Larissa receives of rain per year.\n\nAccording to Greek mythology it is said that the city was founded by Acrisius, who was killed accidentally by his grandson, Perseus. There lived Peleus, the hero beloved by the gods, and his son Achilles.\n\nIn mythology, the nymph Larissa was a daughter of the primordial man Pelasgus.\n\nThe city of Larissa is mentioned in Book II of \"Iliad\" by Homer:\n\n\"Hippothous led the tribes of Pelasgian spearsmen, who dwelt in fertile Larissa- Hippothous, and Pylaeus of the race of Mars, two sons of the Pelasgian Lethus, son of Teutamus.\" \n\nIn this paragraph, Homer shows that the Pelasgians, Trojan allies, used to live in the city of Larissa. It is likely that this city of Larissa was different to the city that was the birthplace of Achilles. The Larissa that features as a Trojan ally in the \"Iliad\" was likely to be located in the Troad, on the other side of the Aegean Sea.\n\nTraces of Paleolithic human settlement have been recovered from the area, but it was peripheral to areas of advanced culture. The area around Larissa was extremely fruitful; it was agriculturally important and in antiquity was known for its horses.\n\nThe name Larissa (Λάρισα \"Lárīsa\") is in origin a Pelasgian word for \"fortress\". There were many ancient Greek cities with this name.\nThe name of Thessalian Larissa is first recorded in connection with the aristocratic Aleuadai family. It was also a polis (city-state).\n\nLarissa was a polis (city-state) during the Classical Era. Larissa is thought to be where the famous Greek physician Hippocrates and the famous philosopher Gorgias of Leontini died.\nWhen Larissa ceased minting the federal coins it shared with other Thessalian towns and adopted its own coinage in the late 5th century BC, it chose local types for its coins. The obverse depicted the nymph of the local spring, Larissa, for whom the town was named; probably the choice was inspired by the famous coins of Kimon depicting the Syracusan nymph Arethusa. The reverse depicted a horse in various poses. The horse was an appropriate symbol of Thessaly, a land of plains, which was well known for its horses. Usually there is a male figure; he should perhaps be seen as the eponymous hero of the Thessalians, Thessalos, who is probably also to be identified on many of the earlier, federal coins of Thessaly.\n\nLarissa, sometimes written Larisa on ancient coins and inscriptions, is near the site of the Homeric Argissa. It appears in early times, when Thessaly was mainly governed by a few aristocratic families, as an important city under the rule of the Aleuadae, whose authority extended over the whole district of Pelasgiotis. This powerful family possessed for many generations before 369 BC the privilege of furnishing the \"tagus\", the local term for the \"strategos\" of the combined Thessalian forces. The principal rivals of the Aleuadae were the Scopadae of Crannon, the remains of which are about 14 miles south west.\n\nLarissa was the birthplace of Meno, who thus became, along with Xenophon and a few others, one of the generals leading several thousands Greeks from various places, in the ill-fated expedition of 401 (retold in Xenophon's \"Anabasis\") meant to help Cyrus the Younger, son of Darius II, king of Persia, overthrow his elder brother Artaxerxes II and take over the throne of Persia (Meno is featured in Plato's dialogue bearing his name, in which Socrates uses the example of \"\"the way to Larissa\"\" to help explain Meno the difference between true opinion and science (Meno, 97a–c); this \"way to Larissa\" might well be on the part of Socrates an attempt to call to Meno's mind a \"way home\", understood as the way toward one's true and \"eternal\" home reached only at death, that each man is supposed to seek in his life).\n\nThe constitution of the town was democratic, which explains why it sided with Athens in the Peloponnesian War. In the neighbourhood of Larissa was celebrated a festival which recalled the Roman Saturnalia, and at which the slaves were waited on by their masters. As the chief city of ancient Thessaly, Larissa was taken by the Thebans and later directly annexed by Philip II of Macedon in 344. It remained under Macedonian control afterwards, except for a brief period when Demetrius Poliorcetes captured it in 302 BC.\n\nIt was in Larissa that Philip V of Macedon signed in 197 BC a treaty with the Romans after his defeat at the Battle of Cynoscephalae, and it was there also that Antiochus III the Great, won a great victory in 192 BC. In 196 BC Larissa became an ally of Rome and was the headquarters of the Thessalian League.\n\nLarissa is frequently mentioned in connection with the Roman civil wars which preceded the establishment of the Roman Empire and Pompey sought refuge there after the defeat of Pharsalus.\n\nLarissa was sacked by the Ostrogoths in the late 5th century, and rebuilt under the Byzantine emperor Justinian I.\n\nIn the 8th century, the city became the metropolis of the theme of Hellas. The city was captured in 986 by Tsar Samuel of Bulgaria, who carried off the relics of its patron saint, Saint Achilleios, to Prespa. It was again unsuccessfully besieged by the Italo-Normans under Bohemond I in 1082/3.\n\nAfter the Fourth Crusade, the King of Thessalonica, Boniface of Montferrat, gave the city to Lombard barons, but they launched a rebellion in 1209 that had to be subdued by the Latin Emperor Henry of Flanders himself. The city was recovered by Epirus soon after.\n\nIt was conquered by the Ottoman Empire in 1386/87 and again in the 1390s, but only came under permanent Ottoman control in 1423, by Turahan Bey. Under Ottoman rule, the city was known as \"Yeni-şehir i-Fenari\", \"new citadel\". As the chief town and military base of Ottoman Thessaly, Larissa was a predominantly Muslim city. During Ottoman rule the administration of the Metropolis of Larissa was transferred to nearby Trikala where it remained until 1734, when Metropolitan Iakovos II returned the see from Trikala to Larissa and established the present-day metropolis of Larissa and Tyrnavos.\n\nThe town was noted for its trade fair in the 17th and 18th centuries, while the seat of the pasha of Thessaly was also transferred there in 1770. Larissa was the headquarters of Hursid Pasha during the Greek War of Independence. It was also renowned for its mosques (four of which were still in use in the late 19th century) and its muslim cemeteries.\n\nThe city remained in Ottoman hands until Thessaly became part of the independent Kingdom of Greece in 1881, except for a period where Ottoman forces re-occupied it during the Greco-Turkish War of 1897. In the late 19th century, there was still a small village in the outskirts of the town inhabited by Africans from Sudan, a curious remnant of the forces collected by Ali Pasha. \n\nIn the 19th century, the town produced leather, cotton, silk and tobacco. Fevers and agues were prevalent owing to bad drainage and the overflowing of the river; and the death rate was higher than the birth rate.\n\nIn 1881, the city, along with the rest of Thessaly, was incorporated into the Kingdom of Greece during the prime ministry of Alexandros Koumoundouros. On 31 August 1881 a unit of the Greek Army headed by General Skarlatos Soutsos entered the city. A considerable portion of the Turkish population emigrated into the Ottoman Empire at that point. In this new era the city starts gradually to expand and to be rebuilt by the Greek authorities.\n\nDuring the Greco-Turkish War of 1897, the city was the headquarters of Greek Crown Prince Constantine. The flight of the Greek army from here to Farsala took place on April 23, 1897. Turkish troops entered the city two days later. After a treaty for peace was signed, they withdrew and Larissa remained permanently in Greece. This was followed by a further exodus of Turks in 1898. The Hassan Bey mosque (which was built in early 16th century) was demolished in 1908.\n\nDuring the Axis Occupation of the country, the Jewish community of the city (dated back to 2nd BC, see Romaniotes) suffered heavy losses. Today in the city there is a Holocaust memorial and a synagogue.\n\nAfter WWII the city was expanded rapidly. Today Larissa is the fourth largest Greek city with many squares, taverns and cafes. It has three public hospitals with one being a military hospital. It hosts the Hellenic Air Force Headquarters and NATO Headquarters in Greece. It has a School of Medicine and a School of Biochemistry – Biotechnology and the third largest in the country Institute of Technology. It occupies the first place among Greek cities into green coverage rate per square-metre urban space and the first place with the highest percentance of bars-taverns-restaurants per capita in Greece. It also has two public libraries and five museums.\n\nChristianity penetrated early to Larissa, though its first bishop is recorded only in 325 at the Council of Nicaea. St. Achillius of the 4th century, is celebrated for his miracles. Le Quien cites twenty-nine bishops from the fourth to the 18th centuries; the most famous is Jeremias II, who occupied the see until 733, when the Emperor Leo III the Isaurian transferred it from the jurisdiction of the Pope of Rome to the Patriarchate of Constantinople. In the first years of the 10th century it had ten suffragan sees; subsequently the number increased and about the year 1175 under the Emperor Manuel I Comnenus, it reached twenty-eight. At the close of the 15th century, under the Ottoman domination, there were only ten suffragan sees, which gradually grew less and finally disappeared.\n\nLarissa is an Orthodox Metropolis of the Church of Greece. \n\nIt was also briefly a Latin archbishopric in the early 13th century, and remains a Latin Metropolitan (top-ranking) titular see of the Roman Catholic Church, which must not be confused with the Latin episcopal (low-ranking) titular see Larissa in Syria. Today there is a Catholic church in the city (Sacred Heart of Jesus).\n\nThe municipality Larissa was formed at the 2011 local government reform by the merger of the following 3 former municipalities, that became municipal units:\nBULLET::::- Giannouli\nBULLET::::- Koilada\nBULLET::::- Larissa\n\nThe municipal unit of Larissa is divided into four city-districts or municipal communities (29 city areas) plus 2 suburban communities (Amphithea and Koulourion). The municipality includes also the Community of Terpsithèa (with the suburban community of Argyssa).\n1st Municipal District\nBULLET::::1. Papastàvrou\nBULLET::::2. Saint Athanàsios\nBULLET::::3. Alkazàr\nBULLET::::4. Hippocrates-Pèra\nBULLET::::5. Potamòpolis\nBULLET::::6. Philippòpolis\nBULLET::::7. Livadàki\nBULLET::::8. Saint Thomas\nBULLET::::9. Saint Paraskevi-Mezourlo\nBULLET::::10. Neàpolis\n\n2nd Municipal District\nBULLET::::1. Saint Achellios\nBULLET::::2. Saint Nikòlaos\nBULLET::::3. Ambelòkipoi\nBULLET::::4. Saints Sarànta\nBULLET::::5. Saint Konstantinos\nBULLET::::6. Stathmòs\n\n3rd Municipal District\nBULLET::::1. Lachanòkipoi\nBULLET::::2. Nèa Smyrne-Kamynia\nBULLET::::3. Kalyvia-Saint Marina\nBULLET::::4. Saint Geòrgios\nBULLET::::5. Anatoli\nBULLET::::6. Koulouri\nBULLET::::7. Amphithèa\n\n4th Municipal District\nBULLET::::1. Charavgi-Toumba-OKE\nBULLET::::2. Pyrovolikà-Pharos\nBULLET::::3. Avèrof-Sèkfo\nBULLET::::4. Nèa Politia\nBULLET::::5. Epiròtika\nBULLET::::6. Anthoupolis\nBULLET::::7. Neràida\nBULLET::::8. Kàmpos\n\nCommunity of Terpsithèa\nBULLET::::1. Terpsithèa\nBULLET::::2. Argyssa\nFrom 1 January 2011, in accordance with the Kallikratis Plan (new administrative division of Greece), the new municipality of Larissa includes also the former municipalities of Giannouli and Koilada.\n\nThe province of Larissa () was one of the provinces of the Larissa Prefecture. Its territory corresponded with that of the current municipalities Larissa (except the municipal unit Giannouli) and Tempi (except the municipal units Gonnoi and Kato Olympos). It was abolished in 2006.\n\nLarissa is a major agricultural center of Greece, due to the plain of Thessaly.\n\nIn manufacturing sector, Larissa is among others home to Biokarpet carpet company (whose owners were also major shareholders of AEL FC in the past) and Orient Bikes.\n\nIt comes also in first place with the highest percentance of bars-taverns-restaurants per capita in Greece. Mikel Coffee Company chain started and has its base in the city.\n\nBULLET::::- Municipal Conservatory of Larissa\nBULLET::::- Pappas's Mile Theatre\nBULLET::::- Municipal Theatre OUHL of Larissa\nBULLET::::- Hatzigianeio Cultural Centre\nBULLET::::- Tiritomba Shadows Theatre\n\nBULLET::::- Second Ancient Theatre\nBULLET::::- Cenotaph monument of Hippocrates\nBULLET::::- Frourio Hill\nBULLET::::- First Ancient Theatre\nBULLET::::- Basilica of St. Achillios\nBULLET::::- Bezesten of Larissa\nBULLET::::- Yeni Mosque (a rare example of mosque built in neoclassical style)\n\nSome historical buildings that have been listed as architecturally preserved, include the Cine Palace (architect Colonello), the Charokopos tower (arch. Anastasios Metaxas), the old Mills of Pappas, such as the complex of the Averofeios Agricultural School.\n\nLocal specialities:\n\nBULLET::::- \"Batzina\" (Μπατζίνα) pie\nBULLET::::- \"Kelaidi\" (Κελαηδί)\nBULLET::::- \"Pita\" (Πίτα, traditional pies) like \"Kreatopita\", \"Loukanikopita\", \"Melintzanopita\", \"Tyropita\", \"Spanakopita\"\nBULLET::::- \"Plastós\" (Πλαστός) pie\nBULLET::::- \"Lahanópsomo\" (Λαχανόψωμο)\nBULLET::::- \"Halvas\" (Χαλβάς)\n\nBULLET::::- Diachronic Museum of Larissa / Archaeological and Byzantine Myseum of Larissa\nBULLET::::- Municipal Gallery of Larissa – G.I. Katsigras Museum\nBULLET::::- Folklore and Historical Museum of Larissa\nBULLET::::- Military Veterinary Museum of Larissa\nBULLET::::- Museum of the Folklore Society of Larissa\nBULLET::::- Museum of Grain and Flours\n\nBULLET::::- TV: Thessalian Radio Television (TRT), Astra TV\nBULLET::::- Press: \"Eleftheria (newspaper)\"\n\nAmong the notable festivals that the city hosts, is the \"Pineiou Festival\" (music) and \"AgroThessaly\", a major agricultural fair.\n\nBULLET::::- A notable film of the Greek cinema partially shot in the area of Larissa and referred to the history of the region is \"Blood on the Land\" (1966) by Vasilis Georgiadis.\n\nLarissa sits in the middle of the plain of Thessaly, with connections to Motorway A1 and national roads EO3 and EO6.\nBULLET::::- Larissa's Urban Bus System\nBULLET::::- Larissa's Interurban System\nBULLET::::- Larissa Central Railway Station Station at\nBULLET::::- Mezourlo Freight Railway station at\nBULLET::::- Larissa National Airport (military)\nBULLET::::- Larissa Tram (planned)\n\nThe city is in close proximity of many interesting destinations in the region (Mount Olympus, Mount Kissavos, Meteora, Lake Plastira, Pilio, etc.) suitable for daily trips.\n\nThe local football club AEL FC currently participates in Superleague Greece. The team won the Greek Championship, in 1988, and won the Greek Cup in 1985 and 2007. These titles place AEL among the five most important football clubs in Greece. AEL has hosted its home games at the AEL FC Arena, a UEFA 3-star-rated football ground, since November 2010.\n\nOther important sport venues are the \"National Sport Center of Larissa\" (EAK Larissas), which includes the Alcazar Stadium and the Neapoli Indoor Hall.\n\nThe National Sports Center of Larissa can accommodate a number of sports and events (football, basketball, wrestling, swimming, boxing, martial arts, handball, water polo, etc.), while the Sports Hall has hosted important athletic events (the 1995 FIBA Under-19 World Cup, the 1997 Women's EuroLeague Final Four, the 2003 Greek Basketball Cup Final Four, martial arts events, etc.), and it is also used for cultural events, such as dance festivals.\n\n!colspan=\"4\"Notable sport clubs based in Larissa\n!width=\"150\"Club\n!Sports\n!Founded\n!Achievements\nApollon Larissa F.C.Football1930Presence in Super League 2\nIraklis LarissaFootball1930/1982 (refoundation)\nrowspan=\"2\"A.E.L. (Athletic Union of Larissa)Football1964Winner of Greek Championship and Greek Cup\nBasketball2006Earlier presence in Greek Basket League\nEA LarissaVolleyball1968Earlier presence in Greek Volleyball League\nOlympia Larissa Basketball1979Earlier presence in Greek Basket League\nLarissa BC Basketball1984Presence in Greek Basket League\nFilathlitikos Larissaikos Syllogos Volleyball1990Earlier presence in Greek Women's Volleyball League\n\n! Year !! Municipal Unit !! Municipality\n\nBULLET::::- Campaspe, mistress of Alexander the Great\nBULLET::::- Achilles (mythology)\nBULLET::::- Hippocrates of Kos (460 BC–370 BC), physician, worked and died in Larissa\nBULLET::::- Medius (4th century BC), officer of Alexander the Great\nBULLET::::- Philinna (4th century BC), dancer, mother of Philip III Arrhidaeus\nBULLET::::- Philo (1st century BC), philosopher\nBULLET::::- Heliodorus of Larissa, mathematician\nBULLET::::- Achillius of Larissa (270–330), patron saint of the city\n\nBULLET::::- Irene of Larissa, empress consort of Bulgaria\nBULLET::::- Agatha, wife of Samuel of Bulgaria\nBULLET::::- Nikoulitzas Delphinas, Byzantine lord of Larissa\n\nBULLET::::- Alexander Helladius, scholar\nBULLET::::- Giorgakis Olympios (1772–1821), commander of the Greek War of Independence\nBULLET::::- Konstantinos Koumas (1777-1836), scholar, figure of the Modern Greek Enlightenment\nBULLET::::- Theoklitos Farmakidis (1784–1860), scholar, figure of the Modern Greek Enlightenment\nBULLET::::- Moshe Pesach (1869-1955), rabbi\nBULLET::::- Achilleas Tzartzanos (1873–1946), linguist, philologist\nBULLET::::- Sotiris Skipis (1881–1952), poet\nBULLET::::- Michail Sapkas, mayor of Larissa and MP\nBULLET::::- Achilleas Protosyngelos, Army officer\nBULLET::::- Agenor Asteriades (1898-1977), painter\nBULLET::::- M. Karagatsis (1908–1960), novelist, journalist\nBULLET::::- Eleni Zafeiriou (1916–2004), actress\nBULLET::::- Antonis Vratsanos (1919–2008), resistance figure during WWII\nBULLET::::- Takis Tloupas (1920–2003), photographer\nBULLET::::- Kostas Gousgounis (1931–), porn actor\nBULLET::::- Athena Tacha (1936–), artist\nBULLET::::- Efthymios Christodoulou (1932–), economist\nBULLET::::- Georgios Souflias (1941–), politician\nBULLET::::- Kostas Tsianos (1942–), theatre director\nBULLET::::- Angela Kokkola, politician\nBULLET::::- Petros Efthimiou (1950–), politician\nBULLET::::- Konstantinos Tzanakoulis (1950–), politician\nBULLET::::- Lakis Lazopoulos (1956–), actor, comedian, script author & director\nBULLET::::- Thanasis Papakonstantinou (1959–), poet, songwriter, singer, musician\nBULLET::::- Kosmas Stratos (1959–), 100m sprinter\nBULLET::::- Georgios Mitsibonas (1962–1997), footballer\nBULLET::::- Vassilis Karapialis (1965–), footballer\nBULLET::::- Christos Papoutsis, politician\nBULLET::::- Maria Spyraki, politician\nBULLET::::- Ekaterini Voggoli (1970–), discus thrower\nBULLET::::- Dimitris Andrikopoulos (1971–), composer\nBULLET::::- Alexis Georgoulis (1974–), actor\nBULLET::::- Yannis Goumas (1975–), footballer\nBULLET::::- Dimosthenis Dikoudis (1977–), basketball player\nBULLET::::- Nestoras Kommatos (1977–), basketball player\nBULLET::::- Fani Halkia (1979–), hurdler\nBULLET::::- Dimitris Spanoulis (1979–), basketball player\nBULLET::::- Theofanis Gekas (1980–), footballer\nBULLET::::- Vangelis Moras (1981–), footballer\nBULLET::::- Vassilis Spanoulis (1982–), basketball player\nBULLET::::- Giorgos Tsiaras (1982–), basketball player\nBULLET::::- Kostas Chalkias (1974–), footballer\nBULLET::::- Athanasios Deligiannis (1983–), composer\nBULLET::::- Apostolis Totsikas (1983–), actor\nBULLET::::- Vasilios Koutsianikoulis (1988–), footballer\nBULLET::::- Valentinos Tzekas (1997-), programmer and businessman\n\nLarissa is twinned with:\nBULLET::::- Bălți, Moldova\nBULLET::::- Banská Bystrica, Slovakia \"(since 1988)\"\nBULLET::::- Knoxville, Tennessee, USA\nBULLET::::- Larnaca, Cyprus\nBULLET::::- Serres, Greece\n\nBULLET::::- Stara Zagora, Bulgaria\nBULLET::::- Rybnik, Poland \"(since 2003)\"\nBULLET::::- Miraflores District, Lima, Peru\n\nBULLET::::- Chemnitz, Germany\nBULLET::::- Anapa, Russia\nBULLET::::- Ürgüp, Turkey \"(since 1996)\"\nBULLET::::- İznik, Turkey \"(since 2000)\"\n\nBULLET::::- Ampelakia, Larissa\nBULLET::::- Vale of Tempe\nBULLET::::- University of Thessaly\nBULLET::::- CERETETH, Center of Technology Thessaly\n\nBULLET::::- Source\nBULLET::::- Official Website\nBULLET::::- Region of Thessaly Official Website\nBULLET::::- International airport of Central Greece\nBULLET::::- Larissa on Web\nBULLET::::- Larissa The Official website of the Greek National Tourism Organisation\nBULLET::::- Larissa Photos\n"}
{"id": "18491", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18491", "title": "Lead and follow", "text": "Lead and follow\n\nIn some types of partner dance, lead and follow are designations for the two dancers comprising a dance pairing. In the case of mixed-gender pairs, it has been considered traditional since the 1960s for a male to be the Lead and a female to be the Follow. The Lead is responsible for guiding the couple and initiating transitions to different dance steps and, in improvised dances, for choosing the dance steps to perform. The Lead communicates choices to the Follow, and directs the Follow by means of subtle physical and visual signals, thereby allowing the pair to be smoothly coordinated.\n\nThe amount of direction given by the Lead depends on several factors, including dance style, social context of the dance, and experience and personalities of the dancers.\n\nTraditionally, the male dance partner is the Lead and the female dance partner is the Follow, though this is not always the case, such as in Schottische danced in the Madrid style where women lead and men follow (Although this is not totally true, during the dance there is an exchange of roles, the one who directs becomes the follower and vice versa. See: 978-84-16068-75-3 \"Apuntes de Chotis Madrileño\", Editorial Punto Rojo). Many social dance forms have a long history of same-sex (e.g. tango) and role-crossing partnerships, and there have been some changes to the strict gendering of partner dances in some competition or performance contexts. An example is a \"Jack and Jack\" dance contest.\n\nPartner dancing requires awareness and clear communication; this is essential both for safety and for the overall success of the dance. If following in the dance, it helps to maintain a centered readiness to the Lead. This helps the Follow be ready for cues both visually and physically. The Lead in the dance will best support the Follow by giving clear direction.\n\nFor the Lead and Follow to interact with each other, communication needs to occur between the dance couple. Because it's not practical to discuss moves verbally, physical contact is the most effective means. More advanced dancers will take many cues from each other through this connection, with the Follow using it to communicate feedback to the Lead just as the Lead uses it to suggest moves to the Follow. The most accomplished dancers use connection as a line of communication which allows the Lead to incorporate the Follow's ideas, abilities, and creative suggestions into their own styling and selection of moves.\n\nIn many partner dances, the Lead's steps differ from the Follow's. In face-to-face positions, the Follow generally \"mirrors\" the Lead's footwork. For example, if the Lead begins on their left foot, the Follow will begin on their right foot. In choreographed pieces and other situations where the Follow is in a tandem position or shadow position, the Lead and Follow will use the same footwork. Usually both partners move together as a unit, but in some dances the partners move in opposite directions - together and apart again.\n\nIn partner dancing, dancers seek to work together to create synchronized or complementary movements. The Lead is largely responsible for \"initiating\" movement, whereas the Follow's role is to \"maintain\" this movement (though they may choose not to). This process can be described as involving the initiation of momentum or 'energy' (by the Lead) and then the subsequent maintenance, exaggeration, decreasing or dissolving of this momentum by both partners.\nThis momentum or energy may be manifested as movement (in its most obvious form), or in a range of more complex interactions between partners:\nBULLET::::- Compression (where each partner 'compress' the energy by bending joints and moving towards or 'into' their partner, to varying degrees);\nBULLET::::- Leverage (where one partner - usually the Lead - exploits the development of compression or connection to shift their Follow's weight or to 'ground' (develop 'compression' downwards, with the contact their feet make with the floor) themselves more thoroughly before initiating movement);\nBULLET::::- Tension (is the opposite of compression - partners moving away from each other but still in contact)\n\nIt is also helpful for dancers to regard their partners in terms of their \"points of balance\" to help the Lead initiate movements for their Follow partners. These points of balance include the front-facing side of the shoulders, the front facing side of the hips, and the Follow's center (the abdomen). If the Lead wants to bring the Follow close, the Lead is to apply tension and draw the hand in and down toward the Lead's own hip; to send the Follow away, the Lead would guide the hand toward the Follow and add compression, signaling the move away.\n\nA general rule is that both Lead and Follow watch each other's back in a dance hall situation. Collision avoidance is one of the cases when the Follow is required to \"backlead\" or at least to communicate about the danger to the Lead. In travelling dances, such as Waltz, common Follow signals of danger are an unusual resistance to the Lead, or a slight tap by the shoulder. In open-position dances, such as Swing or Latin dances, maintaining eye contact with the partner is an important safety communication link.\n\nFor partner dancers, using weight transfers is a way for a Lead to communicate a 'lead' for a dance step to a Follow.\n\nIn another example, for a Lead to have their Follow walk forwards while connected, the Lead begins by taking his or her center back, indicating a backward walking move. As the partners' arms/points of contact move away from each other, they develop tension, which the Follow may either break by dropping their arms or breaking the hold, or 'follow' by moving.\n\nA more experienced Lead may realize (if only on an unconscious level) that the most effective execution of even this \"simple\" step is achieved by preparing for movement before the step begins.\n\nThe Lead-Follow connection facilitates this. The principles of leading and following are explored in contact improvisation of modern dance, though they are as ancient a process as a parent carrying a child.\n\nAdvanced swing dancers do this to enhance their dance connection and to add more fun into the dance. Another way of \"breaking the routine\" of the dance is syncopation (making more steps than required by the standard description of the dance pattern). Syncopations are easier for the Lead to cope with, since the Lead does not have to change the intended dance figure, although experienced dancers try and match the fancy footwork of the partner, at least in rhythm. So, in a sense, syncopation may be perceived as mild hijacking. This is not as difficult as it might seem, since good dancers match their footwork to musical accents.\n\nSometimes a miscommunication will occur between the Lead and Follow. Techniques of the recovery of connection and synchronization vary from dance to dance, but below are a few common examples.\n\nBULLET::::- In dances without obligatory body contact (Latin, swing, hustle, American Smooth), free spin recovers from anything.\nBULLET::::- In dances danced in body contact (Waltz, Tango) it is very important to recover the feet match. To recover, Leads may initiate a well-known (i.e. basic) step with slightly exaggerated sideways shift of weight to force the Follow to free the required foot. For example, in Waltz or Foxtrot one might end a measure in the open promenade position, as there would then be no doubt as to the direction of the movement and which foot to use at the beginning of the next measure.\n\nBULLET::::- Body Lead\nBULLET::::- Arm Lead\n\nA \"body lead\" occurs where the Lead initiates a lead by moving their body, which moves their arm(s), and thus transmits a lead to the Follow. 'Body lead' means much the same as 'weight transfer'.\nAn \"arm lead\" occurs where the Lead moves their arm(s) without moving their body, or moves their body in a different direction to their arm.\nWhile an 'arm lead' without the transfer of weight (or movement of the body) on the part of the Lead is often a marker of an inexperienced or poorly taught dancer, the process of leading and following, particularly at an advanced level, often involves the contra- and contrasting uses of weight transfers and 'arm moves'. As an example, a Lead may lead a Follow back onto their right foot through the Lead's own weight transfer forwards onto their left foot; yet at the same time turn the Follow's torso to the left from above the hips.\n\nThe Lead has to communicate the direction of the movement to the Follow. Traditionally, the Lead's right hand is on the follow's back, near the lowest part of the shoulder-blade. This is the strongest part of the back and the Lead can easily pull the Follow's body inwards. To enable the Lead to communicate a step forward (backward for the Follow) the Follow has to constantly put a little weight against the Lead's right hand. When the Lead goes forward, the Follow will naturally go backwards.\n\nAn important leading mechanism is the Lead's left hand, which usually holds the Follow's right hand. At no point should it be necessary for any partner to firmly grab the other's hand. It is sufficient to press the hand or even only finger tips slightly against each other, the Follow's hand following the Lead's hand.\n\nAnother important leading mechanism is hip contact. Though not possible in traditional Latin dances like Rumba, Cha-cha, Tango Argentino because of partner separation, hip contact is a harmonious and sensual way of communicating movement to the partner, used primarily in Standard or Ballroom Dances (English / slow Waltz, European Tango, Quickstep etc.) and Caribbean dances.\n\nBULLET::::- Active Follow\nBULLET::::- Passive Follow\n\n'Backleading' is when a Follow is executing steps without waiting for, or contrary to the Lead's lead. Both are considered bad dancing habits because it makes the Follow difficult to lead and dance with.\n\nBackleading can be a teaching tool that is often used intentionally by an instructor when dancing with a student Lead, in order to help them learn the desired technique.\n\nBackleading sounds similar to \"hijacking\", and indeed it is often used in place of \"hijacking\". However the two terms have significant differences, stemming from intentions. The first difference is superficial; hijacking is usually an occasional \"outburst\" from the Follow, who otherwise diligently follows the Lead, while a \"backlead\" may refer to a consistent habit. The second difference is more significant; hijacking is an actual reversal of roles, meaning that the hijacker leads the Leader and takes control of the dance, while backleading only takes care of the Follow.\n\nSometimes the Follow steals the lead and the couple reverses roles for some time. This is called hijacking (also known as lead stealing). Hijacking requires experience and good connection, since without proper timing it may look like sloppy dancing. A signal for hijacking is typically an unusually changed (mostly, increased) stress in the connection from the Follow's side. \"Unusually\" meaning more than typically required for the execution of the current step (by these partners). For a Follow to hijack, they must be sure that the Lead will understand or at least guess the Follow's intentions.\n\nClosed Position: The basic dance position has the Lead and Follow facing one another, usually with the Lead's right hand on the Follow's back and the left hand holding the Follow's right hand. The height at which the Lead holds their left hand varies depending on the style of dance.\n\nOpen Position: An open position will have the Lead and Follow facing one another, holding with one or both hands. Partners have slightly more distance between them than in closed position.\n\nApart Position: No hands held or contact made.\n\nPromenade Position: A closed position that forms a V-shape. The Lead will turn approximately 1/8 of a turn to the left and the Follow 1/8 of a turn to the right, with heads following in respective directions. These degrees of turn vary, depending on the style of dance.\n\nCounter-Promenade Position: Similar V-position as above, with partners walking in same direction yet with toes facing opposite directions (towards one another).\n\nOutside Partner Position: A closed position where both of the Lead's feet step on the outside track of the Follow's feet; right leg will be against right leg.\n\nAlignment: Indicate the directions the feet face in relationship to the room. Utilizes the Line Of Dance, which creates orientation positions in the room where the dance is taking place.\n\nTurn: Direction of the turn indicates which shoulder will move backward as one turns. In a Left turn, the left shoulder will move backward. In the Right turn, the right shoulder will move backward.\n\nSway: Sway indicates body movement in the opposite direction of the moving foot. Sway Left stretches away from the moving right foot, while Sway Right stretches away from the moving left foot. Straight indicates no sway, holding an upright position.\n\nCounter-Sway: Body moves in the same direction of the moving foot.\n\nRise and Fall: Refers to the body movement ascending and descending to create dynamic levels in the dance.\n\nContra Body Movement (CBM): Describes the body movement when the opposite shoulder moves in the same direction as the opposite or moving leg.\n\nContra Body Movement Position (CBMP): Describes the foot position when the moving foot is in the same line of position as the opposite foot (as in being on a tightrope).\n\nFall Away: Both dancers walk backwards.\n"}
{"id": "18492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18492", "title": "Lexeme", "text": "Lexeme\n\nA lexeme () is a unit of lexical meaning that underlies a set of words that are related through inflection. It is a basic abstract unit of meaning, a unit of morphological analysis in linguistics that roughly corresponds to a set of forms taken by a single root word. For example, in English, \"run\", \"runs\", \"ran\" and \"running\" are forms of the same lexeme, which can be represented as RUN.\n\nOne form, the lemma (or citation form), is chosen by convention as the canonical form of a lexeme. The lemma is the form used in dictionaries as an entry's headword. Other forms of a lexeme are often listed later in the entry if they are uncommon or irregularly-inflected.\n\nThe notion of the lexeme is central to morphology, the basis for defining other concepts in that field. For example, the difference between inflection and derivation can be stated in terms of lexemes:\nBULLET::::- Inflectional rules relate a lexeme to its forms.\nBULLET::::- Derivational rules relate a lexeme to another lexeme.\n\nA lexeme belongs to a particular syntactic category, has a certain meaning (semantic value) and, in inflecting languages, has a corresponding inflectional paradigm. That is, a lexeme in many languages will have many different forms. For example, the lexeme RUN has a present third person singular form \"runs\", a present non-third-person singular form \"run\" (which also functions as the past participle and non-finite form), a past form \"ran\", and a present participle \"running\". (It does not include \"runner, runners, runnable\" etc.) The use of the forms of a lexeme is governed by rules of grammar. In the case of English verbs such as RUN, they include subject-verb agreement and compound tense rules, which determine the form of a verb that can be used in a given sentence.\n\nIn many formal theories of language, lexemes have subcategorization frames to account for the number and types of complements. They occur within sentences and other syntactic structures.\n\nA language's lexemes are often composed of smaller units with individual meaning called morphemes, according to root morpheme + derivational morphemes + suffix (not necessarily in that order), where:\nBULLET::::- The root morpheme is the primary lexical unit of a word, which carries the most significant aspects of semantic content and cannot be reduced to smaller constituents.\nBULLET::::- The derivational morphemes carry only derivational information.\nBULLET::::- The suffix is composed of all inflectional morphemes, and carries only inflectional information.\n\nThe compound root morpheme + derivational morphemes is often called the stem. The decomposition stem + desinence can then be used to study inflection.\n\nBULLET::::- Ending (linguistics)\nBULLET::::- Inflection\nBULLET::::- Lexical word vs. grammatical word\nBULLET::::- Marker (linguistics)\nBULLET::::- Multiword expression\nBULLET::::- Null morpheme\nBULLET::::- Root (linguistics)\nBULLET::::- Stem\nBULLET::::- Word family\n"}
{"id": "18494", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18494", "title": "Lord's Prayer", "text": "Lord's Prayer\n\nThe Lord's Prayer, also called the Our Father (Latin, Pater Noster), is a venerated Christian prayer which, according to the New Testament, Jesus taught as the way to pray:\nTwo versions of this prayer are recorded in the gospels: a longer form within the Sermon on the Mount in the Gospel of Matthew, and a shorter form in the Gospel of Luke when \"one of his disciples said to him, 'Lord, teach us to pray, as John taught his disciples.'\" ( NRSV). Lutheran theologian Harold Buls suggested that both were original, the Matthean version spoken by Jesus early in his ministry in Galilee, and the Lucan version one year later, \"very likely in Judea\".\n\nThe first three of the seven petitions in Matthew address God; the other four are related to human needs and concerns. The Matthew account alone includes the \"Your will be done\" and the \"Rescue us from the evil one\" (or \"Deliver us from evil\") petitions. Both original Greek texts contain the adjective \"epiousios\", which does not appear in any other classical or Koine Greek literature; while controversial, \"daily\" has been the most common English-language translation of this word. Protestants usually conclude the prayer with a doxology, a later addendum appearing in some manuscripts of Matthew.\n\n! (NRSV) !! (NRSV)\n\n[A few ancient authorities read \"Your Holy Spirit come upon us and cleanse us.\"]\n\nInitial words on the topic from the \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\" teach that it \"is truly the summary of the whole gospel\". The prayer is used by most Christian churches in their worship; with few exceptions, the liturgical form is the Matthean. Although theological differences and various modes of worship divide Christians, according to Fuller Seminary professor Clayton Schmit, \"there is a sense of solidarity in knowing that Christians around the globe are praying together ... and these words always unite us.\"\n\nIn biblical criticism, the prayer's absence in the Gospel of Mark together with its occurrence in Matthew and Luke has caused scholars who accept the two-source hypothesis (against other document hypotheses) to conclude that it is probably a \"logion\" original to Q.\n\nStandard edition of Greek text\n\n<br>\n\"(pater hēmōn ho en tois ouranois)\"\n\n<br>\n\"(hagiasthētō to onoma sou)\"\n\n<br>\n\"(elthetō hē basileia sou)\"\n\n<br>\n\"(genēthētō to thelēma sou hōs en ouranō(i) kai epi gēs)\"\n\n<br>\n\"(ton arton hēmōn ton epiousion dos hēmin sēmeron)\"\n\n<br>\n\"(kai aphes hēmin ta opheilēmata hēmōn hōs kai hēmeis aphēkamen tois opheiletais hēmōn)\"\n\"(kai mē eisenegkēs hēmas eis peirasmon alla rhusai hēmas apo tou ponērou)\"\n\nPatriarchal Edition 1904\n\n<br>\n<br>\n<br>\n<br>\n<br>\n<br>\n<br>\nὅτι σοῦ ἐστιν ἡ βασιλεία καὶ ἡ δύναμις καὶ ἡ δόξα εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας ἀμήν\n\nRoman Missal\n\nThere are several different English translations of the Lord's Prayer from Greek or Latin, beginning around AD 650 with the Northumbrian translation. Of those in current liturgical use, the three best-known are:\nBULLET::::- The translation in the 1662 Anglican \"Book of Common Prayer\" (BCP) of the Church of England\nBULLET::::- The slightly modernized form used in the 1928 version of the Prayer Book of the Episcopal Church in the United States of America (sometimes with the doxology), corresponding to the version in use among English-speaking Catholics from an earlier date (always without the doxology)\nBULLET::::- The 1988 translation of the ecumenical English Language Liturgical Consultation (ELLC)\nThe square brackets in three of the texts below indicate the doxology often added at the end of the prayer by Protestants and, in a slightly different form, by the Byzantine Rite (\"For thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory: of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.\"), among whom the prayer proper is usually recited by the cantors and congregation in unison, and the doxology by the priest as the conclusion of the prayer. The Anglican Book of Common Prayer adds it in some services but not in all. Older English translations of the Bible, based on late Byzantine Greek manuscripts, included it, but it is excluded in critical editions of the New Testament, such as that of the United Bible Societies. It is absent in the oldest manuscripts and is not considered to be part of the original text of –. The Catholic Church has never attached it to the Lord's Prayer, but has included it in the Roman Rite Mass as revised in 1969, not as part of the Our Father but separated from it by a prayer called the embolism spoken or sung by the priest (in the official ICEL English translation: \"Deliver us, Lord, we pray, from every evil, graciously grant peace in our days, that, by the help of your mercy, we may be always free from sin and safe from all distress, as we await the blessed hope and the coming of our Saviour, Jesus Christ.\") that elaborates on the final petition, \"Deliver us from evil.\" For more information on this doxology, see Doxology, below. When Reformers set out to translate the King James Bible, they assumed that a Greek manuscript they possessed was ancient and therefore adopted the phrase \"For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory forever\" into the Lord's Prayer. Later scholarship demonstrated that the manuscript was actually a late addition based on Eastern liturgical tradition.\n\nOther English translations are also used.\n\nThough uses the term \"debts\", the older English versions of the Lord's Prayer uses the term \"trespasses\", while ecumenical versions often use the term \"sins\". The latter choice may be due to , which uses the word \"sins\", while the former may be due to (immediately after the text of the prayer), where Jesus speaks of \"trespasses\". As early as the third century, Origen of Alexandria used the word \"trespasses\" () in the prayer. Although the Latin form that was traditionally used in Western Europe has \"debita\" (\"debts\"), most English-speaking Christians (except Scottish Presbyterians and some others of the Reformed tradition) use \"trespasses\". The Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), the Established Presbyterian Church of Scotland as well as the Congregational denomination follow the version found in Matthew 6 in the Authorized Version (known also as the King James Version), which in the prayer uses the words \"debts\" and \"debtors\".\n\nAll these versions are based on the text in Matthew, rather than Luke, of the prayer given by Jesus:\n\n\"Our\" indicates that the prayer is that of a group of people who consider themselves children of God and who call God their \"Father\". \"In heaven\" indicates that the Father who is addressed is distinct from human fathers on earth.\n\nAugustine interpreted \"heaven\" (\"coelum\", sky) in this context as meaning \"in the hearts of the righteous, as it were in His holy temple\".\n\nFormer Archbishop of Canterbury Rowan Williams explains this phrase as a petition that people may look upon God's name as holy, as something that inspires awe and reverence, and that they may not trivialize it by making God a tool for their purposes, to \"put other people down, or as a sort of magic to make themselves feel safe\". He sums up the meaning of the phrase by saying: \"Understand what you're talking about when you're talking about God, this is serious, this is the most wonderful and frightening reality that we could imagine, more wonderful and frightening than we can imagine.\"\n\n\"This petition has its parallel in the Jewish prayer, 'May he establish his Kingdom during your life and during your days.' In the gospels Jesus speaks frequently of God's kingdom, but never defines the concept: \"He assumed this was a concept so familiar that it did not require definition.\" Concerning how Jesus' audience in the gospels would have understood him, G. E. Ladd turns to the concept's Hebrew Biblical background: \"The Hebrew word \"malkuth\" […] refers first to a reign, dominion, or rule and only secondarily to the realm over which a reign is exercised. […] When \"malkuth\" is used of God, it almost always refers to his authority or to his rule as the heavenly King.\" This petition looks to the perfect establishment of God's rule in the world in the future, an act of God resulting in the eschatological order of the new age.\n\nThe request for God's \"kingdom\" to come is commonly interpreted at the most literal level: as a reference to the belief, common at the time, that a \"Messiah figure\" would bring about a \"kingdom of God\". Traditionally, the coming of God's kingdom is seen as a divine gift to be prayed for, not a human achievement. This idea is frequently challenged by groups who believe that the Kingdom will come by the hands of those faithful who work for a better world. These believe that Jesus' commands to feed the hungry and clothe the needy are the kingdom to which he was referring.\n\nHilda C. Graef notes that the operative Greek word, basileia, means both kingdom and kingship (i.e., reign, dominion, governing, etc.), but that the English word kingdom loses this double meaning. Kingship adds a psychological meaning to the petition: one is also praying for the condition of soul where one follows God's will.\n\nAccording to William Barclay, this phrase is a couplet with the same meaning as \"Thy kingdom come.\" Barclay argues: \"The kingdom is a state of things on earth in which God's will is as perfectly done as it is in heaven... To do the will of God and to be in the Kingdom of God are one and the same thing.\"\n\nJohn Ortberg interprets this phrase as follows: \"Many people think our job is to get my afterlife destination taken care of, then tread water till we all get ejected and God comes back and torches this place. But Jesus never told anybody—neither his disciples nor us—to pray, 'Get me out of here so I can go up there.' His prayer was, 'Make up there come down here.' Make things down here run the way they do up there.\" The request that \"thy will be done\" is God's invitation to \"join him in making things down here the way they are up there.\"\n\nAs mentioned earlier in this article, the original word (\"epiousios\"), commonly characterized as \"daily\", is unique to the Lord's Prayer in all of ancient Greek literature. The word is almost a hapax legomenon, occurring only in Luke and Matthew's versions of the Lord's Prayer, and nowhere else in any other extant Greek texts. While \"epiousios\" is often substituted by the word \"daily,\" all other New Testament translations from the Greek into \"daily\" otherwise reference \"hemeran\" (ἡμέραν, \"the day\"), which does not appear in this usage.\n\nVia linguistic parsing, Jerome translated \"ἐπιούσιον\" (epiousios) as \"supersubstantialem\" in the Gospel of Matthew, but chose \"cotidianum\" (\"daily\") in the Gospel of Luke. This wide-ranging difference with respect to meaning of \"epiousios\" is discussed in detail in the current Catechism of the Catholic Church by way of an inclusive approach toward tradition as well as a literal one for meaning: \"Taken in a temporal sense, this word is a pedagogical repetition of \"this day,\" to confirm us in trust \"without reservation.\" Taken in the qualitative sense, it signifies what is necessary for life, and more broadly every good thing sufficient for subsistence. Taken literally (epi-ousios: \"super-essential\"), it refers directly to the Bread of Life, the Body of Christ, the \"medicine of immortality,\" without which we have no life within us.\"\n\n\"Epiousios\" is translated as \"supersubstantialem\" in the Vulgate () and accordingly as \"supersubstantial\" in the Douay-Rheims Bible ().\n\nBarclay M. Newman's \"A Concise Greek-English Dictionary of the New Testament\", published in a revised edition in 2010 by the United Bible Societies has the following entry:\n\nThe Presbyterian and other Reformed churches tend to use the rendering \"forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors\". Roman Catholics, Lutherans, Anglicans and Methodists are more likely to say \"trespasses… those who trespass against us\". The \"debts\" form appears in the first English translation of the Bible, by John Wycliffe in 1395 (Wycliffe spelling \"dettis\"). The \"trespasses\" version appears in the 1526 translation by William Tyndale (Tyndale spelling \"treaspases\"). In 1549 the first Book of Common Prayer in English used a version of the prayer with \"trespasses\". This became the \"official\" version used in Anglican congregations. On the other hand, the 1611 King James Version, the version specifically authorized for the Church of England, has \"forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors\".\n\nAfter the request for bread, Matthew and Luke diverge slightly. Matthew continues with a request for debts to be forgiven in the same manner as people have forgiven those who have debts against them. Luke, on the other hand, makes a similar request about sins being forgiven in the manner of debts being forgiven between people. The word \"debts\" () does not necessarily mean financial obligations, as shown by the use of the verbal form of the same word () in passages such as . The Aramaic word \"ḥôbâ\" can mean \"debt\" or \"sin\". This difference between Luke's and Matthew's wording could be explained by the original form of the prayer having been in Aramaic. The generally accepted interpretation is thus that the request is for forgiveness of sin, not of supposed loans granted by God. Asking for forgiveness from God was a staple of Jewish prayers. It was also considered proper for individuals to be forgiving of others, so the sentiment expressed in the prayer would have been a common one of the time.\n\nAnthony C. Deane, Canon of Worcester Cathedral, suggested that the choice of the word \"ὀφειλήματα\" (debts), rather than \"ἁμαρτίας\" (sins), indicates a reference to failures to use opportunities of doing good. He linked this with the parable of the sheep and the goats (also in Matthew's Gospel), in which the grounds for condemnation are not wrongdoing in the ordinary sense, but failure to do right, missing opportunities for showing love to others.\n\n\"As we forgive ...\". Divergence between Matthew's \"debts\" and Luke's \"sins\" is relatively trivial compared to the impact of the second half of this statement. The verses immediately following the Lord's Prayer, show Jesus teaching that the forgiveness of our sin/debt (by God) is linked with how we forgive others, as in the Parable of the Unforgiving Servant , which Matthew gives later. R. T. France comments:\n\nThe point is not so much that forgiving is a prior condition of being forgiven, but that forgiving cannot be a one-way process. Like all God's gifts it brings responsibility; it must be passed on. To ask for forgiveness on any other basis is hypocrisy. There can be question, of course, of our forgiving being in proportion to what we are forgiven, as 18:23–35 makes clear.\nInterpretations of the penultimate petition of the prayer—not to be led by God into \"peirasmos\"—vary considerably. The range of meanings of the Greek word \"πειρασμός\" (peirasmos) is illustrated in New Testament Greek lexicons. In different contexts it can mean temptation, testing, trial, experiment. Although the traditional English translation uses the word \"temptation\" and Carl Jung saw God as actually leading people astray, Christians generally interpret the petition as not contradicting : \"Let no one say when he is tempted, 'I am being tempted by God', for God cannot be tempted with evil, and he himself tempts no one. But each person is tempted when he is lured and enticed by his own desire.\" Some see the petition as an eschatological appeal against unfavourable Last Judgment, a theory supported by the use of the word \"peirasmos\" in this sense in . Others see it as a plea against hard \"tests\" described elsewhere in scripture, such as those of Job. It is also read as: \"Do not let us be led (by ourselves, by others, by Satan) into temptations\". Since it follows shortly after a plea for daily bread (i.e., material sustenance), it is also seen as referring to not being caught up in the material pleasures given. A similar phrase appears in and in connection with the prayer of Jesus in Gethsemane.\n\nJoseph Smith, the founder of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, in a translation of the Holy Bible which was not completed before his death, used: \"And suffer us not to be led into temptation\".\n\nIn a conversation on the Italian TV channel \"TV2000\" on 6 December 2017, Pope Francis commented that the then Italian wording of this petition (similar to the traditional English) was a poor translation. He said \"the French\" (i.e., the Bishops' Conference of France) had changed the petition to \"Do not let us fall in/into temptation\". He was referring to the 2017 change to a new French version, \"Et ne nous laisse pas entrer en tentation\" (\"Do not let us enter into temptation\"), but spoke of it in terms of the Spanish translation, \"no nos dejes caer en la tentación\" (\"do not let us fall in/into temptation\"), that he was accustomed to recite in Argentina before his election as Pope. He explained: \"I am the one who falls; it's not him [God] pushing me into temptation to then see how I have fallen\". Anglican theologian Ian Paul said that such a proposal was \"stepping into a theological debate about the nature of evil\".\n\nIn January 2018, the German Bishops' Conference rejected any rewording of their translation of the Lord's Prayer.\n\nIn November 2018, the Episcopal Conference of Italy adopted a new edition of the \"Messale Romano\", the Italian translation of the Roman Missal, which received, a few months later, the confirmation by the Holy See that was required for publication. One of the changes made from the older (1983) edition was to render this petition as \"non abbandonarci alla tentazione\" (\"do not abandon us to temptation\").\n\nSome news reports in English gave the false impression that the Holy See's confirmation of the choice made by the Italian bishops was instead a decree by Pope Francis changing the Our Father for the whole of the Catholic Church. The Catholic Bishops' Conference of England and Wales and the Bishops' Conference of Scotland denied this in response to a query from the British tabloid newspaper \"The Sun\",\n\nThe Italian-speaking Waldensian Evangelical Church maintains its translation of the petition: \"non esporci alla tentazione\" (\"do not expose us to temptation\").\n\nTranslations and scholars are divided over whether the final word here refers to \"evil\" in general or \"the evil one\" (the devil) in particular. In the original Greek, as well as in the Latin translation, the word could be either of neuter (evil in general) or masculine (the evil one) gender. Matthew's version of the prayer appears in the Sermon on the Mount, in earlier parts of which the term is used to refer to general evil. Later parts of Matthew refer to the devil when discussing similar issues. However, the devil is never referred to as \"the evil one\" in any known Aramaic sources. While John Calvin accepted the vagueness of the term's meaning, he considered that there is little real difference between the two interpretations, and that therefore the question is of no real consequence. Similar phrases are found in and .\n\nThe doxology of the prayer is not contained in Luke's version, nor is it present in the earliest manuscripts of Matthew, representative of the Alexandrian text, although it is present in the manuscripts representative of the later Byzantine text. Most scholars do not consider it part of the original text of Matthew. New translations generally omit it.\n\nThe first known use of the doxology, in a less lengthy form (\"for yours is the power and the glory forever\"), as a conclusion for the Lord's Prayer (in a version slightly different from that of Matthew) is in the \"Didache\", 8:2. It has similarities with —\"Yours, O LORD, is the greatness and the power and the glory and the victory and the majesty, for all that is in the heavens and in the earth is yours. Yours is the kingdom, O LORD, and you are exalted as head above all.\" In the Byzantine Rite, a similar doxology is sung within the context of the Divine Liturgy. Following the last line of the prayer, the priest sings \"For thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory, of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now and ever and unto ages of ages.\"\n\nLatin Church Roman Catholics do not use the doxology when reciting the Lord's Prayer, because it is not part of their received liturgical tradition and is not found in the Latin Vulgate of St. Jerome. Since 1970 it is included in the Roman Rite Mass as an independent item, not as part of the Lord's Prayer. The Anglican Book of Common Prayer sometimes gives the Lord's Prayer with the doxology, sometimes without. Most Protestants append it to the Lord's Prayer.\n\nIn the course of Christianization, one of the first texts to be translated between many languages has historically been the Lord's Prayer, long before the full Bible would be translated into the respective languages.\nSince the 16th century, collections of translations of the prayer have often been used for a quick comparison of languages.\n\nThe first such collection, with 22 versions, was \"Mithridates, de differentiis linguarum\" by Conrad Gessner (1555; the title refers to Mithridates VI of Pontus who according to Pliny the Elder was an exceptional polyglot).\n\nGessner's idea of collecting translations of the prayer was taken up by authors of the 17th century, including Hieronymus Megiserus (1603) and Georg Pistorius (1621).\nThomas Lüdeken in 1680 published an enlarged collection of 83 versions of the prayer, of which three were in fictional philosophical languages.\nLüdeken quotes as a \"Barnum Hagius\" as his source for the exotic scripts used, while their true (anonymous) author was Andreas Müller.\nIn 1700, Lüdeken's collection was re-edited by B. Mottus as \"Oratio dominica plus centum linguis versionibus aut characteribus reddita et expressa\".\nThis edition was comparatively inferior, but a second, revised edition was published in 1715 by John Chamberlain.\nThis 1715 edition was used by Gottfried Hensel in his \"Synopsis Universae Philologiae\" (1741) to compile \"geographico-polyglot maps\" where the beginning of the prayer was shown in the geographical area where the respective languages were spoken.\nJohann Ulrich Kraus also published a collection with more than 100 entries.\n\nThese collections continued to be improved and expanded well into the 19th century; Johann Christoph Adelung and Johann Severin Vater in 1806–1817 published the prayer in \"well-nigh five hundred languages and dialects\".\n\nSamples of scripture, including the Lord's Prayer, were published in 52 oriental languages, most of them not previously found in such collections, translated by the brethren of the Serampore Mission and printed at the mission press there in 1818.\n\nThere are similarities between the Lord's Prayer and both biblical and post-biblical material in Jewish prayer especially Kiddushin 81a (Babylonian). \"Our Father which art in heaven\" (אבינו שבשמים, \"Avinu shebashamayim\") is the beginning of many Hebrew prayers. \"Hallowed be thy name\" is reflected in the Kaddish. \"Lead us not into sin\" is echoed in the \"morning blessings\" of Jewish prayer. A blessing said by some Jewish communities after the evening \"Shema\" includes a phrase quite similar to the opening of the Lord's Prayer: \"Our God in heaven, hallow thy name, and establish thy kingdom forever, and rule over us for ever and ever. Amen.\" There are parallels also in .\n\nRabbi Aron Mendes Chumaceiro has said that nearly all the elements of the prayer have counterparts in the Jewish Bible and Deuterocanonical books: the first part in (\"Look down from heaven and see, from your holy and beautiful habitation ... For you are our Father ...\") and (\"I will vindicate the holiness of my great name ...\") and (\"I will show my greatness and my holiness and make myself known in the eyes of many nations ...\"), the second part in (\"Saviours shall go up to Mount Zion to rule Mount Esau, and the kingdom shall be the L's\") and (\"... It is the L. Let him do what seems good to him.\"), the third part in (\"... feed me with my apportioned bread...\"), the fourth part in (\"Forgive your neighbour the wrong he has done, and then your sins will be pardoned when you pray.\"). \"Deliver us from evil\" can be compared with (\"... let no iniquity get dominion over me.\"). Chumaceiro says that, because the idea of God leading a human into temptation contradicts the righteousness and love of God, \"Lead us not into temptation\" has no counterpart in the Jewish Bible/Christian Old Testament.\n\nThe word \"πειρασμός\", which is translated as \"temptation\", could also be translated as \"test\" or \"trial\", making evident the attitude of someone's heart. Well-known examples in the Old Testament are God's test of Abraham (); his \"moving\" (the Hebrew word means basically \"to prick, as by weeds, thorns\") David to do (numbering Israel) what David later acknowledged as sin (; see also ); and the testing of Job in the \"Book of Job\".\n\nIn modern times, various composers have incorporated \"The Lord's Prayer\" into a musical setting for utilization during liturgical services for a variety of religious traditions as well as interfaith ceremonies. Included among them are:\n\nBULLET::::- 9th–10th century: Gregorian chant\nBULLET::::- 1878: Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky – \"Otche Nash\" (Отче наш; Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom, op. 41)\nBULLET::::- 1883: Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov – \"Otche Nash\"\nBULLET::::- 1906: Leoš Janáček – \"Otče náš\"\nBULLET::::- 1919: Emil von Reznicek – \"Vater Unser im Himmel\" (A Choral Fantasy with Mixed Chorus and Organ)\nBULLET::::- 1910: Sergei Rachmaninoff – \"Otche Nash\" (Отче наш; Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom, op. 31)\nBULLET::::- 1926: Igor Stravinsky – \"Otche Nash\" (1926), arr. \"Pater Noster\" (Latin, some time later)\nBULLET::::- 1935: Albert Hay Malotte – \"The Lord's Prayer\"\nBULLET::::- 1973: Arnold Strals – \"The Lord's Prayer\" (performed by Sister Janet Mead)\nBULLET::::- 1985: Clive Strutt - \"XIII Paternoster\" in the \"Festal Eucharist in honour of Saint Olaf, King and Martyr\"\nBULLET::::- 1992: John Serry Sr. – \"The Lord's Prayer\" for Organ & Chorus\nBULLET::::- 1999: Paul Field and Stephen Deal – \"The Millennium Prayer\" (performed by Cliff Richard)\nBULLET::::- 2000: John Tavener – \"The Lord's Prayer\"\nBULLET::::- 2004: Lisa Gerrard – \"Abwoon\" (Lord's Prayer in Aramaic)\nBULLET::::- 2014: Behemoth (band) – \"Ora Pro Nobis Lucifer\" (Doxology used as chorus lyrics)\n\nAs with other prayers, the Lord's Prayer was used by cooks to time their recipes before the spread of clocks.\nFor example, a step could be \"simmer the broth for three Lord's Prayers\".\n\nAmerican songwriter and arranger Brian Wilson set the text of the Lord's Prayer to an elaborate close-harmony arrangement loosely based on Malotte's melody. Wilson's group, The Beach Boys, would return to the piece several times throughout their recording career, most notably as the B-side to their 1964 single \"Little Saint Nick.\"\n\nThe band Yazoo used the prayer interspersed with the lyrics of \"In My Room\" on the album \"Upstairs at Eric's\".\n\nThe 2005 game Civilization IV uses a Swahili-language version of the prayer as its main theme.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Amen\"\nBULLET::::- \"Didache\", an early book of rituals which mentions saying the prayer three times daily\nBULLET::::- Discourse on ostentation, a portion of the Sermon on the Mount\nBULLET::::- Five Discourses of Matthew\nBULLET::::- Hail Mary\nBULLET::::- High Priestly Prayer\nBULLET::::- Prayer in the New Testament\nBULLET::::- \"Novum Testamentum Graece\", the primary source for most contemporary New Testament translations\nBULLET::::- Rosary\nBULLET::::- \"Textus Receptus\"\nBULLET::::- Church of the Pater Noster on the Mount of Olives, Jerusalem\nBULLET::::- Al-Fatiha\n\nBULLET::::- Clark, D. \"The Lord's Prayer. Origins and Early Interpretations\" (\"Studia Traditionis Theologiae\", 21) Turnhout: Brepols Publishers, 2016,\nBULLET::::- Albright, W.F. and C.S. Mann. \"Matthew.\" \"The Anchor Bible Series.\" New York: Doubleday & Co., 1971.\nBULLET::::- Augsburger, Myron. \"Matthew.\" Waco, Texas: Word Books, 1982.\nBULLET::::- Barclay, William. \"The Gospel of Matthew: Volume 1 Chapters 1–10.\" Edinburgh: Saint Andrew Press, 1975.\nBULLET::::- Beare, Francis Wright. \"The Gospel According to Matthew.\" Oxford: B. Blackwell, 1981.\nBULLET::::- Brown, Raymond E. \"The Pater Noster as an Eschatological Prayer,\" article in \"Theological Studies\" (1961) Vol. 22, pp. 175–208: from the website of Marquette University; also reprinted in \"New Testament Essays\" (1965)\nBULLET::::- Filson, Floyd V. \"A Commentary on the Gospel According to St. Matthew.\" London: A. & C. Black, 1960.\nBULLET::::- Fowler, Harold. \"The Gospel of Matthew: Volume One.\" Joplin: College Press, 1968\nBULLET::::- France, R.T. \"The Gospel According to Matthew: an Introduction and Commentary.\" Leicester: Inter-Varsity, 1985.\nBULLET::::- Hendriksen, William. \"The Gospel of Matthew.\" Edinburgh: Banner of Truth Trust, 1976\nBULLET::::- Hill, David. \"The Gospel of Matthew.\" Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1981\nBULLET::::- \"Lilies in the Field.\" \"A Dictionary of Biblical Tradition in English Literature.\" David Lyle Jeffrey, general editor. Grand Rapids: W.B. Eerdmans, 1992.\nBULLET::::- Lewis, Jack P. \"The Gospel According to Matthew.\" Austin, Texas: R.B. Sweet, 1976..\nBULLET::::- Luz, Ulrich. \"Matthew 1–7: A Commentary.\" trans. Wilhlem C. Linss. Minneapolis: Augsburg Fortress, 1989.\nBULLET::::- Morris, Leon. \"The Gospel According to Matthew.\" Grand Rapids: W.B. Eerdmans, 1992.\nBULLET::::- Schweizer, Eduard. \"The Good News According to Matthew.\" Atlanta: John Knox Press, 1975\nBULLET::::- Underhill, Evelyn, \"Abba. A meditation on the Lord's Prayer\" (1940); reprint 2003.\n\nText\nBULLET::::- Pater Noster : a chirographic opus in one hundred and twenty-six languages, by Z. W. Wolkowski\nBULLET::::- Learning the Lord’s Prayer in Gothic, by Robert Oliphant\nComment\nBULLET::::- Jewish Encyclopedia\nBULLET::::- Max Heindel: Rosicrucian view\nBULLET::::- Jehovah's Witnesses view\nBULLET::::- Rudolf Steiner lecture\n"}
{"id": "18495", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18495", "title": "Lightworks", "text": "Lightworks\n\nLightworks is a professional non-linear editing system (NLE) for editing and mastering digital video in various formats, including 2K and 4K resolutions, and television in PAL, NTSC, and high-definition formats. It was an early developer of computer-based non-linear editing systems, and has been in development since 1989 and won a 2017 EMMY Award for pioneering digital nonlinear editing. Lightworks has millions of adoptors worldwide due to the software being available across three platforms in Windows, Mac and Linux. The development of an open-source version was announced in May 2010. No source code of the program has yet been released.\n\nThe free version comes with a limited number of features:\nBULLET::::- Realtime effects\nBULLET::::- Advanced multicam editing\nBULLET::::- Second monitor output\nBULLET::::- Ability to import a wide range of file types\nBULLET::::- Export to Vimeo (H.264/MPEG-4) up to 720p HD\nBULLET::::- Export to YouTube (H.264/MPEG-4) up to 720p HD\n\nThe free version cannot export to DVD, Blu-ray, but can export to a hard drive (since Lightworks 14).\n\n! Film title !! Year !! Director !! Editor\n\nCongo\n1995\nFrank Marshall\nAnne V. Coates\n\nOLE Limited was founded in 1989 by Paul Bamborough, Nick Pollock and Neil Harris. In 1994 it was sold to Tektronix, who were not successful at developing the company's products. In 1999 it was sold on to the newly formed Lightworks Inc., then owned by Fairlight Japan, and then purchased by Gee Broadcast in May 2004.\n\nUnder Gee Broadcast ownership, new product releases resumed with the release of the Lightworks \"Touch\" range, and the \"Alacrity\" and \"Softworks\" ranges for SD & HD editing. Softworks offered the Lightworks User Interface and toolset in a software only package for laptops or office workstations. Softworks and Alacrity supported mixed formats and resolutions in real time and project output in different resolutions without re-rendering. Alacrity supported dual outputs while the same facility was available for Softworks users as an option.\n\nIn August 2009 the UK and US based company \"EditShare\" acquired Gee Broadcast and the Lightworks editing platform from, along with their video server system \"GeeVS\".\n\nAt the annual convention of the National Association of Broadcasters, NAB Show, on 11 April 2010, EditShare announced that they plan to transform Lightworks into Lightworks Open Source. It was presented at IBC in Amsterdam September 2010.\n\nOn 9 November 2010, EditShare announced that Lightworks would be downloadable on 29 November of the same year, at first exclusively for the users who had registered during the initial announcement, but subsequently publishing the software as \"public beta\".\n\nEditShare planned the release of the open source version in Q4 of 2011, after they finished code review. They plan to make money from proprietary plugins offered in their associated online shop, including plugins needed to access professional video formats. Shortly before the scheduled release date of 29 November 2011, EditShare announced that an open source release of the software would be temporarily delayed, but did not announce a new release date. The announcement noted that they were not yet satisfied with the stability of the new version.\n\nAfter an 18-month beta program, EditShare released Lightworks 11, for Windows only, on 28 May 2012. The non beta release of Lightworks includes a host of new features for editors, and runs on wide range of PC hardware. The software was re-designed and re-written for portability (versions for GNU/Linux and Mac OS X have also been released) and now supports many more codecs including AVCHD, H.264, AVC-Intra, DNxHD, ProRes, Red R3D, DPX, XDCAM HD 50, XDCAM EX, DVD, Blu-ray, and 4K, but only for the paid Pro version. The free version supports DV, MPEG, Uncompressed and other codecs for both import and export.\n\nOn 29 May 2013, v11.1 stable release was made available for download. A major development in the Pro version is much improved performance of the H.264/AVC codec in MP4 and MOV containers. This makes it possible to edit this format natively, even with less powerful CPUs. This should interest HDSLR and GoPro camera users. Native editing of H.264 MTS files has been possible since version 11.0.3.\n\nThis version of Lightworks has also replaced HASP with the new EditShare Licensing System (ELS), which eliminates some installation problems. Lightworks Free users can now download the 64 bit version, which was previously limited to Pro users. The Free version now also comes with a 30-day Pro Trial period.\n\nEditShare demonstrated the Linux version at the NAB in Las Vegas in April 2012, and posted a video of it running on Ubuntu on their YouTube channel. At IBC in Amsterdam in September, an updated Linux demo was presented, and EditShare announced that the initial Linux alpha version would become available on 30 October . Lightworks 11 alpha for Linux was released on 30 April 2012, but only to a limited audience. The Linux version of Lightworks was made available as a Public Beta on 30 April 2013.\n\nOn 8 August 2014, the first beta of Lightworks version 12 working on Windows, Linux and Mac was released.\n\nOn 29 August 2015, Lightworks version 12.5 for Windows, Linux and Mac was released.\n\nOn 4 February 2016, Lightworks version 12.6 for Windows, Linux and Mac was released.\n\nIn October 2018, Lightworks released version 14.5 for Windows, Linux and Mac platforms. 14.5 added a vast array of new features including variable frame rate support, a huge amount of codec support including Red Cinema R3D, Cineform and Blackmagic Q1 codecs.\n\nLightworks confirmed that over 4-million downloads and registrations had taken place.\n\nBULLET::::- List of video editing software\nBULLET::::- Comparison of video editing software\n\nBULLET::::- Lightworks Tutorials\nBULLET::::- Lightworks Users' Video Tutorials\n"}
{"id": "18496", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18496", "title": "Love Parade", "text": "Love Parade\n\nThe Love Parade () was a popular electronic dance music festival and technoparade that originated in 1989 in West Berlin, Germany. It was held annually in Berlin from 1989 to 2003 and in 2006, then from 2007 to 2010 in the Ruhr region. Events scheduled for 2004 and 2005 in Berlin and for 2009 in Bochum were cancelled.\n\nOn 24 July 2010, a crowd crush at the Love Parade caused the death of 21 people, with at least 500 others injured. As a consequence, the organizer of the festival announced that no further Love Parades would be held and that the festival was permanently cancelled.\n\nThe parade first occurred in July 1989, when 150 people took to the streets in Berlin. It was started by the Berlin underground at the initiative of Matthias Roeingh (also known as \"Dr Motte\") and his then girlfriend Danielle de Picciotto. It was conceived as a political demonstration for peace and international understanding through love and music. It was supposed to be a bigger birthday party for Roeingh, and the motto \"Friede, Freude, Eierkuchen\" (in English — \"Peace, Joy, Pancakes\") stood for disarmament (peace), music (joy) and a fair food production/distribution (pancakes). Roeingh dissociated himself from the parade in 2006 because of the commercialization of the event.\n\nThe parade was held on the Berlin Kurfürstendamm (avenue) until 1996. Because of overcrowding on the Kurfürstendamm, the festival moved to the Straße des 17. Juni in the Großer Tiergarten park in the center of Berlin. The festival became centered around the \"Siegessäule\" in the middle of the park; and the golden angel atop the column became the parade's emblem.\n\nMany people from Germany and abroad traveled to Berlin to take part in the Parade — over a million attended in the years 1997 through 2000 and 800,000 in 2001. Attendance at the 2001 festival was significantly lower because the date of the parade was changed with little advance notice. 2002 and 2003 also saw lower figures, and in 2004 and 2005 the parade was cancelled because of funding difficulties. The parade had inspired opposition because of the damage to the Tiergarten by participants, who were provided with insufficient toilet facilities. Opponents allegedly complicated matters for organisers by booking their own events in Berlin and so to exclude the parade from being able to register with city police. In 2004, however, a scaled-down version took place which served more as a mini-protest and was promoted with the title \"Love Weekend\". Dozens of clubs promoted the weekend-long event all over the city, with various clubs staying open for three days straight without closing. In 2006, the parade made a comeback with the help of German exercise studio McFit.\n\nThe Love Parade 2007 was planned for 7 July 2007 in Berlin. However, the Berlin event was cancelled in February because the Senate of Berlin did not issue the necessary permits at that time. After negotiations with several German cities, on 21 July, it was announced that the parade would move to the Ruhr Area for the next five years. The first event took place in Essen on 25 August. The parade in Essen saw 1.2 million visitors in comparison to the 500,000 who attended the 2006 parade in Berlin.\n\nIn 2008, the festival took place in Dortmund on 19 July on the Bundesstraße 1 under the motto \"Highway of Love\". The event was planned as a \"Love Weekend\", with parties throughout the region. For the first time the Turkish electronic scene was represented by its own float, called \"Turkish Delights\". The official estimate is that 1.6 million visitors attended, making it the largest parade to date.\n\nThe 2009 event, planned for Bochum, was cancelled; a year later, the deaths of 21 attendees at the Duisburg venue prompted the parade's organiser Rainer Schaller to declare an end to the festival. \"The Love Parade has always been a peaceful party, but it will forever be overshadowed by the accident, so out of respect for the victims the Love Parade will never take place again,\" Schaller said. The parade was one of the oldest and largest festivals of electronic music, together with Zürich's Streetparade, Mayday and Nature One.\n\nThe music played at the events was predominantly electronic dance music — in this case mainly trance, house, techno, and schranz music. Attempts to introduce other music styles, such as hip hop, have failed. Hardcore and gabber music were part of the parade in early years, but were later removed. They are now celebrated separately on a counter-demonstration called \"Fuckparade\".\n\nThe parade was seen to be louder and more crowded than most concerts. With its water-cooled sound systems on every truck, the parade produced an extremely loud sound floor. After the 2001 arrangement, veterinarians at the Berlin Zoo blamed the parade for giving more than half of its animals diarrhea. Chairman Heiner Kloes said veterinarians told him the heavy bass was to blame for disturbing the animals. The parade consisted of the sound trucks that usually featured local, or important, clubs and their DJs. It had become a rule that only trucks that had sponsors from a techno-related field, such as clubs, labels or stores, were allowed, but advertising space was increased after the 2006 event to offset the high costs of equipping a truck. The trucks were usually open on top and featured dancers, with box-systems mounted on the side or rear.\n\nThe parade was a place where some exhibited and enjoyed other people's exhibitionist tendencies. Some attendees enjoyed carrying around toys such or other items such as dummies (pacifiers) or face masks. Often the crowd was imaginative in terms of clothing (or lack thereof) and appearance.\n\nOne famous picture from the parade is people sitting and dancing on streetlamps, trees, commercial signs, telephone booths, which gave the event's nickname \"the greatest amateur circus on earth\".\n\nThe demonstration concluded with the so-called \"Abschlusskundgebung\" which were sets of the world's leading top DJs such as DJ Tiesto, Paul Van Dyk, Carl Cox, Armin Van Buuren, DJ Rush, DJ Hell, Westbam, Drum Connection, Miss Djax, Marusha or Chris Liebing. During this time all trucks (usually about 40) were connected to each other and set online to the statue of victory where the turntables are. This was one of the few chances a DJ can ever have to play for a crowd of about one million people.\n\nThe parade was quite peaceful for an event of its size, seeing few arrests. In 2008, for example, charges were pressed for six robberies, three sexually related offences and forty thefts. Twenty-three participants were caught with drugs and forty-nine were charged with bodily harm. There were 177 parade visitors provisionally arrested by the police. Arrests were usually related to drug crimes and most other incidents featured people passing out due to dehydration or hyperthermia. In 2000, after the parade, a girl under the influence of ecstasy was run over by an S-Bahn after she had been leaning on the door too hard.\n\nAt the 2010 Love Parade in Duisburg, the number of people attending allegedly reached 1.4 million – the original expectation was around 800,000 – whereas police believed around 400,000 people were present. 21 people were killed, and more than 500 injured, in an incident on an overcrowded ramp leading from a tunnel into the festival. At least 20 casualties resulted from suffocation, caused by crowd pressure.\n\nSafety experts and a fire service investigator had previously warned that the site was not suitable for the numbers expected to attend. Rainer Schaller, the festival's organizer and chief executive officer, later said the festival would not continue in future.\n\nA preliminary investigation of the ministry of the interior placed heavy blame on the organizers around Rainer Schaller. Schaller in turn claimed that errors by the police in controlling streams of visitors led to the accident.\n\nSimilar festivals have taken place in other cities of Germany and many other countries worldwide. Large spin-off festivals in Europe include Zürich's Street Parade, Geneva's Lake Parade, Paris's Techno Parade, Rotterdam's FFWD Dance Parade, Munich's Union Move, Hamburg's Generation Move, Hannover's Reincarnation, Bremen's Vision Parade and the Love Parade and the Freeparade in Vienna. In 1994, 1995 and 1996 an event called Love Parade was held in Melbourne, Australia. Unlike its overseas counterparts, this was a smaller \"rave party\" version of the festival. In 1996 it was held at Festival Hall in West Melbourne and included a parade that made the evening news. It was followed in 1997 by a Love Parade in Sydney, Australia, likewise a smaller rave party, held at the infamous Graffiti Hall of Fame in Redfern. In 1999 and 2000 technoparades named \"Buenos Aires Energy Parade\" took place in Buenos Aires, Argentina under the motto \"Love, Peace and Dance\". On Saturday 8 July 2000 a Love Parade was held in Roundhay Park, Leeds, United Kingdom sponsored by BBC Radio 1. In 2001, the official UK parade had moved to Newcastle upon Tyne which was to have seen a parade through the streets of Newcastle before ending up on Town Moor but was cancelled after the police refused a license: BBC Radio 1 still hosted a more contained event, however. Since then no Love Parade has taken place in the United Kingdom. In Summer 2000 one of the first public events that took place in post-war Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, was Futura, Festival of Electronic Music. Some of the world's most famous DJs, including the organizers of the Berlin Love Parade, performed in a bombed and burnt out factory.\nAfter being held in the North-American Continent for the first time in Mexico (2002), in the fall of 2004 the Love Parade was held in San Francisco. They had held their inaugural Parade in September 2004 with 37,000 attending. The parade was held again in San Francisco in September 2005 as a rousing success drawing over 50–60,000 people. In 2006, the parade was held on 23 September and was renamed Love Fest because the Loveparade Berlin organization did not renew any of their worldwide licenses not already under contract so they could focus on their own event. 2009 was the biggest success of the parade now renamed Lovevolution with over 100,000 people. The first Love Parade in Santiago was held in 2005 and gathered over 100,000 people; the 2006 version gathered over 200,000 people. The first Love Parade in Caracas was held in June 2007 and gathered over 25,000 people.\n\nSpin-off festivals of the Love Parade have taken place in:\nBULLET::::- Berlin, Hamburg, Munich, Frankfurt, Bremen and Hannover, Germany\nBULLET::::- Zürich, Geneva, Basel and Bern, Switzerland\nBULLET::::- Vienna and Salzburg, Austria\nBULLET::::- Paris, France\nBULLET::::- Rotterdam, Netherlands\nBULLET::::- Bologna and Turin, Italy\nBULLET::::- Oporto, Portugal\nBULLET::::- Sydney, Australia\nBULLET::::- Buenos Aires, Argentina\nBULLET::::- Rio de Janeiro, Brazil\nBULLET::::- Santiago, Chile\nBULLET::::- Leeds, England\nBULLET::::- Budapest, Hungary\nBULLET::::- Tel Aviv, Israel\nBULLET::::- Mexico City and Acapulco, Mexico\nBULLET::::- Oslo, Norway\nBULLET::::- Cape Town, South Africa\nBULLET::::- Caracas, Venezuela\nBULLET::::- Little Rock, Arkansas; and San Francisco, California, United States\nBULLET::::- Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina\nUnder German law the state has to pay for security during political demonstrations as well as cleaning up the streets after the demonstration. In the case of a commercial event however, the organizer must cover these expenses. For a large event like the Love Parade the costs are quite high: an estimated €300,000 to €400,000.\n\nThe Love Parade was initially held as a political demonstration to save costs; however it was organized by two companies set up just for the Love Parade. Due to this there was a dispute between the organizers and the city of Berlin every year about the status of the Love Parade and who should bear what costs. Finally in 2001, the courts ruled that the Love Parade had to be held as commercial event.\n\nEvery German parade has had its own anthem.\n! Year\n! Artist\n! Title\n\n! Year\n! Location\n! Motto\n! Participants\n\n150,000\n1,400,000\n\nAccording to media reports the \"Participants\" figures were forged by the organizers for years. Accurate counts are not available since entry is free and uncontrolled. The mayor of Dortmund and the police confirmed the number of participants in Dortmund.\n\nBULLET::::- List of technoparades\nBULLET::::- List of electronic music festivals\nBULLET::::- Fuckparade\nBULLET::::- Love Parade disaster\n\nBULLET::::- Love Parade 2008 in Dortmund – Official Site\nBULLET::::- Berlin Life: 'The Death of Dance?' A history of the Berlin Love Parade\nBULLET::::- San Francisco Love Fest (formerly Love Parade San Francisco)\nBULLET::::- 2005 Lovefest Gallery\nBULLET::::- Festivalpigs Love Parade and Euro Techno & Trance Festivals info\nBULLET::::- Sean Nye and Ronald Hitzler. The Love Parade: European Techno, The EDM Festival, and The Tragedy in Duisburg\nBULLET::::- Love Parade Argentina (Buenos Aires Energy Parade)\n"}
{"id": "18497", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18497", "title": "Lost Generation", "text": "Lost Generation\n\nThe Lost Generation is the generation that came of age during World War I. \"Lost\" in this context also means \"disoriented, wandering, directionless\"—a recognition that there was great confusion and aimlessness among the war's survivors in the early post-war years.\" The term is particularly used to refer to a group of artists, and particularly American expatriate writers, living in Paris during the 1920s. Gertrude Stein is credited with coining the term; it was subsequently popularized by Ernest Hemingway who used it in the epigraph for his 1926 novel \"The Sun Also Rises\": \"You are all a lost generation\".\n\nThe Lost Generation includes the cohort born between 1883 and 1900. Since the death of Nabi Tajima (4 August 1900 – 21 April 2018), this generation is believed to be extinct.\n\nIn his memoir \"A Moveable Feast\" (1964), published after Hemingway's and Stein's deaths, Hemingway writes that Stein heard the phrase from a French garage owner who serviced Stein's car. When a young mechanic failed to repair the car quickly enough, the garage owner shouted at the young man, \"You are all a \"\"génération perdue.\"\" While telling Hemingway the story, Stein added: \"That is what you are. That's what you all are ... all of you young people who served in the war. You are a lost generation.\" Hemingway thus credits the phrase to Stein, who was then his mentor and patron.\n\nThe 1926 publication of Hemingway's \"The Sun Also Rises\" popularized the term; the novel serves to epitomize the post-war expatriate generation. However, Hemingway later wrote to his editor Max Perkins that the \"point of the book\" was not so much about a generation being lost, but that \"the earth abideth forever.\" Hemingway believed the characters in \"The Sun Also Rises\" may have been \"battered\" but were not lost.\n\nConsistent with this ambivalence, Hemingway employs \"Lost Generation\" as one of two contrasting epigraphs for his novel. In \"A Moveable Feast\", Hemingway writes, \"I tried to balance Miss Stein's quotation from the garage owner with one from Ecclesiastes.\" A few lines later, recalling the risks and losses of the war, he adds: \"I thought of Miss Stein and Sherwood Anderson and egotism and mental laziness versus discipline and I thought 'who is calling who a lost generation?\n\nThe writings of the Lost Generation literary figures tend to have common themes. These themes mostly pertained to the writers' experiences in World War I and the years following it. It is said that the work of these writers was autobiographical based on their use of mythologized versions of their lives. One of the themes that commonly appears in the authors' works is decadence and the frivolous lifestyle of the wealthy. Both Hemingway and Fitzgerald touched on this theme throughout the novels \"The Sun Also Rises\" and \"The Great Gatsby\". Another theme commonly found in the works of these authors was the death of the American dream, which is exhibited throughout many of their novels. It is particularly prominent in \"The Great Gatsby\", in which the character Nick Carraway comes to realize the corruption that surrounds him.\n\nThe term is also used in a broader context for the generation of young people who came of age during and shortly after World War I. Authors William Strauss and Neil Howe define the Lost Generation as the cohort born from 1883 to 1900, who came of age during World War I and the Roaring Twenties. In Europe, they are mostly known as the \"Generation of 1914\", for the year World War I began. In France, the country in which many expatriates settled, they were sometimes called the \"Génération du feu\", the \"(gun)fire generation\". In Great Britain, the term was originally used for those who died in the war, and often implicitly referred to upper-class casualties who were perceived to have died disproportionately, robbing the country of a future elite. Many felt that \"the flower of youth and the best manhood of the peoples [had] been mowed down,\" for example such notable casualties as the poets Isaac Rosenberg, Rupert Brooke, Edward Thomas and Wilfred Owen, composer George Butterworth and physicist Henry Moseley.\n\nMembers of the Lost Generation include F. Scott Fitzgerald, Gertrude Stein, Ernest Hemingway, T.S. Eliot, Ezra Pound, Jean Rhys and Sylvia Beach.\n\nBULLET::::- List of writers of the Lost Generation\nBULLET::::- Generation#List of named generations\nBULLET::::- Lost Decade (disambiguation)\n\nBULLET::::- Doyle, Barry M. \"Urban Liberalism and the ‘lost generation’: politics and middle class culture in Norwich, 1900–1935.\" \"Historical Journal\" 38.3 (1995): 617-634. in Great Britain.\nBULLET::::- Winter, Jay M. \"Britain's ‘Lost Generation’ of the First World War.\" \"Population Studies\" 31.3 (1977): 449-466. online, covers the statistical and demographic history.\n\nBULLET::::- Writers of the Lost Generation discussed in \"Conversations from Penn State\" interview\n"}
{"id": "18499", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18499", "title": "Left-wing politics", "text": "Left-wing politics\n\nLeft-wing politics supports social equality and egalitarianism, often in opposition to social hierarchy. It typically involves a concern for those in society whom its adherents perceive as disadvantaged relative to others as well as a belief that there are unjustified inequalities that need to be reduced or abolished.\n\nThe political terms \"Left\" and \"Right\" were coined during the French Revolution (1789–1799), referring to the seating arrangement in the French Estates General: those who sat on the left generally opposed the monarchy and supported the revolution, including the creation of a republic and secularization, while those on the right were supportive of the traditional institutions of the Old Regime. Use of the term \"Left\" became more prominent after the restoration of the French monarchy in 1815 when it was applied to the \"Independents\". The word \"wing\" was appended to Left and Right in the late 19th century, usually with disparaging intent and \"left-wing\" was applied to those who were unorthodox in their religious or political views.\n\nThe term was later applied to a number of movements, especially republicanism during the French Revolution in the 18th century, followed by socialism, communism, anarchism and social democracy in the 19th and 20th centuries. Since then, the term left-wing has been applied to a broad range of movements including civil rights movements, feminist movements, anti-war movements and environmental movements, as well as a wide range of parties. According to former professor of economics Barry Clark, \"[leftists] claim that human development flourishes when individuals engage in cooperative, mutually respectful relations that can thrive only when excessive differences in status, power, and wealth are eliminated\".\n\nIn politics, the term \"Left\" derives from the French Revolution, as the anti-monarchist Montagnard and Jacobin deputies from the Third Estate generally sat to the left of the presiding member's chair in parliament, a habit which began in the French Estates General of 1789. Throughout the 19th century in France, the main line dividing Left and Right was between supporters of the French Republic and those of the monarchy. The June Days uprising during the Second Republic was an attempt by the Left to assert itself after the 1848 Revolution, but only a small portion of the population supported this.\n\nIn the mid-19th century, nationalism, socialism, democracy and anti-clericalism became features of the French Left. After Napoleon III's 1851 coup and the subsequent establishment of the Second Empire, Marxism began to rival radical republicanism and utopian socialism as a force within left-wing politics. The influential \"Communist Manifesto\" by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, published in 1848, asserted that all human history is the history of class struggle. They predicted that a proletarian revolution would eventually overthrow bourgeois capitalism and create a classless, stateless, post-monetary communist society. It was in this period that the word \"wing\" was appended to both Left and Right.\nIn the United States, many leftists, social liberals, progressives and trade unionists were influenced by the works of Thomas Paine, who introduced the concept of asset-based egalitarianism, which theorises that social equality is possible by a redistribution of resources.\n\nThe International Workingmen's Association (1864–1876), sometimes called the First International, brought together delegates from many different countries, with many different views about how to reach a classless and stateless society. Following a split between supporters of Marx and Mikhail Bakunin, anarchists formed the International Workers' Association. The Second International (1888–1916) became divided over the issue of World War I. Those who opposed the war, such as Vladimir Lenin and Rosa Luxemburg, saw themselves as further to the left.\n\nIn the United States after Reconstruction, the phrase \"the Left\" was used to describe those who supported trade unions, the civil rights movement and the anti-war movement. More recently in the United States, left-wing and right-wing have often been used as synonyms for Democratic and Republican, or as synonyms for liberalism and conservatism respectively.\n\nSince the Right was populist, both in the Western and the Eastern Bloc anything viewed as avant-garde art was called leftist in all Europe, thus the identification of Picasso's \"Guernica\" as \"leftist\" in Europe and the condemnation of the Russian composer Shostakovich's opera (\"The Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk District\") in \"Pravda\" as follows: \"Here we have 'leftist' confusion instead of natural, human music\".\n\nThe following positions are typically associated with left-wing politics.\n\nLeftist economic beliefs range from Keynesian economics and the welfare state through industrial democracy and the social market to nationalization of the economy and central planning, to the anarcho-syndicalist advocacy of a council- and assembly-based self-managed anarchist communism. During the Industrial Revolution, leftists supported trade unions. At the beginning of the 20th century, many leftists advocated strong government intervention in the economy. Leftists continue to criticize what they perceive as the exploitative nature of globalization, the \"race to the bottom\" and unjust lay-offs. In the last quarter of the 20th century, the belief that government (ruling in accordance with the interests of the people) ought to be directly involved in the day-to-day workings of an economy declined in popularity amongst the center-left, especially social democrats who became influenced by \"Third Way\" ideology.\n\nOther leftists believe in Marxian economics, which are based on the economic theories of Karl Marx. Some distinguish Marx's economic theories from his political philosophy, arguing that Marx's approach to understanding the economy is independent of his advocacy of revolutionary socialism or his belief in the inevitability of proletarian revolution. Marxian economics does not exclusively rely upon Marx, but it draws from a range of Marxist and non-Marxist sources. The \"dictatorship of the proletariat\" or \"workers' state\" are terms used by some Marxists, particularly Leninists and Marxist–Leninists, to describe what they see as a temporary state between the capitalist state of affairs and a communist society. Marx defined the proletariat as salaried workers, in contrast to the \"Lumpenproletariat\", who he defined as outcasts of society, such as beggars, tricksters, entertainers, buskers, criminals and prostitutes. The political relevance of farmers has divided the left. In \"Das Kapital\", Marx scarcely mentioned the subject. Mao Zedong believed that it would be rural peasants, not urban workers, who would bring about the proletarian revolution.\n\nLeft-libertarians, libertarian socialists and anarchists believe in a decentralized economy run by trade unions, workers' councils, cooperatives, municipalities and communes and oppose both state and private control of the economy, preferring social ownership and local control, in which a nation of decentralized regions is united in a confederation.\n\nThe global justice movement, also known as the anti-globalization movement or alter-globalization movement, protests against corporate economic globalization due to its negative consequences for the poor, workers, the environment and small businesses.\n\nOne of the foremost left-wing advocates was Thomas Paine, one of the first individuals since left and right became political terms to describe the collective human ownership of the world which he speaks of in Agrarian Justice. As such, most of left-wing thought concerning environmentalism stems from this duty of ownership, and this cooperative ownership means that we need to take care of it. This is reflected in much of the historical left-wing thought that came after, although there were disagreements about what this entailed.\n\nBoth Karl Marx and the early socialist William Morris arguably had a concern for environmental matters. According to Marx: \"Even an entire society, a nation, or all simultaneously existing societies taken together [...] are not owners of the earth. They are simply its possessors, its beneficiaries, and have to bequeath it in an improved state to succeeding generations\". Following the Russian Revolution, environmental scientists such as revolutionary Alexander Bogdanov and the Proletkult organisation made efforts to incorporate environmentalism into Bolshevism and \"integrate production with natural laws and limits\" in the first decade of Soviet rule, before Joseph Stalin attacked ecologists and the science of ecology, purged environmentalists and promoted the pseudo-science of Trofim Lysenko. Likewise, Mao Zedong rejected environmentalism and believed that based on the laws of historical materialism all of nature must be put into the service of revolution.\n\nFrom the 1970s onwards, environmentalism became an increasing concern of the left, with social movements and some unions campaigning over environmental issues. For example, the left-wing Builders Labourers Federation in Australia, led by the communist Jack Mundy, united with environmentalists to place green bans on environmentally destructive development projects. Some segments of the socialist and Marxist left consciously merged environmentalism and anti-capitalism into an eco-socialist ideology. Barry Commoner articulated a left-wing response to \"The Limits to Growth\" model that predicted catastrophic resource depletion and spurred environmentalism, postulating that capitalist technologies were chiefly responsible for environmental degradation, as opposed to population pressures. Environmental degradation can be seen as a class or equity issue, as environmental destruction disproportionately affects poorer communities and countries.\n\nSeveral left-wing or socialist groupings have an overt environmental concern and several green parties contain a strong socialist presence. For example, the Green Party of England and Wales features an eco-socialist group, Green Left, that was founded in June 2005. Its members held some influential positions within the party, including both the former Principal Speakers Siân Berry and Dr. Derek Wall, himself an eco-socialist and Marxist academic. In Europe, some Green left political parties combine traditional social-democratic values such as a desire for greater economic equality and workers rights with demands for environmental protection, such as the Nordic Green Left.\n\nWell-known socialist Bolivian President Evo Morales has traced environmental degradation to consumerism. He has said: \"The Earth does not have enough for the North to live better and better, but it does have enough for all of us to live well\". James Hansen, Noam Chomsky, Raj Patel, Naomi Klein, The Yes Men and Dennis Kucinich have had similar views.\nIn the 21st century, questions about the environment have become increasingly politicized, with the Left generally accepting the findings of environmental scientists about global warming and many on the Right disputing or rejecting those findings. However, the left is divided over how to effectively and equitably reduce carbon emissions: the center-left often advocates a reliance on market measures such as emissions trading or a carbon tax, while those further to the left tend to support direct government regulation and intervention either alongside or instead of market mechanisms.\n\nThe question of nationality and nationalism has been a central feature of political debates on the Left. During the French Revolution, nationalism was a policy of the Republican Left. The Republican Left advocated civic nationalism and argued that the nation is a \"daily plebiscite\" formed by the subjective \"will to live together\". Related to \"revanchism\", the belligerent will to take revenge against Germany and retake control of Alsace-Lorraine, nationalism was sometimes opposed to imperialism. In the 1880s, there was a debate between those, such as Georges Clemenceau (Radical), Jean Jaurès (Socialist) and Maurice Barrès (nationalist), who argued that colonialism diverted France from the \"blue line of the Vosges\" (referring to Alsace-Lorraine); and the \"colonial lobby\", such as Jules Ferry (moderate republican), Léon Gambetta (republican) and Eugène Etienne, the president of the parliamentary colonial group. After the Dreyfus Affair, nationalism instead became increasingly associated with the far-right.\n\nThe Marxist social class theory of proletarian internationalism asserts that members of the working class should act in solidarity with working people in other countries in pursuit of a common class interest, rather than focusing on their own countries. Proletarian internationalism is summed up in the slogan: \"Workers of the world, unite!\", the last line of \"The Communist Manifesto\". Union members had learned that more members meant more bargaining power. Taken to an international level, leftists argued that workers ought to act in solidarity to further increase the power of the working class.\n\nProletarian internationalism saw itself as a deterrent against war, because people with a common interest are less likely to take up arms against one another, instead focusing on fighting the ruling class. According to Marxist theory, the antonym of proletarian internationalism is bourgeois nationalism. Some Marxists, together with others on the left, view nationalism, racism (including anti-Semitism) and religion as divide and conquer tactics used by the ruling classes to prevent the working class from uniting against them. Left-wing movements therefore have often taken up anti-imperialist positions. Anarchism has developed a critique of nationalism that focuses on nationalism's role in justifying and consolidating state power and domination. Through its unifying goal, nationalism strives for centralization, both in specific territories and in a ruling elite of individuals, while it prepares a population for capitalist exploitation. Within anarchism, this subject has been treated extensively by Rudolf Rocker in \"Nationalism and Culture\" and by the works of Fredy Perlman, such as \"Against His-Story, Against Leviathan\" and \"The Continuing Appeal of Nationalism\".\n\nThe failure of revolutions in Germany and Hungary ended Bolshevik hopes for an imminent world revolution and led to promotion of \"Socialism in One Country\" by Joseph Stalin. In the first edition of the book \"Osnovy Leninizma\" (\"Foundations of Leninism\", 1924), Stalin argued that revolution in one country is insufficient, but by the end of that year in the second edition of the book he argued that the \"proletariat can and must build the socialist society in one country\". In April 1925, Nikolai Bukharin elaborated the issue in his brochure \"Can We Build Socialism in One Country in the Absence of the Victory of the West-European Proletariat?\", whose position was adopted as state policy after Stalin's January 1926 article \"On the Issues of Leninism\" (К вопросам ленинизма). This idea was opposed by Leon Trotsky and his followers who declared the need for an international \"permanent revolution\". Various Fourth Internationalist groups around the world who describe themselves as Trotskyist see themselves as standing in this tradition, while Maoist China supported Socialism in One Country.\n\nEuropean social democrats strongly support Europeanism and supranational integration, although there is a minority of nationalists and eurosceptics also in the left. Some link this left-wing nationalism to the pressure generated by economic integration with other countries encouraged by free trade agreements. This view is sometimes used to justify hostility towards supranational organizations. Left-wing nationalism can also refer to any nationalism which emphasises a working-class populist agenda which seeks to overcome perceived exploitation or oppression by other nations. Many Third World anti-colonial movements adopted left-wing and socialist ideas.\n\nThird-Worldism is a tendency within leftist thought that regards the division between First World developed countries and Third World developing countries as being of high political importance. This tendency supports national liberation movements against what it considers imperialism by capitalists. Third-Worldism is closely connected with African socialism, Latin American socialism, Maoism, Pan-Africanism and Pan-Arabism. Some left-wing groups in the developing world – such as the Zapatista Army of National Liberation in Mexico, the Abahlali baseMjondolo in South Africa and the Naxalites in India – argue that the First World Left takes a racist and paternalistic attitude towards liberation movements in the Third World.\n\nThe original French left-wing was anti-clerical, opposing the influence of the Roman Catholic Church and supporting the separation of church and state. Karl Marx asserted that \"[r]eligion is the sigh of the oppressed creature, the heart of a heartless world, and the soul of soulless conditions. It is the opium of the people\". In Soviet Russia, the Bolsheviks originally embraced \"an ideological creed which professed that all religion would atrophy\" and \"resolved to eradicate Christianity as such\". In 1918, \"ten Orthodox hierarchs were summarily shot\" and \"children were deprived of any religious education outside the home\". Today in the Western world those on the Left usually support secularization and the separation of church and state.\n\nHowever, religious beliefs have also been associated with some left-wing movements, such as the civil rights movement and the anti-capital punishment movement. Early socialist thinkers such as Robert Owen, Charles Fourier and the Comte de Saint-Simon based their theories of socialism upon Christian principles. From St. Augustine of Hippo's \"City of God\" through St. Thomas More's \"Utopia\", major Christian writers defended ideas that socialists found agreeable. Other common leftist concerns such as pacifism, social justice, racial equality, human rights and the rejection of excessive wealth can be found in the Bible. In the late 19th century, the Social Gospel movement arose (particularly among some Anglicans, Lutherans, Methodists and Baptists in North America and Britain) which attempted to integrate progressive and socialist thought with Christianity in faith-based social activism, promoted by movements such as Christian socialism. In the 20th century, the theology of liberation and Creation Spirituality was championed by such writers as Gustavo Gutierrez and Matthew Fox.\n\nOther left-wing religious movements include Islamic socialism and Buddhist socialism. There have been alliances between the left and anti-war Muslims, such as the Respect Party and the Stop the War Coalition in Britain. In France, the left has been divided over moves to ban the hijab from schools, with some supporting a ban based on separation of church and state and others opposing the prohibition based on personal freedom.\n\nSocial progressivism is another common feature of modern leftism, particularly in the United States, where social progressives played an important role in the abolition of slavery, women's suffrage, civil rights and multiculturalism. Progressives have both advocated prohibition legislation and worked towards its repeal. Current positions associated with social progressivism in the West include opposition to the death penalty and the War on Drugs, support for abortion rights, cognitive liberty, LGBT rights including legal recognition of same-sex marriage, distribution of contraceptives, and public funding of embryonic stem-cell research. Public education was a subject of great interest to groundbreaking social progressives such as Lester Frank Ward and John Dewey, who believed that a democratic system of government was impossible without a universal and comprehensive system of education.\n\nVarious counterculture movements in the 1960s and 1970s were associated with the \"New Left\". Unlike the earlier leftist focus on union activism, the New Left instead adopted a broader definition of political activism commonly called social activism. The New Left in the United States is associated with the hippie movement, college campus mass protest movements, and a broadening of focus from protesting class-based oppression to include issues such as gender, race and sexual orientation. The British New Left was an intellectually driven movement which attempted to correct the perceived errors of \"Old Left\".\n\nThe New Left opposed prevailing authority structures in society, which it termed \"The Establishment\" and became known as \"anti-Establishment\". The New Left did not seek to recruit industrial workers but rather concentrated on a social activist approach to organization, convinced that they could be the source for a better kind of social revolution. This view has been criticised by some Marxists (especially Trotskyists) who characterized this approach as \"substitutionism\", which they described as a misguided and non-Marxist belief that other groups in society could \"substitute\" for the revolutionary agency of the working class.\n\nMany early feminists and advocates of women's rights were considered left-wing by contemporaries. Feminist pioneer Mary Wollstonecraft was influenced by the radical thinker Thomas Paine. Many notable leftists have been strong supporters of gender equality, such as the Marxists Rosa Luxemburg, Clara Zetkin, and Alexandra Kollontai; anarchists such as Virginia Bolten, Emma Goldman, and Lucía Sánchez Saornil; and socialists Helen Keller and Annie Besant. However, Marxists such as Rosa Luxemburg, Clara Zetkin and Alexandra Kollontai, though supporters of radical social equality for women, opposed feminism because they considered it to be a bourgeois ideology. Marxists were responsible for organizing the first International Working Women's Day events.\n\nThe women's liberation movement is closely connected to the New Left and other new social movements that challenged the orthodoxies of the Old Left. Socialist feminism, as exemplified by the Freedom Socialist Party and Radical Women; and Marxist feminism, as with Selma James, saw themselves as a part of the left that challenged what they perceive to be male-dominated and sexist structures within the Left. Liberal feminism is closely connected with social liberalism, and in America, with the left wing of mainstream politics (e.g., National Organization for Women).\n\nThe connection between left-leaning ideologies and LGBT rights struggles also has an important history. Prominent socialists who were involved in early struggles for LGBT rights include Edward Carpenter, Oscar Wilde, Harry Hay, Bayard Rustin, and Daniel Guérin, among others.\n\nThe spectrum of left-wing politics ranges from center-left to far-left (or ultra-left). The term center-left describes a position within the political mainstream. The terms far-left and ultra-left refer to positions that are more radical. The center-left includes social democrats, social liberals, progressives and also some democratic socialists and greens (including some eco-socialists). Center-left supporters accept market allocation of resources in a mixed economy with a significant public sector and a thriving private sector. Center-left policies tend to favour limited state intervention in matters pertaining to the public interest.\n\nIn several countries, the terms far-left and radical left have been associated with varieties of communism, autonomism and anarchism. They have been used to describe groups that advocate anti-capitalism or eco-terrorism. In France, a distinction is made between the left (Socialist Party and Communist Party) and the far-left (Trotskyists, Maoists and anarchists). The United States Department of Homeland Security defines left-wing extremism as groups that want \"to bring about change through violent revolution rather than through established political processes\".\n\nIn China, the term \"Chinese New Left\" denotes those who oppose the current economic reforms and favour the restoration of more socialist policies. In the Western world, the term New Left refers to cultural politics. In the United Kingdom in the 1980s, the term \"hard left\" was applied to supporters of Tony Benn, such as the Campaign Group and those involved in the \"London Labour Briefing\" newspaper, as well as Trotskyist groups such as Militant and the Alliance for Workers' Liberty. In the same period, the term \"soft left\" was applied to supporters of the British Labour Party who were perceived to be more moderate. Under the leadership of Tony Blair and Gordon Brown, the British Labour Party rebranded itself as New Labour in order to promote the notion that it was less left-wing than it had been in the past. One of the first actions of the Labour Party leader who succeeded them, Ed Miliband, was the rejection of the \"New Labour\" label. However, Labour's voting record in parliament would indicate that under Miliband it had maintained the same distance from the left as it had with Blair. Likewise, the election of Jeremy Corbyn as Labour Party leader was viewed by some as Labour turning back toward its socialist roots.\n\nLeftist postmodernism opposes attempts to supply universal explanatory theories, including Marxism, deriding them as grand narratives. It views culture as a contested space and via deconstruction seeks to undermine all pretensions to absolute truth. Left-wing critics of post-modernism assert that cultural studies inflates the importance of culture by denying the existence of an independent reality.\n\nBULLET::::- Authoritarian socialism\nBULLET::::- Conflict theory\nBULLET::::- History of trade unions in the United Kingdom\nBULLET::::- Labor history of the United States\nBULLET::::- List of left-wing internationals\nBULLET::::- List of left-wing political parties\nBULLET::::- Political correctness\nBULLET::::- Post-left anarchy\nBULLET::::- Redistribution (economics)\nBULLET::::- Red scare\nBULLET::::- Regressive left\nBULLET::::- Social criticism\nBULLET::::- Syndicalism\nBULLET::::- The Internationale\nBULLET::::- \"Encyclopedia of the American Left\", ed. by Mari Jo Buhle, Paul Buhle, Dan Georgakas, Second Edition, Oxford University Press 1998, .\nBULLET::::- Lin Chun, \"The British New Left\", Edinburgh : Edinburgh Univ. Press, 1993.\nBULLET::::- Geoff Eley, \"Forging Democracy: The History of the Left in Europe, 1850–2000\", Oxford University Press 2002, .\nBULLET::::- \"Leftism in India, 1917–1947\", Satyabrata Rai Chowdhuri, Palgrave Macmillan, UK, 2007, .\nBULLET::::- \"Neither Washington Nor Stowe: Common Sense For The Working Vermonter\", by David Van Deusen, Sean West, and the Green Mountain Anarchist Collective (NEFAC-VT), Catamount Tavern Press, 2004.\nBULLET::::- \"The Rise and Fall of The Green Mountain Anarchist Collective\", 2016.\n"}
{"id": "18504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18504", "title": "Los Angeles-class submarine", "text": "Los Angeles-class submarine\n\nThe \"Los Angeles\" class boats are nuclear-powered fast attack submarines (SSN) in service with the United States Navy. The submarines are also known as the 688 class (pronounced \"Six-Eighty-Eight\"), after the hull number of lead vessel . They represent two generations and close to half a century of the Navy's attack submarine fleet. As of 2018, 35 of the class are still in commission and 27 are retired from service. Of the 27 retired boats, 12 were laid up half way (about 20 years or less) through their projected lifespans, and another five also laid up early (20–25 years), due to their midlife reactor refueling being cancelled, and one was lost due to a fire. Seven have been scrapped and two are being converted to moored training ships. A further four boats were proposed by the Navy, but later cancelled. The class has more active nuclear submarines than any other class in the world. Submarines of this class are named after American towns and cities, such as Albany, New York; Los Angeles, California; and Tucson, Arizona, with the exception of , named after a US Navy Admiral. This was a change from long-standing tradition of naming attack submarines after marine animals, such as or .\n\nIn 1982 after building 31 boats, the class underwent a minor redesign. The following eight that made up the second \"flight\" of subs had 12 new vertical launch tubes that could fire Tomahawk missiles. The last 23 had a significant upgrade with the 688i improvement program. These boats are quieter, with more advanced electronics, sensors, and noise-reduction technology. The diving planes are placed at the bow rather than on the sail, and are retractable.\n\nAccording to the U.S. Department of Defense, the top speed of the submarines of the \"Los Angeles\" class is over , although the actual maximum is classified. Some published estimates have placed their top speed at . In his book \"Submarine: A Guided Tour Inside a Nuclear Warship\", Tom Clancy estimated the top speed of \"Los Angeles\"-class submarines at about .\n\nThe U.S. Navy gives the maximum operating depth of the \"Los Angeles\" class as , while Patrick Tyler, in his book \"Running Critical\", suggests a maximum operating depth of . Although Tyler cites the 688-class design committee for this figure, the government has not commented on it. The maximum diving depth is according to \"Jane's Fighting Ships, 2004–2005 Edition\", edited by Commodore Stephen Saunders of the Royal Navy.\n\n\"Los Angeles\"-class submarines carry about 25 torpedo tube-launched weapons, as well as Mark 67 and Mark 60 CAPTOR mines and were designed to launch Tomahawk cruise missiles, and Harpoon missiles horizontally (from the torpedo tubes). The last 31 boats of this class (Flight II/688i) also have 12 dedicated vertical launching system tubes for launching Tomahawks. The tube configuration for the first two boats of Flight II differed from the later ones: \"Providence\" and \"Pittsburgh\" have four rows of three tubes vs. the inner two rows of four and outer two rows of two tubes found on other examples.\n\nOver close to 40 years, the control suite of the class has changed dramatically. The class was originally equipped with the Mk 113 mod 10 fire control system, also known as the Pargo display program. The Mk 113 runs on a UYK-7 computer.\n\nThe Mk 117 FCS, the first \"all digital\" fire control system replaced the Mk 113. The Mk 117 transferred the duties of the analog Mk 75 attack director to the UYK-7, and the digital Mk 81 weapon control consoles, removing the two analog conversions, and allowing \"all digital\" control of the digital mk 48 control. The first 688 sub to be built with the Mk 117 was .\n\nThe Mark 1 Combat Control System/All Digital Attack Center replaced the Mk 117 FCS, on which it was based. The Mk 1 CCS was built by Lockheed Martin, and gave the class the ability to fire Tomahawk missiles. The CSS internal tracker model provides processing for both towed-array and spherical-array trackers. Trackers are signal followers that generate bearing, arrival angle, and frequency reports based on information received by an acoustic sensor. It incorporated the Gyro Static Navigator into the system in replacement of the DMINS of the earlier 688 class.\n\nThe Mk 1 CCS was replaced by the Mk 2, which was built by Raytheon. Mk 2 provides Tomahawk Block III vertical launch capability as well as fleet-requested improvements to Mk 48 ADCAP torpedo and Towed Array Target Motion Analysis operability. The Mk 2 CCS paired with the AN/BQQ-5E system is referred to as the QE-2\" system. The CCS MK2 Block 1 A/B system architecture extends the CCS MK2 tactical system with a network of tactical advanced computers (TAC-3). These TAC-3s are configured to support the SFMPL, NTCS-A, LINK-11 and ATWCS subsystems.\n\n sensor suite consists of the AN/BQS-13 spherical sonar array and AN/UYK-44 computer. The AN/BQQ-5 was developed from the AN/BQQ-2 sonar system. The BQS 11, 12, and 13 spherical arrays have 1,241 transducers. Also equipped are a 104 hydrophone hull array and two towed arrays: the TB-12 (later replaced by the TB-16) and TB-23 or TB-29, of which there are multiple variants. There are 5 versions of the AN/BQQ-5 system, sequentially identified by letters A-E.\n\nThe 688i (Improved) subclass was initially equipped with the AN/BSY-1 SUBACS submarine advanced combat system that used an AN/BQQ-5E sensor system with updated computers and interface equipment. Development of the AN/BSY-1 and its sister the AN/BSY-2 for the was widely reported as one of the most problematic programs for the Navy, its cost and schedule suffering many setbacks.\n\nA series of conformal passive hydrophones are hard-mounted to each side of the hull, using the AN/BQR-24 internal processor. The system uses FLIT (frequency line integration tracking) which homes in on precise narrowband frequencies of sound and, using the Doppler principle, can accurately provide firing solutions against very quiet submarines. The AN/BQQ-5's hull array doubled the performance of its predecessors.\n\nThe AN/BQQ-5 system was replaced by the AN/BQQ-10 system. Acoustic Rapid Commercial Off-The-Shelf Insertion (A-RCI), designated AN/BQQ-10, is a four-phase program for transforming existing submarine sonar systems (AN/BSY-1, AN/BQQ-5, and AN/BQQ-6) from legacy systems to a more capable and flexible COTS/Open System Architecture (OSA) and also provide the submarine force with a common sonar system. A single A-RCI Multi-Purpose Processor (MPP) has as much computing power as the entire \"Los Angeles\" (SSN-688/688I) submarine fleet combined and will allow the development and use of complex algorithms previously beyond the reach of legacy processors. The use of COTS/OSA technologies and systems will enable rapid periodic updates to both software and hardware. COTS-based processors will allow computer power growth at a rate commensurate with the commercial industry.\n\nTwo watertight compartments are used in the \"Los Angeles\"-class submarines. The forward compartment contains crew living spaces, weapons-handling spaces, and control spaces not critical to recovering propulsion. The aft compartment contains the bulk of the submarine's engineering systems, power generation turbines, and water-making equipment. Some submarines in the class are capable of delivering Navy SEALs through either a SEAL Delivery Vehicle deployed from the Dry Deck Shelter or the Advanced SEAL Delivery System mounted on the dorsal side, although the latter was canceled in 2006 and removed from service in 2009. A variety of atmospheric control devices are used to allow the vessel to remain submerged for long periods of time without ventilating, including an electrolytic oxygen generator, which produces oxygen for the crew and hydrogen as a byproduct. The hydrogen is pumped overboard but there is always a risk of fire or explosion from this process.\nWhile on the surface or at snorkel depth, the submarine may use the submarine's auxiliary or emergency diesel generator for power or ventilation (e.g., following a fire). The diesel engine in a 688 class can be quickly started by compressed air during emergencies or to evacuate noxious (nonvolatile) gases from the boat, although 'ventilation' requires raising a snorkel mast. During nonemergency situations, design constraints call for operators to allow the engine to reach normal operating temperatures before it is capable of producing full power, a process that may take from 20 to 30 minutes. However, the diesel generator can be immediately loaded to 100% power output, despite design criteria cautions, at the discretion of the submarine commander on the recommendation of the submarine's engineer, if necessity dictates such actions to: (a) restore electrical power to the submarine, (b) prevent a reactor incident from occurring or escalating, or (c) to protect the lives of the crew or others as determined necessary by the commanding officer.\n\nNormally, steam power is generated by the submarine's nuclear reactor delivering pressurized hot water to the steam generator, which generates steam to drive the steam-driven turbines and generators. While the emergency diesel generator is starting up, power can be provided from the submarine's battery through the ship service motor generators. Likewise, propulsion is normally delivered through the submarine's steam-driven main turbines that drive the submarine's propeller through a reduction gear system. The submarine has no main drive shaft, unlike conventional diesel electric submarines.\n\nThe ship is equipped with a light water reactor, model GE PWR S6G, generating , developed and supplied by General Electric. The auxiliary prop motor by Magnatek supplies 242 kW. The life of the fuel cells is approximately ten years. Part of the improved 688 program included the improved Performance Machinery Program Phase I.\n\nThe S6G reactor plant was originally designed to use the D1G-2 core, similar to the D2G reactor used on the guided missile cruiser. All \"Los Angeles\"-class submarines from on were built with a D2W core. The D1G-2 cores are being replaced with D2W cores when the boats are refueled.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Los Angeles\"-class submarines have been featured prominently in numerous Tom Clancy literary works and film adaptations, most notably in \"The Hunt for Red October\". Other appearances include in the novel \"Red Storm Rising\" and in \"SSN\". In addition to fictional works, Clancy's 1993 non-fiction book Submarine: A Guided Tour Inside a Nuclear Warship features an in-depth exploration of .\nBULLET::::- was used in the 2008 made-for-television film \"\".\nBULLET::::- \"688 Attack Sub\", a 1989 MS-DOS submarine simulator, allowed the player to control a \"Los Angeles\"-class submarine during a set of Cold War missions. The game was also released for the Sega Genesis console.\nBULLET::::- \"Jane's 688(i) Hunter/Killer\", \"Sub Command\", and \"Dangerous Waters\" developed by Sonalysts Inc. are video games where players control the 688i \"Los Angeles\"-class submarine.\n\nBULLET::::- List of \"Los Angeles\"-class submarines\nBULLET::::- List of active \"Los Angeles\"-class submarines by homeport\nBULLET::::- List of submarine classes of the United States Navy\nBULLET::::- List of submarines of the United States Navy\nBULLET::::- List of submarine classes in service\nBULLET::::- Submarines in the United States Navy\nBULLET::::- Cruise missile submarine\nBULLET::::- Attack submarine\n\nBULLET::::- Role of the Modern Submarine\" at Submarine History\".\n"}
{"id": "18507", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18507", "title": "Lucretia", "text": "Lucretia\n\nAccording to Roman tradition, Lucretia ( , ; died ), anglicized as Lucrece, was a noblewoman in ancient Rome whose rape by Sextus Tarquinius (Tarquin), an Etruscan king's son, was the cause of a rebellion that overthrew the Roman monarchy and led to the transition of Roman government from a kingdom to a republic. There are no contemporary sources; information regarding Lucretia, her rape and suicide, and the consequence of this being the start of the Roman Republic, come from the later accounts of Roman historian Livy and Greco-Roman historian Dionysius of Halicarnassus.\n\nThe incident kindled the flames of dissatisfaction over the tyrannical methods of the last king of Rome, Lucius Tarquinius Superbus. As a result, the prominent families instituted a republic, drove the extensive royal family of Tarquin from Rome, and successfully defended the republic against attempted Etruscan and Latian intervention. As a result of its sheer impact, the rape itself became a major theme in European art and literature.\n\nOne of the first two consuls of the Roman Republic, Lucius Tarquinius Collatinus was Lucretia's husband. All the numerous sources on the establishment of the republic reiterate the basic events of Lucretia's story, though accounts vary slightly. Lucretia's story is not considered a myth by most historians, but rather a historical legend about an early history that was already a major part of Roman folklore before it was first written about. The evidence points to the historical existence of a woman named Lucretia and a historical incident that played a critical part in the real downfall of a real monarchy. Many of the specific details, though, are debatable, and vary depending on the writer. Post-Roman uses of the legend typically became mythical in portrayal, being of artistic rather than historical merit.\n\nAs the events of the story move rapidly, the date of the incident is probably the same year as the first of the \"fasti\". Dionysius of Halicarnassus, a major source, sets this year \"at the beginning of the sixty-eighth Olympiad ... Isagoras being the annual archon at Athens\"; that is, 508/507 BC (the ancient calendars split years over modern ones). Lucretia therefore died in 508 BC. The other historical sources tend to support this date, but the year is debatable within a range of about five years.\n\nLucius Tarquinius Superbus, last king of Rome, being engaged in the siege of Ardea, sent his son, Tarquin, on a military errand to Collatia. Tarquin was received with great hospitality at the governor's mansion, home of Lucius Tarquinius Collatinus, son of the king's nephew, Arruns Tarquinius, former governor of Collatia and first of the Tarquinii Collatini. Collatinus' wife, Lucretia, daughter of Spurius Lucretius, prefect of Rome, \"a man of distinction,\" made sure that the king's son was treated as became his rank, although her husband was away at the siege.\n\nIn a variant of the story, Tarquin and Collatinus, at a wine party on furlough, were debating the virtues of wives when Collatinus volunteered to settle the debate by all of them riding to his home to see what Lucretia was doing. She was weaving with her maids. The party awarded her the palm of victory and Collatinus invited them to visit, but for the time being they returned to camp.\n\nAt night, Tarquin entered her bedroom by stealth, quietly going around the slaves who were sleeping at her door. She awakened. He identified himself and offered her two choices: she could submit to his sexual advances and become his wife and future queen, or he would kill her and one of her slaves and place the bodies together, then claim he had caught her having adulterous sex (see sexuality in ancient Rome for Roman attitudes toward sex). In the alternative story, he returned from camp a few days later with one companion to take Collatinus up on his invitation to visit and was lodged in a guest bedroom. He entered Lucretia's room while she lay naked in her bed and started to wash her belly with water, which woke her up.\n\nTarquin returned to camp. The next day Lucretia dressed in black and went to her father's house in Rome and cast herself down in the supplicant's position (embracing the knees), weeping. Asked to explain herself, she insisted on first summoning witnesses and after disclosing the rape, called on them for vengeance, a plea that could not be ignored, as she was speaking to the chief magistrate of Rome. While they were debating the proper course of action, she drew a concealed dagger and stabbed herself in the heart. She died in her father's arms, with the women present keening and lamenting. \"This dreadful scene struck the Romans who were present with so much horror and compassion that they all cried out with one voice that they would rather die a thousand deaths in defence of their liberty than suffer such outrages to be committed by the tyrants.\"\n\nIn the alternative version, she did not go to Rome, but sent for her father and her husband asking them to bring one friend each. Those selected were Publius Valerius Publicola from Rome and Lucius Junius Brutus from the camp at Ardea. They found Lucretia in her room. She explained what had happened and after exacting an oath of vengeance—\"Pledge me your solemn word that the adulterer shall not go unpunished.\"— and while they were discussing the matter, drew the poignard and stabbed herself in her heart.\n\nIn another version Collatinus and Brutus were encountered returning to Rome unaware, were briefed, and were brought to the death scene. Brutus happened to be a politically motivated participant. By kinship he was a Tarquin on his mother's side, the son of Tarquinia, daughter of Lucius Tarquinius Priscus, the third king before last. He was a candidate for the throne if anything should happen to Superbus. By law, however, as he was a Junius on his father's side, he was not a Tarquin and therefore could later propose the exile of the Tarquins without fear for himself. Superbus had taken his inheritance and left him a pittance, keeping him at court for entertainment.\nCollatinus, seeing his wife dead, became distraught. He held her, kissed her, called her name and spoke to her. Seeing the hand of Destiny in these events, his friend Brutus called the grieving party to order, explained that his simplicity had been a sham, and proposed that they drive the Tarquins from Rome. Grasping the bloody dagger, he swore by Mars and all the other gods that he would do everything in his power to overthrow the dominion of the Tarquinii and that he would neither be reconciled to the tyrants himself nor tolerate any who should be reconciled to them, but would look upon every man who thought otherwise as an enemy and till his death would pursue with unrelenting hatred both the tyranny and its abettors; and if he should violate his oath, he prayed that he and his children might meet with the same end as Lucretia.\n\nHe passed the dagger around and each mourner swore the same oath by it. The two stories agree on this point: Livy's version is:\n\nBy this blood—most pure before the outrage wrought by the king's son—I swear, and you, O gods, I call to witness that I will drive hence Lucius Tarquinius Superbus, together with his cursed wife and his whole blood, with fire and sword and every means in my power, and I will not suffer them or anyone else to reign in Rome.\n\nThe newly sworn revolutionary committee paraded the bloody corpse to the Roman Forum and arriving there heard grievances against the Tarquins and began to enlist an army. Brutus \"urged them to act as men and Romans and take up arms against their insolent foes.\" The gates of Rome were blockaded by the new revolutionary soldiers and more were sent to guard Collatia. By now a crowd had gathered in the forum; the presence of the magistrates among the revolutionaries kept them in good order.\n\nBrutus happened to be Tribune of the Celeres, a minor office of some religious duties, but one which as a magistracy gave him the theoretical power to summon the curiae, an organization of patrician families used mainly to ratify the decrees of the king. Summoning them on the spot he transformed the crowd into an authoritative legislative assembly and began to harangue them in one of the more noted and effective speeches of ancient Rome.\n\nHe began by revealing that his pose as fool was a sham designed to protect him against an evil king. He leveled a number of charges against the king and his family: the outrage against Lucretia, whom everyone could see on the dais, the king's tyranny, the forced labor of the plebeians in the ditches and sewers of Rome. He pointed out that Superbus had come to rule by the murder of Servius Tullius, his wife's father, next-to-the-last king of Rome. He \"solemnly invoked the gods as the avengers of murdered parents.\" The king's wife, Tullia, was in fact in Rome and probably was a witness to the proceedings from her palace near the forum. Seeing herself the target of so much animosity she fled from the palace in fear of her life and proceeded to the camp at Ardea.\n\nBrutus opened a debate on the form of government Rome ought to have, a debate at which many patricians spoke. In summation he proposed the banishment of the Tarquins from all the territories of Rome and appointment of an interrex to nominate new magistrates and conduct an election of ratification. They had decided on a republican form of government with two consuls in place of a king executing the will of a patrician senate. This was a temporary measure until they could consider the details more carefully. Brutus renounced all right to the throne. In subsequent years the powers of the king were divided among various elected magistracies.\n\nA final vote of the curiae carried the interim constitution. Spurius Lucretius was swiftly elected interrex; he was prefect of the city already. He proposed Brutus and Collatinus as the first two consuls and that choice was ratified by the curiae. Needing to acquire the assent of the population as a whole, they paraded Lucretia through the streets summoning the plebeians to legal assembly in the forum. Once there they heard a constitutional speech by Brutus not unlike many speeches and documents of western civilization subsequently. It began:\n\nA general election was held. The vote was for the republic. The monarchy was at an end, even while Lucretia was still displayed in the forum.\n\nThe constitutional consequences of this event were, formally at least, to reverberate for more than two thousand years. Rome would never again have a hereditary \"king,\" even if later emperors were absolute rulers in all but name. This constitutional tradition prevented both Julius Caesar and Octavian Augustus from accepting a crown; instead they had to devise a confluence of several republican offices onto their persons in order to secure absolute power. Their successors both in Rome and in Constantinople adhered to this tradition in form if not in essence, and even the office of German Holy Roman Emperor remained typically elective rather than hereditary—up to its abolition in the Napoleonic Wars, 2314 years later.\n\nHearing of the doings at Rome, the king, his sons and a party of retainers rode posthaste for the city, leaving Titus Herminius and Marcus Horatius in command of the troops at Ardea. The gates of Rome being barred and armed men on the wall, they returned to camp. Meanwhile, letters had arrived from the revolutionary committee and were read to the troops by Herminius and Horatius. The men were assembled by unit for a vote, by which the revolution was confirmed. In one story the Tarquins escaped to Gabii. A 15-year truce was made with Ardea. The troops returned to Rome.\n\nSuperbus was not long in Gabii. He had to retire with his men to Tarquinii, where he raised the standard of intervention among the Etruscans. In an alternative story he went directly to Tarquinii with two of his sons; the third, Tarquin, attempted to resume control of Gabii, but was assassinated. The Romans had to face one intervention by the Etruscans (Horatius Cocles) and another by the Latin League (Battle of Lake Regillus). Sentiment ran high against the Tarquins. Collatinus was asked to resign over constitutional issues. He complied and was replaced by Publius Valerius Publicola.\n\nLivy's account in \"Ab Urbe Condita Libri\" (c. 25–8 BC) is the earliest surviving full historical treatment. In his account her husband has boasted of the virtue of his wife to Tarquin and others. Livy contrasts the virtue of the Roman Lucretia, who remained in her room weaving, with the Etruscan ladies who feasted with friends. Ovid recounts the story of Lucretia in Book II of his \"Fasti\", published in 8 AD, concentrating on the bold over-reaching character of Tarquin. Later, St. Augustine made use of the figure of Lucretia in \"The City of God\" (published 426AD) to defend the honour of Christian women who had been raped in the sack of Rome and had not committed suicide.\n\nThe story of Lucretia was a popular moral tale in the later Middle Ages. Lucretia appears to Dante in the section of Limbo reserved to the nobles of Rome and other \"virtuous pagans\" in Canto IV of the \"Inferno\". Christine de Pizan used Lucretia just as St. Augustine of Hippo did in her \"City of Ladies\", defending a woman's sanctity.\n\nIt is recounted in Geoffrey Chaucer's \"The Legend of Good Women\", John Gower's \"Confessio Amantis\" (Book VII), and John Lydgate's \"Fall of Princes\". Lucretia's rape and suicide is also the subject of William Shakespeare's 1594 long poem \"The Rape of Lucrece\", which draws extensively on Ovid's treatment of the story; he also mentioned her in \"Titus Andronicus\", in \"As You Like It\", and in \"Twelfth Night\" in which Malvolio authenticates his fateful letter by spotting Olivia's Lucrece seal, and alludes to her in \"Macbeth\", and in \"Cymbeline\" he further refers to the story, though without mentioning Lucretia by name. Niccolò Machiavelli's comedy \"La Mandragola\" is loosely based on the Lucretia story.\n\nShe is also mentioned in the poem \"Appius and Virginia\" by John Webster and Thomas Heywood, which includes the following lines:\n\nThomas Heywood's play \"The Rape of Lucretia\" dates from 1607. The subject also enjoyed a revival in the mid twentieth century; André Obey's 1931 play \"\" was adapted by librettist Ronald Duncan for \"The Rape of Lucretia\", a 1946 opera by Benjamin Britten which premiered at Glyndebourne. Ernst Krenek set Emmet Lavery's libretto \"Tarquin\" (1940), a version in a contemporary setting.\n\nJacques Gallot (died ) composed the allemandes \"Lucrèce\" and \"Tarquin\" for baroque lute.\n\nIn Samuel Richardson's 1740 novel \"Pamela\", Mr. B. cites the story of Lucretia as a reason why Pamela ought not fear for her reputation, should he rape her. Pamela quickly sets him straight with a better reading of the story. Colonial Mexican poet Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz also mentions Lucrecia in her poem \"Redondillas,\" a commentary on prostitution and who is to blame.\n\nIn 1769, doctor Joan Ramis wrote a tragedy in Menorca entitled \"Lucrecia\". The play is written in the Catalan language using a neoclassical style and is the most important work of the eighteenth century written in this language.\n\nIn 1932, the play \"Lucrece\" was produced on Broadway starring legendary actress Katharine Cornell in the title part. It was mostly performed in pantomime.\n\nIn Donna Leon's 2009 Venetian novel, \"About Face\", Franca Marinello refers to the tale of Tarquin and Lucrezia, as recounted in Ovid's \" Fasti \" (Book II, for February 24, \"Regifugium\") to explain her actions to Commissario Brunetti.\n\nSince the Renaissance, the suicide of Lucretia has been an enduring subject for visual artists, including Titian, Rembrandt, Dürer, Raphael, Botticelli, Jörg Breu the Elder, Johannes Moreelse, Artemisia Gentileschi, Damià Campeny, Eduardo Rosales, Lucas Cranach the Elder, and others. Most commonly, either the moment of the rape is shown or Lucretia is shown alone at the moment of her suicide. In either situation, her clothing is loosened or absent, while Tarquin is normally clothed.\n\nThe subject was one of a group showing women from legend or the Bible who were either powerless or only able to escape their situations by suicide, such as Susanna, Dido of Carthage, and Verginia. These formed a counterpoint to, or sub-group of, the set of subjects known as the Power of Women, showing female violence against, or domination of, men. These were often depicted by the same artists, and especially popular in Northern Renaissance art. The story of Esther lay somewhere between these two extremes.\n\nThe subject of Lucretia spinning, with her ladies, is sometimes depicted, as in a series of four engravings of her story by Hendrick Goltzius, which also includes a banquet.\n\nBULLET::::- Examples with articles:\nBULLET::::- Tarquin and Lucretia— life-size image of the rape by Titian\nBULLET::::- The Story of Lucretia (Botticelli)—three scenes, of the rape, Brutus arousing the people, and the suicide\nBULLET::::- The Suicide of Lucretia (Dürer)—single figure painting\nBULLET::::- Lucretia and her Husband—distinctive depiction of Lucretia with a knife, and a shadowy male figure just behind. He is either Tarquin or her husband. By either Titian or Palma Vecchio.\nBULLET::::- Lucretia (Veronese)\n\nBULLET::::- Lucretia (gens)\nBULLET::::- Verginia\n\nBULLET::::- Sources:\nBULLET::::- Russell, H Diane (ed), \"Eva/Ave; Women in Renaissance and Baroque Prints\", National Gallery of Art, Washington, 1990,\nBULLET::::- Donaldson, Ian. \"The rapes of Lucretia: a myth and its transformations\". Oxford 1982.\n\n\n \n"}
{"id": "18508", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18508", "title": "Lightweight Directory Access Protocol", "text": "Lightweight Directory Access Protocol\n\nThe Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP ) is an open, vendor-neutral, industry standard application protocol for accessing and maintaining distributed directory information services over an Internet Protocol (IP) network. Directory services play an important role in developing intranet and Internet applications by allowing the sharing of information about users, systems, networks, services, and applications throughout the network. As examples, directory services may provide any organized set of records, often with a hierarchical structure, such as a corporate email directory. Similarly, a telephone directory is a list of subscribers with an address and a phone number.\n\nLDAP is specified in a series of Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) Standard Track publications called Request for Comments (RFCs), using the description language ASN.1. The latest specification is Version 3, published as RFC 4511 (a road map to the technical specifications is provided by RFC4510).\n\nA common use of LDAP is to provide a central place to store usernames and passwords. This allows many different applications and services to connect to the LDAP server to validate users.\n\nLDAP is based on a simpler subset of the standards contained within the X.500 standard. Because of this relationship, LDAP is sometimes called X.500-lite.\n\nTelecommunication companies' understanding of directory requirements were well developed after some 70 years of producing and managing telephone directories. These companies introduced the concept of directory services to information technology and computer networking, their input culminating in the comprehensive X.500 specification, a suite of protocols produced by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) in the 1980s.\n\nX.500 directory services were traditionally accessed via the X.500 Directory Access Protocol (DAP), which required the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) protocol stack. LDAP was originally intended to be a lightweight alternative protocol for accessing X.500 directory services through the simpler (and now widespread) TCP/IP protocol stack. This model of directory access was borrowed from the DIXIE and Directory Assistance Service protocols.\n\nThe protocol was originally created by Tim Howes of the University of Michigan, Steve Kille of Isode Limited, Colin Robbins of Nexor and Wengyik Yeong of Performance Systems International, circa 1993, as a successor to DIXIE and DAS. Mark Wahl of Critical Angle Inc., Tim Howes, and Steve Kille started work in 1996 on a new version of LDAP, LDAPv3, under the aegis of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). LDAPv3, first published in 1997, superseded LDAPv2 and added support for extensibility, integrated the Simple Authentication and Security Layer, and better aligned the protocol to the 1993 edition of X.500. Further development of the LDAPv3 specifications themselves and of numerous extensions adding features to LDAPv3 has come through the IETF.\n\nIn the early engineering stages of LDAP, it was known as \"Lightweight Directory Browsing Protocol\", or \"LDBP\". It was renamed with the expansion of the scope of the protocol beyond directory browsing and searching, to include directory update functions. It was given its \"Lightweight\" name because it was not as network intensive as its DAP predecessor and thus was more easily implemented over the Internet due to its relatively modest bandwidth usage.\n\nLDAP has influenced subsequent Internet protocols, including later versions of X.500, XML Enabled Directory (XED), Directory Service Markup Language (DSML), Service Provisioning Markup Language (SPML), and the Service Location Protocol (SLP). It is also used as the basis for Microsoft's Active Directory.\n\nA client starts an LDAP session by connecting to an LDAP server, called a Directory System Agent (DSA), by default on TCP and UDP port 389, or on port 636 for LDAPS (LDAP over SSL, see below). The client then sends an operation request to the server, and a server sends responses in return. With some exceptions, the client does not need to wait for a response before sending the next request, and the server may send the responses in any order. All information is transmitted using Basic Encoding Rules (BER).\n\nThe client may request the following operations:\nBULLET::::- StartTLS – use the LDAPv3 Transport Layer Security (TLS) extension for a secure connection\nBULLET::::- Bind – authenticate and specify LDAP protocol version\nBULLET::::- Search – search for and/or retrieve directory entries\nBULLET::::- Compare – test if a named entry contains a given attribute value\nBULLET::::- Add a new entry\nBULLET::::- Delete an entry\nBULLET::::- Modify an entry\nBULLET::::- Modify Distinguished Name (DN) – move or rename an entry\nBULLET::::- Abandon – abort a previous request\nBULLET::::- Extended Operation – generic operation used to define other operations\nBULLET::::- Unbind – close the connection (not the inverse of Bind)\n\nIn addition the server may send \"Unsolicited Notifications\" that are not responses to any request, e.g. before the connection is timed out.\n\nA common alternative method of securing LDAP communication is using an SSL tunnel. The default port for LDAP over SSL is 636. The use of LDAP over SSL was common in LDAP Version 2 (LDAPv2) but it was never standardized in any formal specification. This usage has been deprecated along with LDAPv2, which was officially retired in 2003. Global Catalog is available by default on ports 3268, and 3269 for LDAPS.\n\nThe protocol provides an interface with directories that follow the 1993 edition of the X.500 model:\nBULLET::::- An entry consists of a set of attributes.\nBULLET::::- An attribute has a name (an \"attribute type\" or \"attribute description\") and one or more values. The attributes are defined in a \"schema\" (see below).\nBULLET::::- Each entry has a unique identifier: its \"Distinguished Name\" (DN). This consists of its \"Relative Distinguished Name\" (RDN), constructed from some attribute(s) in the entry, followed by the parent entry's DN. Think of the DN as the full file path and the RDN as its relative filename in its parent folder (e.g. if codice_1 were the DN, then codice_2 would be the RDN).\n\nA DN may change over the lifetime of the entry, for instance, when entries are moved within a tree. To reliably and unambiguously identify entries, a UUID might be provided in the set of the entry's \"operational attributes\".\n\nAn entry can look like this when represented in LDAP Data Interchange Format (LDIF) (LDAP itself is a binary protocol):\n\n\"codice_3\" is the distinguished name of the entry; it is neither an attribute nor a part of the entry. \"codice_4\" is the entry's RDN (Relative Distinguished Name), and \"codice_5\" is the DN of the parent entry, where \"codice_6\" denotes 'Domain Component'. The other lines show the attributes in the entry. Attribute names are typically mnemonic strings, like \"codice_7\" for common name, \"codice_6\" for domain component, \"codice_9\" for e-mail address, and \"codice_10\" for surname.\n\nA server holds a subtree starting from a specific entry, e.g. \"codice_5\" and its children. Servers may also hold references to other servers, so an attempt to access \"codice_12\" could return a \"referral\" or \"continuation reference\" to a server that holds that part of the directory tree. The client can then contact the other server. Some servers also support \"chaining\", which means the server contacts the other server and returns the results to the client.\n\nLDAP rarely defines any ordering: The server may return the values of an attribute, the attributes in an entry, and the entries found by a search operation in any order. This follows from the formal definitions - an entry is defined as a set of attributes, and an attribute is a set of values, and sets need not be ordered.\n\nThe ADD operation inserts a new entry into the directory-server database. If the distinguished name in the add request already exists in the directory, then the server will not add a duplicate entry but will set the result code in the add result to decimal 68, \"entryAlreadyExists\".\nBULLET::::- LDAP-compliant servers will never dereference the distinguished name transmitted in the add request when attempting to locate the entry, that is, distinguished names are never de-aliased.\nBULLET::::- LDAP-compliant servers will ensure that the distinguished name and all attributes conform to naming standards.\nBULLET::::- The entry to be added must not exist, and the immediate superior must exist.\nIn the above example, codice_13 must not exist, and codice_14 must exist.\n\nWhen an LDAP session is created, that is, when an LDAP client connects to the server, the authentication state of the session\nis set to anonymous. The BIND operation establishes the authentication state for a session.\n\nSimple BIND and SASL PLAIN can send the user's DN and password in plaintext, so the connections utilizing either Simple or SASL PLAIN\nshould be encrypted using Transport Layer Security (TLS). The server typically checks the password against the codice_15\nattribute in the named entry. Anonymous BIND (with empty DN and password) resets the connection to anonymous state.\n\nSASL (Simple Authentication and Security Layer) BIND provides authentication services through a\nwide range of mechanisms, e.g. Kerberos or the client certificate sent with\nTLS.\n\nBIND also sets the LDAP protocol version by sending a version number in the form of an integer. If the client requests a version that the server does not support,\nthe server must set the result code in the BIND response to the code for a protocol error. Normally clients should use LDAPv3, which is the\ndefault in the protocol but not always in LDAP libraries.\n\nBIND had to be the first operation in a session in LDAPv2, but is not required as of LDAPv3. In LDAPv3, each\nsuccessful BIND request changes the authentication state of the session and each unsuccessful BIND request resets the authentication state\nof the session.\n\nTo delete an entry, an LDAP client transmits a properly formed delete request to the server.\nBULLET::::- A delete request must contain the distinguished name of the entry to be deleted\nBULLET::::- Request controls may also be attached to the delete request\nBULLET::::- Servers do not dereference aliases when processing a delete request\nBULLET::::- Only leaf entries (entries with no subordinates) may be deleted by a delete request. Some servers support an operational attribute codice_16 whose value indicates whether an entry has any subordinate entries, and some servers support an operational attribute codice_17 indicating the number of entries subordinate to the entry containing the codice_17 attribute.\nBULLET::::- Some servers support the subtree delete request control permitting deletion of the DN and all objects subordinate to the DN, subject to access controls. Delete requests are subject to access controls, that is, whether a connection with a given authentication state will be permitted to delete a given entry is governed by server-specific access control mechanisms.\n\nThe Search operation is used to both search for and read entries. Its parameters are:\nBULLET::::- baseObject : The name of the base object entry (or possibly the root) relative to which the search is to be performed.\nBULLET::::- scope : What elements below the baseObject to search. This can be codice_19 (search just the named entry, typically used to read one entry), codice_20 (entries immediately below the base DN), or codice_21 (the entire subtree starting at the base DN).\nBULLET::::- filter : Criteria to use in selecting elements within scope. For example, the filter codice_22 will select \"persons\" (elements of objectClass codice_23) where the matching rules for codice_24 and codice_9 determine whether the values for those attributes match the filter assertion. Note that a common misconception is that LDAP data is case-sensitive, whereas in fact matching rules and ordering rules determine matching, comparisons, and relative value relationships. If the example filters were required to match the case of the attribute value, an \"extensible match filter\" must be used, for example, codice_26\nBULLET::::- derefAliases : Whether and how to follow alias entries (entries that refer to other entries),\nBULLET::::- attributes : Which attributes to return in result entries.\nBULLET::::- sizeLimit, timeLimit : Maximum number of entries to return, and maximum time to allow search to run. These values, however, cannot override any restrictions the server places on size limit and time limit.\nBULLET::::- typesOnly : Return attribute types only, not attribute values.\n\nThe server returns the matching entries and potentially continuation references. These may be returned in any order. The final result will include the result code.\n\nThe Compare operation takes a DN, an attribute name and an attribute value, and checks if the named entry contains that attribute with that value.\n\nThe MODIFY operation is used by LDAP clients to request that the LDAP server make changes to existing entries. Attempts to modify entries that do not exist will fail. MODIFY requests are subject to access controls as implemented by the server.\n\nThe MODIFY operation requires that the distinguished name (DN) of the entry be specified, and a sequence of changes. Each change in the sequence must be one of:\nBULLET::::- add (add a new value, which must not already exist in the attribute)\nBULLET::::- delete (delete an existing value)\nBULLET::::- replace (replace an existing value with a new value)\n\nLDIF example of adding a value to an attribute:\n\nTo replace the value of an existing attribute, Use the replace keyword. If the attribute is multi-valued, the client must specify the value of the attribute to update.\n\nTo delete an attribute from an entry, use the keyword delete and the changetype designator modify. If the attribute is multi-valued, the client must specify the value of the attribute to delete.\n\nThere is also a Modify-Increment extension which allows an incrementable attribute value to be incremented by a specified amount. The following example using LDIF increments employeeNumber by 5:\n\nWhen LDAP servers are in a replicated topology, LDAP clients should consider using the post-read control to verify updates instead of a search after an update. The post-read control is designed so that applications need not issue a search request after an update – it is bad form to retrieve an entry for the sole purpose of checking that an update worked because of the replication eventual consistency model. An LDAP client should not assume that it connects to the same directory server for each request because architects may have placed load-balancers or LDAP proxies or both between LDAP clients and servers.\n\nModify DN (move/rename entry) takes the new RDN (Relative Distinguished Name), optionally the new parent's DN, and a flag that indicates whether to delete the value(s) in the entry that match the old RDN. The server may support renaming of entire directory subtrees.\n\nAn update operation is atomic: Other operations will see either the new entry or the old one. On the other hand, LDAP does not define transactions of multiple operations: If you read an entry and then modify it, another client may have updated the entry in the meantime. Servers may implement extensions that support this, though.\n\nThe Extended Operation is a generic LDAP operation that can define new operations that were not part of the original protocol specification. StartTLS is one of the most significant extensions. Other examples include Cancel and Password Modify.\n\nThe StartTLS operation establishes Transport Layer Security (the descendant of SSL) on the connection. It can provide data confidentiality (to protect data from being observed by third parties) and/or data integrity protection (which protects the data from tampering). During TLS negotiation the server sends its X.509 certificate to prove its identity. The client may also send a certificate to prove its identity. After doing so, the client may then use SASL/EXTERNAL. By using the SASL/EXTERNAL, the client requests the server derive its identity from credentials provided at a lower level (such as TLS). Though technically the server may use any identity information established at any lower level, typically the server will use the identity information established by TLS.\n\nServers also often support the non-standard \"LDAPS\" (\"Secure LDAP\", commonly known as \"LDAP over SSL\") protocol on a separate port, by default 636. LDAPS differs from LDAP in two ways:\n1) upon connect, the client and server establish TLS before any LDAP messages are transferred (without a StartTLS operation) and\n2) the LDAPS connection must be closed upon TLS closure.\n\nSome \"LDAPS\" client libraries only encrypt communication; they do not check the host name against the name in the supplied certificate.\n\nThe Abandon operation requests that the server abort an operation named by a message ID. The server need not honor the request. Neither Abandon nor a successfully abandoned operation send a response. A similar Cancel extended operation does send responses, but not all implementations support this.\n\nThe Unbind operation abandons any outstanding operations and closes the connection. It has no response. The name is of historical origin, and is \"not\" the opposite of the Bind operation.\n\nClients can abort a session by simply closing the connection, but they should use Unbind. Unbind allows the server to gracefully close the connection and free resources that it would otherwise keep for some time until discovering the client had abandoned the connection. It also instructs the server to cancel operations that can be canceled, and to not send responses for operations that cannot be canceled.\n\nAn LDAP uniform resource identifier (URI) scheme exists, which clients support in varying degrees, and servers return in referrals and continuation references (see RFC 4516):\n\nMost of the components described below are optional.\nBULLET::::- \"host\" is the FQDN or IP address of the LDAP server to search.\nBULLET::::- \"port\" is the network port (default port 389) of the LDAP server.\nBULLET::::- \"DN\" is the distinguished name to use as the search base.\nBULLET::::- \"attributes\" is a comma-separated list of attributes to retrieve.\nBULLET::::- \"scope\" specifies the search scope and can be \"base\" (the default), \"one\" or \"sub\".\nBULLET::::- \"filter\" is a search filter. For example, codice_27 as defined in RFC 4515.\nBULLET::::- \"extensions\" are extensions to the LDAP URL format.\n\nFor example, \"codice_28\" refers to all user attributes in John Doe's entry in codice_29, while \"codice_30\" searches for the entry in the default server (note the triple slash, omitting the host, and the double question mark, omitting the attributes). As in other URLs, special characters must be percent-encoded.\n\nThere is a similar non-standard codice_31 URI scheme for LDAP over SSL. This should not be confused with LDAP with TLS, which is achieved using the StartTLS operation using the standard codice_32 scheme.\n\nThe contents of the entries in a subtree are governed by a directory schema, a set of definitions and constraints concerning the structure of the directory information tree (DIT).\n\nThe schema of a Directory Server defines a set of rules that govern the kinds of information that the server can hold. It has a number of elements, including:\nBULLET::::- Attribute Syntaxes—Provide information about the kind of information that can be stored in an attribute.\nBULLET::::- Matching Rules—Provide information about how to make comparisons against attribute values.\nBULLET::::- Matching Rule Uses—Indicate which attribute types may be used in conjunction with a particular matching rule.\nBULLET::::- Attribute Types—Define an object identifier (OID) and a set of names that may be used to refer to a given attribute, and associates that attribute with a syntax and set of matching rules.\nBULLET::::- Object Classes—Define named collections of attributes and classify them into sets of required and optional attributes.\nBULLET::::- Name Forms—Define rules for the set of attributes that should be included in the RDN for an entry.\nBULLET::::- Content Rules—Define additional constraints about the object classes and attributes that may be used in conjunction with an entry.\nBULLET::::- Structure Rule—Define rules that govern the kinds of subordinate entries that a given entry may have.\n\nAttributes are the elements responsible for storing information in a directory, and the schema defines the rules for which attributes may be used in an entry, the kinds of values that those attributes may have, and how clients may interact with those values.\n\nClients may learn about the schema elements that the server supports by retrieving an appropriate subschema subentry.\n\nThe schema defines \"object classes\". Each entry must have an objectClass attribute, containing named classes defined in the schema. The schema definition of the classes of an entry defines what kind of object the entry may represent - e.g. a person, organization or domain. The object class definitions also define the list of attributes that must contain values and the list of attributes which may contain values.\n\nFor example, an entry representing a person might belong to the classes \"top\" and \"person\". Membership in the \"person\" class would require the entry to contain the \"sn\" and \"cn\" attributes, and allow the entry also to contain \"userPassword\", \"telephoneNumber\", and other attributes. Since entries may have multiple ObjectClasses values, each entry has a complex of optional and mandatory attribute sets formed from the union of the object classes it represents. ObjectClasses can be inherited, and a single entry can have multiple ObjectClasses values that define the available and required attributes of the entry itself. A parallel to the schema of an objectClass is a class definition and an instance in Object-oriented programming, representing LDAP objectClass and LDAP entry, respectively.\n\nDirectory servers may publish the directory schema controlling an entry at a base DN given by the entry's subschemaSubentry operational attribute. (An \"operational attribute\" describes operation of the directory rather than user information and is only returned from a search when it is explicitly requested.)\n\nServer administrators can add additional schema entries in addition to the provided schema elements. A schema for representing individual people within organizations is termed a white pages schema.\n\nA lot of the server operation is left to the implementor or administrator to decide. Accordingly, servers may be set up to support a wide variety of scenarios.\n\nFor example, data storage in the server is not specified - the server may use flat files, databases, or just be a gateway to some other server. Access control is not standardized, though there has been work on it and there are commonly used models. Users' passwords may be stored in their entries or elsewhere. The server may refuse to perform operations when it wishes, and impose various limits.\n\nMost parts of LDAP are extensible. Examples: One can define new operations. \"Controls\" may modify requests and responses, e.g. to request sorted search results. New search scopes and Bind methods can be defined. Attributes can have \"options\" that may modify their semantics.\n\nAs LDAP has gained momentum, vendors have provided it as an access protocol to other services. The implementation then recasts the data to mimic the LDAP/X.500 model, but how closely this model is followed varies. For example, there is software to access SQL databases through LDAP, even though LDAP does not readily lend itself to this. X.500 servers may support LDAP as well.\n\nSimilarly, data previously held in other types of data stores are sometimes moved to LDAP directories. For example, Unix user and group information can be stored in LDAP and accessed via PAM and NSS modules. LDAP is often used by other services for authentication and/or authorization (what actions a given already-authenticated user can do on what service). For example in Active Directory Kerberos is used in the authentication step, while LDAP is used in the authorization step.\n\nAn example of such data model is the GLUE Schema, which is used in a distributed information system based on LDAP that enable users, applications and services to discover which services exist in a Grid infrastructure and further information about their structure and state.\n\nAn LDAP server may return referrals to other servers for requests that it cannot fulfill itself. This requires a naming structure for LDAP entries so one can find a server holding a given distinguished name (DN), a concept defined in the X.500 Directory and also used in LDAP. Another way of locating LDAP servers for an organization is a DNS server record (SRV).\n\nAn organization with the domain example.org may use the top level LDAP DN codice_33 (where \"dc\" means domain component). If the LDAP server is also named ldap.example.org, the organization's top level LDAP URL becomes codice_34.\n\nPrimarily two common styles of naming are used in both X.500 [2008] and LDAPv3. These are documented in the ITU specifications and IETF RFCs. The original form takes the top level object as the country object, such as codice_35, codice_36. The domain component model uses the model described above. An example of country based naming could be codice_37, or in the US: codice_38.\n\nBULLET::::- Ambiguous name resolution\nBULLET::::- CCSO Nameserver\nBULLET::::- Federated Naming Service\nBULLET::::- Hesiod (name service)\nBULLET::::- Hierarchical database model\nBULLET::::- Key server (cryptographic)\nBULLET::::- LDAP Application Program Interface\nBULLET::::- List of LDAP software\nBULLET::::- Simple Authentication and Security Layer (SASL)\n\nBULLET::::- ITU-T Rec. X.680, \"Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1) - Specification of Basic Notation\", 1994\nBULLET::::- Basic encoding rules (BER) - ITU-T Rec. X.690, \"Specification of ASN.1 encoding rules: Basic, Canonical, and Distinguished Encoding Rules\", 1994\nBULLET::::- RFC 3641 - Generic String Encoding Rules (GSER) for ASN.1 Types\nBULLET::::- RFC 4346 - The TLS Protocol Version 1.1\nBULLET::::- RFC 4422 - Simple Authentication and Security Layer (SASL)\nBULLET::::- SASL mechanisms registered at IANA\n\n"}
{"id": "18521", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18521", "title": "Latina (disambiguation)", "text": "Latina (disambiguation)\n\nLatina is the feminine form of the term Latino.\n\nLatina may also refer to:\nBULLET::::- Province of Latina, a province in Latium (Lazio), Italy\nBULLET::::- Latina, Lazio, the capital of the province of Latina\nBULLET::::- Latina Nuclear Power Plant\nBULLET::::- Valle Latina, a valley of Lazio, Italy, from south of Rome to Cassino\n\nBULLET::::- Latina (Madrid), a district of Madrid\nBULLET::::- Barrio de La Latina (Madrid), a neighbourhood of Madrid\n\nBULLET::::- or Latin\nBULLET::::- \"Latina\" (genus), a genus of parasitic wasps\nBULLET::::- Latina (architecture), the most common type of northern Indian shikhara (tower or spire on top of a shrine)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Latina\" (magazine), a monthly American magazine\nBULLET::::- \"Latina\", an album by Cristina Pato\nBULLET::::- \"Latina\" (album), a 2016 album by Thalía\n\nBULLET::::- Latina Calcio 1932, an Italian football club formerly known as \"Unione Sportiva Latina Calcio.\"\n\nBULLET::::- Latin (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Latino (disambiguation)\n"}
{"id": "18522", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18522", "title": "Latino", "text": "Latino\n\nThe term Latino () is a noun and adjective often used in English and Spanish to refer to people in the United States with cultural ties to Latin America, in particular to those countries which are Spanish- or Portuguese-speaking. \n\nWithin the Latino community itself in the United States, there is some variation in how it is defined or used. Various U.S. governmental agencies, especially the Census Bureau, codified their usage, and so have specific definitions which may or may not agree with community usage, and includes a specific list of countries from which American residents stem, which are, or are not, included in the agency's definition of \"Latino\". \n\nThese agencies were also simultaneously using the term \"Hispanic\", which usually has a slightly different meaning: where \"Latino\" includes Brazil, \"Hispanic\" usually does not. Conversely, \"Hispanic\" includes Spaniards, whereas \"Latino\" does not. \n\nUsage of \"Latino\" is tied to the United States. Residents of Central and South American countries usually refer to themselves by national origin, rarely as \"Latino\". There is criticism of the term, coming from both inside and outside the United States.\n\n\"Latino\" as a category used in the United States may be understood as a shorthand for the Spanish word \"latinoamericano\" (Latin American in English). \n\nBoth \"Hispanic\" and \"Latino\" are generally used to denote people living in the United States, so much so that \"Outside the United States, we don't speak of Latinos; we speak of Mexicans, Cubans, Puerto Ricans, and so forth.\" In Latin America, the term \"latino\" is not a common endonym and as a demonym is restricted to the Latin American-descended population of the United States.\n\nThe U.S. government Office of Management and Budget has defined \"Hispanic or Latino\" people as \"a person of Cuban, Mexican, Puerto Rican, South or Central American, or other Spanish culture or origin, regardless of race\". The United States Census uses the ethnonym \"Hispanic or Latino\" to refer to \"a person of Cuban, Mexican, Puerto Rican, South or Central American, or other Spanish culture or origin regardless of race\". The Census Bureau also explains that \"[o]rigin can be viewed as the heritage, nationality group, lineage, or country of birth of the person or the person’s ancestors before their arrival in the United States. People who identify their origin as Hispanic, Latino, or Spanish may be of any race.\" Hence the U.S. Census and the OMB are using the terms differently. The U.S. Census and the OMB use the terms interchangeably, where both terms are synonyms. According to a study by the Pew Research Center, the majority (51%) of Hispanic and Latino Americans prefer to identify with their families' country of origin, while only 24% prefer the term \"Hispanic\" or \"Latino\".\n\nThe \"AP Stylebook\"s recommended usage of Latino in Latin America includes not only persons of Spanish-speaking ancestry, but also more generally includes persons \"from – or whose ancestors were from – ... Latin America, including Brazilians\". However, in the recent past, the term \"Latinos\" was also applied to people from the Caribbean region, but those from former French, Dutch and British colonies are excluded.\n\nThe modern usage of comes from a shortening of the term \"Latin America\" (, or .\nThe term Latin America was first coined by South Americans in France in the mid-19th century, and adapted by the French as \"Amérique latine\" during the time of the French intervention in Mexico in the 1860s.\n\nBy the late 1850s, the term was being used in local California newspapers such as \"El Clamor Publico\" by californios writing about \"America latina\" and \"latinoamerica\", and identifying themselves as \"latinos\" as the abbreviated term for their \"hemispheric membership in \"la raza latina\"\".\n\nAn earlier theory held that the term came about in the 16th century, given by geographers to Spain and Portugal's colonies in the New World, referring to the Latin-based, Romance languages imposed on the indigenous population by the colonizers.\n\nWhereas \"Latino\" designates someone with roots in Latin America, the term \"Hispanic\" in contrast is a demonym that includes Spaniards and other speakers of the Spanish language.\n\nThe term \"Latino\" was officially adopted in 1997 by the United States Government in the ethnonym \"Hispanic or Latino\", which replaced the single term \"Hispanic\": \"Because regional usage of the terms differs – Hispanic is commonly used in the eastern portion of the United States, whereas Latino is commonly used in the western portion.\"\n\nU.S. official use of the term \"Hispanic\" has its origins in the 1970 census. The Census Bureau attempted to identify all Hispanics by use of the following criteria in sampled sets:\n\nNeither \"Hispanic\" nor \"Latino\" refers to a race, as a person of Latino/Hispanic ethnicity can be of any race. Like non-Latinos, a Latino can be of any race or combination of races: White American / Caucasian, Black / African American, Asian American, Native American / Alaskan Native, Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander American, or two or more ethnicities. While Brazilian Americans are not included with Hispanics and Latinos in the government's census population reports, any Brazilian American can report as being Hispanic or Latino since Hispanic or Latino origin is, like race or ethnicity, a matter of self-identification.\n\nOther federal and local government agencies and non-profit organizations include Brazilians and Portuguese in their definition of \"Hispanic\". The U.S. Department of Transportation defines \"Hispanic Americans\" as, \"persons of Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Dominican, Central or South American, or other Spanish or Portuguese culture or origin, regardless of race\". This definition has been adopted by the Small Business Administration as well as by many federal, state, and municipal agencies for the purposes of awarding government contracts to minority owned businesses. \nThe Congressional Hispanic Caucus and the Congressional Hispanic Conference include representatives of Spanish and Portuguese descent. The Hispanic Society of America is dedicated to the study of the arts and cultures of Spain, Portugal, and Latin America. Each year since 1997 the International Latino Book Award is conferred to the best achievements in Spanish or Portuguese literature at BookExpo America, the largest publishing trade show in the United States. The Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities, which proclaims itself the champion of Hispanic success in higher education, has member institutions in the U.S., Puerto Rico, Latin America, Spain, and Portugal.\n\nSome authorities of American English maintain a distinction between the terms \"Hispanic\" and \"Latino\":\n\nThough often used interchangeably in American English, \"Hispanic\" and \"Latino\" are not identical terms, and in certain contexts the choice between them can be significant. \"Hispanic\", from the Latin word for \"Spain,\" has the broader reference, potentially encompassing all Spanish-speaking peoples in both hemispheres and emphasizing the common denominator of language among communities that sometimes have little else in common. \"Latino\"—which in Spanish means \"Latin\" but which as an English word is probably a shortening of the Spanish word \"latinoamericano\"—refers more exclusively to persons or communities of Latin American origin. Of the two, only \"Hispanic\" can be used in referring to Spain and its history and culture; a native of Spain residing in the United States is a \"Hispanic\", not a \"Latino\", and one cannot substitute \"Latino\" in the phrase \"the Hispanic influence on native Mexican cultures\" without garbling the meaning. In practice, however, this distinction is of little significance when referring to residents of the United States, most of whom are of Latin American origin and can theoretically be called by either word.\nThe \"AP Stylebook\" also distinguishes between the terms Hispanic and Latino. The Stylebook limits the term \"Hispanic\" to persons \"from – or whose ancestors were from – a Spanish-speaking land or culture\". It provides a more expansive definition, however, of the term \"Latino\". The Stylebook definition of Latino includes not only persons of Spanish-speaking ancestry, but also more generally includes persons \"from – or whose ancestors were from – . . . Latin America\". The Stylebook specifically lists \"Brazilian\" as an example of a group which can be considered Latino.\n\nThere were 28 categories tabulated in the 2000 United States Census: Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Dominican Republic; Central American: Costa Rican, Guatemalan, Honduran, Nicaraguan, Panamanian, Salvadoran, Other Central American; South American: Argentinian, Bolivian, Chilean, Colombian, Ecuadorian, Paraguayan, Peruvian, Uruguayan, Venezuelan, Other South American; Other Hispanic or Latino: Spaniard, Spanish, Spanish American, All other Hispanic or Latino.\n\nIn a recent study, 79% of the Brazilian population identified themselves as \"Brazilians\" while 13% as \"Citizens of the World\" and only 4% as \"Latino-Americanos\".\n\nThe use of the term \"Latino\", despite its increasing popularity, is still highly debated among those who are called by the name. Since the adoption of the term by the U.S. Census Bureau and its subsequent widespread use, there have been several controversies and disagreements, especially in the United States and, to a lesser extent, in Mexico and other Spanish-speaking countries. Since it is an arbitrary generic term, many Latin American scholars, journalists, and indigenous rights organisations have objected to the mass media use of the word \"Latino\", pointing out that such ethnonyms are optional and should be used only to describe people involved in the practices, ideologies, and identity politics of their supporters. Journalist Rodolfo Acuña writes:\n\nWhen and why the Latino identity came about is a more involved story. Essentially, politicians, the media, and marketers find it convenient to deal with the different U.S. Spanish-speaking people under one umbrella. However, many people with Spanish surnames contest the term \"Latino\". They claim it is misleading because no Latino or Hispanic nationality exists since no Latino state exists, so generalizing the term \"Latino\" slights the various national identities included under the umbrella.\n\nThe term \"Latino\" is a loan word borrowed from Spanish, and ultimately has its roots in the Latin language used in Ancient Rome. \n\nAttempts have been made to introduce gender neutral language into Spanish by changing the ending of \"Latino\". Terms like \"Latinx\", and \"Latin@\" are just a few examples.\n\n\"Latinx\" (pronounced or ) is a gender-neutral neologism which is sometimes used in lieu of \"Latino\" or \"Latina\". Its plural is \"Latinxs\".\n\nThe term was first seen around 2004, predominantly online, among intersectional advocacy groups combining the identity politics of race and gender. It slowly gained in usage, and came into popular use around 2014, especially in American universities, where its use has since become widespread.\n\nReactions to this neologism have been mixed. There tends to be a generational and regional divide among supporters and critics of the term, with more support among young people in the United States, and more criticism among older generations, and from those outside the U.S.\n\nBULLET::::- Chicano\nBULLET::::- Hispanic–Latino naming dispute\nBULLET::::- Latin American Australians\nBULLET::::- Latin American Canadians\nBULLET::::- Latin Union\nBULLET::::- Latino diaspora\nBULLET::::- Latino studies\nBULLET::::- List of Latinos in film\nBULLET::::- Race and ethnicity in the United States Census\nBULLET::::- Racial and ethnic demographics of the United States\nNotes\nReferences\nBULLET::::- \"The Oxford Encyclopedia of Latinos and Latinas in the United States\", 4 Vols., Oxford University Press, 2006,\nBULLET::::- Miguel A. De La Torre (ed.), \"Hispanic American Religious Cultures\", 2 Vols., ABC-CLIO Publishers, 2009,\n\nBULLET::::- Latino Cultural Heritage Digital Archives\nBULLET::::- What's in a name?\nBULLET::::- Yale University – Understanding Ethnic Labels and Puerto Rican Identity\nBULLET::::- Chicano/Latino Studies University of California, Irvine\nBULLET::::- Latino news for and about Latinos\n"}
{"id": "18524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18524", "title": "Latin America", "text": "Latin America\n\nLatin America is a group of countries and dependencies in the Western Hemisphere where Romance languages such as Spanish, Portuguese, and French are predominantly spoken; it is broader than the terms Ibero-America or Hispanic America. The term \"Latin America\" was first used in an 1856 conference with the title \"Initiative of the Americas. Idea for a Federal Congress of the Republics\" (Iniciativa de la América. Idea de un Congreso Federal de las Repúblicas), by the Chilean politician Francisco Bilbao. The term was used also by Napoleon III's French government in the 1860s as \"Amérique latine\" to consider French-speaking territories in the Americas (French Canadians, French Louisiana, French Guiana, Haiti, Guadeloupe, Martinique, Saint Martin, Saint Barthélemy), along with the larger group of countries where Spanish and Portuguese languages prevailed, including the Spanish-speaking portions of the United States (Southwestern United States and Florida) Today, areas of Canada (such as Quebec) and the United States (with the exception of Puerto Rico) where Spanish, Portuguese and French are predominant are typically not included in definitions of Latin America.\n\nLatin America consists of 20 countries and 14 dependent territories that cover an area that stretches from Saint Pierre and Miquelon to Tierra del Fuego and includes much of the Caribbean. It has an area of approximately 19,197,000 km (7,412,000 sq mi), almost 13% of the Earth's land surface area. As of , its population was estimated at more than floor(/1e6) million and in 2014, Latin America had a combined nominal GDP of US$5,573,397 million and a GDP PPP of 7,531,585 million USD.\n\nThe idea that a part of the Americas has a linguistic affinity with the Romance cultures as a whole can be traced back to the 1830s, in the writing of the French Saint-Simonian Michel Chevalier, who postulated that this part of the Americas was inhabited by people of a \"Latin race\", and that it could, therefore, ally itself with \"Latin Europe\", ultimately overlapping the Latin Church, in a struggle with \"Teutonic Europe\", \"Anglo-Saxon America\" and \"Slavic Europe\". Further investigations of the concept of Latin America are by Michel Gobat in the \"American Historical Review\", the studies of Leslie Bethell, and the monograph by Mauricio Tenorio-Trillo, \"Latin America: The Allure and Power of an Idea\" (2017).\n\nHistorian John Leddy Phelan located the origins of “Latin America” in the French occupation of Mexico. His argument is that French imperialists used the concept of \"Latin\" America as a way to counter British imperialism, as well as to challenge the German threat to France. The idea of a \"Latin race\" was then taken up by Latin American intellectuals and political leaders of the mid- and late-nineteenth century, who no longer looked to Spain or Portugal as cultural models, but rather to France. French ruler Napoleon III had a strong interest in extending French commercial and political power in the region he and his business promoter Felix Belly called “Latin America” to emphasize the shared Latin background of France with the former colonies of Spain and Portugal. This led to Napoleon's failed attempt to take military control of Mexico in the 1860s.\n\nHowever, though Phelan thesis is still frequently mentioned in the U.S. academy, two Latin American historians, the Uruguayan Arturo Ardao and the Chilean proved decades ago that the term \"Latin America\" was used earlier than Phelan claimed, and the first use of the term was completely opposite to support imperialist projects in the Americas. Ardao wrote about this subject in his book \"Génesis de la idea y el nombre de América latina\" (Genesis of the Idea and the Name of Latin America, 1980), and Miguel Rojas Mix in his article \"Bilbao y el hallazgo de América latina: Unión continental, socialista y libertaria\" (Bilbao and the Finding of Latin America: a Continental, Socialist and Libertarian Union, 1986). As Michel Gobat reminds in his article \"The Invention of Latin America: A Transnational History of Anti-Imperialism, Democracy, and Race\", \"Arturo Ardao, Miguel Rojas Mix, and Aims McGuinness have revealed [that] the term 'Latin America' had already been used in 1856 by Central and South Americans protesting U.S. expansion into the Southern Hemisphere\". Edward Shawcross summarizes Ardao's and Rojas Mix's findings in the following way: \"Ardao identified the term in a poem by a Colombian diplomat and intellectual resident in France, José María Torres Caicedo, published on 15 February 1857 in a French based Spanish-language newspaper, while Rojas Mix located it in a speech delivered in France by the radical liberal Chilean politician Francisco Bilbao in June 1856\".\n\nBy the late 1850s, the term was being used in local California newspapers such as \"El Clamor Publico\" by californios writing about \"America latina\" and \"latinoamerica\", and identifying as \"latinos\" as the abbreviated term for their \"hemispheric membership in \"la raza latina\"\".\n\nSo, regarding when the words \"Latin\" and \"America\" were combined for the first time in a printed work, the term \"Latin America\" was first used in 1856 in a conference by the Chilean politician Francisco Bilbao in Paris. The conference had the title \"Initiative of the America. Idea for a Federal Congress of Republics.\" The following year the Colombian writer also used the term in his poem \"The Two Americas\". Two events related with the U.S. played a central role in both works. The first event happened less than a decade before the publication of Bilbao's and Torres Caicedo works: the Invasion of Mexico or, in USA the Mexican–American War, after which Mexico lost a third of its territory. The second event, the Walker affair, happened the same year both works were written: the decision by U.S. president Franklin Pierce to recognize the regime recently established in Nicaragua by American William Walker and his band of filibusters who ruled Nicaragua for nearly a year (1856–57) and attempted to reinstate slavery there, where it had been already abolished for three decades\n\nIn both Bilbao's and Torres Caicedo's works, the Mexican-American War and Walker's expedition to Nicaragua are explicitly mentioned as examples of dangers for the region. For Bilbao, \"Latin America\" was not a geographical concept, since he excluded Brazil, Paraguay and Mexico. Both authors also ask for the union of all Latin American countries as the only way to defend their territories against further foreign U.S. interventions. Both rejected also European imperialism, claiming that the return of European countries to non-democratic forms of government was another danger for Latin American countries, and used the same word to describe the state of European politics at the time: \"despotism.\" Several years later, during the French invasion of Mexico, Bilbao wrote another work, \"Emancipation of the Spirit in America,\" where he asked all Latin American countries to support the Mexican cause against France, and rejected French imperialism in Asia, Africa, Europe and the Americas. He asked Latin American intellectuals to search for their \"intellectual emancipation\" by abandoning all French ideas, claiming that France was: \"Hypocrite, because she [France] calls herself protector of the Latin race just to subject it to her exploitation regime; treacherous, because she speaks of freedom and nationality, when, unable to conquer freedom for herself, she enslaves others instead!\" Therefore, as Michel Gobat puts it, the term Latin America itself had an \"anti-imperial genesis,\" and their creators were far from supporting any form of imperialism in the region, or in any other place of the globe.\n\nHowever, in France the term Latin America was used with the opposite intention. It was employed by the French Empire of Napoleon III during the French invasion of Mexico as a way to include France among countries with influence in the Americas and to exclude Anglophone countries. It played a role in his campaign to imply cultural kinship of the region with France, transform France into a cultural and political leader of the area, and install Maximilian of Habsburg as emperor of the Second Mexican Empire. This term was also used in 1861 by French scholars in \"La revue des races Latines,\" a magazine dedicated to the Pan-Latinism movement.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Latin America\" generally refers to territories in the Americas where the Spanish, Portuguese or French languages prevail: Mexico, most of Central and South America, and in the Caribbean, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Haiti, and Puerto Rico. \"Latin America\" is, therefore, defined as all those parts of the Americas that were once part of the Spanish, Portuguese and French Empires. By this definition, Latin America is coterminous with Ibero-America when excluding the minority French-speaking territories (\"Iberian America\").\nBULLET::::- The term is sometimes used more broadly to refer to all of the Americas south of the United States, thus including the Guianas (French Guiana, Guyana, and Suriname), the Anglophone Caribbean (and Belize); the Francophone Caribbean; and the Dutch Caribbean. This definition emphasizes a similar socioeconomic history of the region, which was characterized by formal or informal colonialism, rather than cultural aspects (see, for example, dependency theory). As such, some sources avoid this oversimplification by using the phrase \"Latin America and the Caribbean\" instead, as in the United Nations geoscheme for the Americas.\nBULLET::::- In a more literal definition, which is close to the semantic origin, \"Latin America\" designates countries in the Americas where a Romance language (a language derived from Latin) predominates: Spanish, Portuguese, French, and the creole languages based upon these.\n\nThe distinction between \"Latin America\" and \"Anglo-America\" is a convention based on the predominant languages in the Americas by which Romance-language and English-speaking cultures are distinguished. Neither area is culturally or linguistically homogeneous; in substantial portions of Latin America (e.g., highland Peru, Bolivia, Mexico, Guatemala), Native American cultures and, to a lesser extent, Amerindian languages, are predominant, and in other areas, the influence of African cultures is strong (e.g., the Caribbean basinincluding parts of Colombia and Venezuela).\n\nThe term is not without controversy. Historian Mauricio Tenorio-Trillo explores at length the \"allure and power\" of the idea of Latin America. He remarks at the outset, \"The idea of 'Latin America' ought to have vanished with the obsolescence of racial theory... But it is not easy to declare something dead when it can hardly be said to have existed,\" going on to say, \"The term is here to stay, and it is important.\" Following in the tradition of Chilean writer Francisco Bilbao, who excluded Brazil, Argentina and Paraguay from his early conceptualization of Latin America, Chilean historian Jaime Eyzaguirre has criticized the term Latin America for \"disguising\" and \"diluting\" the Spanish character of a region (i.e. Hispanic America) with the inclusion of nations that according to him do not share the same pattern of conquest and colonization.\n\nLatin America can be subdivided into several subregions based on geography, politics, demographics and culture. If defined as all of the Americas south of the United States, the basic geographical subregions are North America, Central America, the Caribbean and South America; the latter contains further politico-geographical subdivisions such as the Southern Cone, the Guianas and the Andean states. It may be subdivided on linguistic grounds into Hispanic America, Portuguese America and French America.\n\n! style=\"line-height:95%; width:2em\" class=\"unsortable\"  Flag\n! style=\"line-height:95%; width:2em\" class=\"unsortable\"  Arms\n! Country\n!Capital(s)\n!Name(s) in official language(s)\n! Area(km²)\n! Population()\n! Population density(per km²)\n! Time(s) zone(s)\n!Subregion\nBuenos Aires\nSouth America\nSucre and La Paz\nSouth America\nBrasília\nSouth America\nSantiago\nSouth America\nBogotá\nSouth America\nSan José\nCentral America\nHavana\nCaribbean\nSanto Domingo\nCaribbean\nQuito\nSouth America\nSan Salvador\nCentral America\nCayenne\nSouth America\nBasse-Terre\nCaribbean\nGuatemala City\nGuatemala\nCentral America\nPort-au-Prince\nCaribbean\nTegucigalpa\nCentral America\nFort-de-France\nCaribbean\nMexico City\nNorth America\nManagua\nCentral America\nPanama City\nCentral America\nAsunción\nSouth America\nLima\nSouth America\nSan Juan\nCaribbean\nGustavia\nCaribbean\n\nMarigot\nCaribbean\n\nMontevideo\nSouth America\nCaracas\nSouth America\n\n<nowiki>*</nowiki>: Not a sovereign state\n\nThe earliest known settlement was identified at Monte Verde, near Puerto Montt in Southern Chile. Its occupation dates to some 14,000 years ago and there is some disputed evidence of even earlier occupation. Over the course of millennia, people spread to all parts of the continents. By the first millennium CE, South America's vast rainforests, mountains, plains and coasts were the home of tens of millions of people. The earliest settlements in the Americas are of the Las Vegas Culture from about 8000 BCE and 4600 BCE, a sedentary group from the coast of Ecuador, the forefathers of the more known Valdivia culture, of the same era. Some groups formed more permanent settlements such as the Chibcha (or \"Muisca\" or \"Muysca\") and the Tairona groups. These groups are in the circum Caribbean region. The Chibchas of Colombia, the Quechuas and Aymaras of Bolivia were the three indigenous groups that settled most permanently.\n\nThe region was home to many indigenous peoples and advanced civilizations, including the Aztecs, Toltecs, Maya, and Inca. The golden age of the Maya began about 250, with the last two great civilizations, the Aztecs and Incas, emerging into prominence later on in the early fourteenth century and mid-fifteenth centuries, respectively. The Aztec empire was ultimately the most powerful civilization known throughout the Americas, until its downfall in part by the Spanish invasion.\n\nWith the arrival of the Europeans following Christopher Columbus' voyages, the indigenous elites, such as the Incas and Aztecs, lost power to the heavy European invasion. Hernándo Cortés seized the Aztec elite's power with the help of local groups who had favored the Aztec elite, and Francisco Pizarro eliminated the Incan rule in Western South America. The European powers of Spain and Portugal colonized the region, which along with the rest of the uncolonized world, was divided into areas of Spanish and Portuguese control by the line of demarcation in 1494, which gave Spain all areas to the west, and Portugal all areas to the east (the Portuguese lands in South America subsequently becoming Brazil). By the end of the sixteenth century Spain and Portugal had been joined by others, including France, in occupying large areas of North, Central and South America, ultimately extending from Alaska to the southern tips of the Patagonia. European culture, customs and government were introduced, with the Roman Catholic Church becoming the major economic and political power to overrule the traditional ways of the region, eventually becoming the only official religion of the Americas during this period.\n\nEpidemics of diseases brought by the Europeans, such as smallpox and measles, wiped out a large portion of the indigenous population. Historians cannot determine the number of natives who died due to European diseases, but some put the figures as high as 85% and as low as 25%. Due to the lack of written records, specific numbers are hard to verify. Many of the survivors were forced to work in European plantations and mines. Intermixing between the indigenous peoples and the European colonists was very common, and, by the end of the colonial period, people of mixed ancestry (mestizos) formed majorities in several colonies.\n\nIndigenous peoples of the Americas in various European colonies were forced to work in European plantations and mines; along with African slaves who were also introduced in the proceeding centuries.\n\nThe Mita of Colonial Latin America was a system of forced labor imposed on the natives. First established by Viceroy Francisco de Toledo (1569–1581), the Mita was upheld by laws that designated how large draft levies were and how much money the workers would receive that was based on how many shifts each individual worker performed. Toledo established Mitas at Potosi and Huancavelica, where the Mitayos—the workers—would be reduced in number to a fraction of how many were originally assigned before the 1700s. While several villages managed to resist the Mita, others offered payment to colonial administrators as a way out. In exchange, free labor became available through volunteers, though the Mita was kept in place as workers like miners, for example, were paid low wages. The Spanish Crown had not made any ruling on the Mita or approved of it when Toledo first established it in spite of the uncertainty of the practice since the Crown could have gained benefits from it. However, the cortes of Spain later abolished it in 1812 once complaints of the Mita violating humanitarian rights were made. Yet complaints also came from: governors; landowners; native leaders known as Kurakas; and even priests, each of whom preferred other methods of economic exploitation. Despite its fall, the Mita made it to the 1800s.\n\nAnother important group of slaves to mention were the slaves brought over from Africa. The first slaves came over with Christopher Columbus from the very beginning on his earliest voyages. However in the few hundred years, the Atlantic Slave trade would begin delivering slaves, imported by Spain and other colonizers, by the millions. Many of the large scale productions were run by forced slave labor. They were a part of sugar and coffee production, farming (beans, rice, corn, fruit, etc.), Mining, whale oil and multiple other jobs. Slaves were also house workers, servants, military soldiers, and much more. To say the least these people were property and treated as such. Though indigenous slaves existed, they were no match in quantity and lack of quality jobs when compared to the African slave. The slave population was massive compared to the better known slave ownership in the United States. After 1860 Brazil alone had imported over 4 million slaves, which only represented about 35% of the Atlantic slave trade. Despite the large number of slaves in Latin America, there was not as much reproduction of slaves amongst the population. Because most of the slaves then were African-born, they were more subject to rebellion. The United States involvement in the slave trade is well known amongst North America, however it hides a larger and in some ways crueler operation in the south which had a much longer history.\n\nIn 1804, Haiti became the first Latin American nation to gain independence, following a violent slave revolt led by Toussaint L'ouverture on the French colony of Saint-Domingue. The victors abolished slavery. Haitian independence inspired independence movements in Spanish America.\n\nBy the end of the eighteenth century, Spanish and Portuguese power waned on the global scene as other European powers took their place, notably Britain and France. Resentment grew among the majority of the population in Latin America over the restrictions imposed by the Spanish government, as well as the dominance of native Spaniards (Iberian-born \"Peninsulares\") in the major social and political institutions. Napoleon's invasion of Spain in 1808 marked a turning point, compelling Criollo elites to form juntas that advocated independence. Also, the newly independent Haiti, the second oldest nation in the New World after the United States, further fueled the independence movement by inspiring the leaders of the movement, such as Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla of Mexico, Simón Bolívar of Venezuela and José de San Martín of Argentina, and by providing them with considerable munitions and troops.\n\nFighting soon broke out between juntas and the Spanish colonial authorities, with initial victories for the advocates of independence. Eventually, these early movements were crushed by the royalist troops by 1810, including those of Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla in Mexico in the year 1810. Later on Francisco de Miranda in Venezuela by 1812. Under the leadership of a new generation of leaders, such as Simón Bolívar \"The Liberator\", José de San Martín of Argentina, and other \"Libertadores\" in South America, the independence movement regained strength, and by 1825, all Spanish America, except for Puerto Rico and Cuba, had gained independence from Spain. In the same year in Mexico, a military officer, Agustín de Iturbide, led a coalition of conservatives and liberals who created a constitutional monarchy, with Iturbide as emperor. This First Mexican Empire was short-lived, and was followed by the creation of a republic in 1823.\n\nThe Brazilian War of Independence, which had already begun along other independent movements around the region, spread through northern, northeastern regions and in Cisplatina province. With the last Portuguese soldiers surrendering on 8 March 1824, Portugal officially recognized Brazil on 29 August 1825.\n\nOn 7 April 1831, worn down by years of administrative turmoil and political dissensions with both liberal and conservative sides of politics, including an attempt of republican secession, as well as unreconciled with the way that absolutists in Portugal had given to the succession of King John VI, Pedro I went to Portugal to reclaim his daughter's crown, abdicating the Brazilian throne in favor of his five-year-old son and heir (who thus became the Empire's second monarch, with the regnal title of Dom Pedro II).\nAs the new Emperor could not exert his constitutional powers until he became of age, a regency was set up by the National Assembly. In the absence of a charismatic figure who could represent a moderate face of power, during this period a series of localized rebellions took place, as the Cabanagem, the Malê Revolt, the Balaiada, the Sabinada, and the Ragamuffin War, which emerged from the dissatisfaction of the provinces with the central power, coupled with old and latent social tensions peculiar of a vast, slaveholding and newly independent nation state. This period of internal political and social upheaval, which included the Praieira revolt, was overcome only at the end of the 1840s, years after the end of the regency, which occurred with the premature coronation of Pedro II in 1841.\n\nDuring the last phase of the monarchy, an internal political debate was centered on the issue of slavery. The Atlantic slave trade was abandoned in 1850, as a result of the British' Aberdeen Act, but only in May 1888 after a long process of internal mobilization and debate for an ethical and legal dismantling of slavery in the country, was the institution formally abolished.\n\nOn 15 November 1889, worn out by years of economic stagnation, in attrition with the majority of Army officers, as well as with rural and financial elites (for different reasons), the monarchy was overthrown by a military coup.\n\nAfter the independence of many Latin American countries, there was a conflict between the people and the government, much of which can be reduced to the contrasting ideologies between liberalism and conservatism. Conservatism was the dominant system of government prior to the revolutions and it was founded on having social classes, including governing by kings. Liberalists wanted to see a change in the ruling systems, and to move away from monarchs and social classes in order to promote equality.\n\nWhen liberal Guadalupe Victoria became the first president of Mexico in 1824, conservatists relied on their belief that the state had been better off before the new government came into power, so, by comparison, the old government was better in the eyes of the Conservatives. Following this sentiment, the conservatives pushed to take control of the government, and they succeeded. General Santa Anna was elected president in 1833. The following decade, the Mexican–American War (1846–48) caused Mexico to lose a significant amount of territory to the United States. This loss led to a rebellion by the enraged liberal forces against the conservative government.\n\nIn 1837, conservative Rafael Carrera conquered Guatemala and separated from the Central American Union. The instability that followed the disintegration of the union led to the independence of the other Central American countries.\n\nIn Brazil, rural aristocrats were in conflict with the urban conservatives. Portuguese control over Brazilian ports continued after Brazil's independence. Following the conservative idea that the old government was better, urbanites tended to support conservatism because more opportunities were available to them as a result of the Portuguese presence.\n\nSimón Bolívar became president of Gran Colombia in 1819 after the region gained independence from Spain. He led a military-controlled state. Citizens did not like the government's position under Bolívar: The people in the military were unhappy with their roles, and the civilians were of the opinion that the military had too much power. After the dissolution of Gran Colombia, New Grenada continued to have conflicts between conservatives and liberals. These conflicts were each concentrated in particular regions, with conservatives particularly in the southern mountains and the Valley of Cauca. In the mid-1840s some leaders in Caracas organized a liberal opposition. Antonio Leocadio Guzman was an active participant and journalist in this movement and gained much popularity among the people of Caracas.\n\nIn Argentina, the conflict manifested itself as a prolonged civil war between \"unitarianas\" (i.e. \"centralists\") and \"federalists\", which were in some aspects respectively analogous to liberals and conservatives in other countries. Between 1832 and 1852, the country existed as a confederation, without a head of state, although the federalist governor of Buenos Aires province, Juan Manuel de Rosas, was given the powers of debt payment and international relations and exerted a growing hegemony over the country. A national constitution was only enacted in 1853, reformed in 1860, and the country reorganized as a federal republic led by a liberal-conservative elite. After Uruguay achieved its independence, in 1828, a similar polarization crystallized between \"blancos\" and \"colorados\", where the agrarian conservative interests were pitted against the liberal commercial interests based in Montevideo, and which eventually resulted in the \"Guerra Grande\" civil war (1839–1851).\n\nLosing most of its North American colonies at the end of the 18th century left Great Britain in need of new markets to supply resources in the early 19th century. In order to solve this problem, Great Britain turned to the Spanish colonies in South America for resources and markets. In 1806 a small British force surprise attacked the capitol of the viceroyalty in Río de la Plata. As a result, the local garrison protecting the capitol was destroyed in an attempt to defend against the British conquest. The British were able to capture large amounts of precious metals, before a French naval force intervened on behalf of the Spanish King and took down the invading force. However, this caused much turmoil in the area as militia took control of the area from the viceroy. The next year the British attacked once again with a much larger force attempting to reach and conquer Montevideo. They failed to reach Montevideo but succeeded in establishing an alliance with the locals. As a result, the British were able to take control of the Indian markets.\n\nThis newly gained British dominance hindered the development of Latin American industries and strengthened the dependence on the world trade network. Britain now replaced Spain as the region's largest trading partner. Great Britain invested significant capital in Latin America in order to develop the area as a market for processed goods. From the early 1820s to 1850, the post-independence economies of Latin American countries were lagging and stagnant. Eventually, enhanced trade among Britain and Latin America led to state development such as infrastructure improvements. These improvements included roads and railroads which grew the trades between countries and outside nations such as Great Britain. By 1870, exports dramatically increased, attracting capital from abroad (including Europe and USA).\n\nBetween 1821 and 1910, Mexico battled through various civil wars between the established Conservative government and the Liberal reformists (\"Mexico Timeline- Page 2)\". On May 8, 1827 Baron Damas, the French Minister of Foreign Affairs, and Sebastián Camacho, a Mexican diplomat, signed an agreement called \"The Declarations\" which contained provisions regarding commerce and navigation between France and Mexico. At this time the French government did not recognize Mexico as an independent entity. It was not until 1861 that the liberalist rebels, led by Benito Juárez, took control of Mexico City, consolidating liberal rule. However, the constant state of warfare left Mexico with a tremendous amount of debt owed to Spain, England, and France, all of whom funded the Mexican war effort (Neeno). As newly appointed president, Benito Juárez suspended payment of debts for next two years, to focus on a rebuilding and stabilization initiative in Mexico under the new government. On December 8, 1861, Spain, England and France landed in Veracruz in order to seize unpaid debts from Mexico. However, Napoleon III, with intentions of establishing a French client state to further push his economic interests, pressured the other two powers to withdraw in 1862 (Greenspan; \"French Intervention in Mexico…\").\n\nFrance under Napoleon III remained and established Maximilian of Habsburg, Archduke of Austria, as Emperor of Mexico. The march by the French to Mexico City enticed heavy resistance by the Mexican government, it resulted in open warfare. The Battle of Puebla in 1862 in particular presented an important turning point in which Ignacio Zaragoza led the Mexican army to victory as they pushed back the French offensive (\"Timeline of the Mexican Revolution\"). The victory came to symbolize Mexico's power and national resolve against foreign occupancy and as a result delayed France's later attack on Mexico City for an entire year (Cinco de Mayo (Mexican History)). With heavy resistance by Mexican rebels and the fear of United States intervention against France, forced Napoleon III to withdraw from Mexico, leaving Maximilian to surrender, where he would be later executed by Mexican troops under the rule of Porfirio Díaz. Napoleon III's desire to expand France's economic empire influenced the decision to seize territorial domain over the Central American region. The port city of Veracruz, Mexico and France's desire to construct a new canal were of particular interest. Bridging both New World and East Asian trade routes to the Atlantic were key to Napoleon III's economic goals to the mining of precious rocks and the expansion of France's textile industry. Napoleon's fear of the United States' economic influence over the Pacific trade region, and in turn all New World economic activity, pushed France to intervene in Mexico under the pretense of collecting on Mexico's debt. Eventually France began plans to build the Panama Canal in 1881 until 1904 when the United States took over and proceeded with its construction and implementation (\"Read Our Story\").\n\nThe Monroe Doctrine was included in President James Monroe's 1823 annual message to Congress. The doctrine warns European nations that the United States will no longer tolerate any new colonization of Latin American countries. It was originally drafted to meet the present major concerns, but eventually became the precept of U.S. foreign policy in the Western Hemisphere. The doctrine was put into effect in 1865 when the U.S. government supported Mexican president, Benito Juárez, diplomatically and militarily. Some Latin American countries viewed the U.S. interventions, allowed by the Monroe Doctrine when the U.S. deems necessary, with suspicion.\n\nAnother important aspect of United States involvement in Latin America is the case of the filibuster William Walker. In 1855, he traveled to Nicaragua hoping to overthrow the government and take the land for the United States. With only the aid of 56 followers, he was able to take over the city of Granada, declaring himself commander of the army and installing Patricio Rivas as a puppet president. However, Rivas's presidency ended when he fled Nicaragua; Walker rigged the following election to ensure that he became the next president. His presidency did not last long, however, as he was met with much opposition from political groups in Nicaragua and neighbouring countries. On May 1, 1857, Walker was forced by a coalition of Central American armies to surrender himself to a United States Navy officer who repatriated him and his followers. When Walker subsequently returned to Central America in 1860, he was apprehended by the Honduran authorities and executed.\n\nThe Mexican–American War, another instance of U.S. involvement in Latin America, was a war between the United States and Mexico that started in April 1846 and lasted until February 1848. The main cause of the war was the United States' annexation of Texas in 1845 and a dispute afterwards about whether the border between Mexico and the United States ended where Mexico claimed, at the Nueces River, or ended where the United States claimed, at the Rio Grande. Peace was negotiated between the United States and Mexico with the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, which stated that Mexico was to cede land which would later become part of California and New Mexico as well as give up all claims to Texas, for which the United States would pay $15,000,000. However, tensions between the two countries were still high and over the next six years things only got worse with raids along the border and attacks by Native Americans against Mexican citizens. To defuse the situation, the United States agreed to purchase 29,670 squares miles of land from Mexico for $10,000,000 so a southern railroad could be built to connect the Pacific and Atlantic coasts. This would become known as the Gadsden Purchase. A critical component of U.S. intervention in Latin American affairs took form in the Spanish–American War, which drastically affected the futures of Cuba and Puerto Rico in the Americas, as well as Guam and the Philippines, by dismantling some of the last remaining Spanish colonial possessions throughout the world.\n\nIn the late 19th century and early 20th century, the U.S. banana importing companies United Fruit Company, Cuyamel Fruit Company (both ancestors of Chiquita), and Standard Fruit Company (now Dole), acquired large amounts of land in Central American countries like Guatemala, Honduras, and Costa Rica. The companies gained leverage over the governments and a ruling elite in these countries by dominating their economies and paying kickbacks, and exploited local workers. These countries came to be called banana republics.\n\nThe 1898 Spanish–American War resulted in the end of Spanish control in the Caribbean. A period of frequent U.S. intervention in Latin America followed, with the acquisition of the Panama Canal Zone in 1903, the so-called Banana Wars in Cuba, Haiti, Dominican Republic, Nicaragua, and Honduras; the Caco Wars in Haiti; and the so-called Border War with Mexico.\n\nAfter World War I, U.S. interventionism diminished, culminating in President Franklin D. Roosevelt's Good Neighbor policy in 1933.\n\nThe Zimmermann Telegram was a 1917 diplomatic proposal from the German Empire for Mexico to join an alliance with Germany in the event of the United States entering World War I against Germany. The proposal was intercepted and decoded by British intelligence. The revelation of the contents outraged the American public and swayed public opinion. President Woodrow Wilson moved to arm American merchant ships in order to defend themselves against German submarines, which had started to attack them. The news helped generate support for the United States declaration of war on Germany in April of that year.\n\nThe message came as a coded telegram dispatched by the Foreign Secretary of the German Empire, Arthur Zimmermann, on January 16, 1917. The message was sent to the German ambassador of Mexico, Heinrich von Eckardt. Zimmermann sent the telegram in anticipation of the by Germany on 1 February, an act which Germany presumed would lead to war. The telegram instructed Ambassador Eckardt that if the U.S. appeared certain to enter the war, he was to approach the Mexican Government with a proposal for a military alliance, with funding from Germany. As part of the alliance, Germany would assist Mexico in reconquering Texas and the Southwest. Eckardt was instructed to urge Mexico to help broker an alliance between Germany and Japan. Mexico, in the middle of the Mexican Revolution, far weaker militarily, economically and politically than the U.S., ignored the proposal; after the U.S. entered the war, it officially rejected it.\n\nAfter World War I, in which Brazil was an ally of the United States, Great Britain, and France, the country realized it needed a more capable army but did not have the technology to create it. In 1919, the French Military Mission was established by the French Commission in Brazil. Their main goal was to contain the inner rebellions in Brazil. They tried to assist the army by bringing them up to the European military standard but constant civil missions did not prepare them for World War II.\n\nBrazil's President, Getúlio Vargas, wanted to industrialize Brazil, allowing it to be more competitive with other countries. He reached out to Germany, Italy, France, and the United States to act as trade allies. Many Italian and German people immigrated to Brazil many years before World War II began thus creating a Nazi influence. The immigrants held high positions in government and the armed forces. It was recently found that 9,000 war criminals escaped to South America, including Croats, Ukrainians, Russians and other western Europeans who aided the Nazi war machine. Most, perhaps as many as 5,000, went to Argentina; between 1,500 and 2,000 are thought to have made it to Brazil; around 500 to 1,000 to Chile; and the rest to Paraguay and Uruguay. It was not a secret that Vargas had an admiration for Hitler's Nazi Germany and its Führer. He even let German Luftwaffe build secret air forces around Brazil.\nThis alliance with Germany became Brazil's second best trade alliance behind the United States.\n\nBrazil continued to try to remain neutral to the United States and Germany because it was trying to make sure it could continue to be a place of interest for both opposing countries. Brazil attended continental meetings in Buenos Aires, Argentina (1936); Lima, Peru (1938); and Havana, Cuba (1940) that obligated them to agree to defend any part of the Americas if they were to be attacked. Eventually, Brazil decided to stop trading with Germany once Germany started attacking offshore trading ships resulting in Germany declaring a blockade against the Americas in the Atlantic Ocean. Furthermore, Germany also ensured that they would be attacking the Americas soon.\n\nOnce the German submarines attacked unarmed Brazilian trading ships, President Vargas met with the United States President Franklin D. Roosevelt to discuss how they could retaliate. On January 22, 1942, Brazil officially ended all relations with Germany, Japan, and Italy, becoming a part of the Allies.\n\nThe Brazilian Expeditionary Force was sent to Naples, Italy to fight for democracy. Brazil was the only Latin American country to send troops to Europe. Initially, Brazil wanted to only provide resources and shelter for the war to have a chance of gaining a high postwar status but ended up sending 25,000 men to fight.\n\nAfter World War II, the United States and Latin America continued to have a close relationship. For example, USAID created family planning programs in Latin America combining the NGOs already in place, providing the women in largely Catholic areas access to contraception.\n\nMexico entered World War II in response to German attacks on Mexican ships. The \"Potrero del Llano,\" originally an Italian tanker, had been seized in port by the Mexican government in April 1941 and renamed in honor of a region in Veracruz. It was attacked and crippled by the on 13 May 1942. The attack killed 13 of 35 crewmen. On 20 May 1942, a second tanker, \"Faja de Oro,\" also a seized Italian ship, was attacked and sunk by the , killing 10 of 37 crewmen. In response, President Manuel Ávila Camacho and the Mexican government declared war on the Axis powers on 22 May 1942.\n\nA large part of Mexico's contribution to the war came through an agreement January 1942 that allowed Mexican nationals living in the United States to join the American armed forces. As many as 250,000 Mexicans served in this way. In the final year of the war, Mexico sent one air squadron to serve under the Mexican flag: the Mexican Air Force's \"Escuadrón Aéreo de Pelea 201\" (201st Fighter Squadron), which saw combat in the Philippines in the war against Imperial Japan. Mexico was the only Latin-American country to send troops to the Asia-Pacific theatre of the war. In addition to those in the armed forces, tens of thousands of Mexican men were hired as farm workers in the United States during the war years through the \"Bracero\" program, which continued and expanded in the decades after the war.\n\nWorld War II helped spark an era of rapid industrialization known as the Mexican Miracle. Mexico supplied the United States with more strategic raw materials than any other country, and American aid spurred the growth of industry. President Ávila was able to use the increased revenue to improve the country's credit, invest in infrastructure, subsidize food, and raise wages.\n\nThere was a Nazi influence in certain parts of the region, but Jewish migration from Europe during the war continued. Only a few people recognized or knew about the Holocaust. Furthermore, numerous military bases were built during the war by the United States, but some also by the Germans. Even now, unexploded bombs from the second world war that need to be made safe still remain.\n\nThe Great Depression caused Latin America to grow at a slow rate, separating it from leading industrial democracies. The two world wars and U.S. Depression also made Latin American countries favor internal economic development, leading Latin America to adopt the policy of import substitution industrialization. Countries also renewed emphasis on exports. Brazil began selling automobiles to other countries, and some Latin American countries set up plants to assemble imported parts, letting other countries take advantage of Latin America's low labor costs. Colombia began to export flowers, emeralds and coffee grains and gold, becoming the world's second-leading flower exporter.\n\nEconomic integration was called for, to attain economies that could compete with the economies of the United States or Europe. Starting in the 1960s with the Latin American Free Trade Association and Central American Common Market, Latin American countries worked toward economic integration.\n\nIn efforts to help regain global economic strength, the U.S. began to heavily assist countries involved in World War II at the expense of Latin America. Markets that were previously unopposed as a result of the war in Latin America grew stagnant as the rest of the world no longer needed their goods.\n\nLarge countries like Argentina called for reforms to lessen the disparity of wealth between the rich and the poor, which has been a long problem in Latin America that stunted economic growth.\n\nAdvances in public health caused an explosion of population growth, making it difficult to provide social services. Education expanded, and social security systems introduced, but benefits usually went to the middle class, not the poor. As a result, the disparity of wealth increased. Increasing inflation and other factors caused countries to be unwilling to fund social development programs to help the poor.\n\nBureaucratic authoritarianism was practised in Brazil after 1964, in Argentina, and in Chile under Augusto Pinochet, in a response to harsh economic conditions. It rested on the conviction that no democracy could take the harsh measures to curb inflation, reassure investors, and quicken economic growth quickly and effectively. Though inflation fell sharply, industrial production dropped with the decline of official protection.\n\nAfter World War II and the beginning of a Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union, US diplomats became interested in Asia, Africa, and Latin America, and frequently waged proxy wars against the Soviet Union in these countries. The US sought to stop the spread of communism. Latin American countries generally sided with the US in the Cold War period, even though they were neglected since the US's concern with communism were focused in Europe and Asia, not Latin America. Between 1946 and 1959 Latin America received only 2% of the United States foreign aid despite having poor conditions similar to the main recipients of The Marshall Plan. Some Latin American governments also complained of the US support in the overthrow of some nationalist governments, and intervention through the CIA. In 1947, the US Congress passed the National Security Act, which created the National Security Council in response to the United States's growing obsession with anti-communism.\n\nIn 1954, when Jacobo Arbenz of Guatemala accepted the support of communists and attacked holdings of the United Fruit Company, the US decided to assist Guatemalan counter-revolutionaries in overthrowing Arbenz. These interventionist tactics featured the use of the CIA rather than the military, which was used in Latin America for the majority of the Cold War in events including the overthrow of Salvador Allende. Latin America was more concerned with issues of economic development, while the United States focused on fighting communism, even though the presence of communism was small in Latin America.\n\nBy 1959, Cuba was afflicted with a corrupt dictatorship under Batista, and Fidel Castro ousted Batista that year and set up the first communist state in the hemisphere. The United States imposed a trade embargo on Cuba, and combined with Castro's expropriation of private enterprises, this was detrimental to the Cuban economy. Around Latin America, rural guerrilla conflict and urban terrorism increased, inspired by the Cuban example. The United States put down these rebellions by supporting Latin American countries in their counter-guerrilla operations through the Alliance for Progress launched by President John F. Kennedy. This thrust appeared to be successful. A Marxist, Salvador Allende, became president of Chile in 1970, but was overthrown three years later in a military coup backed by the United States. Despite civil war, high crime and political instability, most Latin American countries eventually adopted bourgeois liberal democracies while Cuba maintained its socialist system.\n\nEncouraged by the success of Guatemala in the 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état, in 1960, the U.S. decided to support an attack on Cuba by anti-Castro rebels. The Bay of Pigs invasion was an unsuccessful invasion of Cuba in 1961, financed by the U.S. through the CIA, to overthrow Fidel Castro. The incident proved to be very embarrassing for the new Kennedy administration.\n\nPresident John F. Kennedy initiated the Alliance for Progress in 1961, to establish economic cooperation between the U.S. and Latin America. The Alliance would provide $20 billion for reform in Latin America, and counterinsurgency measures. Instead, the reform failed because of the simplistic theory that guided it and the lack of experienced American experts who could understand Latin American customs.\n\nFollowing the American occupation of Nicaragua in 1912, as part of the Banana Wars, the Somoza family political dynasty came to power, and would rule Nicaragua until their ouster in 1979 during the Nicaraguan Revolution. The era of Somoza family rule was characterized by strong U.S. support for the government and its military as well as a heavy reliance on U.S.-based multi-national corporations. The Nicaraguan Revolution (Spanish: Revolución Nicaragüense or Revolución Popular Sandinista) encompassed the rising opposition to the Somoza dictatorship in the 1960s and 1970s, the campaign led by the Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) to violently oust the dictatorship in 1978–79, the subsequent efforts of the FSLN to govern Nicaragua from 1979 until 1990 and the Contra War which was waged between the FSLN and the Contras from 1981–1990.\n\nThe Revolution marked a significant period in Nicaraguan history and revealed the country as one of the major proxy war battlegrounds of the Cold War with the events in the country rising to international attention. Although the initial overthrow of the Somoza regime in 1978–79 was a bloody affair, the Contra War of the 1980s took the lives of tens of thousands of Nicaraguans and was the subject of fierce international debate. During the 1980s both the FSLN (a Leftist collection of political parties) and the Contras (a rightist collection of counter-revolutionary groups) received large amounts of aid from the Cold War super-powers (respectively, the Soviet Union and the United States).\n\nThe set of specific economic policy prescriptions that were considered the \"standard\" reform package were promoted for crisis-wracked developing countries by Washington, D.C.-based institutions such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank, and the US Department of the Treasury during the 1980s and 1990s.\n\nIn recent years, several Latin American countries led by socialist or other left wing governmentsincluding Argentina and Venezuelahave campaigned for (and to some degree adopted) policies contrary to the Washington Consensus set of policies. (Other Latin countries with governments of the left, including Brazil, Mexico, Chile and Peru, have in practice adopted the bulk of the policies.) Also critical of the policies as actually promoted by the International Monetary Fund have been some US economists, such as Joseph Stiglitz and Dani Rodrik, who have challenged what are sometimes described as the \"fundamentalist\" policies of the International Monetary Fund and the US Treasury for what Stiglitz calls a \"one size fits all\" treatment of individual economies.\n\nThe term has become associated with neoliberal policies in general and drawn into the broader debate over the expanding role of the free market, constraints upon the state, and US influence on other countries' national sovereignty.\n\nThis politico-economical initiative was institutionalized in North America by 1994 NAFTA, and elsewhere in the Americas through a series of like agreements. The comprehensive Free Trade Area of the Americas project, however, was rejected by most South American countries at the 2005 4th Summit of the Americas.\n\nIn most countries, since the 2000s left-wing political parties have risen to power. The presidencies of Hugo Chávez in Venezuela, Ricardo Lagos and Michelle Bachelet in Chile, Lula da Silva and Dilma Rousseff in Brazil, Néstor Kirchner and his wife Cristina Fernández in Argentina, Tabaré Vázquez and José Mujica in Uruguay, Evo Morales in Bolivia, Daniel Ortega in Nicaragua, Rafael Correa in Ecuador, Fernando Lugo in Paraguay, Manuel Zelaya in Honduras (removed from power by a coup d'état), Mauricio Funes and Salvador Sánchez Cerén in El Salvador are all part of this wave of left-wing politicians who often declare themselves socialists, Latin Americanists, or anti-imperialists (often implying opposition to US policies towards the region). A development of this has been the creation of the eight-member ALBA alliance, or \"The Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America\" (Spanish: \"Alianza Bolivariana para los Pueblos de Nuestra América\") by some of the countries already mentioned. By June 2014, Honduras (Juan Orlando Hernández), Guatemala (Otto Pérez Molina), and Panama (Ricardo Martinelli) had right-wing governments.\n\nIn 1982, Mexico announced that it could not meet its foreign debt payment obligations, inaugurating a debt crisis that would \"discredit\" Latin American economies throughout the decade. This debt crisis would lead to neoliberal reforms that would instigate many social movements in the region. A \"reversal of development\" reigned over Latin America, seen through negative economic growth, declines in industrial production, and thus, falling living standards for the middle and lower classes. Governments made financial security their primary policy goal over social security, enacting new neoliberal economic policies that implemented privatization of previously national industries and informalization of labor. In an effort to bring more investors to these industries, these governments also embraced globalization through more open interactions with the international economy.\n\nSignificantly, as democracy spread across much of Latin America, the realm of government became more inclusive (a trend that proved conducive to social movements), the economic ventures remained exclusive to a few elite groups within society. Neoliberal restructuring consistently redistributed income upward while denying political responsibility to provide social welfare rights, and though development projects took place throughout the region, both inequality and poverty increased. Feeling excluded from these new projects, the lower classes took ownership of their own democracy through a revitalization of social movements in Latin America.\n\nBoth urban and rural populations had serious grievances as a result of the above economic and global trends and have voiced them in mass demonstrations. Some of the largest and most violent of these have been protests against cuts in urban services, such as the Caracazo in Venezuela and the Argentinazo in Argentina.\nRural movements have made diverse demands related to unequal land distribution, displacement at the hands of development projects and dams, environmental and indigenous concerns, neoliberal agricultural restructuring, and insufficient means of livelihood. These movements have benefited considerably from transnational support from conservationists and INGOs. The Movement of Rural Landless Workers (MST) is perhaps the largest contemporary Latin American social movement. As indigenous populations are primarily rural, indigenous movements account for a large portion of rural social movements, including the Zapatista rebellion in Mexico, the Confederation of Indigenous Nationalities of Ecuador (CONAIE), indigenous organizations in the Amazon region of Ecuador and Bolivia, pan-Mayan communities in Guatemala, and mobilization by the indigenous groups of Yanomami peoples in the Amazon, Kuna peoples in Panama, and Altiplano Aymara and Quechua peoples in Bolivia. Other significant types of social movements include labor struggles and strikes, such as recovered factories in Argentina, as well as gender-based movements such as the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo in Argentina and protests against maquila production, which is largely a women's issue because of how it draws on women for cheap labor.\n\nThe 2000s commodities boom caused positive effects for many Latin American economies. Another trend is the rapidly increasing importance of the relations with China.\n\nWith the end of the commodity boom in the 2010s, economic stagnation or recession resulted in some countries. As a result, the left-wing governments of the Pink Tide lost support. The worst-hit was Venezuela, which is facing severe social and economic upheaval.\n\nThe corruption scandal of Odebrecht, a Brazilian conglomerate, has raised allegations of corruption across the region's governments (see Operation Car Wash). The bribery ring has become the largest corruption scandal in Latin American history. As of July 2017, the highest ranking politicians charged were former Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva (arrested) and former Peruvian Presidents Ollanta Humala (arrested) and Alejandro Toledo (fugitive, fled to the US).\n\nThe following is a list of the ten largest metropolitan areas in Latin America.\n\n! City !! Country !! 2017 population !! 2014 GDP (PPP, $million, USD) !! 2014 GDP per capita, (USD)\nMexico City  Mexico  23,655,355  $403,561  $19,239 \nSão Paulo  Brazil  23,467,354  $430,510  $20,650 \nBuenos Aires  Argentina  15,564,354  $315,885  $23,606 \nRio de Janeiro  Brazil  14,440,345 $176,630  $14,176\nBogotá  Colombia  9,900,800  $199,150  $19,497 \nLima  Peru  9,752,000  $176,447  $16,530 \nSantiago  Chile  7,164,400  $171,436  $23,290\nBelo Horizonte  Brazil  6,145,800  $95,686  $17,635\nGuadalajara  Mexico  4,687,700  $80,656  $17,206 \nMonterrey  Mexico  4,344,200  $122,896  $28,290\n\nThe inhabitants of Latin America are of a variety of ancestries, ethnic groups, and races, making the region one of the most diverse in the world. The specific composition varies from country to country: some have a predominance of European-Amerindian or more commonly referred to as Mestizo or Castizo depending on the admixture, population; in others, Amerindians are a majority; some are dominated by inhabitants of European ancestry; and some countries' populations are primarily Mulatto. Various black, Asian and Zambo (mixed black and Amerindian) minorities are also identified regularly. People with European ancestry are the largest single group, and along with people of part-European ancestry, they combine to make up approximately 80% of the population, or even more.\n\nAccording to Jon Aske:\n\nAske has also written that:\n\nIn his famous 1963 book \"The Rise of the West\", William Hardy McNeill wrote that:\n\nThomas C. Wright, meanwhile, has written that:\n\nSpanish is the predominant language of Latin America. It is spoken as first language by about 60% of the population. Portuguese is spoken by about 34%, and about 6% speak other languages such as Quechua, Mayan languages, Guaraní, Aymara, Nahuatl, English, French, Dutch and Italian. Portuguese is spoken only in Brazil (Brazilian Portuguese), the biggest and most populous country in the region. Spanish is the official language of most of the rest of the countries and territories on the Latin American mainland (Spanish language in the Americas), as well as in Cuba, Puerto Rico (where it is co-official with English), and the Dominican Republic. French is spoken in Haiti and in the French overseas departments of Guadeloupe, Martinique and Guiana, and the French overseas collectivity of Saint Pierre and Miquelon; it is also spoken by some Panamanians of Afro-Antillean descent. Dutch is the official language in Suriname, Aruba, Curaçao, and the Netherlands Antilles. (As Dutch is a Germanic language, these territories are not necessarily considered part of Latin America.) However, the native language of Aruba, Bonaire, and Curaçao, is Papiamento, a creole language largely based on Portuguese and Spanish and has a considerable influence coming from the Dutch language and Portuguese-based creole languages.\n\nAmerindian languages are widely spoken in Peru, Guatemala, Bolivia, Paraguay and Mexico, and to a lesser degree, in Panama, Ecuador, Brazil, Colombia, Venezuela, Argentina, and Chile amongst other countries. In Latin American countries not named above, the population of speakers of indigenous languages tend to be very small or even non-existent (e.g. Uruguay). Mexico is possibly the only country that contains a wider variety of indigenous languages than any Latin American country, but the most spoken language is Nahuatl.\n\nIn Peru, Quechua is an official language, alongside Spanish and any other indigenous language in the areas where they predominate. In Ecuador, while holding no official status, the closely related Quichua is a recognized language of the indigenous people under the country's constitution; however, it is only spoken by a few groups in the country's highlands. In Bolivia, Aymara, Quechua and Guaraní hold official status alongside Spanish. Guaraní, along with Spanish, is an official language of Paraguay, and is spoken by a majority of the population (who are, for the most part, bilingual), and it is co-official with Spanish in the Argentine province of Corrientes. In Nicaragua, Spanish is the official language, but on the country's Caribbean coast English and indigenous languages such as Miskito, Sumo, and Rama also hold official status. Colombia recognizes all indigenous languages spoken within its territory as official, though fewer than 1% of its population are native speakers of these languages. Nahuatl is one of the 62 native languages spoken by indigenous people in Mexico, which are officially recognized by the government as \"national languages\" along with Spanish.\n\nOther European languages spoken in Latin America include: English, by some groups in Puerto Rico, as well as in nearby countries that may or may not be considered Latin American, like Belize and Guyana, and spoken by descendants of British settlers in Argentina & Chile; German, in southern Brazil, southern Chile, portions of Argentina, Venezuela and Paraguay; Italian, in Brazil, Argentina, Venezuela, and Uruguay; Ukrainian, Polish and Russian in southern Brazil and Argentina; and Welsh, in southern Argentina.\nYiddish and Hebrew are possible to be heard around Buenos Aires and São Paulo especially. Non-European or Asian languages include Japanese in Brazil, Peru, Bolivia, and Paraguay, Korean in Brazil, Argentina, Paraguay, and Chile, Arabic in Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Venezuela, and Chile, and Chinese throughout South America.\n\nIn several nations, especially in the Caribbean region, creole languages are spoken. The most widely spoken creole language in Latin America and the Caribbean is Haitian Creole, the predominant language of Haiti; it is derived primarily from French and certain West African tongues with Amerindian, English, Portuguese and Spanish influences as well. Creole languages of mainland Latin America, similarly, are derived from European languages and various African tongues.\n\nThe Garifuna language is spoken along the Caribbean coast in Honduras, Guatemala, Nicaragua and Belize mostly by the Garifuna people a mixed race Zambo people who were the result of mixing between Indigenous Caribbeans and escaped Black slaves. Primarily an Arawakan language, it has influences from Caribbean and European languages.\n\nArchaeologists have deciphered over 15 pre-Columbian distinct writing systems from mesoamerican societies. the ancient Maya had the most sophisticated textually written language, but since texts were largely confined to the religious and administrative elite, traditions were passed down orally. oral traditions also prevailed in other major indigenous groups including, but not limited to the Aztecs and other Nahuatl speakers, Quechua and Aymara of the Andean regions, the Quiché of Central America, the Tupi-Guaraní in today's Brazil, the Guaraní in Paraguay and the Mapuche in Chile.\n\nThe vast majority of Latin Americans are Christians (90%), mostly Roman Catholics belonging to the Latin Church. About 70% of the Latin American population consider themselves Catholic.\n\nAccording to the detailed Pew multi-country survey in 2014, 69% of the Latin American population is Catholic and 19% is Protestant. Protestants are 26% in Brazil and over 40% in much of Central America. More than half of these are converts from Roman Catholicism.\n\nDue to economic, social and security developments that are affecting the region in recent decades, the focus is now the change from net immigration to net emigration. About 10 million Mexicans live in the United States. 31.7 million Americans listed their ancestry as Mexican as of 2010, or roughly 10% of the population. During the initial stage of the Spanish colonization of the Philippines which were around the 1600s, about 16,500 soldiers levied from Peru and Mexico were sent together with 600 Spanish officers to fight wars, settle, colonize and build cities and Presidios in the Philippines. These 16,500 Peruvians and Mexicans supplemented the Native Malay Population which then reached 667,612 people. This initial group of Latin American soldier-settler founders had spread their genes among the sparesly populated Philippines. This resulted into a spread of Latin American admixture among Filipinos as evidenced by a large number of Filipinos possessing Native American ancestry. A Y-DNA compilation organized by the Genetic Company \"Applied Biosystems\" found that 13.33% of the Filipino Male Population sampled from across the country had Y-DNA of Latin American and Spanish origins. Furthermore, according to a survey dated from 1870 conducted by German ethnologist Fedor Jagor of the population of Luzon island (Which holds half the citizens of the Philippines) 1/3rd of the people possess varying degrees of Spanish and Latin American ancestry. According to the 2005 Colombian census or DANE, about 3,331,107 Colombians currently live abroad. The number of Brazilians living overseas is estimated at about 2 million people. An estimated 1.5 to two million Salvadorans reside in the United States. At least 1.5 million Ecuadorians have gone abroad, mainly to the United States and Spain. Approximately 1.5 million Dominicans live abroad, mostly in the United States. More than 1.3 million Cubans live abroad, most of them in the United States. It is estimated that over 800,000 Chileans live abroad, mainly in Argentina, the United States, Canada, Australia and Sweden. An estimated 700,000 Bolivians were living in Argentina as of 2006 and another 33,000 in the United States. Japanese Brazilian immigrants to Japan numbered 250,000 in 2004, constituting Japan's second-largest immigrant population. Their experiences bear similarities to those of Japanese Peruvian immigrants, who are often relegated to low income jobs typically occupied by foreigners. Central Americans living abroad in 2005 were 3,314,300, of which 1,128,701 were Salvadorans, 685,713 were Guatemalans, 683,520 were Nicaraguans, 414,955 were Hondurans, 215,240 were Panamanians and 127,061 were Costa Ricans.\n\nFor the period 2000–2005, Chile, Costa Rica, Panama, and Venezuela were the only countries with global positive migration rates, in terms of their yearly averages.\n\nAs a result of the 2010 Haiti Earthquake and its social and economic impact, there was a significant migration of Haitians to other Latin American countries. During the presidency of Hugo Chávez and his successor Nicolás Maduro, over 3.2 million people fled Venezuela during the Venezuelan refugee crisis as socioeconomic conditions and the quality of life worsened.\n\nThe countries of Latin America seek to strengthen links between migrants and their states of origin, while promoting their integration in the receiving state. These Emigrant Policies focus on the rights, obligations and opportunities for participation of emigrated citizens who already live outside the borders of the country of origin. Research on Latin America shows that the extension of policies towards migrants is linked to a focus on civil rights and state benefits that can positively influence integration in recipient countries. In addition, the tolerance of dual citizenship has spread more in Latin America than in any other region of the world.\n\nDespite significant progress, education access and school completion remains unequal in Latin America. The region has made great progress in educational coverage; almost all children attend primary school and access to secondary education has increased considerably. Quality issues such as poor teaching methods, lack of appropriate equipment and overcrowding exist throughout the region. These issues lead to adolescents dropping out of the educational system early. Most educational systems in the region have implemented various types of administrative and institutional reforms that have enabled reach for places and communities that had no access to education services in the early 1990s. Compared to prior generations, Latin American youth have seen an increase in their levels of education. On average, they have completed two years schooling more than their parents.\n\nHowever, there are still 23 million children in the region between the ages of 4 and 17 outside of the formal education system. Estimates indicate that 30% of preschool age children (ages 4–5) do not attend school, and for the most vulnerable populations, the poor and rural, this calculation exceeds 40 percent. Among primary school age children (ages 6 to 12), coverage is almost universal; however there is still a need to incorporate 5 million children in the primary education system. These children live mostly in remote areas, are indigenous or Afro-descendants and live in extreme poverty.\n\nAmong people between the ages of 13 and 17 years, only 80% are full-time students in the education system; among them only 66% advance to secondary school. These percentages are lower among vulnerable population groups: only 75% of the poorest youth between the ages of 13 and 17 years attend school. Tertiary education has the lowest coverage, with only 70% of people between the ages of 18 and 25 years outside of the education system. Currently, more than half of low income children or living in rural areas fail to complete nine years of education.\n\nLatin America and the Caribbean have been cited by numerous sources to be the most dangerous regions in the world. Studies have shown that Latin America contains the majority of the world's most dangerous cities. Many analysts attribute the reason to why the region has such an alarming crime rate and criminal culture is largely due to social and income inequality within the region, they say that growing social inequality is fueling crime in the region. Many agree that the prison crisis will not be resolved until the gap between the rich and the poor is addressed.\nCrime and violence prevention and public security are now important issues for governments and citizens in Latin America and the Caribbean region. Homicide rates in Latin America are the highest in the world. From the early 1980s through the mid-1990s, homicide rates increased by 50 percent. Latin America and the Caribbean experienced more than 2.5 million murders between 2000 and 2017. There were a total of 63,880 murders in Brazil in 2018.\n\nThe major victims of such homicides are young men, 69 percent of whom are between the ages of 15 and 19 years old. Countries with the highest homicide rate per year per 100,000 inhabitants as of 2015 were: El Salvador 109, Honduras 64, Venezuela 57, Jamaica 43, Belize 34.4, St. Kitts and Nevis 34, Guatemala 34, Trinidad and Tobago 31, the Bahamas 30, Brazil 26.7, Colombia 26.5, the Dominican Republic 22, St. Lucia 22, Guyana 19, Mexico 16, Puerto Rico 16, Ecuador 13, Grenada 13, Costa Rica 12, Bolivia 12, Nicaragua 12, Panama 11, Antigua and Barbuda 11, and Haiti 10. Most of the top countries with the highest homicide rates are in Africa and Latin America. Countries in Central America, like El Salvador and Honduras, top the list of homicides in the world.\n\nBrazil has more overall homicides than any country in the world, at 50,108, accounting for one in 10 globally. Crime-related violence in Latin America represents the most threat to public health, striking more victims than HIV/AIDS or other infectious diseases. Countries with lowest homicide rate per year per 100,000 inhabitants as of 2015 were: Chile 3, Peru 7, Argentina 7, Uruguay 8 and Paraguay 9.\n\nAccording to Goldman Sachs' BRICS review of emerging economies, by 2050 the largest economies in the world will be as follows: China, United States, India, Japan, Germany, United Kingdom, Brazil and Mexico.\n\n+Population and economy size for Latin American countries\n!Country\n!Population\n!GDP (nominal)\n!GDP (PPP)\n\nOver the past two centuries, Latin America’s GDP per capita has fluctuated around world average. However, there is a substantial gap between Latin America and the developed economies. In the Andean region this gap can be a consequence of low human capital among Inca Indios in Pre-Columbian times. It is evident that the numeracy value of Peruvian Indios in the early 16th century was just half of the numeracy of the Spanish and Portuguese. Between 1820 and 2008, this gap widened from 0.8 to 2.7 times. Since 1980, Latin America also lost growth versus the world average. Many nations such as those in Asia have joined others on a rapid economic growth path, but Latin America has grown at slower pace and its share of world output declined from 9.5% in 1980 to 7.8% in 2008.\n\nLatin America is the region with the highest levels of income inequality in the world. The following table lists all the countries in Latin America indicating a valuation of the country's Human Development Index, GDP at purchasing power parity per capita, measurement of inequality through the Gini index, measurement of poverty through the Human Poverty Index, measurement of extreme poverty based on people living under 1.25 dollars a day, life expectancy, murder rates and a measurement of safety through the Global Peace Index. Green cells indicate the best performance in each category while red indicates the lowest.\n\n+Social and economic indicators for Latin American countries\n! Country\n! HDI \n! GDP (PPP) \n! Real GDP growth % \n! Income inequality \n! Extreme poverty % \n! Youth literacy % \n! Life expectancy \n! Murder \n! Peace \n\n style=\"background:#ececec;\"\n+Environmental indicators for Latin American countries\n!Country\n!Environmental performance \n!CO2 emissions \n56.48\n54.57\n1.31\n1.74\n55.34\n1.33\n1.37\n56.48\n2.40\n52.44\n1.79\n60.55\n2.09\n52.08\n1.10\n51.88\n1.03\n52.54\n0.96\n3.72\n59.23\n57.94\n2.10\n52.40\n1.32\n57.06\n2.31\n55.62\n\nWealth inequality in Latin America and the Caribbean remains a serious issue despite strong economic growth and improved social indicators over the past decade. A report released in 2013 by the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs entitled \"Inequality Matters. Report of the World Social Situation\", observed that: ‘Declines in the wage share have been attributed to the impact of labour-saving technological change and to a general weakening of labour market regulations and institutions. Such declines are likely to affect individuals in the middle and bottom of the income distribution disproportionately, since they rely mostly on labour income.’ In addition, the report noted that ‘highly-unequal land distribution has created social and political tensions and is a source of economic inefficiency, as small landholders frequently lack access to credit and other resources to increase productivity, while big owners may not have had enough incentive to do so.\n\nThe major trade blocs (or agreements) in the region are the Pacific Alliance and Mercosur. Minor blocs or trade agreements are the G3 Free Trade Agreement, the Dominican Republic – Central America Free Trade Agreement (DR-CAFTA), the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and the Andean Community of Nations (CAN). However, major reconfigurations are taking place along opposing approaches to integration and trade; Venezuela has officially withdrawn from both the CAN and G3 and it has been formally admitted into the Mercosur (pending ratification from the Paraguayan legislature). The president-elect of Ecuador has manifested his intentions of following the same path. This bloc nominally opposes any Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with the United States, although Uruguay has manifested its intention otherwise. Chile, Peru, Colombia and Mexico are the only four Latin American nations that have an FTA with the United States and Canada, both members of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).\n\nIncome from tourism is key to the economy of several Latin American countries. Mexico is the only Latin American country to be ranked in the top 10 worldwide in the number of tourist visits. It received by far the largest number of international tourists, with 39.3 million visitors in 2017, followed by Argentina, with 6.7 million; the Brazil, with 6.6 million; Chile, with 6.5 million; Dominican Republic, with 6.2 million; Cuba with 4.3 million; Peru and Colombia with 4.0 million. The World Tourism Organization reports the following destinations as the top six tourism earners for the year 2017: Mexico, with US$21,333 million; the Dominican Republic, with US$7,178 million; Brazil, with US$6,024 million; Colombia, with US$4,773 million; Argentina, with US$4,687 million; and Panama, with US$4,258 million.\n\nPlaces such as Cancún, Riviera Maya, Galápagos Islands, Punta Cana, Chichen Itza, Cartagena de Indias, Cabo San Lucas, Mexico City, Machu Picchu, Margarita Island, Acapulco, San Ignacio Miní, Santo Domingo, Buenos Aires, Salar de Uyuni, Rio de Janeiro, Punta del Este, Labadee, San Juan, São Paulo, La Habana, Panama City, Iguazú Falls, Puerto Vallarta, Poás Volcano National Park, Viña del Mar, Guanajuato City, Bogotá, Santa Marta, San Andrés, San Miguel de Allende, Lima, Guadalajara, Cuzco, Ponce and Perito Moreno Glacier are popular among international visitors in the region.\n\n+Performance indicators for international tourism in Latin America\n! Country\n! data-sort-type=\"number\" International tourist arrivals \n! data-sort-type=\"number\" International tourism receipts \n! data-sort-type=\"number\" Tourism receipts \n! data-sort-type=\"number\" Tourism receipts \n! data-sort-type=\"number\" Tourism receipts \n! Tourism receipts \n! Direct and indirect employment in tourism \n! Tourism competitiveness \n\nalign=\"left\"  \nBULLET::::- (*) Data for 2015 rather than 2017, as the newest data is currently unavailable.\n\nLatin American culture is a mixture of many cultural expressions worldwide. It is the product of many diverse influences:\n\nBULLET::::- Indigenous cultures of the people who inhabited the continent prior to European Colonization. Ancient and very advanced civilizations developed their own political, social and religious systems. The Mayas, the Aztecs and the Incas are examples of these. Indigenous legacies in music, dance, foods, arts and crafts, clothing, folk culture and traditions are very strong in Latin America. Linguistic effects on Spanish and Portuguese are also marked, such as in terms like pampa, taco, tamale, cacique.\nBULLET::::- Western civilization, in particular the culture of Europe, was brought mainly by the colonial powersthe Spanish, Portuguese and Frenchbetween the 16th and 19th centuries. The most enduring European colonial influence is language and Roman Catholicism. More recently, additional cultural influences came from the United States and Europe during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, due to the growing influence of the former on the world stage and immigration from the latter. The influence of the United States is particularly strong in northern Latin America, especially Puerto Rico, which is an American territory. Prior to 1959, Cuba, who fought for its independence along American soldiers in the Spanish–American War, was also known to have a close socioeconomic relation with the United States. In addition, the United States also helped Panama become an independent state from Colombia and built the twenty-mile-long Panama Canal Zone in Panama which held from 1903 (the Panama Canal opened to transoceanic freight traffic in 1914) to 1999, when the Torrijos-Carter Treaties restored Panamanian control of the Canal Zone. South America experienced waves of immigration of Europeans, especially Italians, Spaniards, Portuguese, Germans, Austrians, Poles, Ukrainians, French, Dutch, Russians, Croatians, Lithuanians and Ashkenazi Jews. With the end of colonialism, French culture was also able to exert a direct influence in Latin America, especially in the realms of high culture, science and medicine. This can be seen in any expression of the region's artistic traditions, including painting, literature and music, and in the realms of science and politics.\nDue to the impact of Enlightenment ideals after the French revolution, a certain number of Iberian-American countries decriminalized homosexuality after France and French territories in the Americas in 1791. Some of the countries that abolished sodomy laws or banned any reference to state interference in consensual adult sexuality in the 19th century were Dominican Republic (1822), Brazil (1824), Peru (1836), Mexico (1871), Paraguay (1880), Argentina (1887), Honduras (1899), Guatemala and El Salvador. Today same-sex marriage is legal in Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Uruguay, and French overseas departments, as well as in several states of Mexico. Civil unions can be held in Chile.\n\nBULLET::::- African cultures, whose presence derives from a long history of New World slavery. Peoples of African descent have influenced the ethno-scapes of Latin America and the Caribbean. This is manifested for instance in music, dance and religion, especially in countries like Brazil, Uruguay, Honduras, Puerto Rico, Venezuela, Colombia, Panama, Haiti, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, and Cuba.\nBULLET::::- Asian cultures, whose part of the presence derives from the long history of the Coolie trade mostly arriving during the 19th and 20th centuries, and most commonly Chinese workers in Peru and Venezuela. But also from Japanese and Korean immigration especially headed to Brazil. This has largely effected the cuisine, traditions including literature, art and lifestyles and politics. The effects of Asian influences have especially and mostly effected the nations of The Dominican Republic, Brazil, Cuba, Panama and Peru.\n\nBeyond the rich tradition of indigenous art, the development of Latin American visual art owed much to the influence of Spanish, Portuguese and French Baroque painting, which in turn often followed the trends of the Italian Masters. In general, this artistic Eurocentrism began to fade in the early twentieth century, as Latin Americans began to acknowledge the uniqueness of their condition and started to follow their own path.\n\nFrom the early twentieth century, the art of Latin America was greatly inspired by the Constructivist Movement. The Movement quickly spread from Russia to Europe and then into Latin America. Joaquín Torres García and Manuel Rendón have been credited with bringing the Constructivist Movement into Latin America from Europe.\n\nAn important artistic movement generated in Latin America is \"muralism\" represented by Diego Rivera, David Alfaro Siqueiros, José Clemente Orozco and Rufino Tamayo in Mexico, Santiago Martinez Delgado and Pedro Nel Gómez in Colombia and Antonio Berni in Argentina. Some of the most impressive \"Muralista\" works can be found in Mexico, Colombia, New York City, San Francisco, Los Angeles and Philadelphia.\n\nPainter Frida Kahlo, one of the most famous Mexican artists, painted about her own life and the Mexican culture in a style combining Realism, Symbolism and Surrealism. Kahlo's work commands the highest selling price of all Latin American paintings.\n\nThe Venezuelan Armando Reverón, whose work begins to be recognized internationally, is one of the most important artists of the 20th century in South America; he is a precursor of Arte Povera and Happening. From the 60s the kinetic art emerges in Venezuela, its main representatives are Jesús Soto, Carlos Cruz-Diez, Alejandro Otero and Gego.\n\nColombian sculptor and painter Fernando Botero is also widely known by his works which, on first examination, are noted for their exaggerated proportions and the corpulence of the human and animal figures.\n\nLatin American film is both rich and diverse. Historically, the main centers of production have been Mexico, Argentina, Brazil, and Cuba. Latin American film flourished after sound was introduced in cinema, which added a linguistic barrier to the export of Hollywood film south of the border.\nMexican cinema started out in the silent era from 1896 to 1929 and flourished in the Golden Era of the 1940s. It boasted a huge industry comparable to Hollywood at the time with stars such as María Félix, Dolores del Río, and Pedro Infante. In the 1970s, Mexico was the location for many cult horror and action movies. More recently, films such as \"Amores Perros\" (2000) and \"Y tu mamá también\" (2001) enjoyed box office and critical acclaim and propelled Alfonso Cuarón and Alejandro González Iñárritu to the front rank of Hollywood directors. Alejandro González Iñárritu directed in 2010 \"Biutiful\" and \"Birdman\" (2014), Alfonso Cuarón directed \"Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban\" in 2004 and \"Gravity\" (2013). Close friend of both, Guillermo del Toro, a top rank Hollywood director in Hollywood and Spain, directed \"Pan's Labyrinth\" (2006) and produced \"El Orfanato\" (2007). Carlos Carrera (\"The Crime of Father Amaro)\", and screenwriter Guillermo Arriaga are also some of the most known present-day Mexican film makers. \"Rudo y Cursi\" released in December (2008) in Mexico was directed by Carlos Cuarón.\nArgentine cinema has also been prominenent since the first half of the 20th century and today averages over 60 full-length titles yearly. The industry suffered during the 1976–1983 military dictatorship; but re-emerged to produce the Academy Award winner \"The Official Story\" in 1985. A wave of imported U.S. films again damaged the industry in the early 1990s, though it soon recovered, thriving even during the Argentine economic crisis around 2001. Many Argentine movies produced during recent years have been internationally acclaimed, including \"Nueve reinas\" (2000), \"Son of the Bride\" (2001), \"El abrazo partido\" (2004), \"El otro\" (2007), the 2010 Foreign Language Academy Award winner \"El secreto de sus ojos\" and \"Wild Tales\" (2014).\n\nIn Brazil, the \"Cinema Novo\" movement created a particular way of making movies with critical and intellectual screenplays, a clearer photography related to the light of the outdoors in a tropical landscape, and a political message. The modern Brazilian film industry has become more profitable inside the country, and some of its productions have received prizes and recognition in Europe and the United States, with movies such as \"Central do Brasil\" (1999), \"Cidade de Deus\" (2002) and \"Tropa de Elite\" (2007).\n\nPuerto Rican cinema has produced some notable films, such as \"Una Aventura Llamada Menudo\", \"Los Diaz de Doris\" and \"Casi Casi\". An influx of Hollywood films affected the local film industry in Puerto Rico during the 1980s and 1990s, but several Puerto Rican films have been produced since and it has been recovering.\n\nCuban cinema has enjoyed much official support since the Cuban revolution and important film-makers include Tomás Gutiérrez Alea.\n\nPre-Columbian cultures were primarily oral, though the Aztecs and Mayans, for instance, produced elaborate codices. Oral accounts of mythological and religious beliefs were also sometimes recorded after the arrival of European colonizers, as was the case with the Popol Vuh. Moreover, a tradition of oral narrative survives to this day, for instance among the Quechua-speaking population of Peru and the Quiché (K'iche') of Guatemala.\n\nFrom the very moment of Europe's discovery of the continents, early explorers and conquistadores produced written accounts and crónicas of their experiencesuch as Columbus's letters or Bernal Díaz del Castillo's description of the conquest of Mexico. During the colonial period, written culture was often in the hands of the church, within which context Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz wrote memorable poetry and philosophical essays. Towards the end of the 18th Century and the beginning of the 19th, a distinctive criollo literary tradition emerged, including the first novels such as Lizardi's \"El Periquillo Sarniento\" (1816).\n\nThe 19th century was a period of \"foundational fictions\" (in critic Doris Sommer's words), novels in the Romantic or Naturalist traditions that attempted to establish a sense of national identity, and which often focussed on the indigenous question or the dichotomy of \"civilization or barbarism\" (for which see, say, Domingo Sarmiento's \"Facundo\" (1845), Juan León Mera's \"Cumandá\" (1879), or Euclides da Cunha's \"Os Sertões\" (1902)). The 19th century also witnessed the realist work of Machado de Assis, who made use of surreal devices of metaphor and playful narrative construction, much admired by critic Harold Bloom.\n\nAt the turn of the 20th century, \"modernismo\" emerged, a poetic movement whose founding text was Nicaraguan poet Rubén Darío's \"Azul\" (1888). This was the first Latin American literary movement to influence literary culture outside of the region, and was also the first truly Latin American literature, in that national differences were no longer so much at issue. José Martí, for instance, though a Cuban patriot, also lived in Mexico and the United States and wrote for journals in Argentina and elsewhere.\n\nHowever, what really put Latin American literature on the global map was no doubt the literary boom of the 1960s and 1970s, distinguished by daring and experimental novels (such as Julio Cortázar's \"Rayuela\" (1963)) that were frequently published in Spain and quickly translated into English. The Boom's defining novel was Gabriel García Márquez's \"Cien años de soledad\" (1967), which led to the association of Latin American literature with magic realism, though other important writers of the period such as the Peruvian Mario Vargas Llosa and Carlos Fuentes do not fit so easily within this framework. Arguably, the Boom's culmination was Augusto Roa Bastos's monumental \"Yo, el supremo\" (1974). In the wake of the Boom, influential precursors such as Juan Rulfo, Alejo Carpentier, and above all Jorge Luis Borges were also rediscovered.\n\nContemporary literature in the region is vibrant and varied, ranging from the best-selling Paulo Coelho and Isabel Allende to the more avant-garde and critically acclaimed work of writers such as Diamela Eltit, Giannina Braschi, Ricardo Piglia, or Roberto Bolaño. There has also been considerable attention paid to the genre of testimonio, texts produced in collaboration with subaltern subjects such as Rigoberta Menchú. Finally, a new breed of chroniclers is represented by the more journalistic Carlos Monsiváis and Pedro Lemebel.\n\nThe region boasts six Nobel Prize winners: in addition to the two Chilean poets Gabriela Mistral (1945) and Pablo Neruda (1971), there is also the Guatemalan novelist Miguel Angel Asturias (1967), the Colombian writer Gabriel García Márquez (1982), the Mexican poet and essayist Octavio Paz (1990), and the Peruvian novelist Mario Vargas Llosa (2010).\n\nLatin America has produced many successful worldwide artists in terms of recorded global music sales. Among the most successful have been Juan Gabriel (Mexico) only Latin American musician to have sold over 200 million records worldwide, Gloria Estefan (Cuba), Carlos Santana, Luis Miguel (Mexico) of whom have sold over 90 million records, Shakira (Colombia) and Vicente Fernández (Mexico) with over 50 million records sold worldwide. Enrique Iglesias, although not a Latin American, has also contributed for the success of Latin music.\n\nOther notable successful mainstream acts through the years, include RBD, Celia Cruz, Soda Stereo, Thalía, Ricky Martin, Maná, Marc Anthony, Ricardo Arjona, Selena, and Menudo.\n\nCaribbean Hispanic music, such as merengue, bachata, salsa, and more recently reggaeton, from such countries as the Dominican Republic, Puerto Rico, Trinidad and Tobago, Cuba, and Panama, has been strongly influenced by African rhythms and melodies. Haiti's compas is a genre of music that is influenced by its Caribbean Hispanic counterparts, along with elements of jazz and modern sounds.\nAnother well-known Latin American musical genre includes the Argentine and Uruguayan tango (with Carlos Gardel as the greatest exponent), as well as the distinct nuevo tango, a fusion of tango, acoustic and electronic music popularized by bandoneón virtuoso Ástor Piazzolla. Samba, North American jazz, European classical music and choro combined to form \"bossa nova\" in Brazil, popularized by guitarist João Gilberto with singer Astrud Gilberto and pianist Antonio Carlos Jobim.\n\nOther influential Latin American sounds include the Antillean soca and calypso, the Honduran (Garifuna) punta, the Colombian cumbia and vallenato, the Chilean cueca, the Ecuadorian boleros, and rockoleras, the Mexican ranchera and the mariachi which is the epitome of Mexican soul, the Nicaraguan palo de Mayo, the Peruvian marinera and tondero, the Uruguayan candombe, the French Antillean zouk (derived from Haitian compas) and the various styles of music from pre-Columbian traditions that are widespread in the Andean region.\n\nThe classical composer Heitor Villa-Lobos (1887–1959) worked on the recording of native musical traditions within his homeland of Brazil. The traditions of his homeland heavily influenced his classical works. Also notable is the recent work of the Cuban Leo Brouwer and guitar work of the Venezuelan Antonio Lauro and the Paraguayan Agustín Barrios. Latin America has also produced world-class classical performers such as the Chilean pianist Claudio Arrau, Brazilian pianist Nelson Freire and the Argentine pianist and conductor Daniel Barenboim. Brazilian opera soprano Bidu Sayão, one of Brazil's most famous musicians, was a leading artist of the Metropolitan Opera in New York City from 1937 to 1952.\n\nArguably, the main contribution to music entered through folklore, where the true soul of the Latin American and Caribbean countries is expressed. Musicians such as Yma Súmac, Chabuca Granda, Atahualpa Yupanqui, Violeta Parra, Víctor Jara, Jorge Cafrune, Facundo Cabral, Mercedes Sosa, Jorge Negrete, Luiz Gonzaga, Caetano Veloso, Susana Baca, Chavela Vargas, Simon Diaz, Julio Jaramillo, Toto la Momposina, Gilberto Gil, Maria Bethânia, Nana Caymmi, Nara Leão, Gal Costa, Ney Matogrosso as well as musical ensembles such as Inti Illimani and Los Kjarkas are magnificent examples of the heights that this soul can reach.\n\nLatin pop, including many forms of rock, is popular in Latin America today (see Spanish language rock and roll). A few examples are Café Tacuba, Soda Stereo, Maná, Rita Lee, Mutantes, Secos e Molhados Legião Urbana, Titãs, Paralamas do Sucesso, Cazuza, Barão Vermelho, Skank, Miranda!, Cansei de Ser Sexy or CSS, and Bajo Fondo.\n\nMore recently, reggaeton, which blends Jamaican reggae and dancehall with Latin America genres such as bomba and plena, as well as hip hop, is becoming more popular, in spite of the controversy surrounding its lyrics, dance steps (Perreo) and music videos. It has become very popular among populations with a \"migrant culture\" influence – both Latino populations in the United States, such as southern Florida and New York City, and parts of Latin America where migration to the United States is common, such as Trinidad and Tobago, Dominican Republic, Colombia, Ecuador, El Salvador, and Mexico.\n\nThe following is a list of the ten countries with the most World Heritage Sites in Latin America.\n\n!Country !! Natural sites !! Cultural sites !! Mixed sites !! Total sites \n\nBULLET::::- Agroecology in Latin America\nBULLET::::- American (word)\nBULLET::::- Americas (terminology)\nBULLET::::- Americas\nBULLET::::- Aridoamerica\nBULLET::::- Caribbean\nBULLET::::- Association of Caribbean States\nBULLET::::- Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States\nBULLET::::- Central America\nBULLET::::- Central American Integration System\nBULLET::::- Diaspora\nBULLET::::- Hispanic and Latino Americans\nBULLET::::- Latin American Australians\nBULLET::::- Latin American British\nBULLET::::- Latin American Canadians\nBULLET::::- Hispanic\nBULLET::::- Latino\nBULLET::::- French America\nBULLET::::- Hispanic America\nBULLET::::- Ibero-America\nBULLET::::- Latin America and the Caribbean (region)\nBULLET::::- Latin America and the League of Nations\nBULLET::::- Latin American integration\nBULLET::::- Latin American studies\nBULLET::::- Latin Americans\nBULLET::::- Amerindians\nBULLET::::- Criollo\nBULLET::::- Afro-Latin Americans\nBULLET::::- Asian Latin Americans\nBULLET::::- Mestizos\nBULLET::::- Mulatto\nBULLET::::- White Latin Americans\nBULLET::::- Zambo\nBULLET::::- Latin America–United States relations\nBULLET::::- America's Backyard\nBULLET::::- List of Latin Americans\nBULLET::::- Mesoamerica\nBULLET::::- Middle America (Americas)\nBULLET::::- North America\nBULLET::::- Northern America\nBULLET::::- Romance-speaking world\nBULLET::::- South America\nBULLET::::- Water supply and sanitation in Latin America\n\nBULLET::::- Ardao, Arturo. \"Génesis de la idea y nombre de América Latina\". Caracas: Centro de Estudios Latinoamericanos Rómulo Gallegos, 1980.\nBULLET::::- Ayala Mora, Enrique. \"El origen del nombre América Latina y la tradición católica del siglo XIX.\" \"Anuario Colombiano de Historia Social y de la Cultura\" 40, no. 1 (2013), 213–41.\nBULLET::::- Azevedo, Aroldo. \"O Brasil e suas regiões\". São Paulo: Companhia Editora Nacional, 1971.\nBULLET::::- \"Enciclopédia Barsa\". Volume 4: Batráquio – Camarão, Filipe. Rio de Janeiro: Encyclopædia Britannica do Brasil, 1987.\nBULLET::::- Bomfim, Manoel. \"A América latina: Males de origem\". Rio de Janeiro: H. Garnier 1905.\nBULLET::::- Braudel, Fernand. \"Y a-t-il une Amérique latine?\" \"Annales ESC\" 3 (1948), 467–71.\nBULLET::::- Castro-Gómez, Santiago. \"Crítica de la razón latinoamericana\". Barcelona: Puvil Libros 1996.\nBULLET::::- Coatsworth, John H., and Alan M. Taylor, eds. \"Latin America and the World Economy Since 1800\". Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press 1998.\nBULLET::::- Coelho, Marcos Amorim. \"Geografia do Brasil\". 4th ed. São Paulo: Moderna, 1996.\nBULLET::::- Edwards, Sebastián. \"Left Behind: Latin America and the False Promise of Populism\". University of Chicago Press, 2010.\nBULLET::::- Galeano, Eduardo. \"Open Veins of Latin America: Five Centuries of the Pillage of a Continent\". 1973\nBULLET::::- Gobat, Michel, \"The Invention of Latin America: A Transnational History of Anti-Imperialism, Democracy, and Race,\" American Historical Review Vol. 118, no. 3 (December 2013), pp. 1345–1375.\nBULLET::::- Halperin Donghi, Tulio. (1970). Historia contemporánea de América Latina (2. ed.). Madrid: Alianza Editorial.\nBULLET::::- Leonard, Thomas et al. (2010). \"Encyclopedia of Latin America.\" Facts on File.\nBULLET::::- Mariátegui, José Carlos. \"Temas de nuestra América\". Vol. 12 of \"Obras completas de Mariátegui\". Lima: Biblioteca Amauta 1960.\nBULLET::::- Martínez Estrada, Ezequiel. \"Diferencias y semejanzas entre los países de América Latina\". Mexico\" Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México 1962.\nBULLET::::- Maurer Queipo, Isabel (ed.): \"Directory of World Cinema: Latin America\", intellectbooks, Bristol 2013,\nBULLET::::- McGinnes, Aims. \"Searching for 'Latin America': Race and Sovereignty in the Americas in the 1850s.\" In \"Race and Nation in Modern Latin America\", edited by Nancy P. Appelbaum, Anne S. Macpherson, and Karin alejandra Rosemblatt. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press 2003, pp, 87–107.\nBULLET::::- Mignolo, Walter, \"The Idea of Latin America\". Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell 2005.\nBULLET::::- Moraña, Mabel, Enrique Dussel, and Carlos A. Jáuregui, eds. \"Coloniality at Large: Latin America and the Postcolonial Debate\". Durham: Duke University Press 2008.\nBULLET::::- Moreira, Igor A. G. \"O Espaço Geográfico, geografia geral e do Brasil\". 18. Ed. São Paulo: Ática, 1981.\nBULLET::::- Phelan, John Leddy. (1968). \"Pan-latinisms, French Intervention in Mexico (1861–1867) and the Genesis of the Idea of Latin America\". Mexico City: Universidad Nacional Autonónoma de México 1968.\nBULLET::::- Vesentini, José William. \"Brasil, sociedade e espaço – Geografia do Brasil\". 7th Ed. São Paulo: Ática, 1988.\nBULLET::::- Tenenbaum, Barbara A. ed. \"Encyclopedia of Latin American History and Culture.\" 5 vols. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons 1996\nBULLET::::- Tenorio-Trillo, Mauricio. \"Latin America: The Allure and Power of an Idea\". Chicago: University of Chicago Press 2017.\nBULLET::::- Vasconcelos, José. \"Indología: Una interpretación de la cultura ibero-americana\". Barcelona: Agencia Mundial de Librería 1927.\nBULLET::::- Werncek vianna, Luiz. \"A revolução passive: Iberismo e americanismo no Brasil\". Rio de Janeiro: Editora Revan 1997.\nBULLET::::- Zea, Leopoldo. \"Filosofía de la historia americana\". Mexico City: Fondo de Cultura Económico 1978.\nBULLET::::- Zea, Leopoldo, ed. \"Fuentes de la cultura latinoamericana\". 2 vols. Mexico City: Fondo de Cultura Económica 1993.\n\nBULLET::::- IDB Education Initiative\nBULLET::::- Latin American Network Information Center\nBULLET::::- Latin America Data Base\nBULLET::::- Washington Office on Latin America\nBULLET::::- Council on Hemispheric Affairs\nBULLET::::- Codigos De Barra\nBULLET::::- Map of Land Cover: Latin America and Caribbean (FAO)\nBULLET::::- Lessons From Latin America by Benjamin Dangl, \"The Nation\", March 4, 2009\nBULLET::::- Latin America Cold War Resources, Yale University\nBULLET::::- Latin America Cold War, Harvard University\nBULLET::::- http://larc.ucalgary.ca/ Latin American Research Centre, University of Calgary\nBULLET::::- \"The war on Democracy\", by John Pilger\n"}
{"id": "18529", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18529", "title": "Lynx (web browser)", "text": "Lynx (web browser)\n\nLynx is a customizable text-based web browser for use on cursor-addressable character cell terminals. , it is the oldest web browser still in general use and active development, having started in 1992.\n\nLynx was a product of the Distributed Computing Group within Academic Computing Services of the University of Kansas, and was initially developed in 1992 by a team of students and staff at the university (Lou Montulli, Michael Grobe and Charles Rezac) as a hypertext browser used solely to distribute campus information as part of a \"Campus-Wide Information Server\" and for browsing the Gopher space. Beta availability was announced to Usenet on 22 July 1992. In 1993, Montulli added an Internet interface and released a new version (2.0) of the browser.\n\nGarrett Blythe created DosLynx in April 1994 and later joined the Lynx effort as well. Foteos Macrides ported much of Lynx to VMS and maintained it for a time. In 1995, Lynx was released under the GNU General Public License, and is now maintained by a group of volunteers led by .\n\nBrowsing in Lynx consists of highlighting the chosen link using cursor keys, or having all links on a page numbered and entering the chosen link's number. Current versions support SSL and many HTML features. Tables are formatted using spaces, while frames are identified by name and can be explored as if they were separate pages. Lynx cannot inherently display various types of non-text content on the web, such as images and video, but it can launch external programs to handle it, such as an image viewer or a video player.\n\nUnlike most web browsers, Lynx does not support JavaScript or Adobe Flash, which some websites require to work correctly.\n\nThe speed benefits of text-only browsing are most apparent when using low bandwidth internet connections, or older computer hardware that may be slow to render image-heavy content.\n\nBecause Lynx does not support graphics, web bugs that track user information are not fetched; therefore, web pages can be read without the privacy concerns of graphic web browsers. However, Lynx does support HTTP cookies, which can also be used to track user information. Lynx therefore supports cookie whitelisting and blacklisting, or alternatively cookie support can be disabled permanently.\n\nAs with conventional browsers, Lynx also supports browsing histories and page caching, both of which can raise privacy concerns.\n\nLynx accepts configuration options from either command-line options or configuration files. There are 142 command line options according to its help message. The template configuration file codice_1 lists 233 configurable features. There is some overlap between the two, although there are command-line options such as codice_2 which are not matched in codice_1. In addition to pre-set options by command-line and configuration file, Lynx's behavior can be adjusted at runtime using its options menu. Again, there is some overlap between the settings. Lynx implements many of these runtime optional features, optionally (controlled through a setting in the configuration file) allowing the choices to be saved to a separate writable configuration file. The reason for restricting the options which can be saved originated in a usage of Lynx which was more common in the mid-1990s, i.e., using Lynx itself as a front-end application to the Internet accessed by dial-in connections.\n\nBecause of its refreshable braille display and text-to-speech–friendly interface, Lynx can be used for internet access by visually impaired users. As Lynx substitutes images, frames and other non-textual content with the text from codice_4, codice_5 and codice_6 HTML attributes and allows hiding the user interface elements, the browser becomes specifically suitable for use with cost-effective general purpose screen reading software. A version of Lynx specifically enhanced for use with screen readers on Windows was developed at Indian Institute of Technology Madras.\n\nLynx is also useful for accessing websites from a remotely connected system in which no graphical display is available. Despite its text-only nature and age, it can still be used to effectively browse much of the modern web, including performing interactive tasks such as editing Wikipedia.\n\nSince Lynx will take keystrokes from a text file, it is still very useful for automated data entry, web page navigation, and web scraping. Consequently, Lynx is used in some web crawlers. Web designers may use Lynx to determine the way in which search engines and web crawlers see the sites that they develop. Online services that provide Lynx's view of a given web page are available.\n\nLynx is also used to test websites' performance. As one can run the browser from different locations over remote access technologies like telnet and ssh, one can use Lynx to test the web site's connection performance from different geographical locations simultaneously. Another possible web design application of the browser is quick checking of the site's links.\n\nLynx was originally designed for Unix-like operating systems, though it was ported to VMS soon after its public release and to other systems, including DOS, Microsoft Windows, Classic Mac OS and OS/2. It was included in the default OpenBSD installation from OpenBSD 2.3 (May 1998) to 5.5 (May 2014), being in the main tree prior to July 2014, subsequently being made available through the ports tree, and can also be found in the repositories of most Linux distributions, as well as in the Homebrew and Fink repositories for macOS. Ports to BeOS, MINIX, QNX, AmigaOS and OS/2 are also available.\n\nThe sources can be built on many platforms, e.g., mention is made of Google's Android operating system.\n\nBULLET::::- Computer accessibility\nBULLET::::- Links (web browser)\nBULLET::::- ELinks\nBULLET::::- w3m\nBULLET::::- ModSecurity#Former Lynx browser blocking\nBULLET::::- Comparison of web browsers\nBULLET::::- Timeline of web browsers\nBULLET::::- Comparison of Usenet newsreaders\n\n"}
{"id": "18530", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18530", "title": "Lynx (programming language)", "text": "Lynx (programming language)\n\nLynx is a programming language for large distributed networks, using remote procedure calls. It was developed by the University of Wisconsin–Madison in 1984 for the Charlotte multicomputer operating system. \n\nIn 1986 at the University of Rochester Lynx was ported to the Chrysalis operating system running on a BBN Butterfly multiprocessor.\n\nM. L. Scott, \"The Lynx Distributed Programming Language: Motivation, Design, and Experience,\" \"Computer Languages\" 16:3/4 (1991), pp. 209-233. http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/scott91lynx.html\n"}
{"id": "18531", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18531", "title": "L'Hôpital's rule", "text": "L'Hôpital's rule\n\nIn mathematics, more specifically calculus, L'Hôpital's rule or L'Hospital's rule () provides a technique to evaluate limits of indeterminate forms. Application (or repeated application) of the rule often converts an indeterminate form to an expression that can be easily evaluated by substitution. The rule is named after the 17th-century French mathematician Guillaume de l'Hôpital. Although the rule is often attributed to L'Hôpital, the theorem was first introduced to him in 1694 by the Swiss mathematician Johann Bernoulli.\n\nL'Hôpital's rule states that for functions and which are differentiable on an open interval except possibly at a point contained in , if formula_1 formula_2 for all in with , and formula_3 exists, then\n\nThe differentiation of the numerator and denominator often simplifies the quotient or converts it to a limit that can be evaluated directly.\n\nGuillaume de l'Hôpital (also written l'Hospital) published this rule in his 1696 book \"Analyse des Infiniment Petits pour l'Intelligence des Lignes Courbes\" (literal translation: \"Analysis of the Infinitely Small for the Understanding of Curved Lines\"), the first textbook on differential calculus. However, it is believed that the rule was discovered by the Swiss mathematician Johann Bernoulli.\n\nThe general form of L'Hôpital's rule covers many cases. Let and be extended real numbers (i.e., real numbers, positive infinity, or negative infinity). Let be an open interval containing (for a two-sided limit) or an open interval with endpoint (for a one-sided limit, or a limit at infinity if is infinite). The real valued functions and are assumed to be differentiable on except possibly at , and additionally formula_2 on except possibly at . It is also assumed that formula_6 Thus the rule applies to situations in which the ratio of the derivatives has a finite or infinite limit, but not to situations in which that ratio fluctuates permanently as gets closer and closer to .\n\nIf either\nor\nthen\nAlthough we have written \"x\" → \"c\" throughout, the limits may also be one-sided limits (\"x\" → \"c\" or \"x\" → \"c\"), when is a finite endpoint of .\n\nIn the second case, the hypothesis that diverges to infinity is not used in the proof (see note at the end of the proof section); thus, while the conditions of the rule are normally stated as above, the second sufficient condition for the rule's procedure to be valid can be more briefly stated as formula_10\n\nThe hypothesis that formula_2 appears most commonly in the literature, but some authors sidestep this hypothesis by adding other hypotheses elsewhere. One method is to define the limit of a function with the additional requirement that the limiting function is defined everywhere on the relevant interval except possibly at . Another method is to require that both and be differentiable everywhere on an interval containing .\n\nThe requirement that the limit\n\nmust exist is essential. Without this condition, formula_13 or formula_14 may exhibit undampened oscillations as formula_15 approaches formula_16, in which case L'Hôpital's rule does not apply. For example, if formula_17, formula_18 and formula_19, then\n\nthis expression does not approach a limit as formula_15 goes to formula_16, since the cosine function oscillates between and . But working with the original functions, formula_23 can be shown to exist:\n\nIn a case such as this, all that can be concluded is that\n\nso that if the limit of \"f\"/\"g\" exists, then it must lie between the inferior and superior limits of \"f\"′/\"g\"′. (In the example above, this is true, since 1 indeed lies between 0 and 2.)\n\nBULLET::::- Here is a basic example involving the exponential function, which involves the indeterminate form at :\n\nBULLET::::- This is a more elaborate example involving . Applying L'Hôpital's rule a single time still results in an indeterminate form. In this case, the limit may be evaluated by applying the rule three times:\n\nBULLET::::- Here is an example involving :\n\nBULLET::::- Here is an example involving the indeterminate form (see below), which is rewritten as the form :\n\nBULLET::::- Here is an example involving the mortgage repayment formula and . Let be the principal (loan amount), the interest rate per period and the number of periods. When is zero, the repayment amount per period is formula_30 (since only principal is being repaid); this is consistent with the formula for non-zero interest rates:\n\nBULLET::::- One can also use L'Hôpital's rule to prove the following theorem. If is twice-differentiable in a neighborhood of , then\n\nBULLET::::- Sometimes L'Hôpital's rule is invoked in a tricky way: suppose converges as and that formula_33 converges to positive or negative infinity. Then:\n\nSometimes L'Hôpital's rule does not lead to an answer in a finite number of steps unless some additional steps are applied. Examples include the following:\n\nBULLET::::- Two applications can lead to a return to the original expression that was to be evaluated:\n\nBULLET::::- An arbitrarily large number of applications may never lead to an answer even without repeating:\n\nA common pitfall is using L'Hôpital's rule with some circular reasoning to compute a derivative via a difference quotient. For example, consider the task of proving the derivative formula for powers of \"x\":\n\nApplying L'Hôpital's rule and finding the derivatives with respect to of the numerator and the denominator yields \n\nThe necessity of the condition that formula_2 near formula_16 can be seen by the following counterexample due to Otto Stolz. Let formula_51 and formula_52 Then there is no limit for formula_53 as formula_54 However,\n\nwhich tends to 0 as formula_56. Further examples of this type were found by Ralph P. Boas Jr.\n\nOther indeterminate forms, such as , , , , and , can sometimes be evaluated using L'Hôpital's rule. For example, to evaluate a limit involving , convert the difference of two functions to a quotient:\n\nwhere L'Hôpital's rule is applied when going from (1) to (2) and again when going from (3) to (4).\n\nL'Hôpital's rule can be used on indeterminate forms involving exponents by using logarithms to \"move the exponent down\". Here is an example involving the indeterminate form :\n\nIt is valid to move the limit inside the exponential function because the exponential function is continuous. Now the exponent formula_15 has been \"moved down\". The limit formula_60 is of the indeterminate form , but as shown in an example above, l'Hôpital's rule may be used to determine that\n\nThus\n\nThe Stolz–Cesàro theorem is a similar result involving limits of sequences, but it uses finite difference operators rather than derivatives.\n\nConsider the curve in the plane whose -coordinate is given by and whose -coordinate is given by , with both functions continuous, i.e., the locus of points of the form . Suppose . The limit of the ratio as is the slope of the tangent to the curve at the point . The tangent to the curve at the point is given by . L'Hôpital's rule then states that the slope of the curve when is the limit of the slope of the tangent to the curve as the curve approaches the origin, provided that this is defined.\n\nThe proof of L'Hôpital's rule is simple in the case where and are continuously differentiable at the point and where a finite limit is found after the first round of differentiation. It is not a proof of the general L'Hôpital's rule because it is stricter in its definition, requiring both differentiability and that \"c\" be a real number. Since many common functions have continuous derivatives (e.g. polynomials, sine and cosine, exponential functions), it is a special case worthy of attention.\n\nSuppose that and are continuously differentiable at a real number , that formula_63, and that formula_64. Then\n\nThis follows from the difference-quotient definition of the derivative. The last equality follows from the continuity of the derivatives at . The limit in the conclusion is not indeterminate because formula_66.\n\nThe proof of a more general version of L'Hôpital's rule is given below.\n\nThe following proof is due to , where a unified proof for the and indeterminate forms is given. Taylor notes that different proofs may be found in and .\n\nLet \"f\" and \"g\" be functions satisfying the hypotheses in the General form section. Let formula_67 be the open interval in the hypothesis with endpoint \"c\". Considering that formula_2 on this interval and \"g\" is continuous, formula_67 can be chosen smaller so that \"g\" is nonzero on formula_67.\n\nFor each \"x\" in the interval, define formula_71 and formula_72 as formula_73 ranges over all values between \"x\" and \"c\". (The symbols inf and sup denote the infimum and supremum.)\n\nFrom the differentiability of \"f\" and \"g\" on formula_67, Cauchy's mean value theorem ensures that for any two distinct points \"x\" and \"y\" in formula_67 there exists a formula_73 between \"x\" and \"y\" such that formula_77. Consequently, formula_78 for all choices of distinct \"x\" and \"y\" in the interval. The value \"g\"(\"x\")-\"g\"(\"y\") is always nonzero for distinct \"x\" and \"y\" in the interval, for if it was not, the mean value theorem would imply the existence of a \"p\" between \"x\" and \"y\" such that \"g' \"(\"p\")=0.\n\nThe definition of \"m\"(\"x\") and \"M\"(\"x\") will result in an extended real number, and so it is possible for them to take on the values ±∞. In the following two cases, \"m\"(\"x\") and \"M\"(\"x\") will establish bounds on the ratio .\n\nCase 1: formula_79\n\nFor any \"x\" in the interval formula_67, and point \"y\" between \"x\" and \"c\",\nand therefore as \"y\" approaches \"c\", formula_82 and formula_83 become zero, and so\n\nCase 2: formula_85\n\nFor every \"x\" in the interval formula_67, define formula_87. For every point \"y\" between \"x\" and \"c\",\n\nAs \"y\" approaches \"c\", both formula_89 and formula_90 become zero, and therefore\n\nThe limit superior and limit inferior are necessary since the existence of the limit of has not yet been established.\n\nIt is also the case that \n\nand\n\nIn case 1, the squeeze theorem establishes that formula_95 exists and is equal to \"L\". In the case 2, and the squeeze theorem again asserts that formula_96, and so the limit formula_95 exists and is equal to \"L\". This is the result that was to be proven.\n\nIn case 2 the assumption that \"f\"(\"x\") diverges to infinity was not used within the proof. This means that if \"g\"(\"x\") diverges to infinity as \"x\" approaches \"c\" and both \"f\" and \"g\" satisfy the hypotheses of L'Hôpital's rule, then no additional assumption is needed about the limit of \"f\"(\"x\"): It could even be the case that the limit of \"f\"(\"x\") does not exist. In this case, L'Hopital's theorem is actually a consequence of Cesàro–Stolz.\n\nIn the case when \"g\"(\"x\") diverges to infinity as \"x\" approaches \"c\" and \"f\"(\"x\") converges to a finite limit at \"c\", then L'Hôpital's rule would be applicable, but not absolutely necessary, since basic limit calculus will show that the limit of \"f\"(\"x\")/\"g\"(\"x\") as \"x\" approaches \"c\" must be zero.\n\nA simple but very useful consequence of L'Hopital's rule is a well-known criterion for differentiability. It states the following:\nsuppose that \"f\" is continuous at \"a\", and that formula_98 exists for all \"x\" in some open interval containing \"a\", except perhaps for formula_99. Suppose, moreover, that formula_100 exists. Then formula_101 also exists and\nIn particular, \"f\"' is also continuous at \"a\".\n\nConsider the functions formula_103 and formula_104. The continuity of \"f\" at \"a\" tells us that formula_105. Moreover, formula_106 since a polynomial function is always continuous everywhere. Applying L'Hopital's rule shows that formula_107.\n\nBULLET::::- L'Hôpital controversy\n\n"}
{"id": "18532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18532", "title": "Lexicology", "text": "Lexicology\n\nLexicology is the part of linguistics that studies words. This may include \ntheir nature and function as symbols, their meaning, the relationship of their meaning to epistemology in general, and the rules of their composition from smaller elements (morphemes such as the English \"-ed\" marker for past or \"un-\" for negation; and phonemes as basic sound units).\nLexicology also involves relations between words, which may involve semantics (for example, \"love\" vs. \"affection\"), derivation (for example, \"fathom\" vs. \"unfathomably\"), use and sociolinguistic distinctions (for example, \"flesh\" vs. \"meat\"), and any other issues involved in analyzing the whole lexicon of a language.\n\nThe term first appeared in the 1970s, though there were lexicologists in essence before the term was coined. Computational lexicology is a related field (in the same way that computational linguistics is related to linguistics) that deals with the computational study of dictionaries and their contents.\n\nAn allied science to lexicology is lexicography, which also studies words, but primarily in relation with dictionaries – it is concerned with the inclusion of words in dictionaries and from that perspective with the whole lexicon. Sometimes lexicography is considered to be a part or a branch of lexicology, but properly speaking, only lexicologists who actually write dictionaries are lexicographers. Some consider this a distinction of theory vs. practice.\n\nThe word \"lexicology\" derives from the Greek λεξικόν \"lexicon\", neut. of λεξικός \"lexikos\", \"of or for words\", from λέξις \"lexis\", \"speech\", \"word\" (in turn from λέγω \"lego\" \"to say\", \"to speak\") and -λογία \"-logia\", \"the study of\", a suffix derived from λόγος \"logos\", amongst others meaning \"speech, oration, discourse, quote, study, calculation, reason\", in turn also from λέγω.\n\nSemantic relations between words are of many kinds, for example homonymy, antonymy, meronymy, and paronymy. Semantics as specifically involved in lexicological work is called lexical semantics. Lexical semantics is somewhat different from the semantics of larger units such as phrases, sentences, and complete texts (or discourses), because it does not involve the same degree of compositional semantics complexities; however, the notion of \"word\" can be extremely complex, particularly in agglutinative languages.\n\nOutside but related to linguistics, other forms of semantics are studied, such as cultural semantics and computational semantics (the latter may refer either to computational lexicology or mathematical logic.\n\nLexical semantics may not be understood without a brief exploration of its history.\n\nSemantics as a linguistic discipline has its beginning in the middle of the 19th century, and because linguistics at the time was predominantly diachronic, thus lexical semantics was diachronic too – it dominated the scene between the years of 1870 and 1930. Diachronic lexical semantics was interested without a doubt in the change of meaning with predominantly semasiological approach, taking the notion of meaning in a psychological aspect: lexical meanings were considered to be psychological entities), thoughts and ideas, and meaning changes are explained as resulting from psychological processes.\n\nWith the rise of new ideas after the ground break of Saussure's work, prestructuralist diachronic semantics was considerably criticized for the atomic study of words, the diachronic approach and the mingle of nonlinguistics spheres of investigation. The study became synchronic, concerned with semantic structures and narrowly linguistic structures.\n\nSemantic structural relations of lexical entities can be seen in three ways:\n\nBULLET::::- semantic similarity\nBULLET::::- lexical relations such as synonymy, antonymy, and hyponymy\nBULLET::::- syntagmatic lexical relations were identified\n\nWordNet \"is a type of an online electronic lexical database organized on \"relational principles\", which now comprises nearly 100,000 concepts\" as Dirk Geeraerts states it.\n\nGenerative linguists soon investigated two opposing views of the place of semantics in a grammar, which ultimately clashed in an effusive debate, these were interpretative and generative semantics.\n\nCognitive lexical semantics is thought to be most productive of the current approaches.\n\nAnother branch of lexicology, together with lexicography is phraseology. It studies compound meanings of two or more words, as in \"raining cats and dogs\". Because the whole meaning of that phrase is much different from the meaning of words included alone, phraseology examines how and why such meanings come in everyday use, and what possibly are the laws governing these word combinations. Phraseology also investigates idioms.\n\nSince lexicology studies the meaning of words and their semantic relations, it often explores the origin and history of a word, i.e. its etymology. Etymologists analyse related languages using a technique known as the comparative method. In this way, word roots have been found that can be traced all the way back to the origin of, for instance, the Proto Indo-European language.\n\nEtymology can be helpful in clarifying some questionable meanings, spellings, etc., and is also used in lexicography. For example, etymological dictionaries provide words with their historical origins, change and development.\n\nA familiar example of lexicology at work is that of dictionaries and thesauri. Dictionaries are books or computer programs (or databases) that actually represent lexicographical work, they are opened and purposed for the use of public.\n\nAs there are many different types of dictionaries, there are many different types of lexicographers.\n\nQuestions that lexicographers are concerned with are for example the difficulties in defining what simple words such as 'the' mean, and how compound or complex words, or words with many meanings can be clearly explained. Also which words to keep in and which not to include in a dictionary.\n\nSome noted lexicographers include:\nBULLET::::- Dr. Samuel Johnson (September 18, 1709 – December 13, 1784)\nBULLET::::- French lexicographer Pierre Larousse (October 23, 1817 – January 3, 1875)\nBULLET::::- Noah Webster (October 16, 1758 – May 28, 1843)\nBULLET::::- Russian lexicographer Vladimir Dal (November 10, 1801 – September 22, 1872)\n\nBULLET::::- Peter Rolf Lutzeier: German Lexicologist\nBULLET::::- Damaso Alonso (October 22, 1898 - January 25, 1990): Spanish literary critic and lexicologist\nBULLET::::- Roland Barthes (November 12, 1915 – March 25, 1980): French writer, critic and lexicologist\nBULLET::::- Ghil'ad Zuckermann (born June 1, 1971): linguist, revivalist and lexicologist, author of Language Contact and Lexical Enrichment in Israeli Hebrew\n\nBULLET::::- Lexeme\nBULLET::::- Lexicon\nBULLET::::- Lexicography\nBULLET::::- Calque\nBULLET::::- Phono-semantic matching\nBULLET::::- List of lexicographers\nBULLET::::- List of linguists\nBULLET::::- Computational lexicology\nBULLET::::- Semasiology\nBULLET::::- Onomasiology\nBULLET::::- English lexicology and lexicography\nBULLET::::- Lexical Markup Framework\n\nBULLET::::- \"Lexicology/Lexikologie: International Handbook on the Nature and Structure of Words and Vocabulary/Ein Internationales Handbuch Zur Natur and Struktur Von Wortern Und Wortschatzen, Vol 1. & Vol 2.\" (Eds. A. Cruse et al.)\nBULLET::::- \"Words, Meaning, and Vocabulary: An Introduction to Modern English Lexicology,\" (ed. H. Jackson);\nBULLET::::- \"Toward a Functional Lexicology\", (ed. G. Wotjak);\nBULLET::::- \"Lexicology, Semantics, and Lexicography\", (ed. J. Coleman);\nBULLET::::- \"English Lexicology: Lexical Structure, Word Semantics & Word-formation\",(Leonhard Lipka.);\nBULLET::::- \"Outline of English Lexicology \", (Leonhard Lipka.);\n\nBULLET::::- Association for Automatic Language Processing (ATALA), Paris, France\nBULLET::::- International Society for Historical Lexicography and Lexicology, University of Leicester\n\nBULLET::::- Lexicology vs. lexicography – an explanation\nBULLET::::- Lexicography, lexicology, lexicon theory\n\nBULLET::::- 'L' entries (from lexeme to lexicon) at SIL (Summer Institute of Linguistics)'s glossary of linguistic terms\n\nBULLET::::- \"English and General Historical Lexicology\" (by Joachim Grzega and Marion Schöner\n\nBULLET::::- \"Lexis, E-Journal in English Lexicology\" (by Denis Jamet)\n"}
{"id": "18534", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18534", "title": "Lake Abitibi", "text": "Lake Abitibi\n\nLake Abitibi () is a lake in northeastern Ontario and western Quebec, Canada. The lake, which lies within the vast Clay Belt, is separated in two distinct portions by a short narrows, making it actually 2 lakes. Its total area is 931 km², and net area 903 km². The lake is shallow and studded with islands. Its shores and vicinity are covered with small timber.\n\nIts outlet is the Abitibi River, a tributary of the Moose River, which empties into James Bay. The lake takes its name from the river. \"Abitibi\" comes from the Algonquin words \"abitah\", meaning middle and \"nipi\" meaning water, possibly a reference to its geographic location between the Harricana (from the Algonquin word \"Nanikana\", meaning \"the main way\") to the east and the Kapuskasing–Mattagami river system to the west.\n\nApplication of \"Abitibi\" to describe the lake and the people living in the area around it was first noted in The Jesuit Relations in 1640. One of the first Europeans in this area was Pierre de Troyes, who built a post on Lake Abitibi when he was on his way to capture English HBC posts on James Bay in 1686. The Abitibi Post lay halfway between trading posts on James Bay and those on the Ottawa River.\nIt was formerly used by the Hudson's Bay Company (HBC) as part of a canoe route to the fur lands of the north. A HBC trading post was located on the east shore of the lake in Ontario. The construction of the Grand Trunk Pacific Railway (now Canadian National Railway) through this district made it of some importance at the start of the 20th century.\n\nPortions of Lake Abitibi's western shores and a section of the Abitibi River are part of the Abitibi-de-Troyes Provincial Park.\n\nBULLET::::- Wahgoshig First Nation\nBULLET::::- Blake River Megacaldera Complex\nBULLET::::- List of lakes in Ontario\n\nBULLET::::- Canadian Model Forests Network\n"}
{"id": "18538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18538", "title": "Lansing, Michigan", "text": "Lansing, Michigan\n\nLansing is the capital of the U.S. state of Michigan. It is mostly in Ingham County, although portions of the city extend west into Eaton County and north into Clinton County. The 2010 Census placed the city's population at 114,297, making it the fifth largest city in Michigan. The population of its Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) was 464,036, while the even larger Combined Statistical Area (CSA) population, which includes Shiawassee County, was 534,684. It was named the new state capital of Michigan in 1847, ten years after Michigan became a state.\n\nThe Lansing metropolitan area, colloquially referred to as \"Mid-Michigan\", is an important center for educational, cultural, governmental, commercial, and industrial functions. Neighboring East Lansing is home to Michigan State University, a public research university with an enrollment of more than 50,000. The area features two medical schools, one veterinary school, two nursing schools, and two law schools. It is the site of the Michigan State Capitol, the state Supreme Court, the Court of Appeals, a federal court, the Library of Michigan and Historical Center, and headquarters of four national insurance companies.\n\nLansing is the only U.S. state capital (among the 47 located in counties) that is not also a county seat. The seat of government of Ingham County is Mason, but the county maintains some offices in Lansing.\n\nThe first recorded person of European descent to travel through the area that is now Lansing was British fur trader Hugh Heward and his French-Canadian team on April 24, 1790 while canoeing the Grand River. The land that was to become Lansing was surveyed as \"Township 4 North Range 2 West\" in February 1827 in what was then dense forest. It was the last of the county's townships to be surveyed, and the land was not offered for sale until October 1830. There would be no roads to this area for decades to come.\n\nIn the winter of 1835 and early 1836, two brothers from New York plotted the area now known as REO Town just south of downtown Lansing and named it \"Biddle City\". This land lay in a floodplain and was underwater during the majority of the year. Nevertheless, the brothers went back to Lansing, New York, to sell plots for the town that did not exist. They told the New Yorkers this new \"city\" had an area of 65 blocks, a church and a public and academic square. 16 men bought plots in the nonexistent city, and upon reaching the area later that year found they had been scammed. Many in the group too disappointed to stay ended up settling around what is now metropolitan Lansing. Those who stayed quickly renamed the area \"Lansing Township\" in honor of their home village in New York.\n\nThe settlement of fewer than 20 people would remain dormant until the winter of 1847 when the state constitution required the capital be moved from Detroit to a more central and safer location in the state's interior; many were concerned about Detroit's proximity to British-controlled Canada, which had captured Detroit in the War of 1812. The United States had recaptured the city in 1813, but these events led to the dire need to have the center of government relocate from hostile British territory. There was also concern with Detroit's strong influence over Michigan politics, being the state's largest city as well as the capital city.\n\nDuring the multi-day session to determine a new location for the state capital, many cities, including Ann Arbor, Marshall, and Jackson, lobbied hard to win this designation. Unable to publicly reach a consensus because of constant political wrangling, the Michigan House of Representatives privately chose the Township of Lansing out of frustration. When announced, many present openly laughed that such an insignificant settlement was now Michigan's capital. Two months later, Governor William L. Greenly signed into law the act of the legislature making Lansing Township the state capital.\nWith the announcement that Lansing Township had been made the capital, the small village quickly transformed into the seat of state government. The legislature gave the settlement the temporary name of the \"Town of Michigan\". In April 1848, the legislature then gave the settlement the name of \"Lansing\". Within months after it became the capital city, individual settlements began to develop along three key points along the Grand River in the township:\n\nBULLET::::- \"Lower Village/Town\", where present-day Old Town stands, was the oldest of the three villages. It was home to the first house built in Lansing in 1843 by pioneer James Seymour and his family. Lower Town began to develop in 1847 with the completion of the Franklin Avenue (now Grand River Avenue) covered bridge over the Grand River.\nBULLET::::- \"Upper Village/Town\", where present-day REO Town stands at the confluence of the Grand River and the Red Cedar River. It began to take off in 1847 when the Main Street Bridge was constructed over the Grand River. This village's focal point was the Benton House, a 4-story hotel which opened in 1848. It was the first brick building in Lansing and was later razed in 1900.\nBULLET::::- \"Middle Village/Town\", where downtown Lansing now stands, was the last of the three villages to develop in 1848 with the completion of the Michigan Avenue bridge across the Grand River and the completion of the temporary capitol building which sat where Cooley Law School stands today on Capitol Avenue between Allegan and Washtenaw Streets, and finally the relocation of the post office to the village in 1851. This area would grow to become larger than the other two villages up and down river. For a brief time the combined villages were referred to as \"Michigan\" but was officially named Lansing in 1848.\n\nIn 1859, the settlement having grown to nearly 3,000 and encompassing about in area was incorporated as a city. The boundaries of the original city were Douglas Avenue to the north, Wood and Regent streets to the east, Mount Hope Avenue to the south, and Jenison Avenue to the west. These boundaries would remain until 1916. Lansing began to grow steadily over the next two decades with the completion of the railroads through the city, a plank road, and the completion of the current capitol building in 1878.\n\nMost of what is known as Lansing today is the result of the city becoming an industrial powerhouse which began with the founding of Olds Motor Vehicle Company in August 1897. The company went through many changes, including a buyout, between its founding to 1905 when founder Ransom E. Olds started his new REO Motor Car Company, which would last in Lansing for another 70 years. Olds would be joined by the less successful Clarkmobile around 1903. Over the next decades, the city would be transformed into a major American industrial center for the manufacturing of automobiles and parts, among other industries. The city also continued to grow in area. By 1956, the city had grown to , and doubled in size over the next decade to its current size of roughly .\n\nToday, the city's economy is diversified among government service, healthcare, manufacturing, insurance, banking, and education.\n\nOn September 26, 1963, a 12-year-old, 3,000-pound female dancing elephant named Rajje (alternately reported as Raji and Little Rajjee, among other variations) rebelled against her trainer during a performance in a shopping-center circus near what was then Logan Street and Holmes Road in Lansing, and escaped into the streets, aggravated by the frenzied pursuit of nearly 4,000 local residents. The incident ended with the shooting of the elephant by Lansing police. Provoked by the growing crowd, Rajje's rampage took her through the men's wear, sporting goods and gift departments of a local Arlan's discount store before leading police on a two-mile chase in which she knocked down and injured a 67-year-old man, tried to move a car, and caused thousands of dollars in damage before being killed.\n\n\"Life Magazine\" quoted Rajje's trainer, William Pratt, as shouting at the scene, \"Damn these people [...] They wouldn't leave her alone.\"\n\nThe incident was widely reported, including a photospread in \"Life\". While the \"Lansing State Journal\" coverage stressed the danger of the incident, the \"Detroit Free Press\" noted that witnesses cried out \"Murderers! Murderers!\" as police fired eight shots.\n\nAuthor Nelson Algren cites the injustice and sad end of the pursuit of \"Raji, the Pixie-Eared Elephant\" in continuity with the ambush of Bonnie Parker and Clyde Barrow in his introduction to a 1968 biography of the outlaws. Then teenage Lansing residents who had goaded the elephant on recalled the incident with sober regret in a local newspaper retrospective in 2011.\n\nLansing is the centerpiece of a region of Michigan known as Mid-Michigan or Central Michigan.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and is water. This figure includes two 425 Agreements with Alaiedon Township and Meridian Township, and the four 425 Agreements with Delta Township since 2000.\n\nSince the 2010 Census, the city has entered into two additional 425 Agreements. The first agreement consisted of the temporary transfer of 1,888.2 acres of Lansing Capital Region International Airport to the city from DeWitt Township in 2011. The second agreement consisted of the temporary transfer of in Alaiedon Township for the expansion of the headquarters of Jackson National Life Insurance Company in 2013 bringing the area either fully or conditionally under control of the city to .\n\nUnder Michigan law, 425 Agreements are only temporary land sharing agreements, and do not count as official annexations. The Census Bureau, however, for statistical purposes does count these as annexations. Not counting the temporary 425 Agreements, Lansing administers total.\n\nLansing is located in the south-central part of the Lower Peninsula of Michigan, where the Grand River meets the Red Cedar River. The city occupies most of what had formerly been part of Lansing Charter Township. It has also annexed adjacent tracts of land in Delta Charter Township and Windsor Township in Eaton County to the west, Delhi Charter Township in Ingham County to the south, and in DeWitt Charter Township in Clinton County to the north. The city also controls three non-contiguous tracts of land through 425 Agreements (conditional land transfer agreements) with Meridian Charter Township, Delta Charter Township, and Alaiedon Township in Ingham County to the southeast.\n\nLansing elevations range between above sea level on the far south side of Lansing along Northrup Street near the Cedar Street intersection, to to above sea level along the Grand River.\n\nThe Grand River, the largest river in Michigan, flows through downtown Lansing, and the Red Cedar River, a tributary of the Grand, flows through the campus of Michigan State University to its confluence with the Grand in Lansing. Sycamore Creek, a tributary of the Red Cedar, flows northward through the southeastern part of the city. There are two lakes in the area, Park Lake and Lake Lansing, both northeast of the city. Lake Lansing is approximately in size and is a summer favorite for swimmers, boaters, and fishermen. Michigan State University Sailing Club and the Lansing Sailing Club are located on Lake Lansing, where sailing regattas are hosted throughout the summer.\n\nThe City of Lansing operates a total of of parkland, of which is parkland, are golflands, and are cemetery lands. However, this figure includes the Waverly Hills Golf Course and adjacent Michigan Avenue Park, whose are located within neighboring Lansing Township, but operated by the City of Lansing, and does not include the of the combined Hawk Island County Park and adjacent Soldan Dog Park operated by Ingham County within the city of Lansing. All together then, of the city (or approximately 10%) is publicly administered open space.\n\nLansing has a Midwestern humid continental climate (Köppen \"Dfb/Dfa\") that is influenced by the Great Lakes, and is part of USDA Hardiness zone 5b. Winters are cold with moderate to heavy snowfall, while summers are very warm and humid. The monthly daily average temperature in July is , while the same figure for January is ; the annual mean is . On average, temperatures reach or exceed on 8.8 days of the year and drop to or below on 10−11 nights. Precipitation is generally greatest during summer but still frequent and significant in winter. Snowfall, which normally occurs from November to April, averages per season, significantly less than areas to the west such as Grand Rapids as Lansing is relatively immune to lake-effect snows; seasonal snowfall has historically ranged from in 1863−64 to in 1880−81. The highest and lowest officially recorded temperatures were on July 6, 2012, and on February 2, 1868, with the last or colder reading occurred on February 27, 1994; the record low maximum is on January 22, 1883, while, conversely, the record high minimum is on August 1, 2006 and July 18, 1942. Freezing temperatures in June are exceedingly rare and have not occurred in July or August since the 19th century; on average, they arrive on October 4 and depart on May 7, allowing a growing season of 149 days. The average window for measurable snow (≥) is November 4 thru April 6.\n\nThe city's downtown is dominated by state government buildings, especially the State Capitol; but downtown has also experienced recent growth in new restaurants, retail stores and residential developments. Downtown Lansing has a historic city market that is one of the oldest continuously operating farmers' markets in the United States. Upriver and north of downtown is historic Old Town Lansing with many architecturally significant buildings dating to the mid-19th century. Directly south of downtown on the other side of I-496 along Washington Avenue lies \"REO Town\", the birthplace of the automobile in the United States, is where Ransom Eli Olds built factories along Washington Avenue. Ransom Eli Olds' home, which once overlooked the factories along Washington Avenue, was displaced by I-496.\n\nLansing is generally divided into four sections: Eastside, Westside, Northwestside, and the Southside. Each section contains a diverse array of neighborhoods. The Eastside, located east of the Grand River and north of the Red Cedar River, is the most ethnically diverse side of Lansing, with foreign-born citizens making up more of its population than any other side in the city. The Eastside's commercial districts are located mainly along Michigan Avenue, and to a lesser extent along Kalamazoo Street. It is anchored by Frandor Shopping Center on the very eastern edge of the eastside.\n\nThe Westside, roughly located north, west, and south of the Grand River as it curves through the city, is sometimes regarded the city's most socio-economically diverse section. This side also contains Lansing's downtown area, though this neighborhood is often included as an area all its own. Outside downtown, this side is largely a collection of residential neighborhoods and is served by only one other commercial area along Saginaw Street. However, it also includes a small part of the Old Town Commercial Association.\n\nThe Northwestside, generally located north of the Grand River, with the city limits defining its north and western borders, is physically the smallest side of the city. This part of the city includes moderate-density residential areas and some green areas. North of Grand River Avenue, the main street of the side, lie warehouses and light industrial areas served by a major rail line that runs through Lansing. The most notable landmark of this side is Lansing's airport: Capital Region International Airport.\n\nThe Southside, usually described as the neighborhoods located south of the Grand and Red Cedar rivers and the I-496 freeway, is physically the largest and most populous side of the city. The area is largely residential in nature (south of Mount Hope Road near the northern edge), and is served by numerous commercial strips along Cedar Street, Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard, Pennsylvania Avenue, and Waverly Road, which run north/south. The large Edgewood District is located in the southernmost part of the Southside and is sometimes referred to as South Lansing. Though it is the largest area of the city by both physical size and population, it has often been regarded by Southside citizens as Lansing's most overlooked and forgotten area, as most of Lansing's attention in recent decades has been put into the revitalization of the city's historic core located mostly on small parts of both the East and Westsides.\n\nThe middle of the Southside—South-Central Lansing—contains the Old Everett Area. This location once contained the Everett School District and was annexed into the city in 1948.\n\nBULLET::::- Cherry Hill\nBULLET::::- Churchill Downs\nBULLET::::- Colonial Village\nBULLET::::- Eastside\nBULLET::::- Edgewood\nBULLET::::- Genesee\nBULLET::::- Gier Park\nBULLET::::- Hosmer\nBULLET::::- Lansing-Eaton\nBULLET::::- Moores Park\nBULLET::::- Museum District\nBULLET::::- Old Everett\nBULLET::::- Old Town\nBULLET::::- REO Town\nBULLET::::- Stadium District\nBULLET::::- Walnut\nBULLET::::- Washington Square\nBULLET::::- Westside\n\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 114,297 people, 48,450 households, and 26,234 families residing in the city. The population density was 3,174.9 per square mile (1,226.3/km). There were 54,181 housing units at an average density of 1,505.0 per square mile (581.3/km). The racial makeup of the city was 61.2% White (55.5% Non-Hispanic White), 23.7% African American, 0.8% Native American, 3.7% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 4.3% from other races, and 6.2% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 12.5% of the population. Foreign-born residents made up 8.3% of the population.\n\nThe median age in the city was 32.2 years. 24.2% of residents were under the age of 18; 12.3% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 30.2% were from 25 to 44; 23.8% were from 45 to 64; and 9.7% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 48.4% male and 51.6% female.\n\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 119,128 people, 49,505 households, and 28,366 families residing in the city. The population density was 3,399.0 per square mile (1,312.3/km²). There were 53,159 housing units at an average density of 1,516.8/sq mi (585.6/km²). The racial makeup of the city was 65.28% White (61.4% non-Hispanic White), 21.91% African American, 0.80% Native American, 2.83% Asian, 0.05% Pacific Islander, 4.54% from other races, and 4.60% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 10.0% of the population. The city's foreign-born population stood at 5.9%.\n\nAs of 2000, the city's population rose by 32,293 (27%) to 151,421 during the day due to the influx of workers.\n\nThere were 49,505 households out of which 30.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 35.8% were married couples living together, 17.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 42.7% were non-families. 33.2% of all households were made up of individuals and 8.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.39 and the average family size was 3.08.\n\nIn the city, the population was spread out with 26.8% under the age of 18, 11.4% from 18 to 24, 32.7% from 25 to 44, 19.3% from 45 to 64, and 9.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 31 years. For every 100 females, there were 92.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.9 males.\n\nThe median income for a household in the city was $34,833, and the median income for a family was $41,283. Males had a median income of $32,648 versus $27,051 for females. The per capita income for the city was $17,924. About 13.2% of families and 16.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 23.2% of those under age 18 and 9.0% of those age 65 or over.\n\nThe Brookings Institution has ranked Greater Lansing among the top 10 \"medium-sized metropolitan areas\" in the United States for refugee resettlement, with 5,369 refugees resettled from 1983 to 2004. St. Vincent Catholic Charities and Lutheran Social Services handle the adult and unaccompanied minor resettlement processes, respectively, while other organizations, such as the Refugee Development Center, focus on providing educational and social support services to refugees in the Lansing area. Nearby Michigan State University provides a source of volunteers for many of these programs.\n\n, the Lansing area has about 2,000 Arab Americans, mostly second generation Christian Lebanese Americans as well as some Palestinian Americans.\n\nThe city is also home to a large number of temporary foreign residents enrolled as international students at Lansing Community College and nearby Michigan State University, with the city's visitors bureau specifically promoting Mandarin-language video tours of Lansing, touting the \"more than 6,000\" Chinese students enrolled at MSU. The Lansing School District offers language immersion programs for its students in both Spanish and Chinese.\n\nLansing is administered under a mayor-council government, more specifically a \"strong mayor\" setup in which the mayor holds most of the city's administrative powers, such as appointment of department heads and drafting and administering a city budget, though the council must approve his/her actions. The mayor is elected at-large every four years. The city clerk is also elected every four years. The city council consists of eight members, and includes four members elected from the city's four wards, as well as four \"at-large\" members elected citywide. The city levies an income tax of 1 percent on residents and 0.5 percent on nonresidents.\n\nThe city largely supports the Democratic Party. It has not had a Republican mayor in office for more than a decade, and the last two mayoral elections have hosted only Democratic candidates.\n\nLansing currently lies mostly within the boundaries of Michigan's 8th congressional district, which is represented by Democratic congresswoman Elissa Slotkin, who was elected in the 2018 midterm election. The small portion of the city that extends into Eaton County is located in Michigan's 7th congressional district, which has been represented by Republican congressman Tim Walberg since 2011. The small portion of the city that extends into Clinton County is located in Michigan's 4th congressional district, which has been represented by Republican congressman John Moolenaar since 2015.\n\nAt the state level, most of Lansing is located in the 23rd district of the Michigan Senate, which has been represented by Democratic state senator Curtis Hertel Jr. since 2015. The small portions of the city that extend into Eaton County and Clinton County is located in the 24th district of the Michigan Senate, are currently represented by Republican state senator Tom Barrett. The city lies in the 67th, 68th, 71st, and 93rd districts of the Michigan State House of Representatives, represented by state representatives Kara Hope (D-67), Sarah Anthony (D-68), Angela Witwer (D-71), and Graham Filler (R-93).\n\nThough Lansing is not the designated county seat, some Ingham County offices are located in downtown Lansing, including a branch office of the county clerk, the county personnel office, and some courtrooms.\n\nThe Lansing metropolitan area's major industries are government, education, insurance, healthcare, and automobile manufacturing. Being the state capital, many state government workers reside in the area.\n\nMichigan State University, Thomas M. Cooley Law School, and Lansing Community College are significant employers in the region.\n\nGeneral Motors has offices and a hi-tech manufacturing facility in Lansing and several manufacturing facilities immediately outside the city, as well, in nearby Lansing and Delta townships. The Lansing area is headquarters to four major national insurance companies: Auto-Owners Insurance Company, Jackson National Life, the Accident Fund, and Michigan Millers Insurance Company. Other insurers based in Lansing include Farm Bureau Insurance of Michigan.\n\nLocally owned and operated convenience store chain Quality Dairy is a significant presence in the Lansing market.\n\nThe recent decline of the auto industry in the region has increased the region's awareness of the importance of a strategy to foster the high-technology sector.\n\nEarly availability of high-speed Internet in 1996, as well as the MSU, Cooley Law School, and Lansing Community College student body population, fostered an intellectual environment for information technology companies to incubate. Lansing has a number of technology companies in the fields of information technology and biotechnology.\n\nSparrow Hospital is a 740-bed hospital affiliated with Michigan State University and its College of Human Medicine and College of Osteopathic Medicine. In February 2009 it was announced that Sparrow and MSU formalized their partnership to increase research and faculty recruitment. Sparrow Hospital is the Regional Center for pediatrics, cancer care, including radiation therapy, trauma care, neurological care, high-risk obstetrics and neonatal intensive care. The Sparrow Tower was finished January 2008 and includes but is not limited to: a dedicated pediatric emergency room (the only one in the region), the largest adult emergency room in the region, state-of-the-art operating rooms, a rooftop helipad, oncology center, heart and vascular center and orthopedic department. In addition, 4,500 deliveries are performed at Sparrow Hospital annually, rehabilitation, and emergency treatment is more than any other hospital in mid-Michigan. The Sparrow Health System Laboratory performs over 3 million tests per year, at various laboratory sites, which include four remote testing facilities and thirteen patient service centers. Sparrow Hospital is certified as a Level I Trauma Center by the American College of Surgeons. In May 2009 Sparrow announced that it now has its own helicopter service based at its downtown Lansing hospital's new $2.5 million helipad. The addition is expected to increase helicopter patient transport to the hospital from four a month to 400 a year.\n\nMcLaren–Greater Lansing Hospital is also a university affiliated teaching hospital. Ingham enjoys a special affiliation in radiation oncology with the University of Michigan and Michigan State University; McLaren–Greater Lansing is part of the Great Lakes Cancer Institute (GLCI). McLaren received five-star ratings for: Coronary bypass surgery; Cardiac interventions; Treatment of heart attacks; Total knee replacement; Total hip replacement; Back and neck surgery; Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease care; Community-Acquired pneumonia care.\n\nSeveral urban renewal projects by private developers are adding higher end apartments and condominiums to the Lansing market. The Arbaugh, a former department store across from Cooley Law School, was converted into apartments in 2005. Motor Wheel Lofts, a former industrial site, was converted into loft-style living spaces in mid-2006. A combination retail and residential complex immediately south of Cooley Law School Stadium (formerly \"Oldsmobile Park\") called \"The Stadium District\", was completed in 2007. The Stadium District was redeveloped using a grant from the Michigan State Housing Development Authority through the Cool Cities Initiative.\n\nIn May 2006 the historically significant Mutual Building located on Capitol Avenue was purchased by The Christman Company to be renovated back to its original grandeur and used as the company's headquarters. Additional downtown developments include the renovation of the historic Hollister Building and the expansion of the former Abrams Aerial Building. As of August 2008, an 18-story condominium high-rise called Capitol Club Tower was in the design phase with the adjacent parking structure having been approved by city council and purchased by the developer. The city market, in existence since 1909, was approved to be sold for a multi-building mixed-use development called MarketPlace, right next to the current market on the adjacent riverfront. The MarketPlace project was redeveloped along with BallPark North, another mixed-use development that will be immediately north of Oldsmobile Stadium. The new city market is just north of the Lansing Center, across the river from where the Accident Fund Insurance Company renovated the former (art deco) Ottawa Street Powerplant into their new headquarters. In addition to the renovation, Accident Fund Insurance Company built a modern addition to the north of the historic portion that is connected by an atrium for more office space, as well as a parking structure. In 2009, the restaurant Troppo began construction on a new 2-story building that will have an open air patio on the roof facing the Capitol building. Developer Eyde Co. announced plans on April 6, 2010, to renovate the historical and prominent Knapp's building in downtown Lansing for first floor retail, office space and apartments/condos on the top floor (5th) in a $22–24 million project.\n\nThe Lansing area has two major malls: Lansing Mall and Meridian Mall. Other major retail centers include Eastwood Towne Center and Frandor Shopping Center.\n\nMichigan State University, a member of the Big Ten Conference, is known as \"the pioneer land grant college\", located in neighboring East Lansing. MSU has the largest land campus in the United States and is home to several nationally and internationally recognized academic and research oriented programs. Michigan State offers over 200 programs of study and is home to fourteen different degree-granting schools and colleges including two medical schools, a veterinary school, a law school, and numerous PhD programs. It is the only university in the nation with three medical schools. MSU is consistently one of the top three programs in the United States for study abroad programs. The MSU College of Education is also consistently rated as the top education program in the nation. Michigan State University is the oldest agricultural college in the United States. The MSU School of Criminal Justice is the oldest continuous degree granting criminal justice program in the nation. In 2008, the Department of Energy announced MSU won the contest for a $550 million Facility for Rare Isotope Beams that will attract top researchers from around the world to conduct experiments in nuclear science, astrophysics and applications of isotopes to other fields.\n\nThe Thomas M. Cooley Law School is the largest law school in the nation and is located in downtown Lansing. Cooley is fully accredited by the American Bar Association. A majority of Cooley students are from out-of-state.\n\nLansing Community College offers more than 500 areas of study to over 18,000 students at its main facilities in Lansing, and another 5,000 students at twenty-nine extension centers and a site in Otsu, Japan. LCC's new, state-of-the-art University Center enables students to take courses with the goal of eventually earning an undergraduate or graduate degree from other Michigan institutions. The University Center stands on the former site of \"Old Central\", Lansing's first public high school, which was established in 1875 as Lansing High School. (In the 1920s it was renamed as Central High School, and in 1957 became the first building on the LCC campus.)\n\nOther institutions of higher education include Western Michigan University (branch campus in Delta Township), Davenport University in Downtown Lansing, Central Michigan University (branch campus), and Great Lakes Christian College (campus in Delta Township).\n\nBULLET::::- Public schools\nBULLET::::- Lansing School District\nBULLET::::- Lansing Eastern High School\nBULLET::::- Lansing Everett High School\nBULLET::::- J. W. Sexton High School\nBULLET::::- Grand Ledge Public Schools\nBULLET::::- Ingham Intermediate School District\nBULLET::::- Ingham Academy High School\nBULLET::::- Mid-Michigan Public School Academy\nBULLET::::- Shabazz Public School Academy (named after Malcolm X)\nBULLET::::- Waverly School District\n\nBULLET::::- Private schools\nBULLET::::- Capitol City Baptist School\nBULLET::::- Emanuel Lutheran School\nBULLET::::- Lansing Catholic High School\nBULLET::::- Lansing Christian Schools\nBULLET::::- New Covenant Christian School\nBULLET::::- Our Savior Lutheran School\n\nEach year in August, the Michigan Pride festival includes a LGBT pride parade from Riverfront Park to the capitol.\n\nThe Capital City African American Cultural Association hosts an African American Parade and Heritage Festival every year for over a decade. The chair of the CCAACA is the Rev. Dr. Michael C. Murphy, who was pastor of St. Stephen's Community Church and is currently the pastor of Peoples Congregational, United Church of Christ, Washington D.C. He is a former State Representative for the 68th House District in Michigan, former President of the Lansing City Council, and a long-time community leader. The parade highlights African American culture, its influence in Michigan, and recognizes prominent African American individuals in the community and their contributions to Lansing as the grand marshal of each parade. The festival immediately following the parade consists of live entertainment, soul food and lots of fun for adults and children. It is held every year on the first Saturday in August and begins at 11:00 a.m. in downtown Lansing, Michigan. The festival is held at Ferris Park in downtown Lansing. In 2009 they celebrated 10 years.\n\nThe annual Silver Bells in the City Electric Light Parade proceeds through the streets of downtown Lansing every November, the Friday before Thanksgiving. It is followed by the lighting of Michigan's official Christmas tree in front of the State Capitol and a firework show (weather permitting) over the State Capitol.\n\nThe Lansing Symphony Orchestra has been entertaining generations of Lansing-area residents since 1929. The current music director is Timothy Muffett.\n\nThe Lansing JazzFest and the Old Town BluesFest host leading musicians, and are two of the larger music festivals held each year in the state.\n\nOld Town's Festival of the Moon and Sun is a two-day festival of food and live music.\n\nOld Town Oktoberfest is a two-day event drawing hundreds to the Old Town neighborhood for live polka music, authentic German food and world-renowned German-style beer.\n\nIt was announced in May 2007 that the city would host \"Blues on the Square\", a series of summertime blues concerts featuring national acts Thursday nights along Washington Square in downtown Lansing. In 2008 the event regularly drew crowds over 500.\n\nThe Common Ground Festival is a musical event held over a week every July at the Adado Riverfront Park in downtown Lansing pulling in crowds over 90,000 for the week. It began in 2000 and replaced the Michigan Festival that was held in nearby East Lansing. It has wide range of musical acts. In 2008 acts included Staind, Drowning Pool, Sammy Hagar, The Hard Lessons, Snoop Dogg, REO Speedwagon, Kellie Pickler, Seether and Trace Adkins. 2012 acts included The Flaming Lips, Man Man, Motion City Soundtrack, Joshua Davis, mewithoutyou, with local ensembles The Lansing Unionized Vaudeville Spectacle and Vandalay on the bill.\n\nEvery year \"City Pulse\" names the \"Top Original Act\" in the Top of the Town Awards. The 2010 winner was Eastside neighborhood native indie rock band Loune. The 2011 winner was pop punk act Frank and Earnest.\n\nOn June 23, 2018, REO Town hosted the Three Stacks Music Festival featuring Against Me!, Murder by Death, Pup, mewithoutyou, Screaming Females, Camp Cove, Petal, Oceanator, City Mouse, Worn Spirit, Stefanie Haapala, Ness Lake, and Secret Forte.\n\nOther notable Lansing musicians include Tell Yo Mama, Root Doctor, Jen Sygit, James Gardin, The Further Adventures of Fat Boy and the Jive Turkeys, MSU Professors of Jazz, Joe Hertler and the Rainbow Seekers, Jahshua Smith, BLAT! Pack, Deacon Earl and Frontier Ruckus.\n\nLansing has several farmers' markets throughout the city in the summer months. These markets include the Allen Street Farmer's Market on the city's eastside, the Westside Farmers' Market, the Old Town Farmer's Market, the South Lansing Farmer's Market, and the year-round historic Lansing City Market located near downtown. The Lansing City Market has built a brand new $1.6 million facility on the riverfront in downtown Lansing where it will continue its year round operations providing specialty items in addition to regular groceries from over 30 vendors.\n\nThe Library of Michigan and Historical Center is a highly regarded state library and research center. The library is one of the top five genealogical research facilities in the United States. The Capital Area District Library has 13 branches within Ingham County, some of these include: The Main library downtown, the Foster Library on the east side, and the South Lansing Library on the south side.\n\nThe Lansing Art Gallery, founded in 1965, is Lansing's oldest art gallery and a non-profit membership organization. Showcasing the works of Michigan artists, the gallery is committed to providing cultural enhancement opportunities for Michigan residents. The museum is open to the public with free admission.\n\nLansing is home to a number of small, specialized museums:\n\nBULLET::::- The Impression 5 Science Center is a children's science center located in a historic wagon works factory on the Grand River.\nBULLET::::- The Michigan Library and Historical Center contains one of the 10 largest genealogy collections in the nation, has a museum dedicated to Michigan's history among other attractions.\nBULLET::::- The Michigan Women's Hall of Fame is a museum dedicated to the historical accomplishments and achievements of Michigan women. The house is located directly south of downtown in the 1903-built Cooley-Haze House. The museum is surrounded by Cooley Gardens.\nBULLET::::- The R. E. Olds Transportation Museum is dedicated to the education of Lansing's role in the development of transportation, particularly the automobile.\nBULLET::::- The Turner-Dodge House is a museum dedicated to Lansing's early pioneers. The museum sits in the Classical Revival-styled Turner-Dodge Mansion, built in 1858 for James and Marion Turner, and later by their daughter and her husband. It is on the National Register of Historic Places.\n\nBULLET::::- The Riverwalk Theatre, (formerly the Okemos Barn Theatre), the Lansing Civic Players, and the now defunct BoarsHead Theater are or were all located in downtown.\nBULLET::::- Peppermint Creek Theatre Company is a well established \"new\" award-winning theater company.\nBULLET::::- Happendance, Michigan's longest-running professional modern dance company, has been based in Greater Lansing since 1976.\nBULLET::::- The Greater Lansing Ballet Company is an award-winning ballet and dance company.\nBULLET::::- The Creole Gallery brings in various musicians and hosts the Icarus Falling Theater group.\n\nThe historic Potter Park Zoo, located along the Red Cedar River in Lansing, is a 102 acre park that has more than 160 species of animals. The park holds numerous programs and events for children and families to enjoy. With annual attendance increasing every year since 2006 (110,167 in 2006, 137,237 in 2008, and 167,000 in 2009) there are $667,100 in capital improvements planned for 2009 including a giant walk-in aviary and a new female tiger. In 2009 the zoo began a $1.4 million renovation to its rhinoceros exhibit. This is in addition to $1.3 million spent on capital improvements in 2008. In 2011 the Black Rhino exhibit opened; and three tiger cubs were born. In 2016 a 3 acre moose exhibit opened in the park.\n\nIn October 2009 the Wharton Center for Performing Arts completed a , $18.5 million expansion and renovation, having already spent over $1.3 million in 2008. Many Broadway shows come to The Wharton Center before traveling to theaters in larger places such as Chicago. The Kresge Art Museum, the MSU Museum, and the Abrams Planetarium are highly acclaimed cultural destinations located on the campus of Michigan State University in East Lansing. In June 2007 MSU announced the plans to build a new art museum after a $26 million gift from Eli and Edythe Broad. Internationally known Pritzker Prize winning architect Zaha Hadid of London won the design competition for the East Lansing museum that was completed in November 2012.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Lansing State Journal\"\nBULLET::::- \"City Pulse\"\nBULLET::::- \"The New Citizens Press\"\nBULLET::::- \"Capital Gains Media\"\nBULLET::::- \"Capital Area Women's Lifestyle Magazine\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Greater Lansing Business Monthly\"\nBULLET::::- \"Greater Lansing Woman Magazine\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Hub\"\nBULLET::::- \"MIRS News-Michigan Information & Research Service\nBULLET::::- \"The State News\"\nBULLET::::- \"Gongwer News Service\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Michigan Bulletin\"\nBULLET::::- \"Patient In Charge Magazine\"\n\nCable slots listed reflect the Comcast cable system in Lansing.\n\nBULLET::::- WLNS 6 (CBS) (Cable 9)\nBULLET::::- WILX 10 (NBC) (Cable 4)\nBULLET::::- WKAR 23 (PBS) (Cable 13) / DT2 (World) (Cable 20) / DT3 (Create) (Cable 18) / DT4 (PBS Kids) (Cable 293)\nBULLET::::- WSYM 47 (Fox) (Cable 7)\nBULLET::::- WLAJ 53 (ABC) (Cable 3) / DT2 (CW) (Cable 5)\n\nWILX maintains WSYM's News programming. Both affiliates broadcast their newscasts at the News 10 studios in Lansing. Often the same reporters are used on both broadcasts.\n\nNote: If the station has no city listed before the format, it is licensed to Lansing.\nBULLET::::- 88.1 WLGH – (Leroy Township, contemporary Christian) \"Smile FM\"\nBULLET::::- 88.5 WJOM – (Eagle, contemporary Christian) \"Smile FM\"\nBULLET::::- 88.9 WDBM – (East Lansing, college/Michigan State University) \"The Impact\"\nBULLET::::- 89.7 WLNZ – (public radio/Lansing Community College)\nBULLET::::- 90.5 WKAR – (East Lansing, public radio/Michigan State University)\nBULLET::::- Note: WKAR has an effective radiated power of 86,000 watts\nBULLET::::- 91.3 WOES – (Ovid, polka/Ovid-Elsie High School)\nBULLET::::- 92.1 WQTX – (St. Johns, sports talk) \"The Team\"\nBULLET::::- 92.9 WLMI – (Grand Ledge, classic hits) \"Lansing's Greatest Hits\"\nBULLET::::- 93.7 WBCT-FM – (Grand Rapids, country) \"B93\"\nBULLET::::- Note: WBCT has an effective radiated power 320,000 watts\nBULLET::::- 94.1 WWDK – (Jackson, Classic Country) \"94.1 Duke FM\"\nBULLET::::- 94.9 WMMQ – (East Lansing, classic rock)\nBULLET::::- 96.5 WQHH – (DeWitt, urban) \"Power 96.5\"\nBULLET::::- 97.5 WJIM – (CHR) \"97-5 Now-FM\"\nBULLET::::- 99.1 WFMK – (East Lansing, adult contemporary)\nBULLET::::- 99.9 W260BX - (religious/southern gospel) \"Family Life Radio\"\nBULLET::::- Rebroadcasts WUNN 1110 AM.\nBULLET::::- 100.7 WITL-FM – (country) \"Whittle\"\nBULLET::::- 101.7 WHZZ – (adult hits) \"Mike-FM\"\nBULLET::::- 105.7 WSRW – (Grand Rapids, adult contemporary) \"Star 105.7\"\nBULLET::::- 106.1 WJXQ – (Charlotte, active rock) \"Q106\"\nBULLET::::- 107.3 WTNR – (Greenville/Grand Rapids, Country)\nBULLET::::- 730 AM WVFN – (East Lansing, sports talk) \"The Game\"\nBULLET::::- 870 AM WKAR – (East Lansing, NPR news/talk)\nBULLET::::- 1110 AM WUNN – (Mason, religious/southern gospel) \"Family Life Radio\"\nBULLET::::- 1180 AM WXLA – Dimondale, (adult standards) \"Timeless Classics 1180\"\nBULLET::::- 1240 AM WJIM – (news/talk) \"Lansing's Big Talker\"\nBULLET::::- 1320 AM WILS – (news/talk) \"More Compelling Talk Radio\"\nBULLET::::- Note: The daytime power of WILS is 25,000 watts, making it Lansing's most powerful radio station.\nBULLET::::- 1390 AM WLCM – (Charlotte, religious)\nBULLET::::- 1580 AM WWSJ – (St. Johns, urban contemporary gospel) \"Joy 1580\"\nBULLET::::- 162.400 WXK81 – NOAA Weather Radio (Onondaga, weather)\n\nRadio stations from Ann Arbor, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Saginaw, and Flint can also be heard in the Lansing area.\n\n style=\"background:#adadad;\"\nClub\nSport\nYears of Existence\nLansing Lugnuts\nBaseball\nMidwest League (Class-A)\nCooley Law School Stadium\n1996–present\nLansing Capitals\nBasketball\nIndependent Basketball Association\nAim High Sports\nLansing Sting\nBasketball\nAmerican Basketball Association\nAim High Sports\nMichigan State Spartans\nCollege athletics\nBig Ten Conference\nVarious Stadiums\n\nLansing Community College\nCollege athletics\nMichigan Community College Athletic Association\nAim High Sports\nLansing Derby Vixens\nRoller derby\nWomen's Flat Track Derby Association\nLansing Center\nCapital City Stealth\nFootball\nGreat Lakes Football League\nHope Sports Complex\n2010–present\nLansing Ignite FC\nSoccer\nUSL League One\nCooley Law School Stadium\n2019\nLansing United\nSoccer\nUSL PDL\nArcher Stadium, DeMartin Stadium\n\nLansing Hot Rods\nIndoor Lacrosse\nContinental Indoor Lacrosse League\nLansing SoccerZone\n2013–present\n\nThe Lansing Lugnuts are a Class A Midwest League, Minor League Baseball team, currently affiliated with the Toronto Blue Jays. The team plays its home games at Cooley Law School Stadium, which was built at a cost of $12.7 million and opened in 1996 in downtown Lansing. It was partially renovated in 2006. Cooley Law School Stadium has a seating capacity of 11,215 fans, and was built to accommodate additional expansion. The team has won two Midwest League championships, their first in 1997 and their second in 2003. Previously known as \"Oldsmobile Park\", the facility was renamed \"Thomas M. Cooley Law School Stadium\" in April 2010, in reference to the park's new sponsor.\n\nThe Summit at the Capital Centre is a hockey arena and convention center located in the suburb of Dimondale that hosts youth and high school hockey.\n\nThe Lansing Capitals began play in the International Basketball League in 2006 but eventually disband for a few seasons. The team recently resumed playing in the newly formed Independent Basketball Association in 2011.\n\nMichigan State University, located in East Lansing, is the largest university in the State of Michigan. MSU sponsors both men's and women's sports, usually competing as a member of the Big Ten Conference. The Spartans have won National Titles in Men's Basketball, Football, Men's Boxing, Men's Cross Country, Men's Gymnastics, Men's Ice Hockey, Men's Soccer, and Men's Wrestling.\n\nOn November 27, 2011, MSU beat Northwestern in their Big Ten Football finale to secure the top Big Ten record at 7-1 in conference play, and qualified to play in the first ever Big Ten Football Championship Game which was held December 3, 2011, at Lucas Stadium in Indianapolis, Indiana against the Wisconsin Badgers.\n\nLansing Community College also sponsors many sports, competing as members of the Michigan Community College Athletic Association. The Stars have won NJCAA titles in the following sports: Women's Softball, Men's Basketball, Women's Basketball, Men's Cross Country, Women's Cross Country, Women's Marathon and Men's Marathon.\n\nThe Lansing area is also known for its many golf courses, with two courses owned by Michigan State University, four municipal courses, and many additional public and private courses in the area. Walnut Hills Country Club in nearby East Lansing formerly hosted the LPGA's Oldsmobile Classic from 1992 to 2000. The Michigan PGA recently relocated from the Detroit area to Bath, Michigan, which is on the northern edge of Lansing.\n\nThe Capital City Stealth, Lansing's Semi-pro Football team was founded in 2010. The Stealth have posted winning seasons in every year of their existence. They play in the Great Lakes Football League which is nationally known as one of the top leagues in the country. The Stealth appeared in the USFA AA National Championship game for 3 straight seasons from 2012-2014 and won the USFA AA National Championship in 2014 over the Pioneer Valley Knights (New England Football League) by the score of 22-13. The team is made up of Lansing area athletes who play for the love of the game - none of the Stealth coaches or players are paid.\n\nIn the 1980s and 1990s Lansing was a major player in semi-pro football. The Lansing Crusaders won MFL/MCFL championships in 1982, 1983, 1985, 1987, 1989, and 1990. The team finished second in 1984, 1986, and 1991.\n\nOther past sports teams include:\nBULLET::::- Lansing – Michigan State League (baseball) – 1889 to 1890\nBULLET::::- Lansing Senators – Michigan State League (baseball) – 1895 and 1902\nBULLET::::- Southern Michigan League – 1907 to 1914\nBULLET::::- Central League – 1921 to 1922\nBULLET::::- renamed the Lansing Lancers – Michigan State League – 1940\nBULLET::::- and then back as the Lansing Senators – Michigan State League – 1941\nBULLET::::- Lansing Capitals – North American Basketball League – 1966–67 to 1967–68\nBULLET::::- Lansing Lancers – International Hockey League – 1974 to 1975\nBULLET::::- Capital City Cardinals – Michigan Charity Football League – 1980\nBULLET::::- Lansing Crusaders – Michigan Charity Football League – 1980 to 1988\nBULLET::::- Michigan Football League – 1989 to 1994\nBULLET::::- Capital City Cowboys – Michigan Football League – 1992\nBULLET::::- Lansing Ice Nuts – International Independent Hockey League – 2003 to 2004\n\nScheduled commercial airline service is offered from Capital Region International Airport (formerly known as \"Capital City Airport\"). Delta Air Lines maintains routes to Detroit and Minneapolis. United Airlines maintains routes to Chicago O'Hare. American Airlines offers non-stop flights to Washington, D.C. and Chicago O'Hare. Apple Vacations provides seasonal flights to Cancún, Mexico; Montego Bay, Jamaica; and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. UPS has a freight hub at Capital Region International Airport making up part of the 42 million pounds of annual cargo moving through the airport. In 2008 the airport received a port of entry designation – known as \"Port Lansing\" – and now has a permanent customs facility, thus changing its name to reflect the port of entry status. The same year a extension to the largest of the three runways – now – was completed to allow for larger aircraft to use the airport.\n\nBULLET::::- runs from Indianapolis north to Lansing and east to Flint and Port Huron, connecting to Canada.\nBULLET::::- runs from Muskegon, past Grand Rapids and Lansing, to Detroit.\nBULLET::::- loops through downtown Lansing, connecting with I-96 on either end.\nBULLET::::- is a loop route running through Lansing and East Lansing.\nBULLET::::- is a loop route running through Lansing.\nBULLET::::- a loop route off I-496 serving the state capitol and other downtown facilities.\nBULLET::::- is a north–south highway passing between the city and neighboring East Lansing, continuing northerly toward Clare and Grayling and southerly toward Jackson, Michigan and into Ohio.\nBULLET::::- (Saginaw Street/Grand River Avenue)\nBULLET::::- (Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard)\n\nBULLET::::- Amtrak provides intercity passenger rail service at a stop in nearby East Lansing, on the \"Blue Water\" line from Chicago to Port Huron.\nBULLET::::- Three freight railroads serve Lansing including Canadian National Railway, CSX Transportation, and the Jackson & Lansing Railroad.\n\nBULLET::::- Capital Area Transportation Authority (CATA) provides public transit bus service to the Lansing-East Lansing Metropolitan area on 33 routes. CATA boasts the second highest ridership in the state of Michigan after Detroit with 53,000 daily rides in September 2008 and 11,306,339 rides in fiscal year 2008. CATA also provides paratransit services through Spec-Tran and the \"Night Owl.\" Also, the \"Entertainment Express\" (CATA route 4) runs Thursday through Saturday from 7 pm to 2 am connecting downtown Lansing's and East Lansing's entertainment districts. CATA won APTA's America's Best Transit Award in the medium-size category (4–30 million rides) in 2007. CATA has two transportation centers (CTC), one in downtown Lansing and one on the campus of Michigan State University. In 2010, a study was conducted to consider ways of enhancing the Lansing-to-East Lansing route (currently known as Route 1), with options including enhanced bus service, single-car trolley service and light rail service. (Heavy rail was eliminated as an option early in the process, with enhanced bus service eventually winning out.)\nBULLET::::- Greyhound Lines provides inter-city bus service. CATA and Greyhound are both located in the CATA Transportation Center (CTC) in downtown Lansing.\nBULLET::::- Several taxicab companies serve the area. In 2001, Big Daddy Taxi opened using large vans to address the safety concerns of drunk driving and offered $3 rides for students of Michigan State University. In 2008 the Green Cab Company opened using Toyota Prius hybrid cars to provide \"green\" cabs to Lansing.\nBULLET::::- The Michigan Flyer provides bus service between Lansing and Detroit Metro Airport 12 times daily, with a stop in Ann Arbor along the way.\n\nBULLET::::- The , non-motorized Lansing River Trail runs along the Grand River and the Red Cedar River, running as far east as Michigan State University, and passes Potter Park Zoo, the Capitol Loop, and several other destinations of interest, and as far west as Moores Park. The trail is accessible at many points along it, some with car parking lots. The trails breadth is extended from time to time. Currently, the trailheads are: North - Dietrich Park; East - Kircher Park; South - Maguire Park; West - Moores Park. All segments are hard-surfaced. The River Trail connects to other pathways/trails in the Lansing-metro area: East - Michigan State University path system; South - Sycamore Trail. Since the trail follows a river, most street crossings use platforms under existing street bridges to provide an uncommon amount of grade separation, to the benefit of both trail users and automobile traffic. As of February 2015, the River Trail is under construction to add paths as far as Holt.\n\nWater supply, power and steam are municipally owned utilities which are provided by Lansing Board of Water & Light. In 2008 the Lansing BWL constructed Michigan's largest solar array towards the goal of increasing renewable energy in the energy grid.\n\nNatural gas is provided by Consumers Energy.\n\nBULLET::::- Joel Bakan, Canadian law professor and documentary filmmaker\nBULLET::::- Ray Stannard Baker, journalist and author\nBULLET::::- Terry Brunk, ex-WWE, ECW, TNA/WCW professional wrestler known as \"Sabu\"\nBULLET::::- Timothy Busfield, actor and director, \"thirtysomething\", \"Field of Dreams\", \"West Wing\"\nBULLET::::- Charles G. Callard, co-founder of Callard Madden & Associates and a pioneer developer of corporate valuation models\nBULLET::::- Jim Cash, screenwriter of \"Top Gun\" and other commercially successful films\nBULLET::::- Carolyn Cassady, writer, wife of beat generation icon Neal Cassady\nBULLET::::- Doc Corbin Dart, singer of punk band The Crucifucks\nBULLET::::- DJ Infamous, hip-hop DJ\nBULLET::::- Tony Earl, former Governor of Wisconsin\nBULLET::::- Ed Emshwiller, visual artist and founder of CalArts computer animation Lab\nBULLET::::- Rashad Evans, UFC fighter\nBULLET::::- David Fairchild, botanist\nBULLET::::- Ed Farhat, professional wrestler known as \"The Sheik\"\nBULLET::::- Chris Hansen, \"Dateline NBC\" correspondent\nBULLET::::- Thom Hartmann, radio talk-show host and author\nBULLET::::- Ahney Her, actress, \"Gran Torino\"\nBULLET::::- Joel Higgins, actor, graduated from Michigan State\nBULLET::::- Andy Hilbert, NHL hockey player\nBULLET::::- Keiffer Hubbell, figure skater\nBULLET::::- Madison Hubbell, figure skater\nBULLET::::- John Hughes, film writer and director, born in Lansing\nBULLET::::- Carol Hutchins, softball Hall of Famer\nBULLET::::- Magic Johnson, Michigan State University and NBA basketball star, Hall of Famer, president of Los Angeles Lakers, co-owner of Los Angeles Dodgers\nBULLET::::- Jacquelyn Kelley, All-American Girls Professional Baseball League player\nBULLET::::- Michael Kimball, novelist\nBULLET::::- Lisa Kron, theatre actress and playwright\nBULLET::::- Matthew Lillard, actor\nBULLET::::- Dean Look, football player and official\nBULLET::::- Malcolm X, human rights activist\nBULLET::::- Jef Mallett, creator and artist of the comic strip \"Frazz\"\nBULLET::::- Suzanne Malveaux, CNN television news reporter\nBULLET::::- Todd Martin, tennis player\nBULLET::::- Pop McKale, athlete and coach; University of Arizona arena bears his name\nBULLET::::- Drew Miller, NHL hockey player\nBULLET::::- Kelly Miller, NHL player, ranks third all-time for the Washington Capitals in games played\nBULLET::::- Kip Miller, NHL player, 1990 recipient of Hobey Baker Memorial Award\nBULLET::::- Ryan Miller, NHL and Olympic hockey player\nBULLET::::- Muhsin Muhammad, NFL football player\nBULLET::::- Needlz, hip-hop and rap producer\nBULLET::::- Ransom E. Olds, automobile manufacturer, founded Olds Motor Vehicle Company\nBULLET::::- Larry Page, co-founder of Google.com\nBULLET::::- DJ Perry, film writer, actor and director, born in Lansing\nBULLET::::- Alice Pollitt, All-American Girls Professional Baseball League player\nBULLET::::- Corey Potter, NHL hockey player\nBULLET::::- Merv Pregulman, NFL player for Green Bay Packers, Detroit Lions\nBULLET::::- Greg Raymer, 2004 World Series of Poker champion\nBULLET::::- Carl Benton Reid, actor\nBULLET::::- Burt Reynolds, Oscar-nominated and Golden Globe award-winning actor, film and television star, born and raised in Lansing\nBULLET::::- Vic Saier, MLB player\nBULLET::::- Steven Seagal, actor and martial artist, born in Lansing\nBULLET::::- Frederic L. Smith, co-founder of General Motors, born in Lansing\nBULLET::::- John Smoltz, MLB pitcher, 1996 Cy Young Award winner, Hall of Famer\nBULLET::::- Jim \"Soni\" Sonefeld, drummer and percussionist for Hootie & the Blowfish\nBULLET::::- Lori Nelson Spielman, Author of the best seller \"Life List\"\nBULLET::::- Debbie Stabenow, U.S. senator\nBULLET::::- Marcus Taylor, professional basketball player\nBULLET::::- George Teague, NFL player for Green Bay Packers, Dallas Cowboys, Miami Dolphins\nBULLET::::- Denzel Valentine, professional basketball player\nBULLET::::- Jay Vincent, professional basketball player\nBULLET::::- Sam Vincent, professional basketball player\nBULLET::::- Gretchen Whitmer, Governor of Michigan and former Speaker of the Michigan House of Representatives\nBULLET::::- Howard Wolpe, Congressman who was a Lansing resident during his term in office.\nBULLET::::- Lebbeus Woods, architect.\n\nBULLET::::- Adoagyiri, Ghana\nBULLET::::- Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico\nBULLET::::- Ōtsu, Shiga Prefecture, Japan\nBULLET::::- Saltillo, Mexico\nBULLET::::- Sanming, Fujian, China\nBULLET::::- Asan, South Chungcheong, South Korea\n\nLansing was a sister city of Kubyashi District in Saint Petersburg, Russia. The agreement began in 1992 and ended in practice when a change to the political structure of Saint Petersburg cancelled the district. The relations were officially severed by Lansing in 2013 as a protest of the laws against LGBT rights in Russia.\n\nLansing also has four \"friendship cities\":\nBULLET::::- Cosenza, Calabria, Italy\nBULLET::::- Lanzhou, Gansu, China\nBULLET::::- Sakaide, Kagawa, Japan\nBULLET::::- Dar es Salaam, Tanzania\n\nBULLET::::- Balaskovitz, Andy. \"Despite hurdles, consolidating Lansing, East Lansing and Lansing Township makes sense.\" \"Lansing City Pulse\". Wednesday, November 28, 2012. News section. Available on NewsBank, Record Number: 33658e6f3e435749c466e59bf44dd1b692752.\n\nBULLET::::- City of Lansing official website\nBULLET::::- Greater Lansing Convention & Visitors Bureau\nBULLET::::- Great Lakes Capital Fund promotes affordable housing and community economic development activities in Lansing\nBULLET::::- \"The Lansing Republican\", excerpts from 1859 editions\n"}
{"id": "18539", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18539", "title": "Leukemia", "text": "Leukemia\n\nLeukemia, also spelled leukaemia, is a group of blood cancers that usually begin in the bone marrow and result in high numbers of abnormal blood cells. These blood cells are not fully developed and are called \"blasts\" or \"leukemia cells\". Symptoms may include bleeding and bruising, feeling tired, fever, and an increased risk of infections. These symptoms occur due to a lack of normal blood cells. Diagnosis is typically made by blood tests or bone marrow biopsy.\nThe exact cause of leukemia is unknown. A combination of genetic factors and environmental (non-inherited) factors are believed to play a role. Risk factors include smoking, ionizing radiation, some chemicals (such as benzene), prior chemotherapy, and Down syndrome. People with a family history of leukemia are also at higher risk. There are four main types of leukemia—acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), acute myeloid leukemia (AML), chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)—as well as a number of less common types. Leukemias and lymphomas both belong to a broader group of tumors that affect the blood, bone marrow, and lymphoid system, known as tumors of the hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues.\nTreatment may involve some combination of chemotherapy, radiation therapy, targeted therapy, and bone marrow transplant, in addition to supportive care and palliative care as needed. Certain types of leukemia may be managed with watchful waiting. The success of treatment depends on the type of leukemia and the age of the person. Outcomes have improved in the developed world. The average five-year survival rate is 57% in the United States. In children under 15, the five-year survival rate is greater than 60 to 90%, depending on the type of leukemia. In children with acute leukemia who are cancer-free after five years, the cancer is unlikely to return.\nIn 2015, leukemia was present in 2.3 million people and caused 353,500 deaths. In 2012 it newly developed in 352,000 people. It is the most common type of cancer in children, with three quarters of leukemia cases in children being the acute lymphoblastic type. However, over 90% of all leukemias are diagnosed in adults, with CLL and AML being most common in adults. It occurs more commonly in the developed world.\n\n+Four major kinds of leukemia\n! Cell type !! Acute !! Chronic\n\nClinically and pathologically, leukemia is subdivided into a variety of large groups. The first division is between its \"acute\" and \"chronic\" forms:\n\nBULLET::::- Acute leukemia is characterized by a rapid increase in the number of immature blood cells. The crowding that results from such cells makes the bone marrow unable to produce healthy blood cells. Immediate treatment is required in acute leukemia because of the rapid progression and accumulation of the malignant cells, which then spill over into the bloodstream and spread to other organs of the body. Acute forms of leukemia are the most common forms of leukemia in children.\nBULLET::::- Chronic leukemia is characterized by the excessive buildup of relatively mature, but still abnormal, white blood cells. Typically taking months or years to progress, the cells are produced at a much higher rate than normal, resulting in many abnormal white blood cells. Whereas acute leukemia must be treated immediately, chronic forms are sometimes monitored for some time before treatment to ensure maximum effectiveness of therapy. Chronic leukemia mostly occurs in older people, but can occur in any age group.\n\nAdditionally, the diseases are subdivided according to which kind of blood cell is affected. This divides leukemias into lymphoblastic or \"lymphocytic leukemias\" and myeloid or \"myelogenous leukemias\":\nBULLET::::- In lymphoblastic or lymphocytic leukemias, the cancerous change takes place in a type of marrow cell that normally goes on to form lymphocytes, which are infection-fighting immune system cells. Most lymphocytic leukemias involve a specific subtype of lymphocyte, the B cell.\nBULLET::::- In myeloid or myelogenous leukemias, the cancerous change takes place in a type of marrow cell that normally goes on to form red blood cells, some other types of white cells, and platelets.\n\nCombining these two classifications provides a total of four main categories. Within each of these main categories, there are typically several subcategories. Finally, some rarer types are usually considered to be outside of this classification scheme.\n\nBULLET::::- Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common type of leukemia in young children. It also affects adults, especially those 65 and older. Standard treatments involve chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Subtypes include precursor B acute lymphoblastic leukemia, precursor T acute lymphoblastic leukemia, Burkitt's leukemia, and acute biphenotypic leukemia. While most cases of ALL occur in children, 80% of deaths from ALL occur in adults.\nBULLET::::- Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) most often affects adults over the age of 55. It sometimes occurs in younger adults, but it almost never affects children. Two-thirds of affected people are men. The five-year survival rate is 85%. It is incurable, but there are many effective treatments. One subtype is B-cell prolymphocytic leukemia, a more aggressive disease.\nBULLET::::- Acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) occurs far more commonly in adults than in children, and more commonly in men than women. It is treated with chemotherapy. The five-year survival rate is 20%. One subtype is APL (Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia), which has a survival rate greater than 90%. Subtypes of AML include acute promyelocytic leukemia, acute myeloblastic leukemia, and acute megakaryoblastic leukemia.\nBULLET::::- Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) occurs mainly in adults; a very small number of children also develop this disease. It is treated with imatinib (Gleevec in United States, Glivec in Europe) or other drugs. The five-year survival rate is 90%. One subtype is chronic myelomonocytic leukemia.\nBULLET::::- Hairy cell leukemia (HCL) is sometimes considered a subset of chronic lymphocytic leukemia, but does not fit neatly into this category. About 80% of affected people are adult men. No cases in children have been reported. HCL is incurable but easily treatable. Survival is 96% to 100% at ten years.\nBULLET::::- T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia (T-PLL) is a very rare and aggressive leukemia affecting adults; somewhat more men than women are diagnosed with this disease. Despite its overall rarity, it is the most common type of mature T cell leukemia; nearly all other leukemias involve B cells. It is difficult to treat, and the median survival is measured in months.\nBULLET::::- Large granular lymphocytic leukemia may involve either T-cells or NK cells; like hairy cell leukemia, which involves solely B cells, it is a rare and indolent (not aggressive) leukemia.\nBULLET::::- Adult T-cell leukemia is caused by human T-lymphotropic virus (HTLV), a virus similar to HIV. Like HIV, HTLV infects CD4+ T-cells and replicates within them; however, unlike HIV, it does not destroy them. Instead, HTLV \"immortalizes\" the infected T-cells, giving them the ability to proliferate abnormally. Human T-cell lymphotropic virus types I and II (HTLV-I/II) are endemic in certain areas of the world.\nBULLET::::- Clonal eosinophilias (also called \"clonal hypereosinophilias\") are a group of blood disorders characterized by the growth of eosinophils in the bone marrow, blood, and/or other tissues. They may be pre-cancerous or cancerous. Clonal eosinophilias involve a \"clone\" of eosinophils, i.e., a group of genetically identical eosinophils that all grew from the same mutated ancestor cell. These disorders may evolve into chronic eosinophilic leukemia or may be associated with various forms of myeloid neoplasms, lymphoid neoplasms, myelofibrosis, or the myelodysplastic syndrome.\n\nBULLET::::- Transient myeloproliferative disease, also termed transient leukemia, involves the abnormal proliferation of a clone of non-cancerous megakaryoblasts. The disease is restricted to individuals with Down syndrome or genetic changes similar to those in Down syndrome, develops in a baby during pregnancy or shortly after birth, and resolves within 3 months or, in ~10% of cases, progresses to acute megakaryoblastic leukemia. Transient myeloid leukemia is a pre-leukemic condition.\n\nThe most common symptoms in children are easy bruising, pale skin, fever, and an enlarged spleen or liver.\n\nDamage to the bone marrow, by way of displacing the normal bone marrow cells with higher numbers of immature white blood cells, results in a lack of blood platelets, which are important in the blood clotting process. This means people with leukemia may easily become bruised, bleed excessively, or develop pinprick bleeds (petechiae).\n\nWhite blood cells, which are involved in fighting pathogens, may be suppressed or dysfunctional. This could cause the person's immune system to be unable to fight off a simple infection or to start attacking other body cells. Because leukemia prevents the immune system from working normally, some people experience frequent infection, ranging from infected tonsils, sores in the mouth, or diarrhea to life-threatening pneumonia or opportunistic infections.\n\nFinally, the red blood cell deficiency leads to anemia, which may cause dyspnea and pallor.\n\nSome people experience other symptoms, such as feeling sick, having fevers, chills, night sweats, feeling fatigued and other flu-like symptoms. Some people experience nausea or a feeling of fullness due to an enlarged liver and spleen; this can result in unintentional weight loss. Blasts affected by the disease may come together and become swollen in the liver or in the lymph nodes causing pain and leading to nausea.\n\nIf the leukemic cells invade the central nervous system, then neurological symptoms (notably headaches) can occur. Uncommon neurological symptoms like migraines, seizures, or coma can occur as a result of brain stem pressure. All symptoms associated with leukemia can be attributed to other diseases. Consequently, leukemia is always diagnosed through medical tests.\n\nThe word \"leukemia\", which means 'white blood', is derived from the characteristic high white blood cell count that presents in most afflicted people before treatment. The high number of white blood cells is apparent when a blood sample is viewed under a microscope, with the extra white blood cells frequently being immature or dysfunctional. The excessive number of cells can also interfere with the level of other cells, causing further harmful imbalance in the blood count.\n\nSome people diagnosed with leukemia do not have high white blood cell counts visible during a regular blood count. This less-common condition is called \"aleukemia\". The bone marrow still contains cancerous white blood cells which disrupt the normal production of blood cells, but they remain in the marrow instead of entering the bloodstream, where they would be visible in a blood test. For a person with aleukemia, the white blood cell counts in the bloodstream can be normal or low. Aleukemia can occur in any of the four major types of leukemia, and is particularly common in hairy cell leukemia.\n\nThere is no single known cause for any of the different types of leukemias. The few known causes, which are not generally factors within the control of the average person, account for relatively few cases. The cause for most cases of leukemia is unknown. The different leukemias likely have different causes.\n\nLeukemia, like other cancers, results from mutations in the DNA. Certain mutations can trigger leukemia by activating oncogenes or deactivating tumor suppressor genes, and thereby disrupting the regulation of cell death, differentiation or division. These mutations may occur spontaneously or as a result of exposure to radiation or carcinogenic substances.\n\nAmong adults, the known causes are natural and artificial ionizing radiation, a few viruses such as human T-lymphotropic virus, and some chemicals, notably benzene and alkylating chemotherapy agents for previous malignancies. Use of tobacco is associated with a small increase in the risk of developing acute myeloid leukemia in adults. Cohort and case-control studies have linked exposure to some petrochemicals and hair dyes to the development of some forms of leukemia. Diet has very limited or no effect, although eating more vegetables may confer a small protective benefit.\n\nViruses have also been linked to some forms of leukemia. For example, human T-lymphotropic virus (HTLV-1) causes adult T-cell leukemia.\n\nA few cases of maternal-fetal transmission (a baby acquires leukemia because its mother had leukemia during the pregnancy) have been reported. Children born to mothers who use fertility drugs to induce ovulation are more than twice as likely to develop leukemia during their childhoods than other children.\n\nLarge doses of Sr-90 emission from nuclear reactor accidents, nicknamed bone seeker increases the risk of bone cancer and leukemia in animals, and is presumed to do so in people.\n\nSome people have a genetic predisposition towards developing leukemia. This predisposition is demonstrated by family histories and twin studies. The affected people may have a single gene or multiple genes in common. In some cases, families tend to develop the same kinds of leukemia as other members; in other families, affected people may develop different forms of leukemia or related blood cancers.\n\nIn addition to these genetic issues, people with chromosomal abnormalities or certain other genetic conditions have a greater risk of leukemia. For example, people with Down syndrome have a significantly increased risk of developing forms of acute leukemia (especially acute myeloid leukemia), and Fanconi anemia is a risk factor for developing acute myeloid leukemia. Mutation in SPRED1 gene has been associated with a predisposition to childhood leukemia.\n\nChronic myelogenous leukemia is associated with a genetic abnormality called the Philadelphia translocation; 95% of people with CML carry the Philadelphia mutation, although this is not exclusive to CML and can be observed in people with other types of leukemia.\n\nWhether or not non-ionizing radiation causes leukemia has been studied for several decades. The International Agency for Research on Cancer expert working group undertook a detailed review of all data on static and extremely low frequency electromagnetic energy, which occurs naturally and in association with the generation, transmission, and use of electrical power. They concluded that there is limited evidence that high levels of ELF magnetic (but not electric) fields might cause some cases of childhood leukemia. No evidence for a relationship to leukemia or another form of malignancy in adults has been demonstrated. Since exposure to such levels of ELFs is relatively uncommon, the World Health Organization concludes that ELF exposure, if later proven to be causative, would account for just 100 to 2400 cases worldwide each year, representing 0.2 to 4.9% of the total incidence of childhood leukemia for that year (about 0.03 to 0.9% of all leukemias).\n\nDiagnosis is usually based on repeated complete blood counts and a bone marrow examination following observations of the symptoms. Sometimes, blood tests may not show that a person has leukemia, especially in the early stages of the disease or during remission. A lymph node biopsy can be performed to diagnose certain types of leukemia in certain situations.\n\nFollowing diagnosis, blood chemistry tests can be used to determine the degree of liver and kidney damage or the effects of chemotherapy on the person. When concerns arise about other damages due to leukemia, doctors may use an X-ray, MRI, or ultrasound. These can potentially show leukemia's effects on such body parts as bones (X-ray), the brain (MRI), or the kidneys, spleen, and liver (ultrasound). CT scans can be used to check lymph nodes in the chest, though this is uncommon.\n\nDespite the use of these methods to diagnose whether or not a person has leukemia, many people have not been diagnosed because many of the symptoms are vague, non-specific, and can refer to other diseases. For this reason, the American Cancer Society estimates that at least one-fifth of the people with leukemia have not yet been diagnosed.\n\nMost forms of leukemia are treated with pharmaceutical medication, typically combined into a multi-drug chemotherapy regimen. Some are also treated with radiation therapy. In some cases, a bone marrow transplant is effective.\n\nManagement of ALL is directed towards control of bone marrow and systemic (whole-body) disease. Additionally, treatment must prevent leukemic cells from spreading to other sites, particularly the central nervous system (CNS) e.g. monthly lumbar punctures. In general, ALL treatment is divided into several phases:\nBULLET::::- \"Induction chemotherapy\" to bring about bone marrow remission. For adults, standard induction plans include prednisone, vincristine, and an anthracycline drug; other drug plans may include L-asparaginase or cyclophosphamide. For children with low-risk ALL, standard therapy usually consists of three drugs (prednisone, L-asparaginase, and vincristine) for the first month of treatment.\nBULLET::::- \"Consolidation therapy\" or \"intensification therapy\" to eliminate any remaining leukemia cells. There are many different approaches to consolidation, but it is typically a high-dose, multi-drug treatment that is undertaken for a few months. People with low- to average-risk ALL receive therapy with antimetabolite drugs such as methotrexate and 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP). People who are high-risk receive higher drug doses of these drugs, plus additional drugs.\nBULLET::::- \"CNS prophylaxis\" (preventive therapy) to stop the cancer from spreading to the brain and nervous system in high-risk people. Standard prophylaxis may include radiation of the head and/or drugs delivered directly into the spine.\nBULLET::::- \"Maintenance treatments\" with chemotherapeutic drugs to prevent disease recurrence once remission has been achieved. Maintenance therapy usually involves lower drug doses, and may continue for up to three years.\nBULLET::::- Alternatively, \"allogeneic bone marrow transplantation\" may be appropriate for high-risk or relapsed people.\n\nHematologists base CLL treatment on both the stage and symptoms of the individual person. A large group of people with CLL have low-grade disease, which does not benefit from treatment. Individuals with CLL-related complications or more advanced disease often benefit from treatment. In general, the indications for treatment are:\nBULLET::::- Falling hemoglobin or platelet count\nBULLET::::- Progression to a later stage of disease\nBULLET::::- Painful, disease-related overgrowth of lymph nodes or spleen\nBULLET::::- An increase in the rate of lymphocyte production\n\nFor most people with CLL, it is incurable by present treatments, so treatment is directed towards suppressing the disease for many years, rather than totally and permanently eliminating it. The primary chemotherapeutic plan is combination chemotherapy with chlorambucil or cyclophosphamide, plus a corticosteroid such as prednisone or prednisolone. The use of a corticosteroid has the additional benefit of suppressing some related autoimmune diseases, such as immunohemolytic anemia or immune-mediated thrombocytopenia. In resistant cases, single-agent treatments with nucleoside drugs such as fludarabine, pentostatin, or cladribine may be successful. Younger and healthier people may choose allogeneic or autologous bone marrow transplantation in the hope of a permanent cure.\n\nMany different anti-cancer drugs are effective for the treatment of AML. Treatments vary somewhat according to the age of the person and according to the specific subtype of AML. Overall, the strategy is to control bone marrow and systemic (whole-body) disease, while offering specific treatment for the central nervous system (CNS), if involved.\n\nIn general, most oncologists rely on combinations of drugs for the initial, \"induction phase\" of chemotherapy. Such combination chemotherapy usually offers the benefits of early remission and a lower risk of disease resistance. \"Consolidation\" and \"maintenance\" treatments are intended to prevent disease recurrence. Consolidation treatment often entails a repetition of induction chemotherapy or the intensification chemotherapy with additional drugs. By contrast, maintenance treatment involves drug doses that are lower than those administered during the induction phase.\n\nThere are many possible treatments for CML, but the standard of care for newly diagnosed people is imatinib (Gleevec) therapy. Compared to most anti-cancer drugs, it has relatively few side effects and can be taken orally at home. With this drug, more than 90% of people will be able to keep the disease in check for at least five years, so that CML becomes a chronic, manageable condition.\n\nIn a more advanced, uncontrolled state, when the person cannot tolerate imatinib, or if the person wishes to attempt a permanent cure, then an allogeneic bone marrow transplantation may be performed. This procedure involves high-dose chemotherapy and radiation followed by infusion of bone marrow from a compatible donor. Approximately 30% of people die from this procedure.\n\nDecision to treat\nPeople with hairy cell leukemia who are symptom-free typically do not receive immediate treatment. Treatment is generally considered necessary when the person shows signs and symptoms such as low blood cell counts (e.g., infection-fighting neutrophil count below 1.0 K/µL), frequent infections, unexplained bruises, anemia, or fatigue that is significant enough to disrupt the person's everyday life.\n\nTypical treatment approach\nPeople who need treatment usually receive either one week of cladribine, given daily by intravenous infusion or a simple injection under the skin, or six months of pentostatin, given every four weeks by intravenous infusion. In most cases, one round of treatment will produce a prolonged remission.\n\nOther treatments include rituximab infusion or self-injection with Interferon-alpha. In limited cases, the person may benefit from \"splenectomy\" (removal of the spleen). These treatments are not typically given as the first treatment because their success rates are lower than cladribine or pentostatin.\n\nMost people with T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia, a rare and aggressive leukemia with a median survival of less than one year, require immediate treatment.\n\nT-cell prolymphocytic leukemia is difficult to treat, and it does not respond to most available chemotherapeutic drugs. Many different treatments have been attempted, with limited success in certain people: purine analogues (pentostatin, fludarabine, cladribine), chlorambucil, and various forms of combination chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone CHOP, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisone [COP], vincristine, doxorubicin, prednisone, etoposide, cyclophosphamide, bleomycin VAPEC-B). Alemtuzumab (Campath), a monoclonal antibody that attacks white blood cells, has been used in treatment with greater success than previous options.\n\nSome people who successfully respond to treatment also undergo stem cell transplantation to consolidate the response.\n\nTreatment for juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia can include splenectomy, chemotherapy, and bone marrow transplantation.\n\nThe success of treatment depends on the type of leukemia and the age of the person. Outcomes have improved in the developed world. The average five-year survival rate is 61% in the United States. In children under 15, the five-year survival rate is greater (60 to 85%), depending on the type of leukemia. In children with acute leukemia who are cancer-free after five years, the cancer is unlikely to return.\n\nOutcomes depend on whether it is acute or chronic, the specific abnormal white blood cell type, the presence and severity of anemia or thrombocytopenia, the degree of tissue abnormality, the presence of metastasis and lymph node and bone marrow infiltration, the availability of therapies and the skills of the health care team. Treatment outcomes may be better when people are treated at larger centers with greater experience.\n\nIn 2010, globally, approximately 281,500 people died of leukemia. In 2000, approximately 256,000 children and adults around the world developed a form of leukemia, and 209,000 died from it. This represents about 3% of the almost seven million deaths due to cancer that year, and about 0.35% of all deaths from any cause. Of the sixteen separate sites the body compared, leukemia was the 12th most common class of neoplastic disease, and the 11th most common cause of cancer-related death. Leukemia occurs more commonly in the developed world.\n\nAbout 245,000 people in the United States are affected with some form of leukemia, including those that have achieved remission or cure. Rates from 1975 to 2011 have increased by 0.7% per year among children. Approximately 44,270 new cases of leukemia were diagnosed in the year 2008 in the US. This represents 2.9% of all cancers (excluding simple basal cell and squamous cell skin cancers) in the United States, and 30.4% of all blood cancers.\n\nAmong children with some form of cancer, about a third have a type of leukemia, most commonly acute lymphoblastic leukemia. A type of leukemia is the second most common form of cancer in infants (under the age of 12 months) and the most common form of cancer in older children. Boys are somewhat more likely to develop leukemia than girls, and white American children are almost twice as likely to develop leukemia than black American children. Only about 3% cancer diagnoses among adults are for leukemias, but because cancer is much more common among adults, more than 90% of all leukemias are diagnosed in adults.\n\nRace is a risk factor in the United States. Hispanics, especially those under the age of 20, are at the highest risk for leukemia, while whites, Native Americans, Asian Americans, and Alaska Natives are at higher risk than African Americans.\n\nMore men than women are diagnosed with leukemia and die from the disease. Around 30 percent more men than women have leukemia.\n\nOverall, leukaemia is the eleventh most common cancer in the UK (around 8,600 people were diagnosed with the disease in 2011), and it is the ninth most common cause of cancer death (around 4,800 people died in 2012).\n\nLeukemia was first described by anatomist and surgeon Alfred-Armand-Louis-Marie Velpeau in 1827. A more complete description was given by pathologist Rudolf Virchow in 1845. Around ten years after Virchow's findings, pathologist Franz Ernst Christian Neumann found that the bone marrow of a deceased person with leukemia was colored \"dirty green-yellow\" as opposed to the normal red. This finding allowed Neumann to conclude that a bone marrow problem was responsible for the abnormal blood of people with leukemia.\n\nBy 1900 leukemia was viewed as a family of diseases as opposed to a single disease. By 1947 Boston pathologist Sidney Farber believed from past experiments that aminopterin, a folic acid mimic, could potentially cure leukemia in children. The majority of the children with ALL who were tested showed signs of improvement in their bone marrow, but none of them were actually cured. This, however, led to further experiments.\n\nIn 1962, researchers Emil J. Freireich, Jr. and Emil Frei III used combination chemotherapy to attempt to cure leukemia. The tests were successful with some people surviving long after the tests.\n\nObserving an abnormally large number of white blood cells in a blood sample from a person, Virchow called the condition \"Leukämie\" in German, which he formed from the two Greek words \"leukos\" (λευκός), meaning \"white\", and \"haima\" (αἷμα), meaning \"blood\".\n\nAccording to Susan Sontag, leukemia was often romanticized in 20th-century fiction, portrayed as a joy-ending, clean disease whose fair, innocent and gentle victims die young or at the wrong time. As such, it was the cultural successor to tuberculosis, which held this cultural position until it was discovered to be an infectious disease. The 1970 romance novel \"Love Story\" is an example of this romanticization of leukemia.\n\nIn the United States, around $5.4 billion is spent on treatment a year.\n\nSignificant research into the causes, prevalence, diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis of leukemia is being performed. Hundreds of clinical trials are being planned or conducted at any given time. Studies may focus on effective means of treatment, better ways of treating the disease, improving the quality of life for people, or appropriate care in remission or after cures.\n\nIn general, there are two types of leukemia research: clinical or translational research and basic research. Clinical/translational research focuses on studying the disease in a defined and generally immediately applicable way, such as testing a new drug in people. By contrast, basic science research studies the disease process at a distance, such as seeing whether a suspected carcinogen can cause leukemic changes in isolated cells in the laboratory or how the DNA changes inside leukemia cells as the disease progresses. The results from basic research studies are generally less immediately useful to people with the disease.\n\nTreatment through gene therapy is currently being pursued. One such approach used genetically modified T cells, known as chimeric antigen receptor T cells (CAR-T cells), to attack cancer cells. In 2011, a year after treatment, two of the three people with advanced chronic lymphocytic leukemia were reported to be cancer-free and in 2013, three of five subjects who had acute lymphocytic leukemia were reported to be in remission for five months to two years. Subsequent studies with a variety of CAR-T types continue to be promising. As of 2018, two CAR-T therapies have been approved by the Food and Drug Administration. CAR-T treatment has significant side effects, and loss of the antigen targeted by the CAR-T cells is a common mechanism for relapse. The stem cells that cause different types of leukaemia are also being researched.\n\nLeukemia is rarely associated with pregnancy, affecting only about 1 in 10,000 pregnant women. How it is handled depends primarily on the type of leukemia. Nearly all leukemias appearing in pregnant women are acute leukemias. Acute leukemias normally require prompt, aggressive treatment, despite significant risks of pregnancy loss and birth defects, especially if chemotherapy is given during the developmentally sensitive first trimester. Chronic myelogenous leukemia can be treated with relative safety at any time during pregnancy with Interferon-alpha hormones. Treatment for chronic lymphocytic leukemias, which are rare in pregnant women, can often be postponed until after the end of the pregnancy.\n\nBULLET::::- Acute erythroid leukemia\nBULLET::::- Antileukemic drugs, medications used to kill leukemia cells\nBULLET::::- Hematologic diseases, the large class of blood-related disorders, including leukemia\nBULLET::::- Multiple myeloma\nBULLET::::- Cancer-related fatigue\n\nBULLET::::- Leukaemia information from Cancer Research UK\n"}
{"id": "18542", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18542", "title": "Length", "text": "Length\n\nLength is a measure of distance. In the International System of Quantities, length is a quantity with dimension distance. In most systems of measurement, the unit of length is a base unit, from which other units are derived.\n\nLength is commonly understood to mean the most extended dimension of an object.\n\nTypes of length include \"height\", which is vertical length or vertical extent, and width or breadth, which are the side-to-side length, measuring across the object at right angles to the height.\n\nLength is a measure of one dimension, whereas area is a measure of two dimensions (length squared) and volume is a measure of three dimensions (length cubed).\n\nMeasurement has been important ever since humans settled from nomadic lifestyles and started using building materials, occupying land and trading with neighbours.\n\nAs trade between different places increased, the need for standard units of length increased. And later, as society has become more technologically oriented, much higher accuracy of measurement is required in an increasingly diverse set of fields, from micro-electronics to interplanetary ranging.\n\nUnder Albert Einstein's special relativity, length can no longer be thought of as being constant in all reference frames. Thus a ruler that is one meter long in one frame of reference will not be one meter long in a reference frame that is moving relative to the first frame. This means the length of an object varies depending on the observer.\n\nIn the physical sciences and engineering, when one speaks of , the word is synonymous with distance. There are several units that are used to measure length. Historically, units of length may have been derived from the lengths of human body parts, the distance traveled in a number of paces, the distance between landmarks or places on the Earth, or arbitrarily on the length of some common object.\n\nIn the International System of Units (SI), the basic unit of length is the metre and is now defined in terms of the speed of light. The centimetre and the kilometre, derived from the metre, are also commonly used units. In U.S. customary units, English or Imperial system of units, commonly used units of length are the inch, the foot, the yard, and the mile.\n\nUnits used to denote distances in the vastness of space, as in astronomy, are much longer than those typically used on Earth and include the astronomical unit, the light-year, and the parsec.\n\nBULLET::::- Arc length\nBULLET::::- Dimension\nBULLET::::- Distance\nBULLET::::- Orders of magnitude (length)\nBULLET::::- Reciprocal length\nBULLET::::- Smoot\nBULLET::::- Unit of length\nBULLET::::- Width\n"}
{"id": "18543", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18543", "title": "Louis Ginzberg", "text": "Louis Ginzberg\n\nRabbi Louis Ginzberg (, \"Levy Gintzburg\", November 28, 1873 – November 11, 1953) was a Talmudist and leading figure in the Conservative Movement of Judaism of the twentieth century. He was born on November 28, 1873, in Kaunas, Vilna Governorate (then called \"Kovno\"); he died on November 11, 1953, in New York City.\n\nGinzberg was born into a religious family whose piety and erudition was well known. The family traced its lineage back to the revered talmudist, halachist, and kabbalist Gaon of Vilna. Ginzberg sought to emulate the Vilna Gaon's intermingling of 'academic knowledge' in Torah studies under the label 'historical Judaism'; for example, in his book \"Students, Scholars and Saints\", Ginzberg quotes the Vilna Gaon instructing, \"Do not regard the views of the Shulchan Aruch as binding if you think that they are not in agreement with those of the Talmud.\"\n\nHe writes in his memoirs that he felt saddened that he had grieved his father, as he recognized that his pious father was disappointed that his son had chosen a more liberal path with regards to Jewish law opposed contrasted to those of his forefathers. \n\nGinzberg first arrived in America in 1899, unsure where he belonged or what he should pursue. Almost immediately, he accepted a position at Hebrew Union College and subsequently wrote articles for the \"Jewish Encyclopedia\". Still, he had not found his niche.\n\nIn 1903, he began teaching at the Jewish Theological Seminary of America (JTS) in New York City, where he taught until his death. Throughout his life, all of his works were infused with the belief that Judaism and Jewish history could not be understood properly without a firm grasp of Halakhah. Instead of just studying Halakha, Louis Ginzberg wrote responsa, formal responses to questions of Jewish law.\n\nMany of Ginzberg's Orthodox Jewish peers had deep reservations about his choice to work at JTS. The seminary explicitly encouraged its faculty and students to study rabbinical literature within its social and historical context; this was sometimes known as Wissenschaft, or the \"scientific study of Judaism.\" As a result of this, most Orthodox Jews viewed his works as unacceptable, and virtually none refer to them, much less rely on them, today.\n\nOn account of his impressive scholarship in Jewish studies, Ginzberg was one of sixty scholars honored with a doctorate by Harvard University in celebration of its tercentenary. Ginzberg's knowledge warranted him the expert to defend Judaism both in national and international affairs. In 1906, he defended the Jewish community against anti-Semitic accusations that Jews ritually slaughtered gentiles. In 1913, Louis Marshall requested that Ginzberg refute a blood libel charge in Kiev based on Jewish sources.\n\nGinzberg began teaching Talmud at the Jewish Theological Seminary from its reorganization in 1902 until his death in 1953. For fifty years he trained two generations of future Conservative rabbis. During his era, Ginzberg influenced almost every rabbi of the Conservative Movement in a personal way. For some, Louis Ginzberg serves as a role model even today. Today's leading Conservative posek in Israel, Rabbi David Golinkin, has written profusely on Louis Ginzberg. Golinkin has recently published a collection of responsa containing 93 questions answered by Ginzberg.\n\nIn the opening address, Ginzberg spoke of the need to keep Conservative Jewry under the rubric of Halakhah. The conception that in religious matters anyone, however ignorant, can judge for himself, is the direct denial of the old Jewish maxim, 'The ignorant cannot be pious' (Avot 2:5)… The majority vote of a Board of Directors of a synagogue is, after all, a negligible quantity when it is in opposition to the vote of historical Judaism with its myriad of Saints and thousands of Sages…The sorting, distributing, selecting, harmonizing and completing can only be done by experienced hands. Ginzberg's initiative to base halakhic decisions on law committees and not laymen is the method the Conservative movement describes as its present one till today.\n\nIn 1918, at the Sixth Annual Convention, Ginzberg, as the acting president, declared that United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism stood for 'historical Judaism' and thus elaborates:\n\n\"Now let us understand the exact meaning of the expression historical Judaism…Looking at Judaism from a historical point of view, we become convinced that there is no one aspect deep enough to exhaust the content of such a complex phenomenon as Judaism…Accordingly, Torah-less Judaism… would be an entirely new thing and not the continuation of something given…\n\nOne of his responsa concerns the use of wine in the Jewish community during the Prohibition era. The Eighteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, ratified on January 16, 1920, declared that \"the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors within... the United States... for beverage purposes is hereby prohibited.\" The subsequent Volstead Act defined \"intoxicating liquors\" and provided for several exceptions, one of which as for sacramental use. The Christian Church was able to successfully regulate the use of ceremonial wine. The clergy could easily monitor the nominal amount of sacramental wine that each worshipper drank, especially because it was usually drunk only in Church and only on Sundays (for the communion or Eucharist ceremony).\n\nThis was not the case for the Jews. Jews needed a greater quantity of wine per person. Furthermore, the wine was drunk in the privacy of the home on Shabbat, Jewish holidays, weddings and \"brit milah\" (circumcision ceremonies). This alone would have made the regulation of ceremonial wine complicated. It was not difficult for crooks to rig illegal \"wine synagogues\" to trick the government to receive their wine which would then be bootlegged.\n\nWhile contemporary Orthodox Jewish authorities are generally permissive of grape juice as a wine substitute, contemporaneous Orthodox Rabbis soundly rejected its use. The Reform movement in 1920 proclaimed that grape juice be used instead of wine to eliminate future complaints. Shortly afterwards, on January 24, 1922, the Conservative movement publicized the 71-page response written by Ginzberg tackling the halakhic aspects of drinking grape juice instead of wine in light of the historical circumstances. Besides Ginzberg's well-grounded decision to permit grape juice, he includes meta-halakhic reasoning:\n\n\"…The decision of the author of Magen Abraham that the commandment is honored best by the use of old wine is rejected. Even this authority would admit that it is better to pronounce the Kiddush over new wine than to desecrate the Name and to disgrace the Jewish people, and we well know the damage caused the Jewish people by the trafficking in sacramental wine.\"\n\nAt the time of Ginzburg's responsum, the Orthodox rabbinate had exclusive authority to sanction sacramental wine for Jews, and the responsum was thought by the Orthodox community to be tainted by self-interest.\n\nGinzberg was the author of a number of scholarly Jewish works, including a commentary on \"Talmud Yerushalmi\" (the Jerusalem Talmud) and his six-volume (plus a one-volume index) \"The Legends of the Jews,\" (1909) which combined hundreds of legends and parables from a lifetime of midrash research.\n\n\"Legends of the Jews\" is an original synthesis of a vast amount of aggadah from all of classical rabbinic literature, as well as apocryphal, pseudopigraphical and even early Christian literature, with legends ranging from the creation of the world and the fall of Adam, through a huge collection of legends on Moses, and ending with the story of Esther and the Jews in Persia. Ginzberg had an encyclopedic knowledge of all rabbinic literature, and his masterwork included a massive array of aggadot. However he did not create an anthology which showed these aggadot distinctly. Rather, he paraphrased them and rewrote them into one continuous narrative that covered four volumes, followed by two volumes of footnotes that give specific sources. See Jewish folklore and Aggadah.\n\nApart from \"Legends of the Jews\", perhaps his best known scholarly work was his \"Geonica\" (1909), an account of the Babylonian Geonim containing lengthy extracts from their responsa, as discovered in the form of fragments in the Cairo Genizah. This work was continued by him in the similar collection entitled \"Ginze Schechter\" (1929).\n\nProfessor Ginzberg wrote 406 articles and several monograph-length entries for the \"Jewish Encyclopedia\" (Levy 2002), some later collected in his \"Legend and Lore.\" He was an important halakhic authority of the Conservative movement in North America; for a period of ten years (1917–1927), he was virtually \"the\" halakhic authority of this movement. He was also founder and president of the American Academy of Jewish Research.\n\nMany of his halakhic responsa are collected in \"The Responsa of Professor Louis Ginzberg,\" ed. David Golinkin, NY: JTS, 1996.\n\nGinzberg had a long term platonic relationship with Henrietta Szold, who was his editor at JPS. She was in love with him, but was 13 years older than him.\n\nGinzberg visited Berlin in 1908 and became engaged to Adele Katzenstein while he was there. Katzestein was about 22 at the time. They had two children. Son Eli Ginzberg (1911-2002) was a professor of economics at Columbia University. The second child was a daughter, Sophie Ginzberg Gould (1914-1985).\n\nBULLET::::- Excerpts from \"The Responsa of Professor Louis Ginzberg\"\nBULLET::::- Loeb Family Tree\n"}
{"id": "18544", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18544", "title": "Left-arm unorthodox spin", "text": "Left-arm unorthodox spin\n\nLeft-arm unorthodox spin, also known as slow left-arm wrist-spin bowling or chinaman, is a type of left arm wrist leg spin bowling in the sport of cricket. Left-arm unorthodox spin bowlers use wrist spin to spin the ball, and make it deviate, or ‘turn’ from left to right after pitching. The direction of turn is the same as that of a traditional right-handed off spin bowler; however, the ball will usually turn more sharply due to the spin being imparted predominantly by the wrist.\n\nSome left-arm unorthodox bowlers also bowl the equivalent of a ’googly’, (or ’wrong'un’), which turns from right to left on the pitch. The ball turns away from the right-handed batsman, as if the bowler were an orthodox left-arm spinner.\n\nIn cricketing parlance, the word ’chinaman’ was sometimes used to describe the stock delivery of a left-arm wrist-spinner, or ‘unorthodox’ spin bowler (though some reserve it for the googly delivery. The origin of the term is uncertain. One version relates to a Test match played between England and the West Indies at Old Trafford in 1933. Ellis ’Puss’ Achong, a player of Chinese origin, was a left-arm orthodox spinner, playing for the West Indies. He had Walter Robins stumped off a surprise delivery that spun into the right-hander from outside the off stump. As he walked back to the pavilion, Robins reportedly said to the umpire, \"fancy being done by a bloody Chinaman!\", leading to the popularity of the term in England, and subsequently, in the rest of the world. However, it has been suggested that the term originated earlier than this, in Yorkshire. In 2017 Australian journalist Andrew Wu, who is of Chinese descent, raised concerns about the use of the term as a \"racially offensive term\" which he argued the term itself \"has historically been used in a contemptuous manner to describe the Chinese\". \"Wisden\" formally changed their wording of the term to slow left-arm wrist-spin in the 2018 edition of the Almanack, describing it as \"no longer appropriate\".\n\nAmong noted players who have bowled the delivery are Denis Compton, who specialised in the delivery when bowling. Although better known for fast bowling and orthodox slow left arm, Garfield Sobers could also use it to good effect. In cricket's modern era, Brad Hogg is a natural spinner of the ball who popularised the delivery and has one of the most well-disguised wrong'uns. He was a member of Australia's victorious 2003 and 2007 Cricket World Cup teams, picking up 13 wickets in 2003 and 21 wickets in 2007. Kuldeep Yadav, who debuted for India in March 2017, bowls it and Paul Adams played 45 Test matches for South Africa between 1995–2004 using the delivery. Former Australian player Michael Bevan also bowled the delivery.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Cricket and Race\" by Jack Williams\nBULLET::::- \"Wisden\", 1968, 1987 and 2018 editions\n"}
{"id": "18546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18546", "title": "Lists of newspapers", "text": "Lists of newspapers\n\nBelow are lists of newspapers organized by continent.\n"}
{"id": "18549", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18549", "title": "Louis IX of France", "text": "Louis IX of France\n\nLouis IX (25 April 1214 – 25 August 1270), commonly known as Saint Louis, is the only King of France to be canonized in the Catholic Church. Louis was crowned in Reims at the age of 12, following the death of his father Louis VIII; his mother, Blanche of Castile, ruled the kingdom as regent until he reached maturity. During Louis' childhood, Blanche dealt with the opposition of rebellious vassals and obtained a definitive victory in the Albigensian Crusade which had started 20 years earlier.\n\nAs an adult, Louis IX faced recurring conflicts with some of the most-powerful nobles, such as Hugh X of Lusignan and Peter of Dreux. Simultaneously, Henry III of England tried to restore his continental possessions, but was utterly defeated at the battle of Taillebourg. His reign saw the annexation of several provinces, notably parts of Aquitaine, Maine and Provence.\n\nLouis IX was a reformer and developed French royal justice, in which the king was the supreme judge to whom anyone could appeal to seek the amendment of a judgment. He banned trials by ordeal, tried to prevent the private wars that were plaguing the country, and introduced the presumption of innocence in criminal procedure. To enforce the application of this new legal system, Louis IX created provosts and bailiffs.\n\nFollowing a vow he made after a serious illness and confirmed after a miraculous cure, Louis IX took an active part in the Seventh and Eighth Crusades. He died from dysentery during the latter crusade, and was succeeded by his son Philip III.\n\nLouis's actions were inspired by Christian zeal and Catholic devotion. He decided to severely punish blasphemy (for which he set the punishment to mutilation of the tongue and lips), gambling, interest-bearing loans and prostitution. He spent exorbitant sums on presumed relics of Christ, for which he built the Sainte-Chapelle. He expanded the scope of the Inquisition and ordered the burning of Talmuds and other Jewish books. He is the only canonized king of France, and there are consequently many places named after him.\n\nMuch of what is known of Louis's life comes from Jean de Joinville's famous \"Life of Saint Louis\". Joinville was a close friend, confidant, and counselor to the king, and he also participated as a witness in the papal inquest into Louis' life that ended with his canonisation in 1297 by Pope Boniface VIII.\n\nTwo other important biographies were written by the king's confessor, Geoffrey of Beaulieu, and his chaplain, William of Chartres. While several individuals wrote biographies in the decades following the king's death, only Jean of Joinville, Geoffrey of Beaulieu, and William of Chartres wrote from personal knowledge of the king, and all three are biased favorably to the king. The fourth important source of information is William of Saint-Parthus' 19th century biography, which he wrote using the papal inquest mentioned above.\n\nLouis was born on 25 April 1214 at Poissy, near Paris, the son of Louis the Lion and Blanche of Castile, and baptised in \"La Collégiale Notre-Dame\" church. His grandfather on his father's side was Philip II, king of France; while his grandfather on his mother's side was Alfonso VIII, king of Castile. Tutors of Blanche's choosing taught him most of what a king must know—Latin, public speaking, writing, military arts, and government. He was nine years old when his grandfather Philip II died and his father ascended as Louis VIII. Louis was 12 years old when his father died on 8 November 1226. He was crowned king within the month at Reims Cathedral. Because of Louis's youth, his mother ruled France as regent during his minority.\n\nLouis' mother trained him to be a great leader and a good Christian. She used to say:\n\nHis younger brother Charles I of Sicily (1227–85) was created count of Anjou, thus founding the Capetian Angevin dynasty.\n\nNo date is given for the beginning of Louis's personal rule. His contemporaries viewed his reign as co-rule between the king and his mother, though historians generally view the year 1234 as the year in which Louis began ruling personally, with his mother assuming a more advisory role. She continued to have a strong influence on the king until her death in 1252.\n\nOn 27 May 1234, Louis married Margaret of Provence (1221 – 21 December 1295) and she was crowned in the cathedral of Sens the next day. Louis's marriage had political connections, his wife was sister to Eleanor, later the wife of Henry III of England. The new queen's religious zeal made her a well suited partner for the king. He enjoyed her company, and was pleased to show her the many public works he was making in Paris, both for its defence and for its health. They enjoyed riding together, reading, and listening to music. This attention raised a certain amount of jealousy in his mother, who tried to keep them apart as much as she could.\n\nIn the 1230s, Nicholas Donin, a Jewish convert to Christianity, translated the Talmud and pressed 35 charges against it to Pope Gregory IX by quoting a series of passages about Jesus, Mary or Christianity that he considered blasphemous. There is a Talmudic passage, for example, where Jesus of Nazareth is sent to Hell to be boiled in excrement for eternity. Donin also selected an injunction of the Talmud that permits Jews to kill non-Jews. This led to the Disputation of Paris, which took place in 1240 at the court of Louis IX, where rabbi Yechiel of Paris defended the Talmud against the accusations of Nicholas Donin. The translation of the Talmud from Judeo Aramaic to a language that non-Jews could understand was seen by Jews as a profound violation. The disputation led to the condemnation of the Talmud and the burning of thousands of copies.\n\nWhen Louis was 15, his mother brought an end to the Albigensian Crusade in 1229 after signing an agreement with Count Raymond VII, Count of Toulouse that cleared the latter's father of wrongdoing. Raymond VI, Count of Toulouse had been suspected of murdering a preacher on a mission to convert the Cathars.\n\nLouis went on two crusades, in his mid-30s in 1248 (Seventh Crusade), and then again in his mid-50s in 1270 (Eighth Crusade).\n\nIn 1248 Louis decided that his obligations as a son of the Church outweighed those of his throne, and he left his kingdom for a disastrous six-year adventure. Since the base of Muslim power had shifted to Egypt, Louis did not even march on the Holy Land; any war against Islam now fit the definition of a Crusade.\n\nLouis and his followers landed in Egypt on 5 June 1249 and began his first crusade with the rapid capture of the port of Damietta. This attack caused some disruption in the Muslim Ayyubid empire, especially as the current sultan, Al-Malik as-Salih Najm al-Din Ayyub, was on his deathbed. However, the march from Damietta toward Cairo through the Nile River Delta went slowly. The rising of the Nile and the summer heat made it impossible for them to advance and follow up on their success. During this time, the Ayyubid sultan died, and the sultan's wife Shajar al-Durr set in motion a sudden power shift that would make her Queen and eventually place the Egyptian army of the Mamluks in power. On 8 February 1250 Louis lost his army at the Battle of Al Mansurah and was captured by the Egyptians. His release was eventually negotiated in return for a ransom of 400,000 \"livres tournois\" (at the time France's annual revenue was only about 1,250,000 \"livres tournois\") and the surrender of the city of Damietta.\n\nFollowing his release from Egyptian captivity, Louis spent four years in the Latin kingdoms of Acre, Caesarea, and Jaffa, using his wealth to assist the Crusaders in rebuilding their defences and conducting diplomacy with the Islamic powers of Syria and Egypt. In the spring of 1254 he and his army returned to France.\n\nLouis exchanged multiple letters and emissaries with Mongol rulers of the period. During his first crusade in 1248, Louis was approached by envoys from Eljigidei, the Mongol military commander stationed in Armenia and Persia. Eljigidei suggested that King Louis should land in Egypt, while Eljigidei attacked Baghdad, to prevent the Saracens of Egypt and those of Syria from joining forces. Louis sent André de Longjumeau, a Dominican priest, as an emissary to the Great Khan Güyük Khan (r. 1246–48) in Mongolia. Güyük died before the emissary arrived at his court, however, and nothing concrete occurred. Instead his queen and now regent, Oghul Qaimish, politely turned down the diplomatic offer.\n\nLouis dispatched another envoy to the Mongol court, the Franciscan William of Rubruck, who went to visit the Great Khan Möngke (1251–1259) in Mongolia. He spent several years at the Mongol court. In 1259, Berke, the ruler of the Golden Horde, westernmost part of the Mongolian Empire, demanded the submission of Louis. On the contrary, Mongolian Emperors Möngke and Khubilai's brother, the Ilkhan Hulegu, sent a letter seeking military assistance from the king of France, but the letter did not reach France.\n\nIn a parliament held at Paris, 24 March 1267, Louis and his three sons took the cross. On hearing the reports of the missionaries, Louis resolved to land at Tunis, and he ordered his younger brother, Charles of Anjou, to join him there. The crusaders, among whom was the English prince Edward Longshanks, landed at Carthage 17 July 1270, but disease broke out in the camp. Many died of dysentery, and on 25 August, Louis himself died.\n\nLouis' patronage of the arts drove much innovation in Gothic art and architecture, and the style of his court radiated throughout Europe by both the purchase of art objects from Parisian masters for export, and by the marriage of the king's daughters and female relatives to foreign husbands and their subsequent introduction of Parisian models elsewhere. Louis' personal chapel, the \"Sainte-Chapelle\" in Paris, was copied more than once by his descendants elsewhere. Louis most likely ordered the production of the Morgan Bible, a masterpiece of medieval painting.\n\nDuring the so-called \"golden century of Saint Louis\", the kingdom of France was at its height in Europe, both politically and economically. Saint Louis was regarded as \"primus inter pares\", first among equals, among the kings and rulers of the continent. He commanded the largest army and ruled the largest and wealthiest kingdom, the European centre of arts and intellectual thought at the time. The foundations for the famous college of theology later known as the Sorbonne were laid in Paris about the year 1257. The prestige and respect felt in Europe for King Louis IX were due more to the attraction that his personality created rather than to military domination. For his contemporaries, he was the quintessential example of the Christian prince and embodied the whole of Christendom in his person. His reputation for saintliness and fairness was already well established while he was alive, and on many occasions he was chosen as an arbiter in quarrels among the rulers of Europe.\n\nShortly before 1256, Enguerrand IV, Lord of Coucy, arrested and without trial hanged three young squires of Laon whom he accused of poaching in his forest. In 1256 Louis had him arrested and brought to the Louvre by his sergeants. Enguerrand demanded judgment by his peers and trial by battle, which the king refused because he thought it obsolete. Enguerrand was tried, sentenced, and ordered to pay 12,000 livres. Part of the money was to pay for masses in perpetuity for the men he had hanged.\n\nIn 1258, Louis and James I of Aragon signed the Treaty of Corbeil, under which Louis renounced his feudal overlordship over the County of Barcelona and Roussillon, which was held by the King of Aragon. James in turn renounced his feudal overlordship over several counties in southern France including Provence and Languedoc. In 1259 Louis signed the Treaty of Paris, by which Henry III of England was confirmed in his possession of territories in southwestern France and Louis received the provinces of Anjou, Normandy (Normandie), Poitou, Maine, and Touraine.\n\nThe perception of Louis IX as the exemplary Christian prince was reinforced by his religious zeal. Louis was an extremely devout Catholic, and he built the \"Sainte-Chapelle\" (\"Holy Chapel\"), located within the royal palace complex (now the Paris Hall of Justice), on the \"Île de la Cité\" in the centre of Paris. The \"Sainte Chapelle\", a prime example of the Rayonnant style of Gothic architecture, was erected as a shrine for what Louis believed to be the Crown of Thorns and a fragment of the True Cross, supposed precious relics of the Passion of Christ. He acquired these in 1239–41 from Emperor Baldwin II of the Latin Empire of Constantinople by agreeing to pay off the imperial debt Baldwin owed to Niccolo Quirino, a wealthy Venetian merchant, a debt to which Baldwin had pledged the Crown of Thorns as collateral. Louis IX paid the exorbitant sum of 135,000 livres (the construction of the chapel, for comparison, cost only 60,000 livres).\n\nLouis IX took very seriously his mission as \"lieutenant of God on Earth\", with which he had been invested when he was crowned in Reims. To fulfill this duty, he conducted two crusades. They contributed to his prestige, even though both ended disastrously. Everything he did was for what he saw as the glory of God and the good of his people. He protected the poor and was never heard to speak ill of anyone. He excelled in penance, leaving to us both a hair shirt and a scourge, and had a great love for the Church. He was merciful even to rebels. When he was urged to put to death a prince who had followed his father in rebellion, he refused, saying: \"A son cannot refuse to obey his father.\"\n\nIn 1230 the King forbade all forms of usury, defined at the time as any taking of interest and therefore covering most banking activities. Where the original borrowers from Jewish and Lombard lenders could not be found, Louis exacted from those lenders a contribution towards the crusade which Pope Gregory was then trying to launch. Louis also ordered, at the urging of Pope Gregory IX, the burning in Paris in 1243 of some 12,000 manuscript copies of the Talmud and other Jewish books. Eventually, the edict against the Talmud was overturned by Gregory IX's successor, Innocent IV.\n\nIn addition to Louis' legislation against banking and to his burning of Jewish books, he expanded the scope of the Inquisition in France and set the punishment for blasphemy to mutilation of the tongue and lips. The area most affected by this expansion was southern France where the Cathar sect had been strongest. The rate of these confiscations reached its highest levels in the years before his first crusade, and slowed upon his return to France in 1254. In 1250, he headed a crusade and was taken prisoner. During his captivity, he recited the Divine Office every day. After his release against ransom, he visited the Holy Land before returning to France. In these deeds, Louis IX tried to fulfill what he saw as the duty of France as \"the eldest daughter of the Church\" (\"la fille aînée de l'Église\"), a tradition of protector of the Church going back to the Franks and Charlemagne, who had been crowned by the Pope Leo III in Rome in 800. Indeed, the kings of France were known by the title \"most Christian king\" (\"Rex Christianissimus\"). The relationship between France and the papacy was at its peak in the 12th and 13th centuries, and most of the crusades were actually called by the popes from French soil.\n\nLouis was renowned for his charity. Beggars were fed from his table, he ate their leavings, washed their feet, ministered to the wants of the lepers, and daily fed over one hundred poor. He founded many hospitals and houses: the House of the Filles-Dieu for reformed prostitutes; the Quinze-Vingt for 300 blind men (1254), hospitals at Pontoise, Vernon, Compiégne.\n\nSt. Louis installed a house of the Trinitarian Order in his château of Fontainebleau. He chose Trinitarians as his chaplains, and was accompanied by them on his crusades. In his spiritual testament he wrote: \"My dearest son, you should permit yourself to be tormented by every kind of martyrdom before you would allow yourself to commit a mortal sin.\"\nBULLET::::1. Blanche (12 July/4 December 1240 – 29 April 1244), died in infancy.\nBULLET::::2. Isabella (2 March 1241 – 28 January 1271), married Theobald II of Navarre.\nBULLET::::3. Louis (23 September 1243/24 February 1244 – 11 January/2 February 1260). Betrothed to Berengaria of Castile in Paris on 20 August 1255.\nBULLET::::4. Philip III (1 May 1245 – 5 October 1285), married firstly to Isabella of Aragon in 1262 and secondly to Maria of Brabant in 1274.\nBULLET::::5. John (1246/1247 – 10 March 1248), died in infancy.\nBULLET::::6. John Tristan (8 April 1250 – 3 August 1270), Count of Valois, married Yolande II, Countess of Nevers.\nBULLET::::7. Peter (1251 – 6/7 April 1284), Count of Perche and Alençon, married Joanne of Châtillon.\nBULLET::::8. Blanche (early 1253 – 17 June 1320), married Ferdinand de la Cerda, Infante of Castile.\nBULLET::::9. Margaret (early 1255 – July 1271), married John I, Duke of Brabant.\nBULLET::::10. Robert (1256 – 7 February 1317), Count of Clermont, married Beatrice of Burgundy. The French crown devolved upon his male-line descendant, Henry IV, when the legitimate male line of Robert's older brother Philip III died out in 1589.\nBULLET::::11. Agnes (1260 – 19/20 December 1327), married Robert II, Duke of Burgundy.\n\nLouis had his two children that died in infancy buried at the Cistercian abbey of Royaumont; in 1820 they were transferred to Saint-Denis Basilica.\n\nDuring his second crusade, Louis died at Tunis on 25 August 1270, in an epidemic of dysentery that swept through his army. Uncommon in Muslim burial practice, the territory where he died, his body was subject to the process known as \"mos Teutonicus\" (a postmortem funerary custom used in medieval Europe whereby the flesh was boiled from the body, so that the bones of the deceased could be transported hygienically from distant lands back home) for its transportation back to France. He was succeeded by his son, Philip III.\n\nHis heart and intestines, however, were conveyed by his younger brother, Charles I of Naples, for burial in the cathedral of Monreale near Palermo. His bones were carried in a lengthy processional across Sicily, Italy, the Alps, and France, until they were interred in the royal necropolis at Saint-Denis in May 1271. Charles and Philip later disbursed a number of relics to promote his veneration.\n\nPope Boniface VIII proclaimed the canonisation of Louis in 1297; he is the only French king to be declared a saint. Louis IX is often considered the model of the ideal Christian monarch. The impact of his canonization was so great that many of his successors were named Louis.\n\nNamed in his honour, the Sisters of Charity of St. Louis is a Roman Catholic religious order founded in Vannes, France, in 1803. A similar order, the Sisters of St Louis, was founded in Juilly in 1842.\n\nHe is honoured as co-patron of the Third Order of St. Francis, which claims him as a member of the Order. Even in childhood, his compassion for the poor and suffering people had been obvious to all who knew him and when he became king, over a hundred poor people ate in his house on ordinary days. Often the king served these guests himself. Such acts of charity, coupled with Louis' devout religious practices, gave rise to the legend that he joined the Third Order of St. Francis. Though it is unlikely that Louis did join the order, his life and actions proclaimed him one of them in spirit.\n\nThe cities of San Luis Potosí in Mexico; St. Louis, Missouri; St. Louis, Michigan; San Luis, Arizona; San Luis, Colorado; Saint-Louis du Sénégal; Saint-Louis in Alsace; as well as Lake Saint-Louis in Quebec, the Mission San Luis Rey de Francia in California and São Luís, Maranhão in Brazil; St. Louis in Saskatchewan, Canada; are among the many places named after the French king and saint.\n\nThe Cathedral Saint-Louis in Versailles; the Basilica of St. Louis, King of France completed in 1834 and the Cathedral Basilica of St. Louis completed in 1914, both in St. Louis, Missouri; and the St. Louis Cathedral, New Orleans were also named for the king. The French royal Order of Saint Louis (1693–1790 and 1814–1830), the Île Saint-Louis as well as a hospital in the 10th arrondissement of Paris also bear his name. The national church of France in Rome also carries his name: San Luigi dei Francesi in Italian or Saint Louis of France in English. Also the Cathedral of St Louis in Plovdiv, Bulgaria, the Church of St Louis in Moscow, Russia, and rue Saint Louis of Pondicherry.\n\nPort-Louis, the capital city of Mauritius, as well as its cathedral are also named after St. Louis, who is the patron saint of the island.\n\nThailand: Saint Louis Hospital, and Saint Louis Church in Sathon, Bangkok were named after St.Louis, the patron saint of the founder. The name \"Saint Louis\" also exists as the \"Saint Louis neighbourhood\" and Soi Saint Louis 1, 2 and 3 alley (Soi Sathon 11, 13 and 15, officially), which are the area within the hospital.\n\nA bas-relief of St. Louis is one of the carved portraits of historic lawmakers that adorns the chamber of the United States House of Representatives.\n\nSaint Louis is also portrayed on a frieze depicting a timeline of important lawgivers throughout world history, on the North Wall of the Courtroom at the Supreme Court of the United States.\n\nA statue of St. Louis by the sculptor John Donoghue stands on the roofline of the New York State Appellate Division Court at 27 Madison Avenue in New York City.\n\nThe Apotheosis of St. Louis is an equestrian statue of the saint, by Charles Henry Niehaus, that stands in front of the Saint Louis Art Museum in Forest Park.\n\nA heroic portrait by Baron Charles de Steuben hangs in the Basilica of the National Shrine of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary in Baltimore. An 1821 gift of King Louis XVIII of France, it depicts St. Louis burying his plague-stricken troops before the siege of Tunis at the beginning of the Eighth Crusade in 1270.\n\nBULLET::::- Davis, William Stearns, \"\"Falaise of the Blessed Voice\"\" aka \"\"The White Queen\"\". New York, NY: Macmillan, 1904\nBULLET::::- Peter Berling, \"The Children of the Grail\"\nBULLET::::- Jules Verne, \"To the Sun?/Off on a Comet!\" A comet takes several bits of the Earth away when it grazes the Earth. Some people, taken up at the same time, find the Tomb of Saint Louis is one of the bits, as they explore the comet.\nBULLET::::- Adam Gidwitz, \"The Inquisitor's Tale\"\n\nBULLET::::- Marc-Antoine Charpentier, \"Motet for Saint Louis\" H 320, for 1 voice, 2 treble instruments and continuo 1675.\n\n\nBULLET::::- John de Joinville. Memoirs of Louis IX, King of France. Chronicle, 1309.\nBULLET::::- Saint Louis in Medieval History of Navarre\nBULLET::::- Site about The Saintonge War between Louis IX of France and Henry III of England.\nBULLET::::- Account of the first Crusade of Saint Louis from the perspective of the Arabs..\nBULLET::::- A letter from Guy, a knight, concerning the capture of Damietta on the sixth Crusade with a speech delivered by Saint Louis to his men.\nBULLET::::- Etext full version of the Memoirs of the Lord of Joinville, a biography of Saint Louis written by one of his knights\nBULLET::::- \"St. Lewis, King of France\", \"Butler's Lives of the Saints\"\nBULLET::::- \"Man of the Middle Ages, Saint Louis, King of France\", Archdiocese of St. Louis, MO\n"}
{"id": "18551", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18551", "title": "Linear B", "text": "Linear B\n\nLinear B is a syllabic script that was used for writing Mycenaean Greek, the earliest attested form of Greek. The script predates the Greek alphabet by several centuries. The oldest Mycenaean writing dates to about 1450 BC. It is descended from the older Linear A, an undeciphered earlier script used for writing the Minoan language, as is the later Cypriot syllabary, which also recorded Greek. Linear B, found mainly in the palace archives at Knossos, Cydonia, Pylos, Thebes and Mycenae, disappeared with the fall of Mycenaean civilization during the Late Bronze Age collapse. The succeeding period, known as the Greek Dark Ages, provides no evidence of the use of writing. It is also the only one of the Bronze Age Aegean scripts to have been deciphered, by English architect and self-taught linguist Michael Ventris.\n\nLinear B consists of around 87 syllabic signs and over 100 ideographic signs. These ideograms or \"signifying\" signs symbolize objects or commodities. They have no phonetic value and are never used as word signs in writing a sentence.\n\nThe application of Linear B appears to have been confined to administrative contexts. In all the thousands of clay tablets, a relatively small number of different \"hands\" have been detected: 45 in Pylos (west coast of the Peloponnese, in southern Greece) and 66 in Knossos (Crete). It is possible that the script was used only by a guild of professional scribes who served the central palaces. Once the palaces were destroyed, the script disappeared.\n\nLinear B has roughly 200 signs, divided into syllabic signs with phonetic values and ideograms with semantic values. The representations and naming of these signs have been standardized by a series of international colloquia starting with the first in Paris in 1956. After the third meeting in 1961 at the Wingspread Conference Center in Racine, Wisconsin, a standard proposed primarily by Emmett L. Bennett, Jr., became known as the Wingspread Convention, which was adopted by a new organization, the Comité International Permanent des Études Mycéniennes (CIPEM), affiliated in 1970 by the fifth colloquium with UNESCO. Colloquia continue: the 13th occurred in 2010 in Paris.\n\nMany of the signs are identical or similar to those in Linear A; however, Linear A encodes an as-yet unknown language, and it is uncertain whether similar signs had the same phonetic values.\n\nThe grid developed during decipherment by Michael Ventris and John Chadwick of phonetic values for syllabic signs is shown below. (Note that \"q\" represents labilized velar stops [ɡʷ, kʷ, kʷʰ], not a uvular stop as in IPA)\n\nInitial consonants are in the leftmost column; vowels are in the top row beneath the title. The transcription of the syllable (it may not have been pronounced that way) is listed next to the sign along with Bennett's identifying number for the sign preceded by an asterisk (as was Ventris' and Chadwick's convention). In cases where the transcription of the sign remains in doubt, Bennett's number serves to identify the sign. The signs on the tablets and sealings often show considerable variation from each other and from the representations below. Discovery of the reasons for the variation and possible semantic differences is a topic of ongoing debate in Mycenaean studies.\n\n! colspan=11  Recognised signs of shape V, CV\n!\n! colspan=2 \"-a\"\n! colspan=2 \"-e\"\n! colspan=2 \"-i\"\n! colspan=2 \"-o\"\n! colspan=2 \"-u\"\n!\n\"a\"\n\"*08\"\n\"e\"\n\"*38\"\n\"i\"\n\"*28\"\n\"o\"\n\"*61\"\n\"u\"\n\"*10\"\n!\"d-\"\n\"da\"\n\"*01\"\n\"de\"\n\"*45\"\n\"di\"\n\"*07\"\n\"do\"\n\"*14\"\n\"du\"\n\"*51\"\n!\"j-\"\n\"ja\"\n\"*57\"\n\"je\"\n\"*46\"\n\"jo\"\n\"*36\"\n!\"k-\"\n\"ka\"\n\"*77\"\n\"ke\"\n\"*44\"\n\"ki\"\n\"*67\"\n\"ko\"\n\"*70\"\n\"ku\"\n\"*81\"\n!\"m-\"\n\"ma\"\n\"*80\"\n\"me\"\n\"*13\"\n\"mi\"\n\"*73\"\n\"mo\"\n\"*15\"\n\"mu\"\n\"*23\"\n!\"n-\"\n\"na\"\n\"*06\"\n\"ne\"\n\"*24\"\n\"ni\"\n\"*30\"\n\"no\"\n\"*52\"\n\"nu\"\n\"*55\"\n!\"p-\"\n\"pa\"\n\"*03\"\n\"pe\"\n\"*72\"\n\"pi\"\n\"*39\"\n\"po\"\n\"*11\"\n\"pu\"\n\"*50\"\n!\"q-\"\n\"qa\"\n\"*16\"\n\"qe\"\n\"*78\"\n\"qi\"\n\"*21\"\n\"qo\"\n\"*32\"\ncolspan=2\n!\"r-\"\n\"ra\"\n\"*60\"\n\"re\"\n\"*27\"\n\"ri\"\n\"*53\"\n\"ro\"\n\"*02\"\n\"ru\"\n\"*26\"\n!\"s-\"\n\"sa\"\n\"*31\"\n\"se\"\n\"*09\"\n\"si\"\n\"*41\"\n\"so\"\n\"*12\"\n\"su\"\n\"*58\"\n!\"t-\"\n\"ta\"\n\"*59\"\n\"te\"\n\"*04\"\n\"ti\"\n\"*37\"\n\"to\"\n\"*05\"\n\"tu\"\n\"*69\"\n!\"w-\"\n\"wa\"\n\"*54\"\n\"we\"\n\"*75\"\n\"wi\"\n\"*40\"\n\"wo\"\n\"*42\"\ncolspan=2\n!\"z-\"\n\"za\"\n\"*17\"\n\"ze\"\n\"*74\"\ncolspan=2 \n\"zo\"\n\"*20\"\ncolspan=2 \n\nIn addition to the grid, the first edition of \"Documents in Mycenaean Greek\" contained a number of other signs termed \"homophones\" because they appeared at that time to resemble the sounds of other syllables and were transcribed accordingly: \"pa\" and \"pa\" were presumed homophonous to \"pa\". Many of these were identified by the second edition and are shown in the \"special values\" below. The second edition relates: \"It may be taken as axiomatic that there are no true homophones.\" The unconfirmed identifications of \"*34\" and \"*35\" as \"ai\" and \"ai\" were removed. \"pa\" became \"qa\".\n\n! colspan=30 Special values\n! Character\n!Transcription\n! Bennett's Number\n\nOther values remain unknown, mainly because of scarcity of evidence concerning them. Note that *34 and *35 are mirror images of each other but whether this graphic relationship indicates a phonetic one remains unconfirmed.\n\n! colspan=30 Untranscribed and doubtful values\n! Character\n!Transcription\n! Bennett's Number\n\nIn recent times, CIPEM inherited the former authority of Bennett and the Wingspread Convention in deciding what signs are \"confirmed\" and how to officially represent the various sign categories. In editions of Mycenaean texts, the signs whose values have not been confirmed by CIPEM are always transcribed as numbers preceded by an asterisk (e.g., \"*64\"). CIPEM also allocates the numerical identifiers, and until such allocation, new signs (or obscured or mutilated signs) are transcribed as a bullet-point enclosed in square brackets: <nowiki>[•]</nowiki>.\n\nThe signs are approximations―each may be used to represent a variety of about 70 distinct combinations of sounds, within rules and conventions. The grid presents a system of monosyllabic signs of the type V/CV. Clarification of the 14 or so special values tested the limits of the grid model, but Chadwick in the end concluded that even with the ramifications, the syllabic signs can unexceptionally be considered monosyllabic.\n\nPossible exceptions, Chadwick goes on to explain, include the two diphthongs,  (\"ai\") and  (\"au\"), as in , \"ai-ku-pi-ti-jo\", for \"Aiguptios\" (, \"Egyptian\") and , \"au-ke-wa\", for \"Augewās\" ( \"Augeas\"). However, a diphthong is by definition two vowels united into a single sound and therefore might be typed as just V. Thus  (\"rai\"), as in , \"e-rai-wo\", for \"elaiwon\" (), is of the type CV. Diphthongs are otherwise treated as two monosyllables: , \"a-ro-u-ra\", for \"arourans\" (accusative plural of , \"tamarisk trees\"), of the types CV and V. Lengths of vowels and accents are not marked.\n\n (\"Twe\"),  (\"two\"),  (\"dwe\"),  (\"dwo\"),  (\"nwa\") and the more doubtful  (\"swi\") and  (\"swa\") may be regarded as beginning with labialized consonants, rather than two consonants, even though they may alternate with a two-sign form: \"o-da-twe-ta\" and \"o-da-tu-we-ta\" for \"Odatwenta\"; \"a-si-wi-jo\" and \"a-swi-jo\" for \"Aswios\" (). Similarly,  (\"rya\"),  (\"ryo\") and  (\"tya\") begin with palatalized consonants rather than two consonants: \"-ti-ri-ja\" for \"-trja\" (-).\n\nThe one sign Chadwick tags as the exception to the monosyllabic rule is  (\"pte\"), but this he attributes to a development \"pte\"<\"*pje\" as in \"kleptei\"<\"*klep-jei\".\n\nLinear B does not consistently distinguish between voiced and unvoiced stop consonants (except in the dental series) and between aspirated and unaspirated stops even when these distinctions are phonemic in Mycenaean Greek. For example, \"pa-te\" is \"patēr\" (), \"pa-si\" is \"phāsi\" (); \"p\" on the other hand some times does not represent (like in the beginning of the following word) (\"basileus\", meaning in this period \"court official or local chieftain\") is \"qa-si-re-u\"); \"ko-ru\" is \"korus\" (, \"helmet\"), \"ka-ra-we\" is \"grāwes\" (plural of ), \"ko-no\" is \"skhoinos\" (\"rope\"). Exceptionally, however, the dentals are represented by a \"t\"-series and a \"d\"-series for unvoiced and voiced: \"to-so\" for \"tosos\" ( or ) but \"do-ra\" for \"dōra\" (plural of , \"gift\"). Aspiration, however, is not marked: \"to-ra-ke\" for \"thōrākes\" (plural of , \"breastplate\"). In other cases aspiration can be marked but is optional: \"pu-te\" for \"phutēr\" (\"planter\", from ), but \"phu-te-re\" for \"phutēres\" (\"planters\"). Initial aspiration may be marked only in the case of initial \"a\" and rarely: \"ha-te-ro\" for \"hateron\" (masculine ), and yet \"a-ni-ja\" for \"hāniai\" ().\n\nThe \"j\"-series represents the semivowel equivalent to English \"y\", and is used word-initially and as an intervocalic glide after a syllable ending in \"i\": \"-a-jo\" for (\"-aios\"); \"a-te-mi-ti-jo\" for (\"Artemitios\"). The \"w\"-series similarly are semivowels used word-initially and intervocalically after a syllable ending in \"u\": \"ku-wa-no\" for \"kuanos\" (, \"blue\").\n\nThe \"r\"-series includes both the /r/ and /l/ phonemes: \"ti-ri-po\" for \"tripos\" (, i.e. ) and \"tu-ri-so\" for \"Tulisos\" ().\n\nThe \"q\"-series is used for monosyllables beginning with a class of consonants that disappeared from classical Greek by regular phonetic change: the labialized velar consonants (see under Mycenaean Greek). These had entered the language from various sources: inheritance from Proto-Indo-European, assimilation, borrowing of foreign words, especially names. In Mycenaean they are /kʷ/, /gʷ/, and rarely /kʷh/ in names and a few words: \"a-pi-qo-ro\" for \"amphiqoloi\" (); \"qo-u-ko-ro\" for \"goukoloi\" (. \"cowherders\"); \"-qo-i-ta\" for -.\n\nSome consonants in some contexts are not written (but are understood): word-initial \"s-\" and \"-w\" before a consonant, as in \"pe-ma\" for \"sperma\" (, \"seed\"); syllable-final \"-l\", \"-m\", \"-n\", \"-r\", \"-s;\" only word-final velars are notated by plene writing: \"a-to-ro-qo\" for \"anthrōqos\" (, \"human being, person\"). In the first example, the \"pe-\", which was primarily used as its value \"pe\" of grid class CV, is being used for \"sper-\", not in that class. This was not an innovative or exceptional use, but followed the stated rules. Similarly, \"a\", being primarily of grid class V, is being used as \"an-\" and could be used for \"al\", \"am\", \"ar\", and so on.\n\nClusters of two or three consonants that do not follow the initial \"s-\" and \"-w\" rule or the double consonants:  (\"ks\" or \"x\"),  (\"ps\") and \"qs\" (which later did not exist in classical Greek) were represented by the same number of signs of type CV as the cluster had consonants: \"ko-no-so\" for \"Knōsos\", \"ku-ru-so\" for \"khrusos\" (, \"gold\"). The consonants were the same as in the cluster. The vowels so introduced have been called \"empty\", \"null\", \"extra\", \"dead\" and other terms by various writers as they represent no sound. The sign was not alphabetic: rules governed the selection of the vowel and therefore of the sign. The vowel had to be the same as the one of the first syllable following the cluster or if at the end of the word, preceding: \"ti-ri-po\" with \"ti-\" (instead of \"ta-\", \"te-\" and so on) to match \"-ri-\". A rare exception occurs in words formed from \"wa-na-ka\", \"wanax\" (ϝάναξ, Homeric and Classical ἄναξ): \"wa-na-ka-te\" for \"wanaktei\" (dative), and \"wa-na-ka-te-ro\" for \"wanakteros\", the adjectival form.\n\nLinear B also uses a large number of ideograms. They express:\nBULLET::::- The type of object concerned (e.g. a cow, wool, a spear)\nBULLET::::- A unit of measure.\n\nThey have no phonetic value and are never used as word signs in writing a sentence like Japanese kanji are. They are typically at the end of a line before a number and appear to signify the object the number applies to. Many of the values remain unknown or disputed. Some commodities such as cloth and containers are divided into many different categories represented by distinct ideograms. Livestock may be marked with respect to their sex.\n\nThe numerical references for the ideograms were originally devised by Ventris and Bennett, divided into functional groups corresponding to the breakdown of Bennett's index. These groups are numbered beginning 100, 110, 120 etc., with some provision of spare numbers for future additions; the official CIPEM numberings used today are based on Ventris and Bennett's numbering, with the provision that three or four letter codes (written in small capitals), based on Latin words that seemed relevant at the time, are used where the meanings are known and agreed. Unicode (as of version 5.0) encodes 123 Linear B ideograms.\n\nThe ideograms are symbols, not pictures of the objects in question—e.g. one tablet records a tripod with missing legs, but the ideogram used is of a tripod with three legs. In modern transcriptions of Linear B tablets, it is typically convenient to represent an ideogram by its Latin or English name or by an abbreviation of the Latin name. Ventris and Chadwick generally used English; Bennett, Latin. Neither the English nor the Latin can be relied upon as an accurate name of the object; in fact, the identification of some of the more obscure objects is a matter of exegesis.\n\n+ Ideograms\n! Glyph\n! Code point\n! Bennett\n! CIPEM\n! English\nZ<br>\"kotylai\"\nV<br>\"khoinikes\"\nBULLET::::- 21\nWeight\nBULLET::::- 2\nWeight\n\nInscriptions in Linear B have been found on tablets and vases or other objects; they are catalogued and classified by, inter alia, the location of the excavation they were found in.\n! Prefix !! Location !! Number of items and/or notes\nAnother 170 inscriptions in Linear B have been found on various vessels, for a total of some 6,058 known inscriptions.\n\nThe oldest Linear B tablets are probably those from the Room of Chariot Tablets at Knossos, and date to the latter half of the 15th century BC. The Kafkania pebble, though from an earlier context, is not genuine. The earliest inscription from the mainland is an inscribed clay tablet found at Iklaina dating to between 1400 and 1350 BC.\n\nIt is claimed that a Linear B inscription is attested on an amber bead found as far at Bernstorf, in Germany.\n\nThe Aegean is responsible for many of the early Greek language words that have to do with daily life such as words for tools and items that are seen every day. The sequence and the geographical spread of Cretan hieroglyphs, Linear A, and Linear B, the three overlapping, but distinct, writing systems on Bronze Age Crete, the Aegean islands, and mainland Greece are summarized as follows:\n! Writing system\n! Geographical area\n! Time span\nCretan hieroglyphs\nCrete\nca. 1625−1500 BC\nLinear A\nCrete, Aegean Islands (Kea, Kythira, Milos, Santorini), and Laconia\nca. 1800−1450 BC\nLinear B\nCrete (Knossos), and mainland (Pylos, Mycenae, Thebes, Tiryns)\nca. 1425−1200 BC\n\nThe main archives for Linear B are associated with these stages of Late Minoan and Helladic pottery:\n! Relative date !! Period dates !! Location  Locale or tablet\n\nThe Knossos archive was dated by Arthur Evans to the destruction by conflagration of about 1400 BC, which would have baked and preserved the clay tablets. He dated this event to the LM II period. This view stood until Carl Blegen excavated the site of ancient Pylos in 1939 and uncovered tablets inscribed in Linear B. They were fired in the conflagration that destroyed Pylos about 1200 BC, at the end of LHIIIB. With the decipherment of Linear B by Michael Ventris in 1952, serious questions about Evans' date began to be considered. Most notably, Blegen said that the inscribed stirrup jars, which are oil flasks with stirrup-shaped handles, imported from Crete around 1200 were of the same type as those dated by Evans to the destruction of 1400. Blegen found a number of similarities between 1200 BC Pylos and 1400 BC Knossos and suggested the Knossian evidence be reexamined, as he was sure of the 1200 Pylian date.\n\nThe examination uncovered a number of difficulties. The Knossos tablets had been found at various locations in the palace. Evans had not kept exact records. Recourse was had to the day books of Evans' assistant, Duncan Mackenzie, who had conducted the day-to-day excavations. There were discrepancies between the notes in the day books and Evans' excavation reports. Moreover, the two men had disagreed over the location and strata of the tablets. The results of the reinvestigation were eventually published by Palmer and Boardman, \"On the Knossos Tablets\". It contains two works, Leonard Robert Palmer's \"The Find-Places of the Knossos Tablets\" and John Boardman's \"The Date of the Knossos Tablets,\" representing Blegen's and Evans' views respectively. Consequently, the dispute was known for a time as \"the Palmer-Boardman dispute\". There has been no generally accepted resolution to it yet.\n\nThe major cities and palaces used Linear B for records of disbursements of goods. Wool, sheep, and grain were some common items, often given to groups of religious people and to groups of \"men watching the coastline\".\n\nThe tablets were kept in groups in baskets on shelves, judging by impressions left in the clay from the weaving of the baskets. When the buildings they were housed in were destroyed by fires, many of the tablets were fired.\n\nThe British archaeologist Arthur Evans, keeper of the Ashmolean Museum, was presented by Greville Chester in 1886 with a sealstone from Crete engraved with a writing he took to be Mycenaean. Heinrich Schliemann had encountered signs similar to these, but had never identified the signs clearly as writing, relating in his major work on Mycenae that \"of combinations of signs resembling inscriptions I have hitherto only found three or four ...\" In 1893 Evans purchased more sealstones in Athens, verifying from the antiquarian dealers that the stones came from Crete. During the next year he noticed the script on other artefacts in the Ashmolean. In 1894 he embarked for Crete in search of the script. Soon after arrival, at Knossos he saw the sign of the double axe on an excavated wall, considering this the source of the script. Subsequently, he found more stones being worn by Cretan women as amulets called \"milk-stones\", coming from the various ruins.\n\nStarting in 1894, Evans published his theories that the signs evidenced various phases in the development of a writing system in \"The Journal of Hellenic Studies\", the first article being \"Primitive Pictographs and a Prae-Phoenician Script from Crete\". In these articles Evans distinguished between \"pictographic writing\" and \"a linear system of writing\". He did not explicitly define these terms, causing some confusion among subsequent writers concerning what he meant, but in 1898 he wrote \"These linear forms indeed consist of simple geometrical figures which unlike the more complicated pictorial class were little susceptible to modification,\" and \"That the linear or quasi-alphabetic signs ... were in the main ultimately derived from the rudely scratched line pictures belonging to the infancy of art can hardly be doubted.\"\n\nMeanwhile, Evans began to negotiate for the land purchase of the Knossos site. He established the Cretan Exploration Fund, with only his own money at first, and by 1896 the fund had purchased one-fourth of Kephala Hill, on which the ruins were located, with first option to buy the rest. However, he could not obtain a firman excavation permit from the Ottoman government. He returned to Britain. In January 1897, the Christian population of Crete staged its final insurrection against the Ottoman Empire. The last Ottoman troops were ferried off the island by the British fleet on December 5, 1898. In that year also, Evans and his friends returned to complete purchase of the site. By this time, the Fund had other contributors as well. In 1899, the Constitution of a new Cretan Republic went into effect. Once Arthur had received permission to excavate from the local authorities, excavation on the hill began on 23 March 1900.\n\nAccording to Evans' report to the British School at Athens for that year, on April 5, the excavators discovered the first large cache ever of Linear B tablets among the remains of a wooden box in a disused terracotta bathtub. Subsequently, caches turned up at multiple locations, including the Room of the Chariot Tablets, where over 350 pieces from four boxes were found. The tablets were to long by to wide and were scored with horizontal lines over which text was written in about 70 characters. Even in this earliest excavation report, Evans could tell that \"...a certain number of quasi-pictorial characters also occur which seem to have an ideographic or determinative meaning.\"\n\nThe excavation was over for that year by June 2. Evans reported: \"only a comparatively small proportion of the tablets were preserved in their entirety,\" the causes of destruction being rainfall through the roof of the storage room, crumbling of small pieces, and being thrown away by workmen who failed to identify them. A report on September 6 to the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland began to use some of the concepts characteristic of Evans' later thought: \"palace of Knossos\" and \"palace of Minos\". \"Appletons' Cyclopædia of American Biography\", 1900, notes that Evans took up Stillman's theme that the palace was the labyrinth of mythology in which the half-bovine son of King Minos lurked. In the report, the tablets are now called a \"linear script\" as opposed to the \"hieroglyphic or conventionalized pictographic script\". The linear script has characters that are \"of a free, upright, European character\" and \"seem to have been for the most part syllabic\". Evans reasserts the ideographic idea: \"a certain number are unquestionably ideographic or determinative.\"\n\nThe years after 1900 were consumed by excavations at Knossos and the discovery and study by Evans of tablets, with a projected comprehensive work on Cretan scripts to be called \"Scripta Minoa\". A year before the publication of volume I, he began to drop hints that he now believed the linear script was two scripts, to be presented in the forthcoming book.\n\nIn \"Scripta Minoa I\", which appeared in 1909, he explained that the discovery of the Phaistos Disc in July 1908 had caused him to pull the book from the presses so that he could include the disk by permission, as it had not yet been published. On the next page he mentioned that he was also including by permission of Federico Halbherr of the Italian Mission in Crete unpublished tablets from Hagia Triada written in a linear script of \"Class A\". To what degree if any Halbherr was responsible for Evans' division of the \"linear script\" into \"Class A\" and \"Class B\" is not stated. The Knossos tablets were of Class B, so that Evans could have perceived Class A only in tablets from elsewhere, and so recently that he needed permission to include the examples.\n\nEvans summarized the differences between the two scripts as \"type\" or \"form of script;' that is, varieties in the formation and arrangement of the characters. For example, he says \"the clay documents belonging to Class A show a certain approximation in their forms to those presenting the hieroglyphic inscriptions ... the system of numerals is also in some respects intermediate between that of the hieroglyphic documents and that of the linear Class B.\"\n\nThe first volume covered \"the Hieroglyphic and Primitive Linear Classes\" in three parts: the \"pre-Phoenician Scripts of Crete\", the \"Pictorial Script\" and \"the Phaistos Disk\". One or two more volumes publishing the Linear A and Linear B tablets were planned, but Evans ran out of time; the project required more than one man could bring to it. For a good many of the years left to him, he was deeply enmeshed in war and politics in the Balkans. When he did return to Knossos, completion and publication of the palace excavations took priority. His greatest work, \"Palace of Minos\", came out in 1935. It did include scattered descriptions of tablets. He died in 1941, soon after Nazi forces invaded Crete.\n\nThe Knossos tablets had remained in the museum at Irakleion, Crete, where many of them now were missing. The unpublished second volume consisted of notes by Evans and plates and fonts created by Clarendon Press. In 1939, Carl Blegen had uncovered the Pylos Tablets; pressure was mounting to finish \"Scripta Minoa II.\" After Evans' death, Alice Kober, assistant to John Myres and a major transcriber of the Knossos tablets, prompted Myres to come back from retirement and finish the work. Emmett L. Bennett, Jr. added more transcriptions. The second volume came out in 1952 with Evans cited as author and Myres as editor, just before the discovery that Linear B writes an early form of Greek. An impatient Ventris and Chadwick declared: \"Two generations of scholars had been cheated of the opportunity to work constructively on the problem.\"\n\nDespite the limited source materials, during this time there were efforts to decipher the newly discovered Cretan script. Australian classicist Florence Stawell published an interpretation of the Phaistos Disc in the April 1911 issue of \"The Burlington Magazine\". She followed this with the book \"A Clue to the Cretan Scripts\", published in 1931. Stawell declared all three Cretan script forms to represent early Homeric Greek, and offered her attempts at translations. Also in 1931, F. G. Gordon's \"Through Basque to Minoan\" was published by the Oxford University Press. Gordon attempted to prove a close link between the Basque language and Linear B, without lasting success.\n\nIn 1949, Bedřich Hrozný published \"Les Inscriptions Crétoises, Essai de déchiffrement\", a proposed decipherment of the Cretan scripts. Hrozny was internationally renowned as the translator of Hittite cuneiform decades previously. His Minoan translations into academic French, though, proved to be considerably subjective, and incorrect.\n\nFrom the 1930s to 1950s there was correspondence between, and papers published by, various international academic figures. These included Johannes Sundwall, K. D. Ktistopoulos, Ernst Sittig and V. I. Georgiev. None of them succeeded with decipherment, yet they added to knowledge and debate.\n\nAbout the same time, Alice Kober studied Linear B and managed to construct grids, linking similar symbols in groups of threes. Kober noticed that a number of Linear B words had common roots and suffixes. This led her to believe that Linear B represented an inflected language, with nouns changing their endings depending on their case. However, some characters in the middle of the words seemed to correspond with neither a root nor a suffix. Because this effect was found in other known languages, Kober surmised that the odd characters were bridging syllables, with the beginning of the syllable belonging to the root and the end belonging to the suffix. This was a reasonable assumption, since Linear B had far too many characters to be considered alphabetic and too few to be logographic; therefore, each character should represent a syllable. Kober's systematic approach allowed her to demonstrate the existence of three grammatical cases and identify several pairs of signs that shared vowels or consonants with one another.\n\nKober also showed that the two symbol word for 'total' at the end of livestock and personnel lists, had a different symbol for gender. This gender change with one letter, usually a vowel, is most frequent in Indo-European languages. Kober had rejected any speculation on the language represented, preferring painstaking cataloguing and analysis of the actual symbols, though she did believe it likely that Linear A and Linear B represented different languages.\n\nThe convention for numbering the symbols still in use today was first devised by Emmett L. Bennett Jr.. Working alongside fellow academic Alice Kober, by 1950 Bennett had deciphered the metrical system, based on his intensive study of Linear B tablets unearthed at Pylos. He concluded that those tablets contained exactly the same script as the Linear B found at Knossos, and he classified and assigned identification numbers to the Linear B signs as he prepared a publication on the Pylos tablets. Like Kober, Bennett was also an early proponent of the idea that Linear A and B represented different languages. His book \"The Pylos Tablets\" became a crucial resource for Michael Ventris, who later described it as \"a wonderful piece of work\".\n\nIn 1935, the British School at Athens was celebrating its fiftieth anniversary with an exhibition at Burlington House, London. Among the speakers was Arthur Evans, then eighty-four years old. The teenaged Michael Ventris was present in the audience. In 1940, the 18-year-old Ventris had an article \"Introducing the Minoan Language\" published in the American Journal of Archaeology.\n\nAfter wartime service as a navigator with RAF Bomber Command, and a post-war year in Occupied Germany, he returned to civilian life, and completed qualification as an architect. Despite having no university qualification, Ventris continued with his amateur interest in Linear B, corresponding with known scholars, who usually but not always replied.\n\nMichael Ventris and John Chadwick performed the bulk of the decipherment of Linear B between 1951 and 1953. At first Ventris chose his own numbering method, but later switched to Bennett's system. His initial decipherment was achieved using Kober's classification tables, to which he applied his own theories. Some Linear B tablets had been discovered on the Greek mainland. Noticing that certain symbol combinations appeared only on the tablets found in Crete, he conjectured that these might be names of places on the island. This proved to be correct. Working with the symbols he could decipher from this, Ventris soon unlocked much text and determined that the underlying language of Linear B was in fact Greek. This contradicted general scientific views of the time, and indeed Ventris himself had previously agreed with Evans' hypothesis that Linear B was not Greek.\n\nVentris' discovery was of significance in demonstrating a Greek-speaking Minoan-Mycenaean culture on Crete, and thus presenting Greek in writing centuries earlier than had been previously accepted.\n\nChadwick, a university lecturer in Ancient Greek philology, helped Ventris develop his decipherment of the text and discover the vocabulary and grammar of Mycenaean Greek. He noted:\nThat any Linear B tablets are written in a language other than Greek still remains to be demonstrated; but that words and usages not exactly paralleled in later Greek occur is both certain and to be expected. But we must not resort to \"non-Greek\" whenever we come up against an insoluble problem.\nThe first edition of their book, \"Documents in Mycenaean Greek\", was published in 1956, shortly after Ventris's death in an automobile accident.\n\nLinear B was added to the Unicode Standard in April, 2003 with the release of version 4.0.\n\nThe Linear B Syllabary block is U+10000–U+1007F.\nThe Linear B Ideograms block is U+10080–U+100FF.\nThe Unicode block for the related Aegean Numbers is U+10100–U+1013F.\n\nBULLET::::- Aegean civilizations\nBULLET::::- Aegean numerals\nBULLET::::- Linear A\nBULLET::::- Cypro-Minoan syllabary\nBULLET::::- Cypriot syllabary\nBULLET::::- Proto-Greek language\n\nBULLET::::- Carpenter, Rhys (1957). \"Linear B\", \"Phoenix\", Vol. 11, No. 2 (Summer, 1957), pp. 47–62.\nBULLET::::- has the Enkomi clay tablet, circa 1500 BCE., examples of Linear B tablets, and translated, the basic Linear B \"syllabary\", the Cypriot \"syllabary\" and discussions thereof, and short sections on Linear A, and the Phaistos Disk.\nBULLET::::- Palaima, Thomas G., \"Unlocking the Secrets of Ancient Writing: The Parallel Lives of Michael Ventris and Linda Schele and the Decipherment of Mycenaean and Mayan Writing\", University of Texas at Austin, Eleventh International Mycenological Colloquium, 2000.\nBULLET::::- Chapter 6, Linear B, pp. 108–119: discusses Arthur Evans, his work, the Cypriot clues, the \"syllabary\", Alice Kober, the \"Grid\", and a sample tablet \"transliterated, and translated into English.\"\nBULLET::::- Robinson, Andrew \"The Man Who Deciphered Linear B: the story of Michael Ventris\" (2002) Thames & Hudson\nBULLET::::- for a general outline of the Linear B deciphering story, from Schliemann to Chadwick.\nBULLET::::- Ventris, Michael; Chadwick, John (1953) \"Evidence for Greek Dialect in the Mycenaean Archives\", \"The Journal of Hellenic Studies\", Vol. 73, (1953), pp. 84–103.\nBULLET::::- Bakker, Egbert J., ed. 2010. \"A companion to the Ancient Greek language.\" Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.\nBULLET::::- Chadwick, John. 1958. \"The decipherment of Linear B.\" Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.\nBULLET::::- Christidis, Anastasios-Phoivos, ed. 2007. \"A history of Ancient Greek: From the beginnings to Late Antiquity.\" Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.\nBULLET::::- Colvin, Stephen C. 2007. \"A historical Greek reader: Mycenaean to the koiné.\" Oxford: Oxford University Press.\nBULLET::::- Fox, Margalit. \"\"The Riddle of the Labyrinth.\"\" HarperCollins Publishers Inc. New York, NY\nBULLET::::- Hooker, J. T. 1980. \"Linear B: An introduction.\" Bristol, UK: Bristol Classical Press.\nBULLET::::- Horrocks, Geoffrey. 2010. \"Greek: A history of the language and its speakers.\" 2nd ed. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.\nBULLET::::- Morpurgo Davies, Anna, and Yves Duhoux, eds. 1985. \"Linear B: A 1984 survey.\" Louvain, Belgium: Peeters.\nBULLET::::- ––––. 2008. \"A companion to Linear B: Mycenaean Greek texts and their world.\" Vol. 1. Louvain, Belgium: Peeters.\nBULLET::::- Palaima, Thomas G. 1988. \"The development of the Mycenaean writing system.\" In \"Texts, tablets and scribes.\" Edited by J. P. Olivier and T. G. Palaima, 269–342. Suplementos a “Minos” 10. Salamanca, Spain: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas.\nBULLET::::- Palmer, Leonard R. 1980. \"The Greek language.\" London: Faber & Faber.\nBULLET::::- Ventris, Michael, and John Chadwick. 2008. \"Documents in Mycenaean Greek.\" 2nd ed. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.\n\nBULLET::::- Linear B online transliterator\nBULLET::::- Palaeolexicon -\nBULLET::::- Palaima, Thomas G, \"A Linear B Tablet from Heidelberg\", Université de Liège\nBULLET::::- Linear B Explorer\n"}
{"id": "18552", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18552", "title": "Larousse Gastronomique", "text": "Larousse Gastronomique\n\nLarousse Gastronomique () is an encyclopedia of gastronomy. The majority of the book is about French cuisine, and contains recipes for French dishes and cooking techniques. The first edition included few non-French dishes and ingredients; later editions include many more. The book was originally published by Éditions Larousse in Paris in 1938. \nThe first edition (1938) was edited by Prosper Montagné, with prefaces by Georges Auguste Escoffier and Philéas Gilbert. Gilbert was a collaborator in the creation of this book as well as \"Le Guide Culinaire\" with Escoffier, leading to some cross-over with the two books. It caused Escoffier to note when he was asked to write the preface that he could \"see with my own eyes,\" and \"Montagné cannot hide from me the fact that he has used \"Le Guide\" as a basis for his new book, and certainly used numerous recipes.\"\n\nThe third English edition (2001), which runs to approximately 1,350 pages, has been modernized and includes additional material on other cuisines. It is also available in a concise edition (2003). A new, updated and revised edition was released in October 2009, published by Hamlyn in the UK.\n\nBULLET::::- James, Kenneth. \"Escoffier: The King of Chefs\". Hambledon and London: Cambridge University Press, 2002.\nBULLET::::- \"Larousse Gastronomique\", Prosper Montagné, maître cuisinier, avec la collaboration du docteur Gottschalk, Paris, Editions Larousse, 1938.\nBULLET::::- 2001 2nd edition, , with assistance from a gastronomic committee chaired by Joël Robuchon\n\nBULLET::::- Montagné, Prosper. \"Larousse gastronomique: the encyclopedia of food, wine & cookery\", Ed. Charlotte Turgeon and Nina Froud. New York, Crown Publishers, 1961. The English translation of the 1938 edition.\nBULLET::::- Montagné, Prosper. \"Larousse Gastronomique: The New American Edition of the World's Greatest Culinary Encyclopedia\". Edited by Jennifer Harvey Lang. New York: Crown, 1988. Second English edition.\nBULLET::::- Montagné, Prosper. \"Larousse Gastronomique: The New American Edition of the World's Greatest Culinary Encyclopedia\", Ed. Jenifer Harvey Lang. New York, Crown Publishers, 1998.\nBULLET::::- Montagné, Prosper. \"Larousse Gastronomique: The World's Greatest Culinary Encyclopedia\". Edited by Jennifer Harvey Lang. New York: Clarkson Potter, 2001. Third English edition.\n"}
{"id": "18553", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18553", "title": "Louis XIV of France", "text": "Louis XIV of France\n\nLouis XIV (Louis Dieudonné; 5 September 16381 September 1715), known as Louis the Great () or the Sun King (), was King of France from 14 May 1643 until his death in 1715. His reign of 72 years and 110 days is the longest recorded of any monarch of a sovereign country in European history. In the age of absolutism in Europe, Louis XIV's France was a leader in the growing centralisation of power.\n\nLouis began his personal rule of France in 1661, after the death of his chief minister, the Italian Cardinal Mazarin. An adherent of the concept of the divine right of kings, Louis continued his predecessors' work of creating a centralised state governed from the capital. He sought to eliminate the remnants of feudalism persisting in parts of France and, by compelling many members of the nobility to inhabit his lavish Palace of Versailles, succeeded in pacifying the aristocracy, many members of which had participated in the Fronde rebellion during Louis' minority. By these means he became one of the most powerful French monarchs and consolidated a system of absolute monarchical rule in France that endured until the French Revolution.\n\nLouis also enforced uniformity of religion under the Gallican Catholic Church. His revocation of the Edict of Nantes abolished the rights of the Huguenot Protestant minority and subjected them to a wave of dragonnades, effectively forcing Huguenots to emigrate or convert, and virtually destroying the French Protestant community.\n\nThe Sun King surrounded himself with a dazzling constellation of political, military, and cultural figures such as Mazarin, Colbert, Louvois, the Grand Condé, Turenne, Vauban, Boulle, Molière, Racine, Boileau, La Fontaine, Lully, Charpentier, Marais, Le Brun, Rigaud, Bossuet, Le Vau, Mansart, Charles, Claude Perrault, and Le Nôtre.\n\nDuring Louis' long reign, France was the leading European power, and it fought three major wars: the Franco-Dutch War, the War of the League of Augsburg, and the War of the Spanish Succession. There were also two lesser conflicts: the War of Devolution and the War of the Reunions. Warfare defined the foreign policy of Louis XIV, and his personality shaped his approach. Impelled \"by a mix of commerce, revenge, and pique\", Louis sensed that warfare was the ideal way to enhance his glory. In peacetime he concentrated on preparing for the next war. He taught his diplomats that their job was to create tactical and strategic advantages for the French military.\n\nLouis XIV was born on 5 September 1638 in the Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye, to Louis XIII and Anne of Austria. He was named Louis Dieudonné (Louis the God-given) and bore the traditional title of French heirs apparent: \"Dauphin\". At the time of his birth, his parents had been married for 23 years. His mother had experienced four stillbirths between 1619 and 1631. Leading contemporaries thus regarded him as a divine gift and his birth a miracle of God.\n\nSensing imminent death, Louis XIII decided to put his affairs in order in the spring of 1643, when Louis XIV was four years old. In defiance of custom, which would have made Queen Anne the sole Regent of France, the king decreed that a regency council would rule on his son's behalf. His lack of faith in Queen Anne's political abilities was his primary rationale. He did, however, make the concession of appointing her head of the council.\n\nLouis' relationship with his mother was uncommonly affectionate for the time. Contemporaries and eyewitnesses claimed that the Queen would spend all her time with Louis. Both were greatly interested in food and theatre, and it is highly likely that Louis developed these interests through his close relationship with his mother. This long-lasting and loving relationship can be evidenced by excerpts in Louis' journal entries, such as:\n\"Nature was responsible for the first knots which tied me to my mother. But attachments formed later by shared qualities of the spirit are far more difficult to break than those formed merely by blood.\"\nIt was his mother who gave Louis his belief in the absolute and divine power of his monarchical rule.\n\nDuring his childhood, he was taken care of by the governesses Françoise de Lansac and Marie-Catherine de Senecey. In 1646, Nicolas V de Villeroy became the young king's tutor. Louis XIV became friends with Villeroy's young children, particularly François de Villeroy, and divided his time between the Palais-Royal and the nearby Hotel de Villeroy.\n\nOn 14 May 1643, with Louis XIII dead, Queen Anne had her husband's will annulled by the \"Parlement de Paris\" (a judicial body comprising mostly nobles and high clergymen). This action abolished the regency council and made Anne sole Regent of France. Anne exiled some of her husband's ministers (Chavigny, Bouthilier), and she nominated Brienne as her minister of foreign affairs. Anne also nominated Saint Vincent de Paul as her spiritual adviser, which helped her deal with religious policy and the Jansenism question.\n\nAnne kept the direction of religious policy strongly in her hand until 1661; her most important political decisions were to nominate Cardinal Mazarin as her chief minister and the continuation of her late husband's and Cardinal Richelieu's policy, despite their persecution of her, for the sake of her son. Anne wanted to give her son absolute authority and a victorious kingdom. Her rationales for choosing Mazarin were mainly his ability and his total dependence on her, at least until 1653 when she was no longer regent. Anne protected Mazarin by arresting and exiling her followers who conspired against him in 1643: the Duke of Beaufort and Marie de Rohan. She left the direction of the daily administration of policy to Cardinal Mazarin.\n\nThe best example of Anne's statesmanship and the partial change in her heart towards her native Spain is seen in her keeping of one of Richelieu's men, the Chancellor of France Pierre Séguier, in his post. Séguier was the person who had interrogated Anne in 1637, treating her like a \"common criminal\" as she described her treatment following the discovery that she was giving military secrets and information to Spain. Anne was virtually under house arrest for a number of years during her husband's rule. By keeping him in his post, Anne was giving a sign that the interests of France and her son Louis were the guiding spirit of all her political and legal actions. Though not necessarily opposed to Spain, she sought to end the war with a French victory, in order to establish a lasting peace between the Catholic nations.\n\nThe Queen also gave a partial Catholic orientation to French foreign policy. This was felt by the Netherlands, France's Protestant ally, which negotiated a separate peace with Spain in 1648.\n\nIn 1648, Anne and Mazarin successfully negotiated the Peace of Westphalia, which ended the Thirty Years' War. Its terms ensured Dutch independence from Spain, awarded some autonomy to the various German princes of the Holy Roman Empire, and granted Sweden seats on the Imperial Diet and territories to control the mouths of the Oder, Elbe, and Weser rivers. France, however, profited most from the settlement. Austria, ruled by the Habsburg Emperor Ferdinand III, ceded all Habsburg lands and claims in Alsace to France and acknowledged her \"de facto\" sovereignty over the Three Bishoprics of Metz, Verdun, and Toul. Moreover, eager to emancipate themselves from Habsburg domination, petty German states sought French protection. This anticipated the formation of the 1658 League of the Rhine, leading to the further diminution of Imperial power.\n\nAs the Thirty Years' War came to an end, a civil war known as the ' (after the slings used to smash windows) erupted in France. It effectively checked France's ability to exploit the Peace of Westphalia. Anne and Mazarin had largely pursued the policies of Cardinal Richelieu, augmenting the Crown's power at the expense of the nobility and the '. Anne interfered much more in internal policy than foreign affairs; she was a very proud queen who insisted on the divine rights of the King of France.\n\nAll this led her to advocate a forceful policy in all matters relating to the King's authority, in a manner that was much more radical than the one proposed by Mazarin. The Cardinal depended totally on Anne's support and had to use all his influence on the Queen to avoid nullifying, but to restrain some of her radical actions. Anne imprisoned any aristocrat or member of parliament who challenged her will; her main aim was to transfer to her son an absolute authority in the matters of finance and justice. One of the leaders of the Parlement of Paris, whom she had jailed, died in prison.\n\nThe ', political heirs of the disaffected feudal aristocracy, sought to protect their traditional feudal privileges from the increasingly centralized royal government. Furthermore, they believed their traditional influence and authority was being usurped by the recently ennobled bureaucrats (the ', or \"nobility of the robe\"), who administered the kingdom and on whom the monarchy increasingly began to rely. This belief intensified the nobles' resentment.\n\nIn 1648, Anne and Mazarin attempted to tax members of the '. The members refused to comply and ordered all of the king's earlier financial edicts burned. Buoyed by the victory of (later known as ') at the Battle of Lens, Mazarin, on Queen Anne's insistence, arrested certain members in a show of force. The most important arrest, from Anne's point of view, concerned Pierre Broussel, one of the most important leaders in the \".\n\nPeople in France were complaining about the expansion of royal authority, the high rate of taxation, and the reduction of the authority of the Parlement de Paris and other regional representative entities. Paris erupted in rioting as a result, and Anne was forced, under intense pressure, to free Broussel. Moreover, a mob of angry Parisians broke into the royal palace and demanded to see their king. Led into the royal bedchamber, they gazed upon Louis, who was feigning sleep, were appeased, and then quietly departed. The threat to the royal family prompted Anne to flee Paris with the king and his courtiers.\n\nShortly thereafter, the conclusion of the Peace of Westphalia allowed Condé's army to return to aid Louis and his court. Condé's family was close to Anne at that time, and he agreed to help her attempt to restore the king's authority. The queen's army, headed by Condé, attacked the rebels in Paris; the rebels were under the political control of Anne's old friend Marie de Rohan. Beaufort, who had escaped from the prison where Anne had incarcerated him five years before, was the military leader in Paris, under the nominal control of Conti. After a few battles, a political compromise was reached; the Peace of Rueil was signed, and the court returned to Paris.\n\nUnfortunately for Anne, her partial victory depended on Condé, who wanted to control the queen and destroy Mazarin's influence. It was Condé's sister who pushed him to turn against the queen. After striking a deal with her old friend Marie de Rohan, who was able to impose the nomination of as minister of justice, Anne arrested Condé, his brother Armand de Bourbon, Prince of Conti, and the husband of their sister Anne Genevieve de Bourbon, duchess of Longueville. This situation did not last long, and Mazarin's unpopularity led to the creation of a coalition headed mainly by Marie de Rohan and the duchess of Longueville. This aristocratic coalition was strong enough to liberate the princes, exile Mazarin, and impose a condition of virtual house arrest on Queen Anne.\n\nAll these events were witnessed by Louis and largely explained his later distrust of Paris and the higher aristocracy. \"In one sense, Louis' childhood came to an end with the outbreak of the Fronde. It was not only that life became insecure and unpleasant – a fate meted out to many children in all ages – but that Louis had to be taken into the confidence of his mother and Mazarin and political and military matters of which he could have no deep understanding\". \"The family home became at times a near-prison when Paris had to be abandoned, not in carefree outings to other chateaux but in humiliating flights\". The royal family was driven out of Paris twice in this manner, and at one point Louis XIV and Anne were held under virtual arrest in the royal palace in Paris. The Fronde years planted in Louis a hatred of Paris and a consequent determination to move out of the ancient capital as soon as possible, never to return.\n\nJust as the first ' (the ' of 1648–1649) ended, a second one (the ' of 1650–1653) began. Unlike that which preceded it, tales of sordid intrigue and half-hearted warfare characterized this second phase of upper-class insurrection. To the aristocracy, this rebellion represented a protest against and a reversal of their political demotion from vassals to courtiers. It was headed by the highest-ranking French nobles, among them Louis' uncle Gaston, Duke of Orléans and first cousin Anne Marie Louise d'Orléans, Duchess of Montpensier, known as '; Princes of the Blood such as Condé, his brother Armand de Bourbon, Prince of Conti, and their sister the Duchess of Longueville; dukes of legitimised royal descent, such as Henri, Duke of Longueville, and François, Duke of Beaufort; so-called \"foreign princes\" such as Frédéric Maurice, Duke of Bouillon, his brother Marshal Turenne, and Marie de Rohan, Duchess of Chevreuse; and scions of France's oldest families, such as François de La Rochefoucauld.\n\nQueen Anne played the most important role in defeating the Fronde because she wanted to transfer absolute authority to her son. In addition, most of the princes refused to deal with Mazarin, who went into exile for a number of years. The \" claimed to act on Louis' behalf, and in his real interest against his mother and Mazarin.\n\nQueen Anne had a very close relationship with the Cardinal, and many observers believed that Mazarin became Louis XIV's stepfather by a secret marriage to Queen Anne. However, Louis' coming-of-age and subsequent coronation deprived them of the ' pretext for revolt. The ' thus gradually lost steam and ended in 1653, when Mazarin returned triumphantly from exile. From that time until his death, Mazarin was in charge of foreign and financial policy without the daily supervision of Anne, who was no longer regent.\n\nDuring this period, Louis fell in love with Mazarin's niece Marie Mancini, but Anne and Mazarin ended the king's infatuation by sending Mancini away from court to be married in Italy. While Mazarin might have been tempted for a short period of time to marry his niece to the King of France, Queen Anne was absolutely against this; she wanted to marry her son to the daughter of her brother, Philip IV of Spain, for both dynastic and political reasons. Mazarin soon supported the Queen's position because he knew that her support for his power and his foreign policy depended on making peace with Spain from a strong position and on the Spanish marriage. Additionally, Mazarin's relations with Marie Mancini were not good, and he did not trust her to support his position. All of Louis' tears and his supplications to his mother did not make her change her mind; the Spanish marriage was very important both for its role in ending the war between France and Spain, and because many of the claims and objectives of Louis' foreign policy in the next 50 years would be based on this marriage.\n\nLouis XIV was declared to have reached the age of majority on 7 September 1651. On the death of Mazarin, in March 1661, Louis assumed personal control of the reins of government and astonished his court by declaring that he would rule without a chief minister: \"Up to this moment I have been pleased to entrust the government of my affairs to the late Cardinal. It is now time that I govern them myself. You [he was talking to the secretaries and ministers of state] will assist me with your counsels when I ask for them. I request and order you to seal no orders except by my command . . . I order you not to sign anything, not even a passport . . . without my command; to render account to me personally each day and to favor no one\". Louis was able to capitalize on the widespread public yearning for law and order, that resulted from prolonged foreign wars and domestic civil strife, to further consolidate central political authority and reform at the expense of the feudal aristocracy. Praising his ability to choose and encourage men of talent, the historian Chateaubriand noted: \"it is the voice of genius of all kinds which sounds from the tomb of Louis\".\n\nLouis began his personal reign with administrative and fiscal reforms. In 1661, the treasury verged on bankruptcy. To rectify the situation, Louis chose Jean-Baptiste Colbert as Controller-General of Finances in 1665. However, Louis first had to neutralize Nicolas Fouquet, the Superintendent of Finances, in order to give Colbert a free hand. Although Fouquet's financial indiscretions were not very different from Mazarin's before him or Colbert's after him, his ambition was worrying to Louis. He had, for example, built an opulent château at Vaux-le-Vicomte where he entertained Louis and his court ostentatiously, as if he were wealthier than the king himself. The court was left with the impression that the vast sums of money needed to support his lifestyle could only have been obtained through embezzlement of government funds.\n\nFouquet appeared eager to succeed Mazarin and Richelieu in assuming power, and he indiscreetly purchased and privately fortified the remote island of Belle Île. These acts sealed his doom. Fouquet was charged with embezzlement. The \"Parlement\" found him guilty and sentenced him to exile. However, Louis altered the sentence to life-imprisonment and abolished Fouquet's post.\n\nWith Fouquet dismissed, Colbert reduced the national debt through more efficient taxation. The principal taxes included the \"aides\" and \"douanes\" (both customs duties), the \"gabelle\" (a tax on salt), and the \"taille\" (a tax on land). The \"taille\" was reduced at first; financial officials were forced to keep regular accounts, auctioning certain taxes instead of selling them privately to a favored few, revising inventories and removing unauthorized exemptions (for example, in 1661 only 10 per cent from the royal domain reached the King). Reform proved difficult because the \"taille\" was levied by officers of the Crown who had purchased their post at a high price: punishment of abuses necessarily lowered the value of the post. Nevertheless, excellent results were achieved: the deficit of 1661 turned into a surplus in 1666. The interest on the debt was reduced from 52 million to 24 million livres. The \"taille\" was reduced to 42 million in 1661 and 35 million in 1665; finally the revenue from indirect taxation progressed from 26 million to 55 million. The revenues of the royal domain were raised from 80,000 livres in 1661 to 5.5 million livres in 1671. In 1661, the receipts were equivalent to 26 million British pounds, of which 10 million reached the treasury. The expenditure was around 18 million pounds, leaving a deficit of 8 million. In 1667, the net receipts had risen to 20 million pounds sterling, while expenditure had fallen to 11 million, leaving a surplus of 9 million pounds.\n\nTo support the reorganized and enlarged army, the panoply of Versailles, and the growing civil administration, the king needed a good deal of money. Finance had always been the weak spot in the French monarchy: methods of collecting taxes were costly and inefficient; direct taxes passed through the hands of many intermediate officials; and indirect taxes were collected by private concessionaries, called tax farmers, who made a substantial profit. Consequently, the state always received far less than what the taxpayers actually paid.\n\nThe main weakness arose from an old bargain between the French crown and nobility: the king might raise taxes without consent if only he refrained from taxing the nobles. Only the \"unprivileged\" classes paid direct taxes, and this term came to mean the peasants only, since many bourgeois, in one way or another, obtained exemptions.\n\nThe system was outrageously unjust in throwing a heavy tax burden on the poor and helpless. Later, after 1700, the French ministers who were supported by Louis' secret wife Madame De Maintenon, were able to convince the king to change his fiscal policy. Louis was willing enough to tax the nobles but was unwilling to fall under their control, and only towards the close of his reign, under extreme stress of war, was he able, for the first time in French history, to impose direct taxes on the aristocratic elements of the population. This was a step toward equality before the law and toward sound public finance, but so many concessions and exemptions were won by nobles and bourgeois that the reform lost much of its value.\n\nLouis and Colbert also had wide-ranging plans to bolster French commerce and trade. Colbert's mercantilist administration established new industries and encouraged manufacturers and inventors, such as the Lyon silk manufacturers and the Gobelins manufactory, a producer of tapestries. He invited manufacturers and artisans from all over Europe to France, such as Murano glassmakers, Swedish ironworkers, and Dutch shipbuilders. In this way, he aimed to decrease foreign imports while increasing French exports, hence reducing the net outflow of precious metals from France.\n\nLouis instituted reforms in military administration through Michel le Tellier and the latter's son François-Michel le Tellier, Marquis de Louvois. They helped to curb the independent spirit of the nobility, imposing order on them at court and in the army. Gone were the days when generals protracted war at the frontiers while bickering over precedence and ignoring orders from the capital and the larger politico-diplomatic picture. The old military aristocracy (the \"Noblesse d'épée\", or \"nobility of the sword\") ceased to have a monopoly over senior military positions and rank. Louvois, in particular, pledged to modernize the army and re-organize it into a professional, disciplined, well-trained force. He was devoted to the soldiers' material well-being and morale, and even tried to direct campaigns.\n\nLegal matters did not escape Louis' attention, as is reflected in the numerous \"Great Ordinances\" he enacted. Pre-revolutionary France was a patchwork of legal systems, with as many legal customs as there were provinces, and two co-existing legal traditions—customary law in the north and Roman civil law in the south. The \"Grande Ordonnance de Procédure Civile\" of 1667, also known as the \"Code Louis\", was a comprehensive legal code attempting a uniform regulation of civil procedure throughout legally irregular France. Among other things, it prescribed baptismal, marriage and death records in the state's registers, not the church's, and it strictly regulated the right of the \"Parlements\" to remonstrate. The \"Code Louis\" played an important part in French legal history as the basis for the Napoleonic code, from which many modern legal codes are, in turn, derived.\n\nOne of Louis' more infamous decrees was the \"Grande Ordonnance sur les Colonies\" of 1685, also known as the \"Code Noir\" (\"black code\"). Although it sanctioned slavery, it attempted to humanise the practice by prohibiting the separation of families. Additionally, in the colonies, only Roman Catholics could own slaves, and these had to be baptised.\n\nLouis ruled through a number of councils:\nBULLET::::- Conseil d'en haut (\"High Council\", concerning the most important matters of state)—composed of the king, the crown prince, the controller-general of finances, and the secretaries of state in charge of various departments. The members of that council were called ministers of state.\nBULLET::::- Conseil des dépêches (\"Council of Messages\", concerning notices and administrative reports from the provinces).\nBULLET::::- Conseil de Conscience (\"Council of Conscience\", concerning religious affairs and episcopal appointments).\nBULLET::::- Conseil royal des finances (\"Royal Council of Finances\") who was headed by the \"chef du conseil des finances\" (an honorary post in most cases)—this was one of the few posts in the council that was opened to the high aristocracy.\n\nThe death of his maternal uncle King Philip IV of Spain, in 1665, precipitated the War of Devolution. In 1660, Louis had married Philip IV's eldest daughter, Maria Theresa, as one of the provisions of the 1659 Treaty of the Pyrenees. The marriage treaty specified that Maria Theresa was to renounce all claims to Spanish territory for herself and all her descendants. Mazarin and Lionne, however, made the renunciation conditional on the full payment of a Spanish dowry of 500,000 écus. The dowry was never paid and would later play a part persuading his maternal first cousin Charles II of Spain to leave his empire to Philip, Duke of Anjou (later Philip V of Spain), the grandson of Louis XIV and Maria Theresa.\n\nThe War of Devolution did not focus on the payment of the dowry, rather, the lack of payment was what Louis XIV used as a pretext for nullifying Maria Theresa's renunciation of her claims, allowing the land to \"devolve\" to him. In Brabant (the location of the land in dispute), children of first marriages traditionally were not disadvantaged by their parents’ remarriages and still inherited property. Louis' wife was Philip IV's daughter by his first marriage, while the new King of Spain, Charles II, was his son by a subsequent marriage. Thus, Brabant allegedly \"devolved\" to Maria Theresa. This excuse allowed France to attack the Spanish Netherlands.\n\nDuring the Eighty Years' War with Spain, France supported the Dutch Republic as part of a general policy of opposing Habsburg power. Johan de Witt, Dutch Grand Pensionary from 1653 to 1672, viewed them as crucial for Dutch security and against his domestic Orangist opponents. Louis provided support in the 1665-1667 Second Anglo-Dutch War but used the opportunity to launch the War of Devolution in 1667. This captured Franche-Comté and much of the Spanish Netherlands; French expansion in this area was a direct threat to Dutch economic interests. \n\nThe Dutch opened talks with Charles II of England on a common diplomatic front against France, leading to the Triple Alliance, between England, the Dutch and Sweden. The threat of an escalation and a secret treaty to divide Spanish possessions with Emperor Leopold, the other major claimant to the throne of Spain, led Louis to relinquish many of his gains in the 1668 Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle. \n\nLouis placed little reliance on his agreement with Leopold and as it was now clear French and Dutch aims were in direct conflict, he decided to first defeat the Republic, then seize the Spanish Netherlands. This required breaking up the Triple Alliance; he paid Sweden to remain neutral and signed the 1670 Secret Treaty of Dover with Charles, an Anglo-French alliance against the Dutch. In May 1672, France invaded the Republic, supported by Münster and the Electorate of Cologne. \n\nRapid French advance led to a coup that toppled De Witt and brought William III to power. Leopold viewed French expansion into the Rhineland as an increasing threat, especially after their seizure of the strategic Duchy of Lorraine in 1670. The prospect of Dutch defeat led him to an alliance with Brandenburg-Prussia on 23 June, followed by another with the Republic on 25th. Although Brandenburg was forced out of the war by the June 1673 Treaty of Vossem, in August an anti-French alliance was formed by the Dutch, Spain, Emperor Leopold and the Duke of Lorraine. \n\nThe French alliance was deeply unpopular in England, who made peace with the Dutch in the February 1674 Treaty of Westminster. However, French armies held significant advantages over their opponents; an undivided command, talented generals like Turenne, Condé and Luxembourg and vastly superior logistics. Reforms introduced by Louvois, the Secretary of War, helped maintain large field armies that could be mobilised much quicker, allowing them to mount offensives in early spring before their opponents were ready.\n\nThe French alliance was deeply unpopular in England, who made peace with the Dutch in the February 1674 Treaty of Westminster. The French were forced to retreat from the Dutch Republic but these advantages allowed them to hold their ground in Alsace and the Spanish Netherlands, while retaking Franche-Comté. By 1678, mutual exhaustion led to the Treaty of Nijmegen, which was generally settled in France's favour and allowed Louis to intervene in the Scanian War. Despite military defeat, his ally Sweden regained much of their losses under the 1679 treaties of Saint-Germain-en-Laye, Fontainebleau and Lund imposed on Denmark-Norway and Brandenburg.\n\nLouis was at the height of his power, but at the cost of uniting his opponents; this increased as he continued his expansion. In 1679, he dismissed his foreign minister Simon Arnauld, marquis de Pomponne, because he was seen as having compromised too much with the allies. Louis maintained the strength of his army, but in his next series of territorial claims avoided using military force alone. Rather, he combined it with legal pretexts in his efforts to augment the boundaries of his kingdom. Contemporary treaties were intentionally phrased ambiguously. Louis established the Chambers of Reunion to determine the full extent of his rights and obligations under those treaties.\n\nCities and territories, such as Luxembourg and Casale, were prized for their strategic positions on the frontier and access to important waterways. Louis also sought Strasbourg, an important strategic crossing on the left bank of the Rhine and theretofore a Free Imperial City of the Holy Roman Empire, annexing it and other territories in 1681. Although a part of Alsace, Strasbourg was not part of Habsburg-ruled Alsace and was thus not ceded to France in the Peace of Westphalia.\n\nFollowing these annexations, Spain declared war, precipitating the War of the Reunions. However, the Spanish were rapidly defeated because the Emperor (distracted by the Great Turkish War) abandoned them, and the Dutch only supported them minimally. By the Truce of Ratisbon, in 1684, Spain was forced to acquiesce in the French occupation of most of the conquered territories, for 20 years.\n\nLouis' policy of the \"Réunions\" may have raised France to its greatest size and power during his reign, but it alienated much of Europe. This poor public opinion was compounded by French actions off the Barbary Coast and at Genoa. First, Louis had Algiers and Tripoli, two Barbary pirate strongholds, bombarded to obtain a favourable treaty and the liberation of Christian slaves. Next, in 1684, a punitive mission was launched against Genoa in retaliation for its support for Spain in previous wars. Although the Genoese submitted, and the Doge led an official mission of apology to Versailles, France gained a reputation for brutality and arrogance. European apprehension at growing French might and the realisation of the extent of the dragonnades' effect (discussed below) led many states to abandon their alliance with France. Accordingly, by the late 1680s, France became increasingly isolated in Europe.\n\nFrench colonies multiplied in Africa, the Americas, and Asia during Louis' reign, and French explorers made important discoveries in North America. In 1673, Louis Jolliet and Jacques Marquette discovered the Mississippi River. In 1682, René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle, followed the Mississippi to the Gulf of Mexico and claimed the vast Mississippi basin in Louis' name, calling it \"Louisiane\". French trading posts were also established in India, at Chandernagore and Pondicherry, and in the Indian Ocean at Île Bourbon. Throughout these regions Louis and Colbert embarked on an extensive program of architecture and urbanism meant to reflect the styles of Versailles and Paris and the 'gloire' of the realm.\n\nMeanwhile, diplomatic relations were initiated with distant countries. In 1669, Suleiman Aga led an Ottoman embassy to revive the old Franco-Ottoman alliance. Then, in 1682, after the reception of the Moroccan embassy of Mohammed Tenim in France, Moulay Ismail, Sultan of Morocco, allowed French consular and commercial establishments in his country. In 1699, Louis once again received a Moroccan ambassador, Abdallah bin Aisha, and in 1715, he received a Persian embassy led by Mohammad Reza Beg.\n\nFrom farther afield, Siam dispatched an embassy in 1684, reciprocated by the French magnificently the next year under Alexandre, Chevalier de Chaumont. This, in turn, was succeeded by another Siamese embassy under Kosa Pan, superbly received at Versailles in 1686. Louis then sent another embassy in 1687, under Simon de la Loubère, and French influence grew at the Siamese court, which granted Mergui as a naval base to France. However, the death of Narai, King of Ayutthaya, the execution of his pro-French minister Constantine Phaulkon, and the Siege of Bangkok in 1688 ended this era of French influence.\n\nFrance also attempted to participate actively in Jesuit missions to China. To break the Portuguese dominance there, Louis sent Jesuit missionaries to the court of the Kangxi Emperor in 1685: Jean de Fontaney, Joachim Bouvet, Jean-François Gerbillon, Louis Le Comte, and Claude de Visdelou. Louis also received a Chinese Jesuit, Michael Shen Fu-Tsung, at Versailles in 1684. Furthermore, Louis' librarian and translator Arcadio Huang was Chinese.\n\nBy the early 1680s, Louis had greatly augmented French influence in the world. Domestically, he successfully increased the influence of the crown and its authority over the church and aristocracy, thus consolidating absolute monarchy in France.\n\nLouis initially supported traditional Gallicanism, which limited papal authority in France, and convened an Assembly of the French clergy in November 1681. Before its dissolution eight months later, the Assembly had accepted the Declaration of the Clergy of France, which increased royal authority at the expense of papal power. Without royal approval, bishops could not leave France, and appeals could not be made to the Pope. Additionally, government officials could not be excommunicated for acts committed in pursuance of their duties. Although the king could not make ecclesiastical law, all papal regulations without royal assent were invalid in France. Unsurprisingly, the pope repudiated the Declaration.\n\nBy attaching nobles to his court at Versailles, Louis achieved increased control over the French aristocracy. Apartments were built to house those willing to pay court to the king. However, the pensions and privileges necessary to live in a style appropriate to their rank were only possible by waiting constantly on Louis. For this purpose, an elaborate court ritual was created wherein the king became the centre of attention and was observed throughout the day by the public. With his excellent memory, Louis could then see who attended him at court and who was absent, facilitating the subsequent distribution of favours and positions. Another tool Louis used to control his nobility was censorship, which often involved the opening of letters to discern their author's opinion of the government and king. Moreover, by entertaining, impressing, and domesticating them with extravagant luxury and other distractions, Louis not only cultivated public opinion of him, he also ensured the aristocracy remained under his scrutiny.\n\nLouis' extravagance at Versailles extended far beyond the scope of elaborate court rituals. In an excerpt from Diderot's \"Encyclopédie,\" Louis-Jean-Marie Daubenton recounts a story in which Louis took delivery of an African elephant as a gift. This, along with the prohibition of private armies, prevented them from passing time on their own estates and in their regional power bases, from which they historically waged local wars and plotted resistance to royal authority. Louis thus compelled and seduced the old military aristocracy (the \"nobility of the sword\") into becoming his ceremonial courtiers, further weakening their power. In their place, Louis raised commoners or the more recently ennobled bureaucratic aristocracy (the \"nobility of the robe\"). He judged that royal authority thrived more surely by filling high executive and administrative positions with these men because they could be more easily dismissed than nobles of ancient lineage, with entrenched influence. It is believed that Louis' policies were rooted in his experiences during the \"Fronde\", when men of high birth readily took up the rebel cause against their king, who was actually the kinsman of some. This victory of Louis' over the nobility may have then in fact ensured the end of major civil wars in France until the French Revolution about a century later.\n\nIn 1648 France was the leading European power, and most of the wars pivoted around its aggressiveness. Only poverty-stricken Russia exceeded it in population, and no one could match its wealth, central location, and very strong professional army. It had largely avoided the devastation of the Thirty Years' War. Its weaknesses included an inefficient financial system that was hard-pressed to pay for all the military adventures, and the tendency of most other powers to gang up against it.\n\nDuring the very long reign of King Louis XIV (1643 – 1715), France fought three major wars: the Franco-Dutch War, the War of the League of Augsburg, and the War of the Spanish Succession. There were also two lesser conflicts: the War of Devolution and the War of the Reunions. The wars were very expensive but they defined Louis XIV's foreign policies, and his personality shaped his approach. Impelled \"by a mix of commerce, revenge, and pique,\" Louis sensed that warfare was the ideal way to enhance his glory. In peacetime he concentrated on preparing for the next war. He taught his diplomats that their job was to create tactical and strategic advantages for the French military. By 1695, France retained much of its dominance, but had lost control of the seas to the combination of England and Holland. What's more, most countries, both Protestant and Catholic, were in alliance against it. Vauban, France's leading military strategist, warned the king in 1689 that a hostile \"Alliance\" was too powerful at sea. He recommended the best way for France to fight back was to license French merchants ships to privateer and seize enemy merchant ships, while avoiding its navies:\n\nVauban was pessimistic about France's so-called friends and allies: \n\nIt has traditionally been suggested that the devout Madame de Maintenon pushed Louis to persecute Protestants and revoke the 1598 Edict of Nantes, which awarded Huguenots political and religious freedom, but her influence in the matter is now being questioned. Louis saw the persistence of Protestantism as a disgraceful reminder of royal powerlessness. After all, the Edict was the pragmatic concession of his grandfather Henry IV to end the longstanding French Wars of Religion. An additional factor in Louis' thinking was the prevailing contemporary European principle to assure socio-political stability, \"cuius regio, eius religio\" (\"whose realm, his religion\"), the idea that the religion of the ruler should be the religion of the realm (as originally confirmed in central Europe in the Peace of Augsburg of 1555).\n\nResponding to petitions, Louis initially excluded Protestants from office, constrained the meeting of synods, closed churches outside of Edict-stipulated areas, banned Protestant outdoor preachers, and prohibited domestic Protestant migration. He also disallowed Protestant-Catholic intermarriages to which third parties objected, encouraged missions to the Protestants, and rewarded converts to Catholicism. This discrimination did not encounter much Protestant resistance, and a steady conversion of Protestants occurred, especially among the noble elites.\n\nIn 1681, Louis dramatically increased his persecution of Protestants. The principle of \"cuius regio, eius religio\" generally had also meant that subjects who refused to convert could emigrate, but Louis banned emigration and effectively insisted that all Protestants must be converted. Secondly, following the proposal of René de Marillac and the Marquis of Louvois, he began quartering dragoons in Protestant homes. Although this was within his legal rights, the \"dragonnades\" inflicted severe financial strain on Protestants and atrocious abuse. Between 300,000 and 400,000 Huguenots converted, as this entailed financial rewards and exemption from the \"dragonnades\".\n\nOn 15 October 1685, Louis issued the Edict of Fontainebleau, which cited the redundancy of privileges for Protestants given their scarcity after the extensive conversions. The Edict of Fontainebleau revoked the Edict of Nantes and repealed all the privileges that arose therefrom. By his edict, Louis no longer tolerated the existence of Protestant groups, pastors, or churches in France. No further churches were to be constructed, and those already existing were to be demolished. Pastors could choose either exile or a secular life. Those Protestants who had resisted conversion were now to be baptised forcibly into the established church.\n\nWriters have debated Louis' reasons for issuing the Edict of Fontainebleau. He may have been seeking to placate Pope Innocent XI, with whom relations were tense and whose aid was necessary to determine the outcome of a succession crisis in the Electorate of Cologne. He may also have acted to upstage Emperor Leopold I and regain international prestige after the latter defeated the Turks without Louis' help. Otherwise, he may simply have desired to end the remaining divisions in French society dating to the Wars of Religion by fulfilling his coronation oath to eradicate heresy.\n\nMany historians have condemned the Edict of Fontainebleau as gravely harmful to France. In support, they cite the emigration of about 200,000 highly skilled Huguenots (roughly one-fourth of the Protestant population, or 1% of the French population) who defied royal decrees and fled France for various Protestant states, weakening the French economy and enriching that of Protestant states.\n\nOn the other hand, there are historians who view this as an exaggeration. They argue that most of France's preeminent Protestant businessmen and industrialists converted to Catholicism and remained.\n\nWhat is certain is that reaction to the Edict was mixed. Even while French Catholic leaders exulted, Pope Innocent XI still argued with Louis over Gallicanism and criticised the use of violence. Protestants across Europe were horrified at the treatment of their co-religionists, but most Catholics in France applauded the move. Nonetheless, it is indisputable that Louis' public image in most of Europe, especially in Protestant regions, was dealt a severe blow.\n\nIn the end, however, despite renewed tensions with the Camisards of south-central France at the end of his reign, Louis may have helped ensure that his successor would experience fewer instances of the religion-based disturbances that had plagued his forebears. French society would sufficiently change by the time of his descendant, Louis XVI, to welcome tolerance in the form of the 1787 Edict of Versailles, also known as the Edict of Tolerance. This restored to non-Catholics their civil rights and the freedom to worship openly. With the advent of the French Revolution in 1789, Protestants were granted equal rights with their Roman Catholic counterparts.\n\nThe War of the League of Augsburg, which lasted from 1688 to 1697, initiated a period of decline in Louis' political and diplomatic fortunes. The conflict arose from two events in the Rhineland. First, in 1685, the Elector Palatine Charles II died. All that remained of his immediate family was Louis' sister-in-law, Elizabeth Charlotte. German law ostensibly barred her from succeeding to her brother's lands and electoral dignity, but it was unclear enough for arguments in favour of Elizabeth Charlotte to have a chance of success. Conversely, the princess was clearly entitled to a division of the family's personal property. Louis pressed her claims to land and chattels, hoping the latter, at least, would be given to her. Then, in 1688, Maximilian Henry of Bavaria, Archbishop of Cologne, an ally of France, died. The archbishopric had traditionally been held by the Wittelsbachs of Bavaria. However, the Bavarian claimant to replace Maximilian Henry, Prince Joseph Clemens of Bavaria, was at that time not more than 17 years old and not even ordained. Louis sought instead to install his own candidate, William Egon of Fürstenberg, to ensure the key Rhenish state remained an ally.\n\nIn light of his foreign and domestic policies during the early 1680s, which were perceived as aggressive, Louis' actions, fostered by the succession crises of the late 1680s, created concern and alarm in much of Europe. This led to the formation of the 1686 League of Augsburg by the Holy Roman Emperor, Spain, Sweden, Saxony, and Bavaria. Their stated intention was to return France to at least the borders agreed to in the Treaty of Nijmegen. Emperor Leopold I's persistent refusal to convert the Truce of Ratisbon into a permanent treaty fed Louis' fears that the Emperor would turn on France and attack the Reunions after settling his affairs in the Balkans.\n\nAnother event that Louis found threatening was the Glorious Revolution of 1688, in England. Although King James II was Catholic, his two Anglican daughters, Mary and Anne, ensured the English people a Protestant succession. However, when James II's son James was born, he took precedence in the succession over his elder sisters. This seemed to herald an era of Catholic monarchs in England. Protestant lords called on the Dutch Prince William III of Orange, grandson of Charles I of England, to come to their aid. He sailed for England with troops despite Louis' warning that France would regard it as a provocation. Witnessing numerous desertions and defections, even among those closest to him, James II fled England. Parliament declared the throne vacant, and offered it to James's daughter Mary II and his son-in-law and nephew William. Vehemently anti-French, William (now William III of England) pushed his new kingdoms into war, thus transforming the League of Augsburg into the Grand Alliance. Before this happened, Louis expected William's expedition to England to absorb his energies and those of his allies, so he dispatched troops to the Rhineland after the expiry of his ultimatum to the German princes requiring confirmation of the Truce of Ratisbon and acceptance of his demands about the succession crises. This military manoeuvre was also intended to protect his eastern provinces from Imperial invasion by depriving the enemy army of sustenance, thus explaining the pre-emptive scorched earth policy pursued in much of southwestern Germany (the \"Devastation of the Palatinate\").\n\nFrench armies were generally victorious throughout the war because of Imperial commitments in the Balkans, French logistical superiority, and the quality of French generals such as Condé's famous pupil, François Henri de Montmorency-Bouteville, duc de Luxembourg. His triumphs at the Battles of Fleurus in 1690, Steenkerque in 1692, and Landen in 1693 preserved northern France from invasion.\n\nAlthough an attempt to restore James II failed at the Battle of the Boyne in 1690, France accumulated a string of victories from Flanders in the north, Germany in the east, and Italy and Spain in the south, to the high seas and the colonies. Louis personally supervised the captures of Mons in 1691 and Namur in 1692. Luxembourg gave France the defensive line of the Sambre by capturing Charleroi in 1693. France also overran most of the Duchy of Savoy after the battles of Marsaglia and Staffarde in 1693. While naval stalemate ensued after the French victory at the Battle of Beachy Head in 1690 and the Allied victory at Barfleur-La Hougue in 1692, the Battle of Torroella in 1694 exposed Catalonia to French invasion, culminating in the capture of Barcelona. Although the Dutch captured Pondichéry in 1693, a French raid on the Spanish treasure port of Cartagena, Spain in 1697 yielded a fortune of 10,000,000 livres.\n\nIn July 1695, the city of Namur, occupied for three years by the French, was besieged by an allied army led by William III. Louis XIV ordered the surprise destruction of a Flemish city to divert the attention of these troops. This led to the bombardment of Brussels, in which 4-5000 buildings were destroyed, including the entire city-center. The strategy failed, as Namur fell three weeks later, but harmed Louis XIV's reputation: a century later, Napoleon deemed the bombardment \"as barbarous as it was useless.\"\n\nPeace was broached by Sweden in 1690. By 1692, both sides evidently wanted peace, and secret bilateral talks began, but to no avail. Louis tried to break up the alliance against him by dealing with individual opponents, but this did not achieve its aim until 1696, when the Savoyards agreed to the Treaty of Turin and switched sides. Thereafter, members of the League of Augsburg rushed to the peace table, and negotiations for a general peace began in earnest, culminating in the Treaty of Ryswick of 1697.\n\nThe Treaty of Ryswick ended the War of the League of Augsburg and disbanded the Grand Alliance. By manipulating their rivalries and suspicions, Louis divided his enemies and broke their power.\n\nThe treaty yielded many benefits for France. Louis secured permanent French sovereignty over all of Alsace, including Strasbourg, and established the Rhine as the Franco-German border (which persists to this day). Pondichéry and Acadia were returned to France, and Louis' \"de facto\" possession of Saint-Domingue was recognised as lawful. However, he returned Catalonia and most of the Reunions.\n\nFrench military superiority might have allowed him to press for more advantageous terms. Thus, his generosity to Spain with regard to Catalonia has been read as a concession to foster pro-French sentiment and may ultimately have induced King Charles II to name Louis' grandson Philip, Duke of Anjou, as heir to the throne of Spain. In exchange for financial compensation, France renounced its interests in the Electorate of Cologne and the Palatinate. Lorraine, which had been occupied by the French since 1670, was returned to its rightful Duke Leopold, albeit with a right of way to the French military. William and Mary were recognised as joint sovereigns of the British Isles, and Louis withdrew support for James II. The Dutch were given the right to garrison forts in the Spanish Netherlands that acted as a protective barrier against possible French aggression. Though in some respects, the Treaty of Ryswick may appear a diplomatic defeat for Louis since he failed to place client rulers in control of the Palatinate or the Electorate of Cologne, he did in fact fulfill many of the aims laid down in his 1688 ultimatum. In any case, peace in 1697 was desirable to Louis, since France was exhausted from the costs of the war.\n\nBy the time of the Treaty of Ryswick, the Spanish succession had been a source of concern to European leaders for well over forty years. King Charles II ruled a vast empire comprising Spain, Naples, Sicily, Milan, the Spanish Netherlands, and numerous Spanish colonies. He produced no children, however, and consequently had no direct heirs.\n\nThe principal claimants to the throne of Spain belonged to the ruling families of France and Austria. The French claim derived from Louis XIV's mother Anne of Austria (the older sister of Philip IV of Spain) and his wife Maria Theresa (Philip IV's eldest daughter). Based on the laws of primogeniture, France had the better claim as it originated from the eldest daughters in two generations. However, their renunciation of succession rights complicated matters. In the case of Maria Theresa, nonetheless, the renunciation was considered null and void owing to Spain's breach of her marriage contract with Louis. In contrast, no renunciations tainted the claims of the Emperor Leopold I's son Charles, Archduke of Austria, who was a grandson of Philip III's youngest daughter Maria Anna. The English and Dutch feared that a French or Austrian-born Spanish king would threaten the balance of power and thus preferred the Bavarian Prince Joseph Ferdinand, a grandson of Leopold I through his first wife Margaret Theresa of Spain (the younger daughter of Philip IV).\n\nIn an attempt to avoid war, Louis signed the Treaty of the Hague with William III of England in 1698. This agreement divided Spain's Italian territories between Louis's son \"le Grand Dauphin\" and the Archduke Charles, with the rest of the empire awarded to Joseph Ferdinand. William III consented to permitting the Dauphin's new territories to become part of France when the latter succeeded to his father's throne. The signatories, however, omitted to consult the ruler of these lands, and Charles II was passionately opposed to the dismemberment of his empire. In 1699, he re-confirmed his 1693 will that named Joseph Ferdinand as his sole successor.\n\nSix months later, Joseph Ferdinand died. Therefore, in 1700, Louis and William III concluded a fresh partitioning agreement, the Treaty of London. This allocated Spain, the Low Countries, and the Spanish colonies to the Archduke. The Dauphin would receive all of Spain's Italian territories. Charles II acknowledged that his empire could only remain undivided by bequeathing it entirely to a Frenchman or an Austrian. Under pressure from his German wife, Maria Anna of Neuburg, Charles II named the Archduke Charles as his sole heir.\n\nOn his deathbed in 1700, Charles II unexpectedly changed his will. The clear demonstration of French military superiority for many decades before this time, the pro-French faction at the court of Spain, and even Pope Innocent XII convinced him that France was more likely to preserve his empire intact. He thus offered the entire empire to the Dauphin's second son Philip, Duke of Anjou, provided it remained undivided. Anjou was not in the direct line of French succession, thus his accession would not cause a Franco-Spanish union. If Anjou refused, the throne would be offered to his younger brother Charles, Duke of Berry. If the Duke of Berry declined it, it would go to the Archduke Charles, then to the distantly related House of Savoy if Charles declined it.\n\nLouis was confronted with a difficult choice. He might agree to a partition of the Spanish possessions and avoid a general war, or accept Charles II's will and alienate much of Europe. Initially, Louis may have been inclined to abide by the partition treaties. However, the Dauphin's insistence persuaded Louis otherwise. Moreover, Louis's foreign minister, Jean-Baptiste Colbert, marquis de Torcy, pointed out that war with the Emperor would almost certainly ensue whether Louis accepted the partition treaties or Charles II's will. He emphasised that, should it come to war, William III was unlikely to stand by France since he \"made a treaty to avoid war and did not intend to go to war to implement the treaty\". Indeed, in the event of a war, it might be preferable to be already in control of the disputed lands. Eventually, therefore, Louis decided to accept Charles II's will. Philip, Duke of Anjou, thus became Philip V, King of Spain.\n\nMost European rulers accepted Philip as king, though some only reluctantly. Depending on one's views of the war as inevitable or not, Louis acted reasonably or arrogantly. He confirmed that Philip V retained his French rights despite his new Spanish position. Admittedly, he may only have been hypothesising a theoretical eventuality and not attempting a Franco-Spanish union. But his actions were certainly not read as being disinterested. Moreover, Louis sent troops to the Spanish Netherlands to evict Dutch garrisons and secure Dutch recognition of Philip V. In 1701, Philip transferred the \"asiento\" (the right to supply slaves to Spanish colonies) to France, alienating English traders. As tensions mounted, Louis decided to acknowledge James Stuart, the son of James II, as king of England on the latter's death, infuriating William III. These actions enraged Britain and the Dutch Republic. With the Holy Roman Emperor and the petty German states, they formed another Grand Alliance and declared war on France in 1702. French diplomacy, however, secured Bavaria, Portugal, and Savoy as Franco-Spanish allies.\n\nEven before war was officially declared, hostilities began with Imperial aggression in Italy. When finally declared, the War of the Spanish Succession would last almost until Louis's death, at great cost to him and the kingdom of France.\n\nThe war began with French successes, however the joint talents of John Churchill, Duke of Marlborough, and Eugene of Savoy checked these victories and broke the myth of French invincibility. The duo allowed the Palatinate and Austria to occupy Bavaria after their victory at the Battle of Blenheim. Maximilian II Emanuel, Elector of Bavaria, had to flee to the Spanish Netherlands. The impact of this victory won the support of Portugal and Savoy. Later, the Battle of Ramillies delivered the Low Countries up to the Allies, and the Battle of Turin forced Louis to evacuate Italy, leaving it open to Allied forces. Marlborough and Eugene of Savoy met again at the Battle of Oudenarde, which enabled them to mount an invasion of France.\n\nFrance established contact with Francis II Rákóczi and promised support if he took up the cause of Hungarian independence.\n\nDefeats, famine, and mounting debt greatly weakened France. Between 1693 and 1710, over two million people died in two famines, made worse as foraging armies seized food supplies from the villages. In his desperation, Louis XIV even ordered a disastrous invasion of the English island of Guernsey in the autumn of 1704 with the aim of raiding their successful harvest. By the winter of 1708–1709, Louis was willing to accept peace at nearly any cost. He agreed that the entire Spanish empire should be surrendered to the Archduke Charles, and he also consented to return to the frontiers of the Peace of Westphalia, giving up all the territories he had acquired over sixty years of his reign. He could not speak for his grandson, however, and could not promise that Philip V would accept these terms. Thus, the Allies demanded that Louis single-handedly attack his own grandson to force these terms on him. If he could not achieve this within the year, the war would resume. Louis could not accept these terms.\n\nThe final phases of the War of the Spanish Succession demonstrated that the Allies could not maintain the Archduke Charles in Spain just as surely as France could not retain the entire Spanish inheritance for King Philip V. The Allies were definitively expelled from central Spain by the Franco-Spanish victories at the Battles of Villaviciosa and Brihuega in 1710. French forces elsewhere remained obdurate despite their defeats. The Allies suffered a Pyrrhic victory at the Battle of Malplaquet with 21,000 casualties, twice that of the French. Eventually, France recovered its military pride with the decisive victory at Denain in 1712.\n\nFrench military successes near the end of the war took place against the background of a changed political situation in Austria. In 1705, the Emperor Leopold I died. His elder son and successor, Joseph I, followed him in 1711. His heir was none other than the Archduke Charles, who secured control of all of his brother's Austrian land holdings. If the Spanish empire then fell to him, it would have resurrected a domain as vast as that of Holy Roman Emperor Charles V in the sixteenth century. To the maritime powers of Great Britain and the Dutch Republic, this would have been as undesirable as a Franco-Spanish union.\n\nAs a result of the fresh British perspective on the European balance of power, Anglo-French talks began that culminated in the 1713 Treaty of Utrecht between Louis, Philip V of Spain, Anne, Queen of Great Britain, and the Dutch Republic. In 1714, after losing Landau and Freiburg, the Holy Roman Emperor also made peace with France in the Treaties of Rastatt and Baden.\n\nIn the general settlement, Philip V retained Spain and its colonies, whereas Austria received the Spanish Netherlands and divided Spanish Italy with Savoy. Britain kept Gibraltar and Menorca. Louis agreed to withdraw his support for James Stuart, son of James II and pretender to the throne of Great Britain, and ceded Newfoundland, Rupert's Land, and Acadia in the Americas to Anne. Britain gained most from the Treaty of Utrecht, but the final terms were much more favourable to France than those which were being discussed in peace negotiations in 1709 and 1710. France retained Île-Saint-Jean and Île Royale, and Louis did acquire a few minor European territories, such as the Principality of Orange and the Ubaye Valley, which covered transalpine passes into Italy. Thanks to Louis, his allies the Electors of Bavaria and Cologne were restored to their pre-war status and returned their lands.\n\nLouis and his wife Maria Theresa of Spain had six children from the marriage contracted for them in 1660. However, only one child, the eldest, survived to adulthood: Louis, \"le Grand Dauphin\", known as \"Monseigneur\". Maria Theresa died in 1683, whereupon Louis remarked that she had never caused him unease on any other occasion.\n\nDespite evidence of affection early on in their marriage, Louis was never faithful to Maria Theresa. He took a series of mistresses, both official and unofficial. Among the better documented are Louise de La Vallière (with whom he had 5 children; 1661–67), Bonne de Pons d'Heudicourt (1665), Catherine Charlotte de Gramont (1665), Françoise-Athénaïs, Marquise de Montespan (with whom he had 7 children; 1667–80), Anne de Rohan-Chabot (1669–75), Claude de Vin des Œillets (1 child born in 1676), Isabelle de Ludres (1675–78), and Marie Angélique de Scorailles (1679–81), who died at age 19 in childbirth. Through these liaisons, he produced numerous illegitimate children, most of whom he married to members of cadet branches of the royal family.\n\nLouis proved relatively more faithful to his second wife, Françoise d'Aubigné, Marquise de Maintenon. He first met her through her work caring for his children by Madame de Montespan, noting the care she gave to his favorite, Louis Auguste, Duke of Maine. The king was, at first, put off by her strict religious practice, but he warmed to her through her care for his children.\n\nWhen he legitimized his children by Madame de Montespan on 20 December 1673, Françoise d'Aubigné became the royal governess at Saint-Germain. As governess, she was one of very few people permitted to speak to him as an equal, without limits. It is believed that they were married secretly at Versailles on or around 10 October 1683 or January 1684. This marriage, though never announced or publicly discussed, was an open secret and lasted until his death.\n\nLouis was a pious and devout king who saw himself as the head and protector of the Gallican Church. Louis made his devotions daily regardless of where he was, following the liturgical calendar regularly. Under the influence of his very religious second wife, he became much stronger in the practice of his Catholic faith. This included the banning of opera and comedy performances during Lent.\n\nTowards the middle and the end of his reign, the centre for the King's religious observances was usually the Chapelle Royale at Versailles. Ostentation was a distinguishing feature of daily Mass, annual celebrations, such as those of Holy Week, and special ceremonies. Louis established the Paris Foreign Missions Society, but his informal alliance with the Ottoman Empire was criticised for undermining Christendom.\n\nLouis generously supported the royal court of France and those who worked under him. He brought the Académie Française under his patronage and became its \"Protector\". He allowed Classical French literature to flourish by protecting such writers as Molière, Racine, and La Fontaine, whose works remain greatly influential to this day. Louis also patronised the visual arts by funding and commissioning various artists, such as Charles Le Brun, Pierre Mignard, Antoine Coysevox, and Hyacinthe Rigaud, whose works became famous throughout Europe. In music, composers and musicians such as Jean-Baptiste Lully, Jacques Champion de Chambonnières, and François Couperin thrived. In 1661, Louis founded the Académie Royale de Danse, and in 1669, the Académie d'Opéra, important driving events in the evolution of ballet. The King also attracted, supported and patronized such artists as André Charles Boulle who revolutionised marquetry with his art of inlay, today known as \"Boulle Work\".\n\nOver the course of four building campaigns, Louis converted a hunting lodge built by Louis XIII into the spectacular Palace of Versailles. With the exception of the current Royal Chapel (built near the end of Louis' reign), the palace achieved much of its current appearance after the third building campaign, which was followed by an official move of the royal court to Versailles on 6 May 1682. Versailles became a dazzling, awe-inspiring setting for state affairs and the reception of foreign dignitaries. At Versailles, the king alone commanded attention.\n\nSeveral reasons have been suggested for the creation of the extravagant and stately palace, as well as the relocation of the monarchy's seat. For example, the memoirist Saint-Simon speculated that Louis viewed Versailles as an isolated power center where treasonous cabals could be more readily discovered and foiled. Alternatively, there has been speculation that the revolt of the \"Fronde\" caused Louis to hate Paris, which he abandoned for a country retreat. However, his sponsorship of many public works in Paris, such as the establishment of a police force and of street-lighting, lend little credence to this theory. As a further example of his continued care for the capital, Louis constructed the \"Hôtel des Invalides\", a military complex and home to this day for officers and soldiers rendered infirm either by injury or old age. While pharmacology was still quite rudimentary in his day, the \"Invalides\" pioneered new treatments and set new standards for hospice treatment. The conclusion of the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, in 1668, also induced Louis to demolish the northern walls of Paris in 1670 and replace them with wide tree-lined boulevards.\n\nLouis also renovated and improved the Louvre and other royal residences. Gian Lorenzo Bernini was originally to plan additions to the Louvre; however, his plans would have meant the destruction of much of the existing structure, replacing it with an Italian summer villa in the centre of Paris. Bernini's plans were eventually shelved in favour of Perrault's elegant colonnade. With the relocation of the court to Versailles, the Louvre was given over to the arts and the public.\nDuring his visit from Rome, Bernini also executed a renowned portrait bust of the king.\n\nFew rulers in world history have commemorated themselves in as grand a manner as Louis. Louis used court ritual and the arts to validate and augment his control over France. With his support, Colbert established from the beginning of Louis' personal reign a centralised and institutionalised system for creating and perpetuating the royal image. The King was thus portrayed largely in majesty or at war, notably against Spain. This portrayal of the monarch was to be found in numerous media of artistic expression, such as painting, sculpture, theatre, dance, music, and the almanacs that diffused royal propaganda to the population at large.\n\nOver his lifetime, Louis commissioned numerous works of art to portray himself, among them over 300 formal portraits. The earliest portrayals of Louis already followed the pictorial conventions of the day in depicting the child king as the majestically royal incarnation of France. This idealisation of the monarch continued in later works, which avoided depictions of the effect of the smallpox that Louis contracted in 1647. In the 1660s, Louis began to be shown as a Roman emperor, the god Apollo, or Alexander the Great, as can be seen in many works of Charles Le Brun, such as sculpture, paintings, and the decor of major monuments.\n\nThe depiction of the king in this manner focused on allegorical or mythological attributes, instead of attempting to produce a true likeness. As Louis aged, so too did the manner in which he was depicted. Nonetheless, there was still a disparity between realistic representation and the demands of royal propaganda. There is no better illustration of this than in Hyacinthe Rigaud's frequently-reproduced \"Portrait of Louis XIV of 1701\", in which a 63-year-old Louis appears to stand on a set of unnaturally young legs.\n\nRigaud's portrait exemplified the height of royal portraiture during Louis' reign. Although Rigaud crafted a credible likeness of Louis, the portrait was neither meant as an exercise in realism nor to explore Louis' personal character. Certainly, Rigaud was concerned with detail and depicted the king's costume with great precision, down to his shoe buckle.\n\nHowever, Rigaud's intention was to glorify the monarchy. Rigaud's original, now housed in the Louvre, was originally meant as a gift to Louis' grandson, Philip V of Spain. However, Louis was so pleased with the work that he kept the original and commissioned a copy to be sent to his grandson. That became the first of many copies, both in full and half-length formats, to be made by Rigaud, often with the help of his assistants. The portrait also became a model for French royal and imperial portraiture down to the time of Charles X over a century later. In his work, Rigaud proclaims Louis' exalted royal status through his elegant stance and haughty expression, the royal regalia and throne, rich ceremonial fleur-de-lys robes, as well as the upright column in the background, which, together with the draperies, serves to frame this image of majesty.\n\nIn addition to portraits, Louis commissioned at least 20 statues of himself in the 1680s, to stand in Paris and provincial towns as physical manifestations of his rule. He also commissioned \"war artists\" to follow him on campaigns to document his military triumphs. To remind the people of these triumphs, Louis erected permanent triumphal arches in Paris and the provinces for the first time since the decline of the Roman Empire.\n\nLouis' reign marked the birth and infancy of the art of medallions. Sixteenth-century rulers had often issued medals in small numbers to commemorate the major events of their reigns. Louis, however, struck more than 300 to celebrate the story of the king in bronze, that were enshrined in thousands of households throughout France.\n\nHe also used tapestries as a medium of exalting the monarchy. Tapestries could be allegorical, depicting the elements or seasons, or realist, portraying royal residences or historical events. They were among the most significant means to spread royal propaganda prior to the construction of the Hall of Mirrors at Versailles.\n\nLouis loved ballet and frequently danced in court ballets during the early half of his reign. In general, Louis was an eager dancer who performed 80 roles in 40 major ballets. This approaches the career of a professional ballet dancer.\n\nHis choices were strategic and varied. He danced four parts in three of Molière's comédies-ballets, which are plays accompanied by music and dance. Louis played an Egyptian in \"Le Mariage forcé\" in 1664, a Moorish gentleman in \"Le Sicilien\" in 1667, and both Neptune and Apollo in \"Les Amants magnifiques\" in 1670.\n\nHe sometimes danced leading roles which were suitably royal or godlike (such as Neptune, Apollo, or the Sun). At other times, he would adopt mundane roles before appearing at the end in the lead role. It is considered that, at all times, he provided his roles with sufficient majesty and drew the limelight with his flair for dancing. For Louis, ballet may not have merely been a tool for manipulation in his propaganda machinery. The sheer number of performances he gave as well as the diversity of roles he played may serve to indicate a deeper understanding and interest in the art form.\n\nBesides the official depiction and image of Louis, his subjects also followed a non-official discourse consisting mainly of clandestine publications, popular songs, and rumors that provided an alternative interpretation of Louis and his government. They often focused on the miseries arising from poor government, but also carried the hope for a better future when Louis escaped the malignant influence of his ministers and mistresses, and took the government into his own hands. On the other hand, petitions addressed either directly to Louis or to his ministers exploited the traditional imagery and language of monarchy. These varying interpretations of Louis abounded in self-contradictions that reflected the people's amalgamation of their everyday experiences with the idea of monarchy.\n\nBULLET::::- Alexandre Dumas portrayed Louis in his two sequels to \"The Three Musketeers\": first as a child in \"Twenty Years After\", then as a young man in \"The Vicomte de Bragelonne\", in which he is a central character. The final part of the latter novel recounts the legend that a mysterious prisoner in an iron mask was actually Louis' twin brother and has spawned numerous film adaptations generally titled \"The Man in the Iron Mask.\"\nBULLET::::- In 1910, the American historical novelist Charles Major wrote \"\"The Little King: A Story of the Childhood of King Louis XIV\"\".\nBULLET::::- Louis is a major character in the 1959 historical novel \"\"Angélique et le Roy\"\" (\"Angélique and the King\"), part of the Angelique Series. The protagonist, a strong-willed lady at Versailles, rejects the King's advances and refuses to become his mistress. A later book, the 1961 \"\"Angélique se révolte\"\" (\"Angélique in Revolt\"), details the dire consequences of her defying this powerful monarch.\nBULLET::::- A character based on Louis plays an important role in \"The Age of Unreason\", a series of four alternate history novels written by American science fiction and fantasy author Gregory Keyes.\nBULLET::::- Louis features significantly in Neal Stephenson's Baroque Cycle, specifically \"The Confusion\", the greater part of which takes place at Versailles.\nBULLET::::- In the \"39 Clues\" series universe, it has been noted that Louis was part of the Cahill branch, Tomas.\nBULLET::::- He is called the son of Apollo in Rick Riordan's Trials of Apollo series.\nBULLET::::- Louis XIV is portrayed in the novel The Moon and the Sun by Vonda N. McIntyre.\n\nBULLET::::- The film, \"The Taking of Power by Louis XIV\" (1966), directed by Roberto Rossellini, shows Louis's rise to power after the death of Cardinal Mazarin.\nBULLET::::- The film \"Man in the Iron Mask\" (1998), directed by Randall Wallace, focused on the identity of an anonymous masked prisoner who spent decades in the Bastille and other French prisons, and his true identity remains somewhat a mystery till date. The monarch was played by Leonardo DiCaprio.\nBULLET::::- The film, \"Le Roi Danse\" (2000; translated: \"The King Dances\"), directed by Gérard Corbiau, reveals Louis through the eyes of\nBULLET::::- Jean-Baptiste Lully, his court musician. Julian Sands portrayed Louis in Roland Jaffe's \"Vatel\" (2000).\nBULLET::::- Alan Rickman directed, co-wrote, and stars as Louis XIV in the film, \"A Little Chaos\", which centers on construction in the gardens of Versaille, at the time immediately before and after the death of Queen Maria Theresa.\nBULLET::::- The 2016 film \"The Death of Louis XIV\", directed by Albert Serra, is set during the last two weeks of Louis XIV's life before dying of gangrene, with the monarch played by Jean-Pierre Léaud.\n\nBULLET::::- The 15-year-old Louis XIV, as played by the Irish actor Robert Sheehan, is a major character of the short-lived historical fantasy series \"Young Blades\" from January to June 2005.\nBULLET::::- George Blagden portrays Louis XIV in the Canal+ series \"Versailles\" which aired for three seasons from 2015.\n\nDespite the image of a healthy and virile king that Louis sought to project, evidence exists to suggest that his health was not very good. He had many ailments: for example, symptoms of diabetes, as confirmed in reports of suppurating periostitis in 1678, dental abscesses in 1696, along with recurring boils, fainting spells, gout, dizziness, hot flushes, and headaches.\n\nFrom 1647 to 1711, the three chief physicians to the king (Antoine Vallot, Antoine d'Aquin, and Guy-Crescent Fagon) recorded all of his health problems in the \"Journal de Santé du Roi\" (\"Journal of the King's Health\"), a daily report of his health. On 18 November 1686, Louis underwent a painful operation for an anal fistula that was performed by the surgeon Charles Felix de Tassy, who prepared a specially shaped curved scalpel for the occasion. The wound took more than two months to heal.\n\nLouis died of gangrene at Versailles on 1 September 1715, four days before his 77th birthday, after 72 years on the throne. Enduring much pain in his last days, he finally \"yielded up his soul without any effort, like a candle going out\", while reciting the psalm \"Domine, ad adjuvandum me festina\" (\"O Lord, make haste to help me\"). His body was laid to rest in Saint-Denis Basilica outside Paris. It remained there undisturbed for about 80 years, until revolutionaries exhumed and destroyed all of the remains found in the Basilica.\n\nLouis outlived most of his immediate legitimate family. His last surviving in-wedlock son, the Dauphin, died in 1711. Barely a year later, the Duke of Burgundy, the eldest of the Dauphin's three sons and then heir to Louis, followed his father. Burgundy's elder son, Louis, Duke of Brittany, joined them a few weeks later. Thus, on his deathbed, Louis' heir was his five-year-old great-grandson, Louis, Duke of Anjou, Burgundy's younger son.\n\nLouis foresaw an underaged heir and sought to restrict the power of his nephew Philip II, Duke of Orléans, who, as his closest surviving legitimate relative in France, would likely become regent to the prospective Louis XV. Accordingly, the king created a regency council as Louis XIII had in anticipation of Louis XIV's own minority, with some power vested in his illegitimate son Louis-Auguste de Bourbon, Duke of Maine. Orléans, however, had Louis' will annulled by the \"Parlement of Paris\" after his death and made himself sole regent. He stripped Maine and his brother, Louis-Alexandre, Count of Toulouse, of the rank of Prince of the Blood, which Louis had granted them, and significantly reduced Maine's power and privileges.\n\nLine of succession to the French throne upon the death of Louis XIV in 1715. Louis XIV's only surviving legitimate grandson, Philip V, was not included in the line of succession due to having renounced the French throne after the war of the Spanish succession, which lasted for 13 years after the death of Charles II of Spain in 1700.\nBULLET::::- \"Louis XIII (1601–1643)\"\nBULLET::::- Louis XIV \"(1638–1715)\"\nBULLET::::- \"Louis, Grand Dauphin (1661–1711)\"\nBULLET::::- \"Louis, Duke of Burgundy (1682–1712)\"\nBULLET::::- \"Louis, Duke of Brittany (1707–1712)\"\nBULLET::::- (1) Louis, Duke of Anjou (1710–1774)\nBULLET::::- Philip V of Spain (1683–1746)\nBULLET::::- \"Charles, Duke of Berry (1686–1714)\"\nBULLET::::- \"Philippe I, Duke of Orléans (1640–1701)\"\nBULLET::::- (2) Philippe II, Duke of Orléans (1674–1723)\nBULLET::::- (3) Louis, Duke of Chartres (1703–1752)\n\nAccording to Philippe de Dangeau's \"Journal\", Louis on his deathbed advised his heir with these words: Do not follow the bad example which I have set you; I have often undertaken war too lightly and have sustained it for vanity. Do not imitate me, but be a peaceful prince, and may you apply yourself principally to the alleviation of the burdens of your subjects.\n\nSome historians point out that it was a customary demonstration of piety in those days to exaggerate one's sins. Thus they do not place much emphasis on Louis' deathbed declarations in assessing his accomplishments. Rather, they focus on military and diplomatic successes, such as how he placed a French prince on the Spanish throne. This, they contend, ended the threat of an aggressive Spain that historically interfered in domestic French politics. These historians also emphasise the effect of Louis' wars in expanding France's boundaries and creating more defensible frontiers that preserved France from invasion until the Revolution.\n\nArguably, Louis also applied himself indirectly to \"the alleviation of the burdens of [his] subjects.\" For example, he patronised the arts, encouraged industry, fostered trade and commerce, and sponsored the founding of an overseas empire. Moreover, the significant reduction in civil wars and aristocratic rebellions during his reign are seen by these historians as the result of Louis' consolidation of royal authority over feudal elites. In their analysis, his early reforms centralised France and marked the birth of the modern French state. They regard the political and military victories as well as numerous cultural achievements as the means by which Louis helped raise France to a preeminent position in Europe. Europe came to admire France for its military and cultural successes, power, and sophistication. Europeans generally began to emulate French manners, values, goods, and deportment. French became the universal language of the European elite.\n\nLouis' detractors have argued that his considerable foreign, military, and domestic expenditure impoverished and bankrupted France. His supporters, however, distinguish the state, which was impoverished, from France, which was not. As supporting evidence, they cite the literature of the time, such as the social commentary in Montesquieu's \"Persian Letters\".\n\nAlternatively, Louis' critics attribute the social upheaval culminating in the French Revolution to his failure to reform French institutions while the monarchy was still secure. Other scholars counter that there was little reason to reform institutions that largely worked well under Louis. They also maintain that events occurring almost 80 years after his death were not reasonably foreseeable to Louis, and that in any case, his successors had sufficient time to initiate reforms of their own.\n\nLouis has often been criticised for his vanity. The memoirist Saint-Simon, who claimed that Louis slighted him, criticised him thus: There was nothing he liked so much as flattery, or, to put it more plainly, adulation; the coarser and clumsier it was, the more he relished it. For his part, Voltaire saw Louis' vanity as the cause for his bellicosity:It is certain that he passionately wanted glory, rather than the conquests themselves. In the acquisition of Alsace and half of Flanders, and of all of Franche-Comté, what he really liked was the name he made for himself.\n\nNonetheless, Louis has also received praise. The anti-Bourbon Napoleon described him not only as \"a great king\", but also as \"the only King of France worthy of the name\". Leibniz, the German Protestant philosopher, commended him as \"one of the greatest kings that ever was\". And Lord Acton admired him as \"by far the ablest man who was born in modern times on the steps of a throne\". The historian and philosopher Voltaire wrote: \"His name can never be pronounced without respect and without summoning the image of an eternally memorable age\". Voltaire's history, \"The Age of Louis XIV\", named Louis' reign as not only one of the four great ages in which reason and culture flourished, but the greatest ever.\n\nIn 1848, at Nuneham House, a piece of Louis' mummified heart, taken from his tomb and kept in a silver locket by Lord Harcourt, Archbishop of York, was shown to the Dean of Westminster, William Buckland, who ate it.\n\nNumerous quotes have been attributed to Louis XIV by legend. \n\nThe well-known \"I am the state\" (\"\"L'état, c'est moi.\"\") was reported from at least the late 18th century.\nIt was widely repeated but also denounced as apocryphal by the early 19th century.\n\nHe did say, \"Every time I appoint someone to a vacant position, I make a hundred unhappy and one ungrateful.\" Louis is recorded by numerous eyewitnesses as having said on his deathbed: \"\" (\"I depart, but the State shall always remain.\")\n\nBULLET::::- 5 September 1638 – 14 May 1643 \"His Royal Highness\" The Dauphin of France\nBULLET::::- 14 May 1643 – 1 September 1715 \"His Most Christian Majesty\" The King of France\nLouis's formal style was \"\"Louis XIV, par la grâce de Dieu, roi de France et de Navarre\"\", or \"Louis XIV, by the Grace of God, King of France and of Navarre\".\n\nOn 5 April 1693, Louis also founded the Royal and Military Order of Saint Louis (), a military order of chivalry. He named it after Louis IX and intended it as a reward for outstanding officers. It is notable as the first decoration that could be granted to non-nobles and is roughly the forerunner of the \"Légion d'honneur\", with which it shares the red ribbon (though the \"Légion d'honneur\" is awarded to military personnel and civilians alike).\n\nLouis' patriline is the line from which he is descended father to son.\n\nPatrilineal descent is the principle behind membership in royal houses, as it can be traced back through the generations - which means that if King Louis were to choose an historically accurate house name it would be Robertian, as all his male-line ancestors have been of that house.\n\nLouis is a member of the House of Bourbon, a branch of the Capetian dynasty and of the Robertians.\n\nLouis' patriline is the line from which he is descended father to son. It follows the Bourbon, Kings of France, and the Counts of Paris and Worms. This line can be traced back more than 1,200 years from Robert of Hesbaye to the present day, through Kings of France & Navarre, Spain and Two-Sicilies, Dukes of Parma and Grand-Dukes of Luxembourg, Princes of Orléans and Emperors of Brazil. It is one of the oldest in Europe.\n\nBULLET::::1. Robert II of Worms and Rheingau (Robert of Hesbaye), 770–807\nBULLET::::2. Robert III of Worms and Rheingau, 808–834\nBULLET::::3. Robert IV the Strong, 820–866\nBULLET::::4. Robert I of France, 866–923\nBULLET::::5. Hugh the Great, 895–956\nBULLET::::6. Hugh Capet, 941–996\nBULLET::::7. Robert II of France, 972–1031\nBULLET::::8. Henry I of France, 1008–1060\nBULLET::::9. Philip I of France, 1053–1108\nBULLET::::10. Louis VI of France, 1081–1137\nBULLET::::11. Louis VII of France, 1120–1180\nBULLET::::12. Philip II of France, 1165–1223\nBULLET::::13. Louis VIII of France, 1187–1226\nBULLET::::14. Louis IX of France, 1215–1270\nBULLET::::15. Robert, Count of Clermont, 1256–1317\nBULLET::::16. Louis I, Duke of Bourbon, 1279–1342\nBULLET::::17. James I, Count of La Marche, 1319–1362\nBULLET::::18. John I, Count of La Marche, 1344–1393\nBULLET::::19. Louis, Count of Vendôme, 1376–1446\nBULLET::::20. Jean VIII, Count of Vendôme, 1428–1478\nBULLET::::21. François, Count of Vendôme, 1470–1495\nBULLET::::22. Charles de Bourbon, Duke of Vendôme, 1489–1537\nBULLET::::23. Antoine, King of Navarre, Duke of Vendôme, 1518–1562\nBULLET::::24. Henry IV, King of France and of Navarre, 1553–1610\nBULLET::::25. Louis XIII, King of France and Navarre, 1601–1643\nBULLET::::26. Louis XIV, King of France and Navarre, 1638–1715\n!Name!!Birth!!Death!!Notes\n\nThis is an incomplete list of Louis XIV's illegitimate children. He reputedly had more, but the difficulty in fully documenting all such births restricts the list only to the better-known and/or legitimised.\n\n!Name!!Birth!!Death!!Notes\nDaughter1660unknownShe married N de la Queue, a sentry.\nCharles de La Baume Le Blanc19 December 166315 July 1665 (aged 1)Not legitimised.\nPhilippe de La Baume Le Blanc7 January 16651666 (aged 1)Not legitimised.\nLouis de La Baume Le Blanc27 December 16651666 (aged 1)Not legitimised.\nMarie Anne de Bourbon  2 October 1666 3 May 1739 (aged 73)Legitimised on 14 May 1667. Married Louis Armand I, Prince of Conti.\nLouise de Maisonblanche\"c\". 17 June 167612 September 1718 (aged 42)In 1696 she married Bernard de Prez, Baron de La Queue.\nSonJanuary 1680January 1680 (stillborn)\nDaughterMarch 1681March 1681 (stillborn) Her existence is doubtful.\n\nBULLET::::- Charles de Lorme, personal medical doctor to Louis XIV\nBULLET::::- House of France\nBULLET::::- Levée (ceremony)\nBULLET::::- List of French monarchs\nBULLET::::- Outline of France\nBULLET::::- Style Louis XIV\n\nBULLET::::- Ashley, Maurice P. \"Louis XIV And The Greatness Of France\" (1965) excerpt and text search\nBULLET::::- Beik, William. \"Louis XIV and Absolutism: A Brief Study with Documents\" (2000) excerpt and text search\nBULLET::::- Beik, William. \"The Absolutism of Louis XIV as Social Collaboration.\" \"Past & Present\" 2005 (188): 195–224. online at Project MUSE\nBULLET::::- Bluche, François, \"Louis XIV\", (Franklin Watts, 1990)\nBULLET::::- Buckley, Veronica. \"Madame de Maintenon: The Secret Wife of Louis XIV\". London: Bloomsbury, 2008.\nBULLET::::- Wolf Burchard: \"The Sovereign Artist: Charles Le Brun and the Image of Louis XIV\", Paul Holberton Publishing, 2016,\nBULLET::::- Burke, Peter. \"The Fabrication of Louis XIV\" (1994)\nBULLET::::- \"Cambridge Modern History: Vol. 5 The Age Of Louis XIV\" (1908), old, solid articles by scholars; complete text online\nBULLET::::- Campbell, Peter Robert. \"Louis XIV, 1661–1715\" (London, 1993)\nBULLET::::- Church, William F., ed. \"The Greatness of Louis XIV\". (1972).\nBULLET::::- Cowart, Georgia J. \"The Triumph of Pleasure: Louis XIV and the Politics of Spectacle\" U of Chicago Press, 2008.\nBULLET::::- Cronin, Vincent. \"Louis XIV\". London: HarperCollins, 1996.\nBULLET::::- Dunlop, Ian. \"Louis XIV\" (2000), 512pp excerpt and text search\nBULLET::::- Engerand, Fernand, editor (1899). \"Inventaire des tableaux du Roy rédigé en 1709 et 1710 par Nicolas Bailly\". Paris: Ernest Leroux. Copy at Gallica.\nBULLET::::- Erlanger, Philippe, \"Louis XIV\" Praeger, 1970.\nBULLET::::- Fraser, Antonia. \"Love and Louis XIV: The Women in the Life of the Sun King\". London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2006 (hardcover, ); New York: Nan A. Talese, 2006 (hardcover, )\nBULLET::::- Jones, Colin. \"The Great Nation: France from Louis XIV to Napoleon (1715–1799)\" (2002)\nBULLET::::- Lewis, W. H. \"The Splendid Century: Life in the France of Louis XIV\" (1953) excerpt and text search; also online complete edition\nBULLET::::- Le Roy Ladurie, Emmanuel. \"The Ancien Régime: A History of France 1610–1774\" (1999), survey by leader of the Annales School excerpt and text search\nBULLET::::- Mitford, Nancy. \"The Sun King\" (1995), popular excerpt and text search\nBULLET::::- Nolan, Cathal J. \"Wars of the Age of Louis XIV, 1650–1715: An Encyclopedia of Global Warfare and Civilization\" . (2008) 607pp; over 1000 entries;\nBULLET::::- Rowlands, Guy. \"The Dynastic State and the Army under Louis XIV: Royal Service and Private Interest, 1661–1701\" (2002) online edition\nBULLET::::- Rubin, David Lee, ed. \"Sun King: The Ascendancy of French Culture during the Reign of Louis XIV\". Washington: Folger Books and Cranbury: Associated University Presses, 1992.\nBULLET::::- Rule, John C., \"Louis XIV and the craft of kingship\" 1969.\nBULLET::::- Shennan, J. H. \"Louis XIV\" (1993) online edition\nBULLET::::- Thompson, Ian. \"The Sun King's Garden: Louis XIV, André Le Nôtre And the Creation of the Gardens of Versailles\". London: Bloomsbury Publishing, 2006\nBULLET::::- Treasure, Geoffrey. \"Louis XIV\" (London, 2001).\nBULLET::::- Treasure, Geoffrey. \"The Making of Modern Europe, 1648–1780\" (3rd ed. 2003). pp 230–96.\nBULLET::::- Wilkinson, Rich. \"Louis XIV\" Routledge, 2007.\nBULLET::::- the standard scholarly biography; online Questia edition\n\nBULLET::::- Ranum, Orest, ed. \"The Century of Louis XIV\" (1972) documents; online\n\nBULLET::::- Louis XIV at \"History.com\"\nBULLET::::- Full text of marriage contract (PDF), France National Archives transcription\nBULLET::::- by Voltaire, 1751, hosted by French Wikisource\nBULLET::::- \"The Story of Civilization VIII: The Age of Louis XIV\" online ebook by historians Will Durant and Ariel Durant.\n"}
{"id": "18554", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18554", "title": "Ludwig Ritter von Köchel", "text": "Ludwig Ritter von Köchel\n\nLudwig Alois Friedrich Ritter von Köchel (; 14 January 1800 – 3 June 1877) was an Austrian musicologist, writer, composer, botanist and publisher. He is best known for cataloguing the works of Mozart and originating the 'K-numbers' by which they are known (\"K\" for \"Köchel\").\n\nBorn in the town of Stein, Lower Austria, he studied law in Vienna and graduated with a PhD in 1827. For fifteen years, he was tutor to the four sons of Archduke Charles of Austria. Köchel was rewarded with a knighthood and a generous financial settlement, permitting him to spend the rest of his life as a private scholar. Contemporary scientists were greatly impressed by his botanical researches in North Africa, the Iberian Peninsula, the United Kingdom, the North Cape, and Russia. In addition to botany, he was interested in geology and mineralogy, but also loved music, and was a member of the Mozarteum Salzburg. He died of cancer at age 77 in Vienna.\n\nIn 1862 he published the Köchel catalogue, a chronological and thematic register of the works of Mozart. This catalogue was the first on such a scale and with such a level of scholarship behind it; it has since undergone revisions. Mozart's works are often referred to by their K-numbers (\"cf.\" opus number); for example, the \"Jupiter\" symphony, \"Symphony No. 41\" K. 551.\n\nMoreover, Köchel arranged Mozart's works into twenty-four categories, which were used by Breitkopf & Härtel when they published the first complete edition of Mozart's works from 1877 to 1910, a venture partly funded by Köchel.\n\nHe also catalogued the works of Johann Fux.\n\n\nBULLET::::- Ludwig Ritter von Köchel Society\n"}
{"id": "18555", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18555", "title": "LEO (computer)", "text": "LEO (computer)\n\nThe LEO I (\"Lyons electronic office I\") was the first computer used for commercial business applications.\n\nThe prototype LEO I was modelled closely on the Cambridge EDSAC. Its construction was overseen by Oliver Standingford, Raymond Thompson and David Caminer of J. Lyons and Co. LEO I ran its first business application in 1951. In 1954 Lyons formed LEO Computers Ltd to market LEO I and its successors LEO II and LEO III to other companies. LEO Computers eventually became part of English Electric Company (EELM) where the same team developed the faster LEO 360 and even faster LEO 326 models. It then passed to International Computers Limited (ICL) and ultimately Fujitsu.\n\nLEO series computers were still in use until 1981.\n\nJ. Lyons and Co., one of the UK's leading catering and food manufacturing companies in the first half of the 20th century, sent two of its senior managers, Oliver Standingford and Raymond Thompson, to the USA in 1947 to look at new business methods developed during World War II. During their visit they met Herman Goldstine, one of the original developers of ENIAC, the first general-purpose electronic computer (although it had no stored program). Standingford and Thompson saw the potential of computers to help solve the problem of administering a major business enterprise. They also learned from Goldstine that, back in the UK, Douglas Hartree and Maurice Wilkes were actually building another such machine, the pioneering EDSAC computer, at the University of Cambridge.\n\nOn their return to the UK, Standingford and Thompson visited Hartree and Wilkes in Cambridge, and were favourably impressed with their technical expertise and vision. Hartree and Wilkes estimated that EDSAC was twelve to eighteen months from completion, but said that this timeline could be shortened if additional funding were available. Standingford and Thompson wrote a report to the Lyons' board recommending that Lyons should acquire or build a computer to meet their business needs. The board agreed that, as a first step, Lyons would provide Hartree and Wilkes with £2,500 funding for the EDSAC project, and would also provide them with the services of a Lyons electrical engineer, Ernest Lenaerts. EDSAC was completed and ran its first program in May 1949.\n\nFollowing the successful completion of EDSAC, the Lyons' board agreed to start the construction of their own machine, expanding on the EDSAC design. The Lyons machine was christened Lyons Electronic Office, or LEO. On the recommendation of Wilkes, Lyons recruited John Pinkerton, a radar engineer and research student at Cambridge, as team leader for the project. Lenaerts returned to Lyons to work on the project, and Wilkes provided training for Lyons' engineer Derek Hemy, who would be responsible for writing LEO's programs. On 15 February 1951 the computer, carrying out a simple test program, was shown to HRH Princess Elizabeth. The first business application to be run on LEO was Bakery Valuations. This was successfully run on 5 September 1951, and LEO took over Bakery Valuations calculations completely on 29-30 November 1951.\n\nLEO I's clock speed was 500 kHz, with most instructions taking about 1.5 ms to execute. To be useful for business applications, the computer had to be able to handle a number of data streams, input and output, simultaneously. Therefore, its chief designer, John Pinkerton, designed the machine to have multiple input/output buffers. In the first instance, these were linked to fast paper tape readers and punches, fast punched card readers and punches, and a 100 line a minute tabulator. Later, other devices, including magnetic tape, were added. Its ultrasonic delay line memory based on tanks of mercury, with 2K (2048) 35-bit words (i.e., 8 kilobytes), was four times as large as that of EDSAC. The systems analysis was carried out by David Caminer.\n\nLyons used LEO I initially for valuation jobs, but its role was extended to include payroll, inventory, and so on. One of its early tasks was the elaboration of daily orders which were phoned in every afternoon by the shops and used to calculate the overnight production requirements, assembly instructions, delivery schedules, invoices, costings, and management reports. This was the first instance of an integrated management information system. The LEO project was also a pioneer in outsourcing: in 1956, Lyons started doing the payroll calculations for Ford UK and others on the LEO I machine. The success of this led to the company dedicating one of its LEO II machines to bureau services. Later, the system was used for scientific computations as well. Met Office staff used a LEO I before the Met Office bought its own computer, a Ferranti Mercury, in 1959.\n\nIn 1954, with the decision to proceed with LEO II and interest from other commercial companies, Lyons formed LEO Computers Ltd.\n\nThe first LEO III was completed in 1961. This was a solid-state machine with a 13.2 μs cycle time ferrite core memory. It was microprogrammed and was controlled by a multitasking operating system. In 1963, LEO Computers Ltd was merged into English Electric Company and this led to the breaking up of the team that had inspired LEO computers. English Electric Company continued to build the LEO III, and went on to build the faster LEO 360 and even faster LEO 326 models, which had been designed by the LEO team before the takeover. All LEO IIIs allowed concurrent running of as many as 12 application programs through the \"Master program\" operating system. Some, primarily producing telephone bills, purchased in the mid- to late 1960s, were still in commercial use with GPO Telephones, forerunner of British Telecom, until 1981, remaining usable throughout, using parts cannibalised from redundant LEOs purchased by the GPO.\n\nUsers of LEO computers programmed in two coding languages: Intercode, a low-level assembler type language; and CLEO (acronym: Clear Language for Expressing Orders), the COBOL equivalent.\n\nOne of the features that LEO III shared with many computers of the day was a loudspeaker connected to the central processor which enabled operators to tell whether a program was looping by the distinctive sound it made. Another quirk was that many intermittent faults were due to faulty connectors and could be temporarily fixed by briskly strumming the card handles.\n\nEnglish Electric LEO Computers, later English Electric Leo Marconi (EELM), eventually merged with International Computers and Tabulators (ICT) and others to form International Computers Limited (ICL) in 1968. In the 1980s, there were still ICL 2900 mainframes running LEO programs, using an emulator written in ICL 2960 microcode at the Dalkeith development centre. At least one modern emulator has been developed which can run some original LEO III software on a modern server.\n\nWhether its investment in LEO actually benefited J. Lyons is unclear. Nick Pelling notes that before LEO I the company already had a proven, industry-leading system using clerks that gave it \"near-real-time management information on more or less all aspects of its business\", and that no jobs were lost when the system was computerized. In addition, LEO Computers lost money on many of its sales because of unrealistically low prices, forcing J. Lyons to subsidize it.\n\nBULLET::::- List of vacuum tube computers\n\nBULLET::::- Bird, P. J. (1994). \"LEO: The First Business Computer\". Wokingham: Hasler Publishing Co. .\nBULLET::::- Campbell-Kelly, M., (1989). \"ICL: A Business and Technical History\". Oxford: Clarendon Press.\nBULLET::::- Caminer, D. T., Aris, J. B. B., Hermon, P. M. R., Land, F. F. (1996). \"User-Driven Innovation: The World’s First Business Computer\". London: McGraw-Hill. .\nBULLET::::- Carmichael, H., editor (1996). An ICL Anthology, Chapter 6: \"LEO\", Laidlaw Hicks, Surbiton, UK.\nBULLET::::- Hally, M. (2005). \"Electronic Brains: stories from the dawn of the computer age\". Washington:Joseph Henry Press. Chapter 5: LEO the Lyons Computer. .\nBULLET::::- Land, F. F., (1997). LEO, the First Business Computer: A Personal Experience. In Glass, R. L., editor. \"In the Beginning: Recollections of Software Pioneers\", pages 134–153. IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, CA.\nBULLET::::- PEP, (1957). \"Three Case Studies in Automation\", PEP, London.\nBULLET::::- Simmons, J. R. M., (1962). \"LEO and the Managers\", MacDonald, London.\n\nBULLET::::- Aris, J. B. B. (1996). \"Systems Design — Then and Now\". \"Resurrection\", Summer issue 1996.\nBULLET::::- Land, F. F. (1996). \"Systems Analysis for Business Applications\". \"Resurrection\", Summer issue 1996.\nBULLET::::- Aris, J. B. B. (2000). \"Inventing Systems Engineering\". \"IEEE Annals of the History of Computing\", Vol. 22, No. 3, July–September, pp. 4–15\nBULLET::::- Land, F. F. (2000). \"The First Business Computer: A Case Study in User-Driven Automation\". \"IEEE Annals of the History of Computing\", Vol. 22, No. 3, July–September, pp. 16–26.\nBULLET::::- Caminer, D. T. (1958), \"...And How to Avoid Them\". \"The Computer Journal\", Vol. 1, No. 1.\nBULLET::::- Caminer, D. T. (1997). \"LEO and its Applications: The Beginning of Business Computing\". \"The Computer Journal\", Vol. 40, No. 10.\nBULLET::::- Caminer, D. T. (2003). \"Behind the Curtain at LEO: A Personal Reminiscence\". \"IEEE Annals of the History of Computing\", Vol. 25, No. 2, April–June, pp3–13.\nBULLET::::- Hendry, J. (1988). \"The Teashop Computer Manufacturer: J. Lyons\". \"Business History\", Vol. 29, No. 8, pp. 73–102.\nBULLET::::- Land, Frank (1999). \"A Historical Analysis of Implementing IS at J. Lyons.\" In Currie, W. G.; Galliers, R. D., editors. \"Rethinking Management Information Systems\", pp. 310–325. Oxford University Press.\nBULLET::::- (NB. Has information on the LEO III character set.)\n\nBULLET::::- How a cake company pioneered the first office computer Video interview with Mary Coombs, who worked on the first LEO computer and was the first woman to become a commercial computer programmer\nBULLET::::- Oral history interview with John M. M. Pinkerton, Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota. Pinkerton describes his work on Leo computers. In this context he discusses the British computer firms J. Lyons and Company, English Electric, and International Computers Ltd.\nBULLET::::- About LEO — From \"Business Computing: the Second 50 Years\", The Guildhall conference for business leaders, 2001. Archived in \"The Internet Archive\" on 2012-02-10.\nBULLET::::- J. Lyons & Co. LEO Computers. Extract from Peter Bird's \"LEO — The First Business Computer\" (2002); at David Lawrence's Lyons website\nBULLET::::- LEO Computers Society. Accessed 2018-01-13. Includes \"LEOPEDIA\" which is intended to be a comprehensive reference to archive, museum and media holdings and references to LEO computers, and individuals associated with them, updated periodically by Frank Land.\nBULLET::::- LEO Computers Collection, National Archive for the History of Computing, University of Manchester Library.\nBULLET::::- BBC Science - Electronic Brains BBC Radio 4 Series about early computers, Programme 1 is about LEO\nBULLET::::- \"Hidden Histories of the Information Age\" BBC Radio 4 series, programme about LEO\nBULLET::::- A computer called LEO: Lyons Teashops and the world's first office computer A standard work on the development of LEO\nBULLET::::- Obituary of Caminer Daily Telegraph, 2008-06-24\nBULLET::::- \"Developing LEO: The world's first business computer\", documents from the papers of John Simmons, Modern Records Centre, University of Warwick\nBULLET::::- LEO Artefacts at the ICL Computer Museum\n"}
{"id": "18557", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18557", "title": "Laurence of Canterbury", "text": "Laurence of Canterbury\n\nLaurence (died 2 February 619) was the second Archbishop of Canterbury from about 604 to 619. He was a member of the Gregorian mission sent from Italy to England to Christianise the Anglo-Saxons from their native Anglo-Saxon paganism, although the date of his arrival is disputed. He was consecrated archbishop by his predecessor, Augustine of Canterbury, during Augustine's lifetime, to ensure continuity in the office. While archbishop, he attempted unsuccessfully to resolve differences with the native British bishops by corresponding with them about points of dispute. Laurence faced a crisis following the death of King Æthelberht of Kent, when the king's successor abandoned Christianity; he eventually reconverted. Laurence was revered as a saint after his death in 619.\n\nLaurence was part of the Gregorian mission originally dispatched from Rome in 595 to convert the Anglo-Saxons from their native paganism to Christianity; he landed at Thanet, Kent, with Augustine in 597, or, as some sources state, first arrived in 601 and was not a part of the first group of missionaries. He had been a monk in Rome before his travels to England, but nothing else is known of his history or background. The medieval chronicler Bede says that Augustine sent Laurence back to Pope Gregory I to report on the success of converting King Æthelberht of Kent and to carry a letter with questions for the pope. Accompanied by Peter of Canterbury, another missionary, he set off some time after July 598, and had returned by June 601. He brought back with him Gregory's replies to Augustine's questions, a document commonly known as the \"Libellus responsionum\", that Bede incorporated in his \"Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum\". Laurence is probably the Laurence referred to in the letter from Gregory to Bertha, queen of Kent. In that letter, Gregory praises Bertha for her part in the conversion of her husband, details of which Gregory says he received from Laurence the priest. It is known that Laurence returned to England with Mellitus and others of the second group of missionaries in the summer of 601, but there is no record of Peter being with them.\n\nLaurence succeeded Augustine to the see of Canterbury in about 604, and ruled until his death on 2 February 619. To secure the succession, Augustine had consecrated Laurence before he died, even though that was prohibited by canon law. Augustine was afraid though that if someone did not step into the office immediately, it would damage the missionary efforts in Britain. However, Laurence never received a pallium from Rome, so he may have been considered uncanonical by the papacy. Bede makes a point of comparing Augustine's action in consecrating Laurence to Saint Peter's action of consecrating Clement as Bishop of Rome during Peter's lifetime, which the theologian J. Robert Wright believes may be Bede's way of criticising the practices of the church in his day.\n\nIn 610 Laurence received letters from Pope Boniface IV, addressed to him as archbishop and Augustine's successor. The correspondence was in response to Laurence having sent Mellitus to Rome earlier in 610, to solicit advice from the papacy on matters concerning the English Church. While in Rome Mellitus attended a synod, and brought the synodical decrees back with him to Laurence.\n\nIn 613 Laurence consecrated the monastery church built by Augustine in Canterbury, and dedicated it to saints Peter and Paul; it was later re-consecrated as St Augustine's Abbey, Canterbury. Laurence also wrote to the bishops in the lands held by the Scots and by the Britons, urging them to hold Easter on the day that the Roman church celebrated it, instead of their traditional date, part of the Easter controversy. The letter is also preserved in Bede's history. Laurence in 609 stated that Dagan, a native bishop, would not eat with Laurence or share a roof with the archbishop, due to the differences between the two Churches.\n\nÆthelberht died in 616, during Laurence's tenure; his son Eadbald abandoned Christianity in favour of Anglo-Saxon paganism, forcing many of the Gregorian missionaries to flee the pagan backlash that followed Æthelberht's death. Among them in Gaul were Mellitus, who was Bishop of London, and Justus, who was Bishop of Rochester. Remaining in Britain, Laurence succeeded in reconverting Eadbald to Christianity. Bede relates the story that Laurence had been prepared to give up when he was visited by St Peter in a dream or vision. St Peter chastised Laurence and whipped him, and the marks of the whipping remained after the vision or dream ended. Laurence then displayed them to Eadbald, and the king was converted on the spot. Bede, however, hints that it was the death of some of the leaders of the pagan party in battle that really persuaded Laurence to stay. According to Benedicta Ward, a historian of Christianity, Bede uses the story of the whipping as an example of how suffering was a reminder of Christ's suffering for humans, and how that example could lead to conversion. Wright argues that another point Bede is making is that it is because of the intercession of St Peter himself that the mission continued. David Farmer, in the \"Oxford Dictionary of Saints\", suggests that the whipping story may have been a blending of the \"Quo Vadis\" story with some information given by Jerome in a letter.\n\nModern historians have seen political overtones in the pagan reaction. The historian D. P. Kirby sees Eadbald's actions as a repudiation of his father's pro-Frankish policies. Alcuin, a later medieval writer, wrote that Laurence was \"censured by apostolic authority\". This may have been a letter from Pope Adeodatus I, commanding Laurence to stay in Kent. Kirby goes on to argue that it was Justus, not Laurence, who converted Eadbald, and this while Justus was archbishop, sometime around 624. Not all historians agree with this argument, however. Nicholas Brooks states that the king was converted during Laurence's archiepiscopate, within a year of him succeeding his father. The historian Barbara Yorke argues that there were two co-rulers of Kent after Æthelberht's death, Eadbald and a Æthelwald, and that Eadbald was converted by Laurence while Æthelwald was converted by Justus after his return to Rochester. Another factor in the pagan reaction was Laurence's objection to Eadbald's marriage to his father's widow, something that Christians considered to be unlawful.\n\nAll efforts to extend the church beyond Kent encountered difficulties due to the attitude of King Rædwald of East Anglia, who had become the leading king in the south after Æthelberht's death. Rædwald was converted before the death of Æthelberht, perhaps at the urging of Æthelberht, but his kingdom was not, and Rædwald seems to have converted only to the extent of placing a Christian altar in his pagan temple. It proved impossible for Mellitus to return to London as bishop, although Justus did resume his duties at Rochester.\n\nLaurence died on 2 February 619, and was buried in the abbey of St Peter and Paul in Canterbury, later renamed St Augustine's; his relics, or remains, were moved, or translated, to the new church of St Augustine's in 1091. His shrine was in the axial chapel of the abbey church, flanking the shrine of Augustine, his predecessor. Laurence came to be regarded as a saint, and was given the feast day of 3 February. The ninth century Stowe Missal commemorates his feast day, along with Mellitus and Justus. A \"Vita\" (or \"Life\") was written about the time of his translation, by Goscelin, but it is mainly based on information in Bede. His tomb was opened in 1915. Besides his feast day, the date of his translation, 13 September, was also celebrated after his death. Laurence's tenure as archbishop is mainly remembered for his failure to secure a settlement with the Celtic church, and for his reconversion of Eadbald following Æthelbert's death. He was succeeded as archbishop by Mellitus, the Bishop of London.\n\nBULLET::::- List of members of the Gregorian mission\n\nBULLET::::- – listing of most contemporary and close to contemporary mentions of Laurence in the primary sources. Includes some spurious charter listings.\nBULLET::::- , who travelled back to Rome, and is probably the same person\n"}
{"id": "18560", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18560", "title": "Leaf by Niggle", "text": "Leaf by Niggle\n\n\"Leaf by Niggle\" is a short story written by J. R. R. Tolkien in 1938–39 and first published in the \"Dublin Review\" in January 1945. It can be found, most notably, in Tolkien's book titled \"Tree and Leaf\", and in other places (including the collections \"The Tolkien Reader\", \"Poems & Stories\", \"A Tolkien Miscellany\", and \"Tales from the Perilous Realm\"). This is notable because the book, consisting of a seminal essay called \"On Fairy-Stories\" and \"Leaf by Niggle\", offers the underlying philosophy (Creation and Sub-Creation, see below) of much of Tolkien's fantastical writings.\n\n\"Leaf by Niggle\" is often seen as an allegory of Tolkien's own creative process, and, to an extent, of his own life.\n\nIn this story, an artist, named Niggle, lives in a society that does not value art. Working only to please himself, he paints a canvas of a great Tree with a forest in the distance. He invests each and every leaf of his tree with obsessive attention to detail, making every leaf uniquely beautiful. Niggle ends up discarding all his other artworks, or tacks them onto the main canvas, which becomes a single vast embodiment of his vision.\n\nHowever, there are many mundane chores and duties that prevent Niggle from giving his work the attention it deserves, so it remains incomplete and is not fully realised.\n\nAt the back of his head, Niggle knows that he has a great trip looming, and he must pack and prepare his bags.\n\nAlso, Niggle's next door neighbour, a gardener named Parish, frequently drops by asking for various forms of help. Parish is lame and has a sick wife and genuinely needs help. Niggle, having a good heart, takes time out to help—but he is also reluctant because he would rather work on his painting. Niggle has other pressing work duties as well that require his attention. Then Niggle himself catches a chill doing errands for Parish in the rain.\n\nEventually, Niggle is forced to take his trip, and cannot get out of it. He has not prepared, and as a result ends up in a kind of institution, in which he must perform menial labour each day. Back at the home to which he cannot return, Niggle's painting is abandoned, used to patch a damaged roof, and all but destroyed (except for the one perfect leaf of the story's title, which is placed in the local museum). \n\nIn time, Niggle is paroled from the institution, and he is sent to a place \"for a little gentle treatment\". He discovers that this new place is the country of the Tree and Forest of his great painting. This place is the true realisation of his vision, not the flawed and incomplete version in his painting.\n\nNiggle is reunited with his old neighbour, Parish, who now proves his worth as a gardener, and together they make the Tree and Forest even more beautiful. Finally, Niggle journeys farther and deeper into the Forest, and beyond into the great Mountains that he only faintly glimpsed in his painting.\n\nLong after both Niggle and Parish have taken their journeys, the lovely place that they created together becomes a destination for many travelers to visit before their final voyage into the Mountains, and it earns the name \"Niggle's Parish\".\n\nOne religious reading of \"Leaf by Niggle\" could lead to the conclusion that the allegory of \"Leaf by Niggle\" is life, death, purgatory and paradise. Niggle is not prepared for his unavoidable trip, as humans often are not prepared for death. His time in the institution and subsequent discovery of his Tree represent purgatory and heaven.\n\nBut \"Leaf by Niggle\" can also be interpreted as an illustration of Tolkien's religious philosophy of creation and sub-creation. In this philosophy, true creation is the exclusive province of God, and those who aspire to creation can only make echoes (good) or mockeries (evil) of truth. The sub-creation of works that echo the true creations of God is one way that mortals honour God.\n\nThis philosophy is evident in Tolkien's other works, especially \"The Silmarillion\"—one Vala, Morgoth, creates the Orc race as a foul mockery of the elf. Another Vala, Aulë, creates the Dwarf race as an act of subcreation that honoured Eru Ilúvatar (the analog of God in Tolkien's writings), and which Eru accepted and made real, just as Niggle's Tree was made real.\n\nNiggle's yearnings after truth and beauty (God's creations) are echoed in his great painting; after death, Niggle is rewarded with the realisation (the making-real) of his yearning. Or, if you prefer, Niggle's Tree always existed; he simply echoed it in his art. From a metanarrative viewpoint, Tolkien's Arda is itself a subcreation designed to honour the true stories of the real world. Thus, the Middle-earth legendarium, despite its lack of overt religious elements, can be interpreted as a profoundly religious work.\n\nAn autobiographical interpretation places Tolkien himself as Niggle—in mundane matters as well as spiritual ones. Tolkien was compulsive in his writing, his revision, his desire for perfection in form and in the \"reality\" of his invented world, its languages, its chronologies, its existence. Like Niggle, Tolkien came to abandon other projects or graft them onto his \"Tree\", Middle-earth. Like Niggle, Tolkien faced many chores and duties that kept him from the work he loved; and like Niggle, Tolkien was a horrible procrastinator.\n\nTolkien himself might have disagreed with an allegorical interpretation. He wrote, in Letter 131 of \"The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien\", \"I dislike Allegory\". In specific reference to Niggle, he wrote in Letter 241, \"It is not really or properly an 'allegory' so much as 'mythical'.\" On the other hand, in Letter 153 he said, \"I tried to show allegorically how [subcreation] might come to be taken up into Creation in some plane in my 'purgatorial' story \"Leaf by Niggle\".\"\n\nBULLET::::- Leaf by Niggle – a symbolic story about a small painter\nBULLET::::- Essay on \"Leaf by Niggle\"\n"}
{"id": "18562", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18562", "title": "Leet", "text": "Leet\n\nLeet (or \"1337\"), also known as eleet or leetspeak, is a system of modified spellings used primarily on the Internet. It often uses character replacements in ways that play on the similarity of their glyphs via reflection or other resemblance. Additionally, it modifies certain words based on a system of suffixes and alternate meanings. There are many dialects or linguistic varieties in different online communities.\n\nThe term \"leet\" is derived from the word \"elite\", used as an adjective to describe formidable prowess or accomplishment, especially in the fields of online gaming or computer hacking. The leet lexicon includes spellings of the word as \"1337\" or \"l33t\".\n\nLeet originated within bulletin board systems (BBS) in the 1980s, where having \"elite\" status on a BBS allowed a user access to file folders, games, and special chat rooms. The Cult of the Dead Cow hacker collective has been credited with the original coining of the term, in their text-files of that era. One theory is that it was developed to defeat text filters created by BBS or Internet Relay Chat system operators for message boards to discourage the discussion of forbidden topics, like cracking and hacking. Creative misspellings and ASCII-art-derived words were also a way to attempt to indicate one was knowledgeable about the culture of computer users. \n\nOnce the reserve of hackers, crackers, and script kiddies, leet has since entered the mainstream. It is now also used to mock newbies, also known colloquially as noobs, or newcomers, on web sites, or in gaming communities. Some consider emoticons and ASCII art, like smiley faces, to be leet, while others maintain that leet consists of only symbolic word encryption. More obscure forms of leet, involving the use of symbol combinations and almost no letters or numbers, continue to be used for its original purpose of encrypted communication. It is also sometimes used as a script language. Variants of leet have been used for censorship purposes for many years; for instance \"@$$\" (ass) and \"$#!+\" (shit) are frequently seen to make a word appear censored to the untrained eye but obvious to a person familiar with leet.\n\nLeet symbols, especially the number 1337, are Internet memes that have spilled over into popular culture. Signs that show the numbers \"1337\" are popular motifs for pictures and shared widely across the Internet.\n\n1337 SPE4K is currently one of the premier coding and computer science conferences active in Europe as of 2019, aimed towards a newer livelier generation of technology enthusiasts\n\nOne of the hallmarks of leet is its unique approach to orthography, using substitutions of other characters, letters or otherwise, to represent a letter or letters in a word. For more-casual use of leet, the primary strategy is to use homoglyphs, symbols that closely resemble (to varying degrees) the letters for which they stand. The choice of symbol is not fixed—anything the reader can make sense of is valid. However, this practice is not extensively used in regular leet; more often it is seen in situations where the argot (i.e., secret language) characteristics of the system are required, either to exclude newbies or outsiders in general, i.e., anything that the \"average\" reader \"cannot\" make sense of is valid; a valid reader should himself try to make sense, if deserving of the underlying message. Another use for Leet orthographic substitutions is the creation of paraphrased passwords. Limitations imposed by websites on password length (usually no more than 36) and the characters permitted (usually alphanumeric and underscore) require less extensive forms of Leet when used in this application.\n\nSome examples of leet include \"B1ff\" and \"n00b\", a term for the stereotypical newbie; the l33t programming language; and the web-comic \"Megatokyo\", which contains characters who speak leet.\n\nText rendered in leet is often characterized by distinctive, recurring forms.\nBULLET::::- \"-xor\" suffix\nBULLET::::- \"-age\" suffix\nBULLET::::- \"-ness\" suffix\nBULLET::::- Words ending in \"-ed\"\nBULLET::::- Use of the \"-&\" suffix\n\nLeet can be pronounced as a single syllable, , rhyming with \"eat,\" by way of aphesis of the initial vowel of \"elite\". It may also be pronounced as two syllables, . Like hacker slang, leet enjoys a looser grammar than standard English. The loose grammar, just like loose spelling, encodes some level of emphasis, ironic or otherwise. A reader must rely more on intuitive parsing of leet to determine the meaning of a sentence rather than the actual sentence structure. In particular, speakers of leet are fond of verbing nouns, turning verbs into nouns (and back again) as forms of emphasis, e.g. \"Austin rocks\" is weaker than \"Austin roxxorz\" (note spelling), which is weaker than \"Au5t1N is t3h r0xx0rz\" (note grammar), which is weaker than something like \"0MFG D00D /\\Ü571N 15 T3H l_l83Я 1337 Я0XX0ЯZ\" (OMG, dude, Austin is the über-elite rocks-er!). In essence, all of these mean \"Austin rocks,\" not necessarily the other options. Added words and misspellings add to the speaker's enjoyment. Leet, like hacker slang, employs analogy in construction of new words. For example, if \"haxored\" is the past tense of the verb \"to hack\" (hack → haxor → haxored), then \"winzored\" would be easily understood to be the past tense conjugation of \"to win,\" even if the reader had not seen that particular word before.\n\nLeet has its own colloquialisms, many of which originated as jokes based on common typing errors, habits of new computer users, or knowledge of cyberculture and history. Leet is not solely based upon one language or character set. Greek, Russian, and other languages have leet forms, and leet in one language may use characters from another where they are available. As such, while it may be referred to as a \"cipher\", a \"dialect\", or a \"language\", leet does not fit squarely into any of these categories. The term \"leet\" itself is often written \"31337\", or \"1337\", and many other variations. After the meaning of these became widely familiar, \"10100111001\" came to be used in its place, because it is the binary form of \"1337\" decimal, making it more of a puzzle to interpret. An increasingly common characteristic of leet is the changing of grammatical usage so as to be deliberately incorrect. The widespread popularity of deliberate misspelling is similar to the cult following of the \"All your base are belong to us\" phrase. Indeed, the online and computer communities have been international from their inception, so spellings and phrases typical of non-native speakers are quite common.\n\nMany words originally derived from leet slang have now become part of the modern Internet slang, such as \"pwned\". The original driving forces of new vocabulary in leet were common misspellings and typing errors such as \"teh\" (generally considered lolspeak), and intentional misspellings, especially the \"z\" at the end of words (\"skillz\"). Another prominent example of a surviving leet expression is \"w00t\", an exclamation of joy. w00t is sometimes used as a backronym for \"We owned the other team.\"\n\nNew words (or corruptions thereof) may arise from a need to make one's username unique. As any given Internet service reaches more people, the number of names available to a given user is drastically reduced. While many users may wish to have the username \"CatLover,\" for example, in many cases it is only possible for one user to have the moniker. As such, degradations of the name may evolve, such as \"C@7L0vr.\" As the leet cipher is highly dynamic, there is a wider possibility for multiple users to share the \"same\" name, through combinations of spelling and transliterations.\n\nAdditionally, \"leet\"—the word itself—can be found in the screen-names and gamertags of many Internet and video games. Use of the term in such a manner announces a high level of skill, though such an announcement may be seen as baseless hubris. \n\n\"Warez\" (nominally ) is a plural shortening of \"software\", typically referring to cracked and redistributed software. \"Phreaking\" refers to the hacking of telephone systems and other non-Internet equipment. \"Teh\" originated as a typographical error of \"the\", and is sometimes spelled \"t3h\". \"j00\" takes the place of \"you\", originating from the affricate sound that occurs in place of the palatal approximant, , when \"you\" follows a word ending in an alveolar plosive consonant, such as or . Also, from German, is \"über\", which means \"over\" or \"above\"; it usually appears as a prefix attached to adjectives, and is frequently written without the umlaut over the \"u\".\n\n\"Haxor\", and derivations thereof, is leet for \"hacker\", and it is one of the most commonplace examples of the use of the \"-xor\" suffix. \"Suxxor\" (pronounced suck-zor) is a derogatory term which originated in warez culture and is currently used in multi-user environments such as multiplayer video games and instant messaging; it, like \"haxor\", is one of the early leet words to use the \"-xor\" suffix. \"Suxxor\" is a modified version of \"sucks\" (the phrase \"to suck\"), and the meaning is the same as the English slang. Its negative definition essentially makes it the opposite of \"roxxor\", and both can be used as a verb or a noun. The letters \"ck\" are often replaced with the Greek Χ (chi) in other words as well.\n\nWithin leet, the term \"n00b\", and derivations thereof, is used extensively. The word means and derives from \"newbie\" (as in new and inexperienced or uninformed), and is used as a means of segregating them as less than the \"elite,\" or even \"normal,\" members of a group.\n\n\"Owned\" and \"pwn3d\" (generally pronounced \"owned\" and \"poned\", respectively) both refer to the domination of a player in a video game or argument (rather than just a win), or the successful hacking of a website or computer.\n\nAs is a common characteristic of leet, the terms have also been adapted into noun and adjective forms, \"ownage\" and \"pwnage\", which can refer to the situation of \"pwning\" or to the superiority of its subject (e.g., \"He is a very good player. He is pwnage.\").\n\n\"Pr0n\" is slang for \"pornography\". This is a deliberately inaccurate spelling/pronunciation for \"porn\", where a zero is often used to replace the letter O. It is sometimes used in legitimate communications (such as email discussion groups, Usenet, chat rooms, and Internet web pages) to circumvent language and content filters, which may reject messages as offensive or spam. The word also helps prevent search engines from associating commercial sites with pornography, which might result in unwelcome traffic. \"Pr0n\" is also sometimes spelled backwards (n0rp) to further obscure the meaning to potentially uninformed readers. It can also refer to ASCII art depicting pornographic images, or to photos of the internals of consumer and industrial hardware. \"Prawn\", a spoof of the misspelling, has started to come into use, as well; in \"\", a pornographer films his movies on \"Prawn Island\". Conversely, in the RPG \"Kingdom of Loathing\", \"prawn\", referring to a kind of crustacean, is spelled \"pr0n\", leading to the creation of food items such as \"pr0n chow mein\".\n\n\"b&\" or banned refers to when an individual is no longer allowed into an online community. words containing -and-,anned- or ant or a similar sound can be replaced by the & symbol.\n\nmeaning sandbox could be spelled as &box or even &[] (e.g. \"skyrim is the best &box of 216 noCAP\").\n\nBULLET::::- Calculator spelling\nBULLET::::- Elitism\nBULLET::::- Faux Cyrillic\nBULLET::::- Geek Code\nBULLET::::- IDN homograph attack\nBULLET::::- Magic debug values, specific values written to a PC's memory\nBULLET::::- Mojibake, garbled text, resulting from text being decoded using an unintended character encoding\nBULLET::::- Numeronym, e.g. \"K9\" for \"canine\"\nBULLET::::- Rebus, an allusional device that uses pictures to represent words or parts of words\nBULLET::::- SMS language, a term for the abbreviations and slang used in mobile phone text messaging and other social technology\nBULLET::::- Urban Dictionary, a crowd-sourced slang dictionary\nBULLET::::- Verlan, inversion of syllables in a word\nBULLET::::- Jargon File, is a glossary and usage dictionary of computer programmer slang\nBULLET::::- Arabic chat alphabet\n\nBULLET::::- Leet Translator\n"}
{"id": "18563", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18563", "title": "Lud", "text": "Lud\n\nLud or LUD may refer to:\nBULLET::::- Local usage details, a record of local calls made from and received by a particular phone number\nBULLET::::- Ludic language, a Finnic language spoken in Karelia\nBULLET::::- Lud son of Heli, a legendary British king who in Geoffrey of Monmouth's pseudohistorical \"Historia Regum Britanniae\" founded London and was buried at Ludgate\nBULLET::::- Lud, son of Shem, a grandson of Noah\nBULLET::::- Lludd Llaw Eraint, a mythical Welsh figure cognate with king Nuada Airgetlám\nBULLET::::- Lud Fiser (1908–1990), American football and baseball player and coach\nBULLET::::- Lud Gluskin (1898–1989), Russian jazz bandleader\nBULLET::::- Lud Kramer (1932–2004), American politician\nBULLET::::- Ned Ludd, founder of the Luddite movement\n\nBULLET::::- Lud River, a river of New Zealand's South Island\nBULLET::::- Ludlow railway station, England\nBULLET::::- River Lud, a river of England, canalised as the Louth Navigation\nBULLET::::- Stone Lud, a standing stone in Caithness, in the Highland area of Scotland\nBULLET::::- Lud Gate, a city gate in the London area of Ludgate\nBULLET::::- Lüderitz Airport IATA code\n\nBULLET::::- Lud (city), a city in Stephen King's \"Dark Tower\" series\nBULLET::::- Lobby Lud, a character used in British newspaper scavenger hunts in the 1920s\n\nBULLET::::- Ludd (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Lod, a city in Israel (formerly Lydda)\n"}
{"id": "18564", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18564", "title": "Lois Lane", "text": "Lois Lane\n\nLois Lane is a fictional character appearing in American comic books published by DC Comics. Created by writer Jerry Siegel and artist Joe Shuster, she first appeared in \"Action Comics\" #1 (June 1938). Lois is an award-winning journalist for the Metropolis newspaper the \"Daily Planet\" and the primary love interest of the superhero Superman and his alter-ego, Clark Kent. In DC continuity, she is also his wife and the mother of their son, Jon Kent, the current Superboy in the DC Universe.\n\nLois' physical appearance was originally based on Joanne Carter, a model hired by Joe Shuster. For her character, Jerry Siegel was inspired by actress Glenda Farrell's portrayal of the fictional reporter Torchy Blane in a series of films. Siegel took her name from actress Lola Lane. She was also influenced by the real-life journalist Nellie Bly.\n\nDepictions of the character have varied spanning the comics and other media adaptations. The original Golden Age version of Lois Lane, as well as versions of her from the 1970s onwards, portrays Lois as a dauntless journalist and intellectually equal to Superman. During the Silver Age of Comics, she was the star of \"Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane\", a comic book series that had a light and humorous tone. Beginning in 2015, she is the protagonist in the young adult novel series, \"Lois Lane\", by writer Gwenda Bond.\n\nLois is among the best-known female comic book characters. She has appeared in various media adaptations. Actress Noel Neill first portrayed Lois Lane in the 1940s \"Superman\" film series and later reprised her role in the 1950s television series \"Adventures of Superman\", replacing Phyllis Coates from season two. Margot Kidder played the character in four Superman films in the 1970s and 1980s, Kate Bosworth in the 2006 film \"Superman Returns\", and Amy Adams in the DC Extended Universe. In the 1990s television series, she was portrayed by Teri Hatcher in \"\" and Erica Durance in the 2000s series, \"Smallville\". Most recently Elizabeth Tulloch appeared as Lois in the Arrowverse television shows. Actresses who have voiced Lois in animated adaptations include Joan Alexander in the Fleischer Superman cartoons and Dana Delany in \"\", among others.\n\nWriter Jerry Siegel first conceived Lois Lane in 1934, when Siegel and Joe Shuster were still developing Superman. One of the major influence on Lois' characterization was actress Glenda Farrell and her portrayal of the fictional reporter Torchy Blane in a series of Warner Bros. films. The Torchy Blane movies were popular second features during the later 1930s. On the conception of Lois Lane, Siegel stated in the 1988 \"Time\" magazine:\n\nArtist Joe Shuster based Lois' physical appearance on a model named Joanne Carter. Carter had placed an ad in the \"Cleveland Plain Dealer\" newspaper in the Situation Wanted column, advertising herself as a model. Shuster corresponded with her and hired her as the model for Lois Lane. Shuster's depiction of Lois was modeled on her hairstyle and facial features. \"To me she was Lois Lane. She was a great inspiration for me, though. She encouraged me, she was very enthusiastic about the strip; it meant a lot to me.\" Shuster said about Joanne Carter.\n\nJoanne Carter married co-creator Jerry Siegel in 1948. On working with Joe Shuster for Lois Lane, Carter said in the 1983 \"Nemo\" magazine interview: \"Joe was redrawing the strip, and it was going to be more realistic, rather than cartoony. I used to model for him every Saturday until he had enough drawings. He made so many stock drawings that it got to a point where he didn't need any more. We became such good friends by that time we decided we would always stay friends.\"\n\nLois Lane made her debut in \"\"Action Comics\" #1\" (June 1938) the first published Superman story. She was one of the first female comic book characters appearing in the superhero comics. Lois is the daughter of Ella and Sam Lane, in earlier comics, her parents were farmers in a town called Pittsdale. The modern comics depicts Lois as a former Army brat, born at Ramstein Air Base with Lois having been trained by her father, a US Army General, in areas such as hand-to-hand combat and the use of firearms. She has one younger sibling, her sister Lucy Lane. Lois is a journalist for the \"Daily Planet\", one of the best investigative reporters and the best at the newspaper she works at. In some stories, she has been shown obtaining superpowers and becoming a superhero, some of her superhero identities are Superwoman and Red Tornado of Earth 2.\n\nAspects of Lois' personality have varied over the years, depending on the comic book writers handling of the character and American social attitudes toward women at the time. In most incarnations, she is shown to be an independent person who is smart, determined and strong-willed. Her physical appearance has varied over the years, depending either on contemporary fashion or media adaptations. In the 1990s, when the television series \"\" began airing Lois received a haircut that made her look more like actress Teri Hatcher, and her eyes were typically violet to match her character on \"\". From the late 1980s through the 1990s she was depicted with auburn hair in the comic books. \nIn the 1940s, Lois had a newspaper comic strip, \"Lois Lane, Girl Reporter\", a direct spin-off of the Superman comic strip running at the time. A similar title comic series began appearing in the \"Superman\" comic book in 1944, starting with \"Superman\" #28. In 1958, DC Comics gave Lois a comic book series, \"Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane\". The series focuses on her solo adventures and began publication in April 1958. In the 1960s, the series was one of DC's most popular titles and was the top ten best-selling comic books in America. She had a series featured in \"The Superman Family\" comic book from 1974 to 1982. In 2015, she received her own young adult novel series written by author Gwenda Bond. Published by Switch Press the series include: \"Lois Lane: Fallout\", \"Lois Lane: Double Down\" and \"Lois Lane: Triple Threat\".\n\nLois is the character most commonly associated with Superman, and throughout their long history, she has always been the most prominent love interest in Clark Kent/Superman's life. In the 1990s, after Clark proposes to Lois and reveals to her that he is Superman, she married him in the comic book \"\" (Dec. 1996). The couple's biological child in DC Comics canon was born in \"Convergence: Superman #2\" (July 2015) a son named Jonathan Samuel Kent, who eventually becomes Superboy.\n\nIn the Golden Age comics, Lois was an aggressive, career-minded reporter for the \"Daily Star\" (the newspaper's name was changed to the \"Daily Planet\" in \"Action Comics\" #23 in 1940). After Clark Kent joined the paper and Superman debuted around the same time, Lois found herself attracted to Superman but displeased with her new journalistic competition in the form of Kent.\n\nStarting early as the 1940s, Lois began to suspect that Clark Kent was Superman, and started to make various attempts at uncovering his secret identity, all of which backfired because of Superman's efforts. The first such story appears in \"Superman\" #17 (July–August 1942). This theme became particularly pronounced in the 1950s and 1960s Silver Age comic books.\n\nLois gained her first series of stories (without Superman) starting with \"Superman\" #28 (May–June 1944), \"Lois Lane, Girl Reporter\", running in the \"Superman\" comic book for a number of years, had Lois defeating bad guys and getting front-page stories on her own, without any help from Superman.\n\nIn the Golden Age comics, Lois had a niece named Susie Tompkins, whose main trait was getting into trouble by telling exaggerated tall tales and fibs to adults. Susie's last appearance was in \"Superman\" #95 (February 1955). Subsequent comics presented Lois' only sibling, Lucy, as single and childless.\n\nWhen the reading audience of superhero comic books became predominately young boys in the mid to late 1950s, the focus of Superman stories shifted toward science fiction inspired plots involving extraterrestrials, fantasy creatures, and bizarre plots.\n\nLois' main interests in various late 1950s and 1960s stories became vying with her rival Lana Lang for Superman's affections, attempting to prove Clark Kent and Superman were one and the same or otherwise getting Superman into marriage. Superman's rationale for resisting her matrimonial desires was that marrying her would put her in increased danger from his enemies and that she could not keep his secret identity hidden. Regardless, Lois married several times in the Superman stories of this era, including to a Superman impostor from Kandor, the villainous Zak-Kul and a man from the future. All these marriages were either annulled or otherwise forgotten.\n\nLois became more and more popular during the 1950s, and after appearing as the lead character in two issues of DC's title \"Showcase\" in 1957, DC Comics created an ongoing series for the character, titled \"Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane\" beginning in April 1958 and running for 137 issues until October 1974. Most stories were about Lois' romance with Superman, and were drawn by artist Kurt Schaffenberger; indeed, Schaffenberger's rendition of Lois became cited by many as the \"definitive\" version of Lois, and he was often asked by DC editor Mort Weisinger to redraw other artists' depictions of Lois Lane in other DC titles where she appeared. So many stories depicted Lois and marriage that the cover of a 1968 80-Page Giant that reprinted several such stories, the \"All-Wedding Issue\", described the magazine as \"featuring Lois' schemes and dreams to marry Superman!\".\n\nThe series \"Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane\" became one of DC's most popular titles, the third best-selling comic in 1962 and 1965. The title featured the first appearance of the Silver Age Catwoman, after an absence from the comics for over a decade.\n\nWhile Lois suspicious of Superman's secret identity as early as \"Superman\" #7 (1940), her suspicions grew during the early Silver Age, with many stories in her series focusing on her attempts to prove Superman and Clark Kent were one and the same. Stories showed Superman using various means to protect his secret identity from Lois, including his Superman robots or Batman disguising himself as Clark/Superman.\n\nBy the end of the 1960s, as attitudes toward women's role in American society changed, Lois' character changed as well. In \"Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane\" #80 (Jan. 1968), the character's fashions were updated to a then more contemporary look. Stories in the 1970s depicted Lois as fully capable and less reliant on Superman. She engaged in more adventures without Superman being involved and was much less interested in discovering Superman's secret identity.\n\nLois had a series featured in \"The Superman Family\" (an anthology title started in the mid-1970s after the cancellation of \"Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane\" and \"Superman's Pal, Jimmy Olsen\") from 1974 to 1982. In her series, Lois regularly battled criminals and often defeated them using her quick wits and considerable skill in the Kryptonian martial art of Klurkor, taught to her by Kryptonian survivors in the bottle city of Kandor. There were several cameos of the New Gods, including Desaad and Darkseid. Lois Lane was the backup series in \"The Daring New Adventures of Supergirl\" in 1982 to 1983.\n\nDuring the Silver and Bronze Age, Lois' backstory became more fully fleshed out, with various stories explaining her life before becoming employed at the \"Daily Planet\". This backstory was attributed to the Lois Lane of Earth-One.\n\nAs summarized in various stories, Lois was born to Sam and Ella Lane and grew up on their farm in the small town of Pittsdale. While Lois was a toddler, she encountered a rattlesnake in the woods near the Lane family farm. The snake was scared away by one of Kal-El's baby toys which had landed nearby in one of Jor-El's experimental rockets. At the age of two, Lois suffered measles, and at the age of three, whooping cough. At an unspecified time during Lois' childhood, her younger sister Lucy Lane was born.\n\nDuring Lois' adolescence, she won a youth contest run by the \"Daily Planet\", with the prize being a trip to Metropolis to spend a week working as a cub reporter for the newspaper. There, she first met Clark Kent of Smallville, who was the other winner of the contest. Lois found Clark dull and became more interested in asking him for information about Superboy after learning Clark came from Smallville. During the week in Metropolis, Lois made a bet with Clark to see who would get the most scoops, which turned out to be Lois, as Clark was forced to constantly go into action as Superboy. Lois met Superboy for the first time while uncovering a criminal enterprise for one of her stories. At the end of the week, Clark paid off Lois' bet (an ice cream sundae), and the two returned to their respective hometowns. Lois would meet Superboy (but not Clark Kent) again during her adolescence while attending an all-girls summer camp near Smallville. There, Lois met Lana Lang, a fellow camper, for the first time. Lois would make further attempts at landing a job with the \"Daily Planet\" during her teenage years and spent time writing for her hometown's newspaper, the \"Pittsdale Star\".\n\nUpon finishing high school, Lois left Pittsdale and attended Raleigh College to study journalism. While in college, Lois worked for the student newspaper, the \"Raleigh Review\", as a reporter and eventually its co-editor. After graduating from college, Lois became permanently employed at the \"Daily Planet\". Clark Kent and Jimmy Olsen later joined the \"Planet\"s staff but Lois remained the newspaper's star reporter, winning the Pulitzer Prize. She was very dependent on Superman, however; he told her that having to rescue her so often from problems she caused prevented him from helping others. For example, when late for a deadline Lois jumped off a cliff expecting Superman to catch her \"as he has done a thousand times\", and fly her to her destination. When asked on a Sunday morning talk show what she would do if trapped in an underground mine with rescue impossible before the air ran out, Lois admitted that she would impatiently await Superman because \"I've got a deadline to meet.\"\n\nAfter the 1985–1986 miniseries \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" writer John Byrne revised the Superman legend and eliminated the Silver Age version of Lois from continuity. Before this happened, a final non-canonical imaginary story \"Whatever Happened to the Man of Tomorrow?\" was written by Alan Moore, meant as a send-off for the pre-Crisis versions of the characters, including Lois. Published at the same time but in Earth-One continuity was a two-issue miniseries, \"Lois Lane\", in which she investigates missing children.\n\nLois underwent a character alteration beginning with John Byrne's \"The Man of Steel\" miniseries, which significantly rewrote Superman's origin and history. In this modern version of events, Lois was portrayed as a tough-as-nails reporter who rarely needed rescuing. She was depicted as strong, opinionated, yet sensitive.\n\nLois' first real relationship in this version was with Jose Delgado, who she later came to know acted as a vigilante. José's legs are shattered in a battle with a Lexcorp cyborg/human hybrid gone amok. Delgado eventually recovered. He and Lois would have several on and off experiences together before the relationship completely disintegrated, due to Delgado accepting help from a Lexcorp subsidiary ARL.\n\nAnother major change made was that Lois did not fall in love with just Superman, although she was attracted to him. One reason was the revised nature of the Superman/Clark Kent relationship. In the original Silver Age stories, Superman had been the man who disguised himself as Clark Kent. In this newly revised concept, it was Clark Kent who lived a life in which his activity as Superman was decidedly secondary. Lois initially resented the rookie Clark Kent getting the story on Superman as his first piece when she had spent ages trying to get an interview. This sometimes ill-tempered rivalry remained the case until \"The Adventures of Superman\" #460–463 and \"Action Comics\" #650.\n\nFollowing Clark's brief rampage under the influence of the Eradicator, Lois was hesitant to forgive Clark for \"selling out\" to Collin Thornton and running \"Newstime\" Magazine, but forgave him in a span of mere minutes when he returned to ask for his job back. Clark elected to repay Lois by finally letting go of his self-imposed inhibitions and passionately kissed her. The two became a couple, and eventually, Lois accepted a proposal of marriage. Clark shortly after revealed to her that he was Superman.\n\nDC Comics had planned on Lois and Clark being married in 1993's \"Superman vol. 2\" #75. With the then-upcoming television show \"\", DC decided they did not want to have the two married in the comics and not married on TV. Partially as a result of this, Superman was killed in \"Superman\" #75 instead, dying in Lois' arms after a battle royal with the monster Doomsday. After a period of time, Superman returned to life, and both he and Lois resumed their relationship, though not without a few problems (such as a brief reappearance of Clark's former college girlfriend, the mermaid Lori Lemaris). Lois eventually decided to take an overseas assignment to assert her independence and not be dependent on Clark, who had begun to overprotect her. When Clark became convinced Lois was in danger, he and her father Sam allied to aid her secretly.\n\nWhen Lois returned to Metropolis, she had been through several life-threatening exploits and was slightly amused when Clark informed her his powers had been depleted, and that he was her editor (due to Perry White's cancer). Upon discovering Clark still had her wedding ring within a handkerchief, Lois warmly broke down, teasing Clark and finally agreeing to become his wife.\n\nLois and Clark were finally married in the comic book \"\" (Dec. 1996), which featured the work of nearly every living artist who had ever worked on Superman. The issue was published during the week of October 6, 1996, coinciding with an episode of the television series \"\", which featured the wedding of the two characters. \"The Wedding Album\" itself spent part of its opening pages accommodating and reconciling the then-current comic storyline of Lois and Clark having broken off their engagement.\n\nSince their marriage, Clark and Lois continue to be one of the strongest relationships in comics. In 2006, the couple took the next step in adopting a newly arrived Kryptonian boy, who they named Chris Kent. The boy is later discovered to be the son of Jor-El's foe, General Zod. Although initially uneasy about raising a super-powered child, Lois has shown immense aptitude of being 'Mommy Lois.' Following a devastating battle with Zod, Chris sacrificed himself to seal the Phantom Zone rift, trapping himself inside with Zod's forces, leaving Lois without her son.\n\nIn the second issue of \"Final Crisis\", Lois and Perry are caught in an explosion triggered by Clayface destroying the \"Daily Planet\" and Lois is critically injured. In the third issue, it is revealed that only Clark's heat vision is keeping her heart beating. Clark is visited by a mysterious phantom who insists that he must depart Earth immediately if he is to save his wife's life. The story is continued in the 3D tie-in comic \"Superman Beyond\", where the female Monitor Zillo Valla stops time around Lois, allowing Superman to leave her side for a while, recruiting him and several of his multiversal doppelgangers in a mission to save the entire Multiverse, promising care for Lois. After defeating the dark Monitor Mandrakk, Superman brings back a distilled drop of The Bleed and administers it to Lois through a kiss, restoring her to full health. Lois is later seen in \"Final Crisis\" #6, one of the few still free humans.\n\nAfter the events of \"\" Superman must leave Earth for an undetermined amount of time swearing off his Earthly connections in the eyes of his fellow Kryptonians to keep an eye on General Zod the New Kryptonian military commander, but he secretly tells Lois he still considers her his wife and will come back to her. In the issues of \"Action Comics\" Lois has reunited with Christopher Kent who has aged to adulthood in the past months and became the new Metropolis hero Nightwing. Supergirl and Lana visit Lois' apartment to tell her the bad news that her sister Lucy Lane was killed during a battle with Supergirl. Lois doesn't believe that her sister is dead and refuses to accept the news until she has irrefutable proof. Lois asks Supergirl for a recovered piece of Superwoman's costume.\n\nLois hands her exposé in and the government is after her for treason. With agents on her tail, she makes a mad dash for it. When Lois is in custody, her father Sam Lane is there to greet her in an interview room in an unnamed facility. Sam tells Lois the only reason he has been lenient with her is because she is his daughter, while he does love her the planet will always come first over his family and threatens to make her disappear forever if she continues. Lois returns to the \"Daily Planet\" under cover of night and explains all to Perry. She points out the whole paper is at risk and everyone connected to it if her exposé runs. Perry understands and though he must protect the paper he is first and foremost a good journalist and nudges Lois in the right direction; he won't run the story but noted it must get out to the people somehow. Enlightened, she quits the \"Daily Planet\", as Lois gets her edge back. It was later revealed she never really quit the \"Daily Planet\".\n\nLois learns her father's forces destroyed New Krypton. She is kidnapped by Lucy and taken to Sam's secret base. There, Lois argues with her father, saying the Kryptonians think of him as a genocidal maniac. In the war between New Krypton and Earth, Supergirl finds them and threatens to kill Sam. Lois stops her, saying her father will be judged for his war crimes. Sam takes a gun and commits suicide. Later, Lois visits the imprisoned Lucy. She expresses disbelief on what her sister has become. Lois says while she will not miss her father, she will miss her sister.\n\nIn \"\", Superman begins a journey through America to reconnect with the American people, and Lois, though confused at first, supports his choice. Lois later travels to Rushmark and finds an old college friend Brian, who invites her to have dinner with him and his wife. When Lois leaves Brian's home she is met by Superman. The two reaffirm their love to each other and go to Chicago. There, Lois helps Superman arrest a violent father who has been attacking his wife and son. Later, Lois and Superman investigate a factory in Des Moines. Lois wants to publish an article, which would reveal the workers' illegal activities, but Superman forces her not to. Feeling betrayed, Lois returns to Metropolis and does not speak to Superman for a while. When Lois is kidnapped by Lisa Jennings, a woman who wants to destroy Superman, he rescues her. With the danger over. Superman apologizes to Lois about what happened in Des Moines. Lois replies that she wrote the article anyway, saying that she was a reporter before she was his wife. Knowing that his wife did the right thing, Superman kisses her. The two then return home.\n\nIn 2011, DC Comics relaunched its titles and its main continuity was rebooted with the New 52. Lois now works for Morgan Edge heading up the media division of the \"Daily Planet\". She views Clark as a friend and is unaware that he is Superman.\n\nLois investigates the story of twenty people who developed metahuman powers after being kidnapped by Brainiac. Her search leads her to a U.S. senator, who revealed to be one of the Twenty. The senator dies, but not before transferring his powers to Lois, who falls into a coma. Lois later awakes from her coma at the hospital, with Jonathan Carroll at her side. Lois manifests psychic powers and helps Superman fight the Psychic Pirate. During the fight, Lois learns that Clark is Superman but falls back into a coma. After defeating the Psychic Pirate, Superman brings Lois back to the hospital. Later, the Parasite attacks the hospital and attempts to steal Lois' powers. Superman tricks the Parasite into absorbing Lois' psionic energy. The power overwhelms the Parasite, causing him to collapse. Lois awakens from her coma but she does not seem to remember Superman's identity.\n\nLois is the main character in the \"Superman: Lois Lane\" #1 one-shot. In this story, Lois' sister, Lucy, asks for her help in finding her roommate Amanda Suresh, who had been kidnapped by a mysterious group called \"the Cartel.\" According to Lucy, Amanda had been taking a drug that transformed her into a monster. As Lois investigates the Cartel, she gets captured and taken to the Cartel's headquarters. There, Lois finds out the Cartel had been capturing people who had been mutated by the drug. Lois escapes and rescues Amanda when the captured monsters cause a riot. As she returns home, Lois finds out Lucy had been taking the drug. As Lucy apologizes for putting all three in danger, Lois chooses to publish her story about the Cartel.\n\nIn the \"\", set five years in the possible future of the New 52-verse. Lois is considered the most successful freelance reporter on the planet and her blog \"The Fast Lane\" is one of the most read and well-respected sources of news in the world.\n\nIn the miniseries \"Convergence\", which featured many Post-\"Crisis\" DC Universe characters, including a married Superman and his pregnant wife Lois Lane, deal with the impending birth of their child, as Superman is called to protect the city. \"Convergence\" shows the birth of their son, Jonathan Samuel Kent.\n\nFollowing \"Convergence\", DC announced the spin-off comic book series \"\", debuting in October 2015 by Dan Jurgens and Lee Weeks. The eight-issue series is set several years after the \"Convergence\" event, where Clark and Lois and their son Jonathan has been living and working in the New 52 universe. The couple now lives in California and has changed their last name to White (a tribute to Perry White). Lois has become an anonymous author, publishing several critically acclaimed books under the alias name \"Author X.\" While Clark continues his superhero duty, protecting cities and civilians quietly behind the scenes. Their son, Jonathan, eventually began to develop superpowers of his own (similar to those of his father Superman) and learned the truth about his parents' true origin.\n\nIn June 2016, DC Comics relaunched its entire line of comic book titles with DC Rebirth. The publisher once again re-established the Post-\"Crisis\" Superman as the principal Superman in DC comics, along with his wife, Lois Lane, and their son, Jonathan Samuel Kent.\n\nLois began to investigate the disappearance of her New 52 counterpart, and after learning the apparent death of her other-self, she returns to the \"Daily Planet\" posing as her counterpart. Following a confrontation with Mister Mxyzptlk, Lois and Superman's essence is merged with their New 52 counterpart, creating a new DC Universe.\n\nLois Lane has become a superhero and gained superpowers several times in the comics, animation, and live-action series.\n\nLois was the first person to assume the Superwoman persona and has become the superheroine on several occasions. Her first appearance as Superwoman (as well as Superwoman's first appearance in DC Comics) was in \"Action Comics\" #60 (May 1943). The story is set in a dream sequence, where, after Lois is hit by a truck, she dreams a transfusion of Superman's blood gives her superpowers and she becomes Superwoman. In \"Superman\" #45, Lois believes Hocus and Pocus—a pair of fraudulent magicians—have given her superpowers, and with Superman's help and intervention, Lois once again becomes Superwoman. In \"Action Comics\" #156, Lois actually gains superpowers from one of Lex Luthor's inventions, which launches a short-lived career as \"Superwoman.\" In \"The Superman Family\" #207, the Earth-Two Lois gained superpowers from her husband, after Superman brought an extraterrestrial plant into their home, with Lois losing the powers after the death of the plant. Other stories have Lois transformed into Superwoman when Superman transfers some of his powers to Lois, or due to Mr. Mxyzptlk's interference. On \"Smallville\" in the episode \"Prophecy,\" Jor-El gives Lois all of Clark's powers for one day.\n\nIn the original Crime Syndicate of America on Earth-Three, Lois Lane and Superwoman were two separate individual characters. Superwoman is a supervillain and Lois married Earth-Three's greatest champion, Alexander Luthor. The pre-Crisis version of the characters perished when Earth-Three was destroyed during the events of \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\". In the graphic novel \"\", Superwoman, a member of the Crime Syndicate is the alternate version of Lois Lane. She is an Amazon by birth and the chief editor of the \"Daily Planet\". She inhabits the same antimatter universe which contains the planet Qward. The New 52 version of Superwoman of Earth-3 is also named Lois Lane and is part of the Crime Syndicate.\n\nIn \"All-Star Superman\", the 12-issue comic book series by Grant Morrison and Frank Quitely, Lois becomes a Kryptonian Superwoman for 24 hours. In the story, Superman (who believed he was dying) revealed his secret identity to her and takes Lois to his Fortress of Solitude to spend her birthday. While at his Arctic sanctuary, he presents Lois with her birthday present, a formula called \"Exo-Genes\" created by Superman from his own DNA, that allows Lois to have his powers for twenty-four hours. With her new Kryptonian powers and new Superwoman costume (made by Superman), the two spend the whole day together on different adventures and shared a kiss on the moon. At the end of the story, Superman proclaims his love for Lois, before he flies off into the sun to repair it. Lois later appeared as Superwoman in the animated All-Star Superman film, voiced by Christina Hendricks.\n\nIn DC Rebirth, the \"New 52\" Lois and Lana gained superpowers due to the solar energy explosion caused by the death of the New 52 Superman. This results in both Lois and Lana becoming Superwoman, with Lois possessing all of Superman's traditional powers, while Lana has the ability to absorb solar energy and release it in other forms. Lois later dies at the hands of a female Bizarro, being overloaded with solar energy the same way Superman was killed.\n\nFollowing the DC relaunch, the series \"\" debuted in 2012, set on the parallel world of that name. It depicts a modern take on the Golden Age world, starring the Justice Society of America and superheroes of that period.\n\nIn \"Earth 2\", Lois Lane is married to Superman. When Clark's cousin, Kara arrived on earth, she stayed with Clark's parents, before moving in and living with Clark and Lois. Lois considers Kara as her daughter and Kara calls Lois mom. Five years prior to the start of the story, during the first Apokoliptian invasion of Earth 2, Lois was killed by one of Darkseid's assassins at the Daily Planet, she died in her husband's arms. Superman and many other heroes of Earth 2 perished in the war.\n\nFive years later, as various heroes begin to rise and various gods from Apokolips begin to wreak havoc again. Lois' consciousness is revealed to have survived and was downloaded into the robot body of Red Tornado by her father Sam Lane. Lois, now as Red Tornado, possessed the power of wind manipulation and cyclone generation abilities. Lois bands together with Green Lantern (Alan Scott), Batman (Thomas Wayne), Accountable (Jimmy Olsen) and the other gathered heroes to fight against the forces of Apokolips. After a protracted battle with what was thought to be a surviving brainwashed Superman, Lois realizes he is, in fact, a Bizarro, and takes advantage of his deteriorating form to disintegrate him with a cyclone blast. In the story, Lois is referred to by Doctor Fate as the \"Resurrection hope\".\n\nDuring Superman's rampage and destruction on Earth 2, Lois is among a group that discovers Val-Zod, a Kryptonian, hidden in a cell beneath Arkham. Lois helps Val feel accepted and welcomed on Earth 2, learn to control his superpower, and overcome his agoraphobia (due to his prolonged travel in space to Earth). Val-Zod eventually becomes the new Superman of Earth 2.\n\nIn the second Apokoliptian invasion of Earth 2, Lois and Kara are reunited, after Kara and Huntress return to Earth 2 from Prime Earth. Lois, along with Kara, Val, Huntress, Batman and other heroes, fights against the armies of Apokolips and new villains appearing across Earth 2. While searching for Huntress beneath the fire pits of Earth 2 in DeSaad's cloning facility, Lois, Val, Kara and Batman found the real Superman who has been held captive for five years. He was revived by DeSaad and was used as the genetic source for the Kryptonian clones. The extraction of his DNA corrupted his body leaving him without any powers. Lois and Superman reunite briefly, before he sacrificed himself one last time, destroying the Parademon facilities using his corrupt DNA. After Superman's death, Lois gave Kara the symbol from his uniform, which was then worn by Kara in remembrance.\n\nIn the final days of Earth 2, Lois' instincts as a journalist lead her to attempt to preserve and record the history and stories of Earth 2 in her large memory bank in the hope that someday, someone will read the data and rebuild this world. After the destruction of Earth 2, Lois and the remaining civilians and heroes of Earth 2 relocated to a new world.\n\nThe writer of \"Earth 2\", Tom Taylor, specifically resurrected Lois Lane on Earth 2 after he was told to kill off the character in the \"Injustice\" comic series. Taylor stated \"bringing Lois in was quite a personal thing, because having to do such horrible, horrible things to her in Injustice, the first thing I asked when I got on the book was if I could bring back Lois. Then it was just a matter of working out exactly how.\" Taylor received \"Women in Refrigerators\" criticism for his \"Injustice\" comic stories. Bringing back Lois as Red Tornado was Taylor's way to \"unfridge\" Lois. As Taylor noted, in Lois' first appearance as Red Tornado, Lois literally came out of a blue refrigerator. Other reasons for bringing back Lois involve Superman, Taylor commented \"While evil bastard Superman is out there killing and maiming and destroying, I wanted Lois to exist as the counterpoint to this. She's the beating heart at the center. She's the good Ying to Superman's evil Yang. Where there's Lois, there's hope.\"\n\nNicola Scott, the long-time artist on Earth 2, on drawing Red Tornado Lois, \"I wanted Lois to be Lois, despite the fact that she’s metal. I wanted to make sure she looked really feminine and really beautiful, so all she’d need is a flesh coating and a wig and she’d be good to go.\"\n\nBULLET::::- Green Lantern – In \"Tangent Comics: Tales of the Green Lantern\" #1, Green Lantern of Earth-9 is introduced with three different origin tales. In one origin story, Lois is an archaeologist, explorer, and adventurer hired by billionaire playboy Booster Gold to explore the underwater ruins off the coast of Florida. She discovers a community of mutated life forms known as the Sea Devils and is murdered by Booster Gold when she tries to protect the Sea Devils. Her body is taken to the underwater castle and resurrected as the Green Lantern.\nBULLET::::- Elastic Lass – Lois becomes Elastic Lass, after borrowing Jimmy Olsen's Elastic Lad serum, given to him by Professor Potter, so she can catch the Wrecker, who has been blowing up statues around Metropolis.\nBULLET::::- Isis – On the television series \"Smallville\", Lois is possessed by the spirit of the Egyptian goddess and hero Isis while wearing the Amulet of Isis in the tenth-season episode \"Isis.\" This was based on the character of Isis who first appeared in an eponymous 1975-77 CBS television series, later known as \"The Secrets of Isis\". Isis was then brought into DC comics canon, both as a superhero and as a separate goddess. As Isis, Lois had super strength, speed, telekinesis, telepathy, energy projection, magic, and could fly.\nBULLET::::- Krypton Girl – In the imaginary story in \"Superman's Girlfriend Lois Lane\" #47, Lois is from Krypton and takes the superhero name Krypton Girl on Earth; Clark Kent is an ordinary human.\nBULLET::::- Leopard Lady – Lois becomes the supervillain Leopard Lady and marries Lex Luthor when a machine that can bring out evil in a person is used on her.\nBULLET::::- Power Girl – In \"Superman\" #125, Lois dreams she and Clark gain superpowers and become Power-Girl and Power-Man.\nBULLET::::- Stiletto – On \"Smallville\", Lois takes on the superhero persona of Stiletto, after saving Chloe from a carjacker in the eighth-season episode \"Stiletto.\"\nBULLET::::- Super-Lois – The comic book \"Superman's Girlfriend Lois Lane\" featured several stories in which Lois gains superpowers and becomes Super-Lois. In one, Lois gains superpower after Superman gives her a blood transfusion. In another story, Lois is invited to visit Kandor with three other accomplished women of Earth; while there, a scientist gives her superpowers. Lois uses her new superpowers to save Superman from a Kryptonite trap set by Mayhem, Inc.\nBULLET::::- Supermaid – In an imaginary story in \"Superman\" #158, Lois goes to Krypton as a child and becomes Supermaid. Lois' father sent his infant daughter to Krypton in a starship, after discovering Earth's sun would go nova and destroy the solar system. Arriving on Krypton within a power beam modifies Lois' molecular biology, giving her superpowers. Lois was adopted and raised by a zookeeper as Kandi Khan and became the Superheroine Supermaid.\nBULLET::::- Ultra Woman – On the television series \"\" in the episode \"Ultra Woman\" Superman's powers are transferred to Lois when a red Kryptonite laser beam hit him. Martha Kent makes Lois a new costume and Clark introduces her to Metropolis as Ultra Woman.\nBULLET::::- Divine empowerment – Lois was briefly granted divine powers as the Goddess of Integrity by the war and death gods, but gave the powers up at the urging of Wonder Woman. Her powers include flight, enhanced intellect, teleportation and weather manipulation.\nBULLET::::- Psychic powers – In \"The New 52\", Lois was given various psychic powers by Senator Hume; she has redeveloped and lost these powers numerous times. Some of her powers are telepathy and astral projection.\n\nDC Comics instituted its multiverse system in the early 1960s for organizing its continuity and introduced the Earth-Two Superman in \"Justice League of America\" #73 (August 1969). This retcon declared the Golden Age Superman and Lois Lane stories (i.e. comics published from 1938 through the early 1950s) as having taken place on the parallel world of \"Earth-Two\" versus the then mainstream (Silver Age) universe of \"Earth-One\".\n\nIn \"Action Comics\" #484 (June 1978), a flashback story reveals Earth-Two's Lois became infatuated with Clark Kent after the latter lost his memory of his superheroic identity (thanks to a spell cast by the old Justice Society of America enemy, the Wizard), with the result of Clark acting more aggressive and extroverted. Clark and Lois began to date each other and were soon married. During the honeymoon, Lois discovered that Clark was indeed Superman, and after recruiting the aid of the Wizard, restored Clark's memory.\n\nThe now-married Lois and Clark appeared in a series of stories in \"The Superman Family\" #195 – #199 and #201 – #222 titled \"Mr and Mrs Superman\", which presented their further adventures early in their marriage. Susie Tompkins made a return as a recurring character. Years later, Lois and Clark acted as parental figures for Power Girl, Superman's cousin, after she arrived on Earth.\n\nDuring the \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" miniseries, the Earth-Two Lois Lane was seemingly seen for the final time, as Lois, the Earth-Two Superman, and the Superboy of Earth-Prime are taken by Earth-Three's Alexander Luthor, Jr. into a paradise-like dimension at the end of the story. Following the events of \"Crisis on Infinite Earths,\" this version of Lois was retroactively removed from DC's continuity.\n\nIn 2005's \"Infinite Crisis\" miniseries, it was revealed that the Earth-Two Lois Lane Kent, along with Superboy, Alexander Luthor, Jr., and Superman, have been watching the events of the post-Crisis DC Universe from their pocket dimension. Out of the four observers, she is the only one who still believes that the new universe is just going through a rough patch; Superboy Prime and Alex Luthor are convinced that Earth is utterly corrupt, and Kal-L is slowly becoming swayed to their way of thinking. This version of Lois is frail, and dying for reasons not explicitly revealed, though probably connected to her octogenarian status. This was the main reason for Kal-L's determination to restore Earth-Two, as he believed that Lois' health would recover once back on her proper Earth. Despite the restoration of Earth-Two, Lois Lane Kent died in the arms of her husband, Superman, in \"Infinite Crisis\" #5, regardless of Kal-L's protests that he could not let her die. After Kal-L died at the hands of Superboy-Prime at the end of \"Infinite Crisis\" #7, he commented that he finally understood Lois' final words \"\"It's... not... going...\"\" as meaning that it would never end for them, and one day it would be understood that even the heroes who had been lost in the original Crisis were still out there somewhere. After his demise, they are shown reunited in the stars, while their bodies are buried on Earth alongside Kon-El's, who gave his life to stop Superboy-Prime's attempts to restore his Earth.\n\nLois later returns as a sinister Black Lantern with her husband in the \"Blackest Night\" crossover. Her first task is to kidnap Martha Kent with her spouse, and stating that she and Kal-L wish for Kal-El, Connor Kent, and Martha, to be reunited with Jonathan Kent in death. She proved unable to deal with the resourcefulness of Martha Kent, and was set ablaze by the widow, but kept regenerating until Krypto intervened, ripping the black ring out of her hand and preventing regeneration for long enough to allow Superman and Conner Kent to destroy the Black Lantern powerhouses attacking Smallville, and reaching town to aid others unhindered.\n\nBlack Lantern Lois later appears to Power Girl, claiming that she has escaped the ring's corrupting influence, and needs her help. This was just a ploy to get close enough to her husband's body, which was being held in the JSA headquarters after his black ring had been removed. Black Lantern Lois \"sacrifices\" herself by removing her ring and giving it to Kal-L, restoring him to full undead status, and causing her own body to become inert.\n\nDuring the years 1942–1985 Editora Brasil-América and Editora Abril which published the Brazilian versions of Superman comics, Lois Lane's name was translated to \"Miriam Lane\" and later to \"Miriam Lois Lane.\" In Spanish speaking countries, her name was translated to \"Luisa Lane\" in comics, TV series and movies.\n\nBULLET::::- \"\", a 1993 Elseworlds story based on the concept of an amalgamation of Superman and Batman. Martha and Thomas Wayne discovered Baby Kal-El, adopt and named him Bruce. Bruce discovers his superpowers when his parents are killed and create the identity Batman to fight criminals in Gotham City. Lois relocates to Gotham City after Lex Luthor buys the \"Daily Planet\", and soon forms a relationship with Bruce Wayne, the owner of her new job at the \"Gotham Gazette\". She later convinces him to abandon the identity of Batman and adopt a more hopeful persona of Superman.\nBULLET::::- \"\", a 1994 Elseworlds special in \"Superman Annual\" #6, based on The Jungle Book stories with elements from Tarzan. Raised by wolves in 19th-century Indian Jungle and is given the name K'L'L. Lois is an American girl who falls for K'L'L.\nBULLET::::- In \"Superman: Kal\", Lady Loisse is the daughter of the late Lord Lane in the Middle Ages. She is held captive by Baron Luthor, who hopes to make her his bride. Lois falls for Kal, a blacksmith's apprentice after he wins a contest against Luthor's best fighters. She accepts his request for her hand in marriage, as payment for him forging a suit of armour for Luthor from his rocket. After their wedding, Loisse is taken from Kal by Luthor, who subsequently killed her.\nBULLET::::- Lois is a teacher from the undercity in the 1996 series, \"Superman's Metropolis\", modelled on Fritz Lang's classic 1927 science-fiction film \"Metropolis\".\nBULLET::::- \"\", a Superman story adapted into the H. G. Wells novel \"The War of the Worlds\". Set in 1938, after applying for a job at the Daily Star, Clark and Lois witness the arrival of the Martian invasion of Earth. Superman dies saving the Earth, and Lois marries Lex Luthor who becomes the Vice President.\nBULLET::::- In the 1998 series, \"\", the Kents never found Clark, Lois is selected by Green Lantern to provide the Justice League with some positive media presentation after a recent propaganda campaign focuses on the idea that many modern metahumans are alien invaders. Tracking recent kidnapped heroes to a secret base, Lois is introduced to the Kents, who provide a safe house for various heroes after Lana Lang smuggled them out of the facility, and later discovers that the true mastermind behind the conspiracy is Jimmy Olsen, mutated into a Kryptonian through genetic experiments carried out based on DNA samples found in Kal-El's crashed and abandoned ship. Jimmy is finally defeated by Kal-El, who was here raised by an Amish couple until their deaths at Olsen's hands, with Lois writing about how Kal-El's time with the Kents helped him accept his abilities and grow into the Superman he should have been. In the sequel, \"\" Lois helps the Kents create Kal-El's 'Clark' disguise- albeit naming him 'Carl' on impulse- to give him a chance at a normal life outside of his role as Superman, reasoning that the simplicity of the glasses will stop people paying too much attention to him, while their original plan to completely cover him with a false beard would make people suspect that Kal-El had something to hide.\nBULLET::::- John Byrne's \"\" follow the life and families of Superman and Lois and their descendants over the course of three separate Elseworlds series.\nBULLET::::- Published in 1999, \"The Superman Monster\" takes elements from Mary Shelley's novel \"Frankenstein\" where Superman is similar to the Frankenstein monster. Set in Gotham City in 1888, Eloise Edge is the daughter of Burgomaster Edge and the fiancé of scientist Vicktor Luthor who creates the creature, Klaus, using Kryptonian technology.\nBULLET::::- In the series, \"Son of Superman\", fifteen years after the disappearance of Superman, Lois' teenage son Jon Kent begins to display superpowers and learns his father is Superman. Jon joins the rebel organization to fight against the corrupt U.S. government.\nBULLET::::- In \"\", all men on Earth except Superman and Lex Luthor is killed by a strange disease. When Lois become pregnant, Superman is forced to leave Earth after Luthor reveals he is still a carrier for the disease. Years later, after Lois dies her and Clark's son, Adam, is raised by the remaining female heroes.\nBULLET::::- Lois is a Captain in the military in series \"\" and \"\". A reverse of the Superman origin with Kal-El being sent from Earth to Krypton, discovering the Green Lantern power ring, and journeys to Earth and help its people fight against the dictator Luthor.\nBULLET::::- In \"\", Kal-El, the last survivor of Krypton crash-lands in East Africa and is raised by apes to become the Lord of the Jungle; and meet the adventurer John Greystoke, Jane Clayton and her friend Metropolis reporter Lois Lane.\nBULLET::::- In the 2003 Elseworlds series \"\", Superman's escape rocket did not land in Smallville, but in the Soviet Union under Joseph Stalin. Lois is married to Lex Luthor but still uses the surname Lane for her articles in the \"Daily Planet\". Superman saves her life, and the two have an instant attraction with each other and Lois has feelings for him through the rest of the story. After the fall of Superman's Greater Soviet Union and presumed death, he attends his \"funeral\" wearing a suit and glasses. Superman's secret identity as Clark Kent does not exist on this alternate Earth.\nBULLET::::- \"\", the 2004 series re-imagines the origin of Superman, where his spaceship crashed in Weston-super-Mare in England instead of the town of Smallville in America. A humorous look at Superman and the British tabloid press, it features Louisa Layne-Ferret, a hard-edged reporter. Lois herself briefly appears to offer an American perspective on Superman and invites Colin Clark to visit America.\n\nIn the alternate timeline of the \"Flashpoint\" event, a young Lois Lane sneaks into the facility where her father Sam Lane is stationed to bring him a birthday cake. During a breakout, Lois briefly encounters Kal-El and Neil Sinclair. Sinclair attempts to pursue revenge against her father for the experiments that were performed on him. Sam traps Sinclair and himself in the Phantom Zone.\n\nYears later, Lois is reporting on a fashion show in Montmartre when the Atlanteans flooded Europe. She is saved by the Amazons who take her to \"New Themiscyra\" (the United Kingdom). Once there, she learns that Jimmy Olsen, who dies in the flood while trying to save an old man, was an agent of Cyborg. Lois agrees to spy on the Amazons for Cyborg. When the time comes for her to undergo a near-fatal \"conversion\" into the Amazonian ranks, she escapes, aided by Penny Black, who is wounded by Artemis in the process.\n\nDuring this time, Lois walks through the remains of the London Underground and encounters Grifter and the Resistance. Lois soon joins the Resistance. After meeting up with the recovering Penny, she uses Cyborg's device to locate her missing armor at Westminster. Lois later broadcasts a message to the world that the Amazons have imprisoned people in internment. The Amazons in Westminster attempt to kill her. Lois is then rescued by Kal-El (who comes to protect her from Sinclair who has returned). During the fight, Kal-El manages to destroy Sinclair, but Lois is caught in the blast. Before Lois dies in the arms of Kal-El, she tells him to save the people.\n\nIn the digital prequel comic to the video game \"\", Lois is married to Superman and is pregnant with their child. While on a story at the docks with Jimmy Olsen, she is kidnapped by The Joker and Harley Quinn and taken to a submarine where they perform surgery on her. When the Joker is captured by the Justice League, he informs them he has planted a nuclear bomb in Metropolis and wired the detonator to Lois's heart, set to go off when she dies. While under the influence of Scarecrow's kryptonite-laced fear gas, Superman mistakes Lois for Doomsday and, in an attempt to protect his family, unknowingly flies up into space with her, killing both Lois and their unborn child in the process. When she dies, a nuclear bomb obliterates Metropolis. Superman, devastated by the death of Lois and their unborn child, kills the Joker and begins his campaign for world domination. Her death causes him to turn darker, as he becomes more willing to kill to protect the world.\n\nIn Year Three of the series, Superman was put in a magic comatose sleep, where events played out differently in his dream scenario. In this dream world, Superman imagines he had broken free of the fear gas in time to save Lois and their unborn child. Lois eventually gave birth to their daughter Lara Lane-Kent. Superman and Lois live a happy and normal life, raising their daughter Lara, who eventually develop superpowers and with her father's guidance becomes a superhero of her own. Superman is eventually awakened from his slumber by Ares and is left feeling angrier and bitterer after realizing and living the life he could've had with Lois and their child. In Year Five, in an alternate world, Lois and Clark are shown happily visiting Clark's parents, telling them that she is pregnant.\n\n\"DC Comics Bombshells\", a comic book series set in an alternate history of World War II, Eloisa \"Lois\" Lane is a mixed-race 17-year-old newspaper hawker from Metropolis' Cuban district. When criminals working for Killer Frost kidnaps her, she is rescued by the Batgirls (a group of female vigilantes) and partners with them to defeat Hugo Strange, the man who crippled her mother. Later in the series, she gets a job working at the \"Gotham Gazette\" for Vicki Vale and eventually begins dating Supergirl.\n\nIn an alternate reality, Nightwing activates a device ending an ongoing war between the super-powered beings and depowers ninety percent of the superhero population, and leads to a future where superpower is outlawed. Lois is a Blue Lantern and a member of the Titans, who form a resistance against the anti-metahuman government.\n\nPublished in 2004, \"\" is a four-issue miniseries written by Kurt Busiek and art by Stuart Immonen. Set in the real world where superheroes only exist in comic books. Clark Kent, living in a small town in Kansas, discovers that he has the same powers as Superman, the fictional superhero he was named after. Years later, Clark moves to New York, working as a writer and secretly saving people with his abilities. He meets Lois Chaudhari, an Indian American designer on a blind date (set up by friends because their names resemble the fictional couple Clark Kent and Lois Lane). The two quickly fall in love, got married and had twin daughters Jane and Carol Kent, who also inherit their father's powers.\n\n\"Gotham City Garage\", a digital-first comic book series written by Collin Kelly and Jackson Lanzing, reimagines DC superheroes and villains as bikers in a post-apocalyptic world. Governor Lex Luthor controls the modern utopia Gotham City and the rest of the continent is a wasteland. Lois Lane runs a rebel news radio station \"The Frequency\". When Barda ask for help, Lois and Jimmy Olsen join her in the resistance.\n\n\"Tales from the Dark Multiverse: Death of Superman\", an anthology series explore alternate takes on classic DC stories set in a different world in the Dark Multiverse. After Superman is killed by Doomsday, filled with anger and grief, Lois merges with the Eradicator giving her Kryptonian powers and takes revenge on the corrupt world and those who let Superman die.\n\nLois Lane has had two minor cameo appearances alongside Clark Kent in past works of Marvel Comics, namely in \"The Mighty Thor\" #341 (1984) and \"Excalibur\" Vol.1 #8.\n\n\"Lois Lane, Girl Reporter\" is a newspaper comic strip featuring Lois Lane, a spin-off from the Superman comic strip and topper to the Superman Sunday strip in the \"Cleveland Plain Dealer\". Twelve comic strips were produced and originally ran between October 24, 1943 to February 27, 1944. Lois also appears in the \"Superman\" daily newspaper comic strip, distributed by McClure Syndicate which ran continuously from January 1939 to May 1966 with a separate Sunday strip added on November 5, 1939.\n\nLois has appeared in several self-titled miniseries, one-shots and collected editions:\n\nBULLET::::- \"Lois Lane\" – a two issue limited series published in August and September 1986.\nBULLET::::- \"Superman: Lois Lane\" – a one-shot published in June 1998 as part of the \"Girlfrenzy!\" Fifth-week event.\nBULLET::::- \"Flashpoint: Lois Lane and the Resistance\" – a three-issue limited series published August 2011-October 2011 as part of the \"Flashpoint\" crossover.\nBULLET::::- \"DC Archive Editions: Superman's Girlfriend Lois Lane Archives Vol. 1\" – a collection of Silver Age Lois Lane stories. Showcase #9-10 and \"Superman's Girlfriend, Lois Lane\" #1-8. Published in January 2012.\nBULLET::::- \"Lois Lane: A Celebration of 75 Years\" – special anniversary anthology celebrating Lois Lane's 75 years in comics. Collects material from Action Comics #1-2, 6, 484, 600, 662, Adventures of Superman #631, All Star Superman #2-3, Man of Steel #2, Showcase #9, Superman #29, 33-34, 58, 168, Superman 80-page giant #1, Superman's Girlfriend, Lois Lane #1, 5, 16, 23, 42, 106, and Wonder Woman #170. Published in November 2013, the collection compiles stories from Golden Age to Silver Age and modern adventures.\nBULLET::::- \"Superman: Lois Lane\" #1 – a one-shot published in April 2014.\nBULLET::::- \"\" – an eight-issue limited series, collects #1-8 published in August 2016.\n\nLois is the protagonist in the young adult novel series, \"Lois Lane\", written by Gwenda Bond and published by Switch Press. The series follows the adventures of Lois Lane as a savvy, whip-smart, and unafraid contemporary teenage high school girl. The first book in the series, \"Fallout\", was revealed by the author in 2014 and was released on May 1, 2015. Bond revealed the second book, \"Double Down\", in July 2015, and the book was released on May 1, 2016.\n\nOn the series, Bond said: \"Lois is an icon, of course, a superhero without any superpowers ... except her unmatched bravery and smarts. Not to mention her sense of humor and her commitment to truth and justice. She's also one of my all-time favorite characters—which is why I jumped at the chance to write a novel featuring a teen Lois, moving to Metropolis and becoming a reporter for the first time. And, most of all, to get to put Lois front and center in the starring role, obviously.\"\n\nBULLET::::- \"Fallout\" – first novel in the \"Lois Lane\" series by Gwenda Bond. The novel features a teenage Lois Lane, an Army brat, who has lived all over the world. Lois is starting a new life in Metropolis with her family. While attending a new high school, she tries to solve a mystery as a group known as the Warheads begins to tamper with people's minds via a high-tech immersive video game. Two prequel short stories: \"Lois Lane: A Real Work of Art\" and \"Lois Lane: Cloudy With a Chance of Destruction\" was also published by Switch Press. \"Fallout\" received positive reviews and was named by Kirkus Reviews one of the \"Best Teen Books of 2015\" in the science fiction and fantasy category.\nBULLET::::- \"Double Down\" – second \"Lois Lane\" novel by Gwenda Bond and published by Switch Press in May 2016. The book also received positive reviews. \"Double Down\" continues to follow teenage Lois Lane as she settled into her new life in Metropolis, and has a job that challenges her. Lois finds herself embroiled in a dangerous mystery that brings her closer to the dirty underbelly of Metropolis.\nBULLET::::- \"Triple Threat\" – Switch Press announced a third Lois Lane novel, \"Triple Threat\", in August 2016. The book was released in May 2017.\n\nBased on the ABC television series \"\" four original novels were published in 1996:\nBULLET::::- \"Heat Wave\" – written by author Michael Jan Friedman and published by HarperCollins.\nBULLET::::- \"Exile\" – by Michael Jan Friedman\nBULLET::::- \"Deadly Games\" – by Michael Jan Friedman\nBULLET::::- \"\" – a full-length Lois and Clark novel by author C. J. Cherryh and published by Prima Lifestyles.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Examining Lois Lane: The Scoop on Superman's Sweetheart\" – an anthology exploring Lois Lane's many incarnations and multiple adaptations from comic book to various films and television series. Analyzing the character in various media through the perspectives of feminism, gender studies, and cultural studies.\nBULLET::::- \"Investigating Lois Lane: The Turbulent History of the Daily Planet's Ace Reporter\" – an in-depth look at the character and her history in different media by comic book historian Tim Hanley.\n\nSince her debut in the comic books in 1938, Lois has appeared in various media adaptations including radio, animations, films, television, video games and Broadway musical. Actresses who have portrayed Lois Lane include Noel Neill, Phyllis Coates, Margot Kidder, Teri Hatcher, Erica Durance, Kate Bosworth, Amy Adams, and Elizabeth Tulloch, and voiced by actresses such as Joan Alexander, Dana Delany, Stana Katic, Rebecca Romijn, and numerous others.\n\nBULLET::::- The American sitcom \"Seinfeld\" made numerous references to Lois Lane over its nine-year run:\nBULLET::::- In the episode \"The Outing,\" Jerry tells a female reporter for a college newspaper \"I was attracted to you, too. You remind me of Lois Lane.\"\nBULLET::::- In the episode \"The Marine Biologist,\" when Elaine accuses Jerry of helping a strange woman just so he can take her out on a date, Jerry replies that Superman is never suspected of such intentions when saving a woman's life, prompting Elaine to comment \"Well, you're no Superman\", to which Jerry responds, \"Well, you're no Lois Lane...\"\nBULLET::::- The episode \"The Mom & Pop Store\" has Elaine tell Jerry she's been doing some snooping for him. \"Ah! What'd you find out, Lois?\" he replies.\nBULLET::::- In the episode \"The Race,\" Jerry dates a woman named \"Lois\" and enjoys frequently using her first name and slyly making Superman-related references in her presence.\nBULLET::::- In the episode \"The Face Painter,\" George discovers that a woman he is dating is deaf in one ear and therefore might not have heard him tell her he loves her. \"Don't you see what this means?\" he says. \"It's like the whole thing never happened. It's like when Superman reversed the rotation of the Earth to save Lois Lane!\"\nBULLET::::- The episode \"The Cartoon\" has Jerry make fun of Elaine's drawings, leading her to reply: \"It's better than your drawings of naked Lois Lane.\"\nBULLET::::- In Just Jack's 2007 single \"Writer's Block,\" the verse \"I'm lovin' Mary Jane, flyin' with Lois Lane\" features.\nBULLET::::- The Spin Doctors' 1991 album, \"Pocket Full of Kryptonite\", takes its title as a reference to the album's first song, \"Jimmy Olsen's Blues.\" The song is sung from the point of view of \"Daily Planet\" photojournalist Jimmy Olsen, who's in love with Lois Lane and jealous of Superman because of it.\nBULLET::::- In the song \"I-E-A-I-A-I-O\" by System of a Down, Lois Lane was mentioned in one of the tongue twisters in the song \"Fighting crime, with a partner, Lois Lane, Jimmy Carter.\"\nBULLET::::- In the USA Network television series \"Monk\", Adrian Monk's nurse, Sharona, reveals to a date that her job as the nurse assistant to the obsessive compulsive detective, makes her feel like Lois Lane. Later in the episode, when Sharona follows the killer they've been after, police captain Stottlemeyer snaps at Monk, \"Who does Sharona think she is?\" Monk answers sheepishly, \"Lois Lane.\"\nBULLET::::- In the movie, \"A Time to Kill\" (1996) Jake Brigance consults with Ellen Roark about the case and the judge is clearly annoyed and says \"If Lois Lane will let us continue.\"\nBULLET::::- In the movie, \"One Fine Day\" (1996) the editor of the newspaper reporter Jack Taylor (George Clooney) has a cat named after Lois Lane.\nBULLET::::- In the song \"Anybody Seen the Popo's\" by rapper Ice Cube, Lois Lane is mentioned in the line: \"His girlfriend's Lois Lane and if you f—k with her you must smoke cocaine, brother.\"\nBULLET::::- In the song \"Superman\" by the band Peggy Sue, Lois Lane is mentioned in the line: \"I'm in love with Lois Lane, but she doesn't even know my real name.\"\nBULLET::::- In the song \"Rapper's Delight\" by The Sugarhill Gang, she is mentioned in the line: \"I said, \"By the way, baby, what's your name?\" She said, \"I go by the name of Lois Lane.\" According to the song, the rapper Big Bank Hank tells Lois Lane why he would make a better boyfriend than Superman.\nBULLET::::- In the movie, \"Megamind\" (2010) the reporter Roxanne Ritchi is heavily based on Lois Lane.\nBULLET::::- The 1967 show \"Underdog\" is a parody of Superman and its star reporter Sweet Polly Purebred is based on Lois Lane.\nBULLET::::- Keone Madrid directed and choreography a dance video titled \"Lois Lane\" and features a poem by Rudy Francisco \"I'm a Superman, thanks to Lois Lane\" which includes the line, \"Superman... The Man of steel, big Blue, the last son of Krypton, he is faster than a speeding bullet, stronger than a locomotive, he has Lasers for eyes, X-ray vision and can fly without even flapping his arms, but his most notable power... was Lois Lane, the love of an amazing woman is a phone booth, that can turn a man from a spineless news reporter into a symbol of justice, into the reason why it's safe to walk outside while the sun is sleeping.\"\nBULLET::::- The That's Entertainment comic shop successfully petitioned the Worcester, Massachusetts City Council to change the name of the private street running alongside the store to \"Lois Lane\". On December 28, 2012, the new sign was installed. A celebration at the store followed on December 30, 2012, featuring an unveiling, free sketches of Lois by Paul Ryan, and a Lois Lane lookalike contest.\nBULLET::::- Matt Groening, the co-creator of \"The Simpsons\", originally wanted to name the Comic Book Guy, Louis Lane, and the character is both \"obsessed and tormented\" by Lois Lane. He was eventually named Jeff Albertson, the decision was made without Matt Groening's presence.\nBULLET::::- In \"The Simpsons\" episode \"Married to the Blob,\" during the song \"Comic Book Guy's Lament\" the Simpsons' version of vintage Spider-Man and Lois Lane comics can be seen. The song, sung by Comic Book Guy includes the line \"I've always been happy, to call myself single, no Mary Jane, or Lois Lane, with whom I co-mingle, you could say that I was, an unstackable pringles, I've got original, sign by Siegel and Shuster, but they don't satisfy, in the way that they use to.\"\nBULLET::::- On \"30 Rock\", in the episode \"Grandmentor,\" Jack asks Liz if she would be interested in writing the screenplay for the greatest love story ever told, to which Liz responds, \"You mean Lois Lane's love affair with journalism?\"\nBULLET::::- \"To Lois\" a poem by Shane Koyczan is a love letter from Superman to Lois Lane, written from Clark's perspective.\nBULLET::::- In the movie, \"Mermaids\" (1990) Kate Flax (Christina Ricci) asks her sister Charlotte (Winona Ryder) if her boyfriend has ever kissed her like Superman kisses Lois Lane.\nBULLET::::- \"From the Backbeat\" by Lucy Hale includes the line \"And my dad was a Superman stick shift driver, stay at home Lois Lane beside him.\"\nBULLET::::- \"Superhero\" by 5 Seconds of Summer includes the line \"She met him on the staircase, like Kent and Lois Lane.\"\nBULLET::::- In the Mexican comedy TV series \"El Chapulín Colorado\", a parody of superhero shows, Captain Hopper says his mother is Lois Lane.\nBULLET::::- \"Waiting for Superman\" by Daughtry includes the line \"She's just watching the clouds roll by and they spell her name like Lois Lane.\"\nBULLET::::- \"Lois Lane\" a song by pop artist Noelle Bean, includes the line \"I'm so happy, and now we're flying, like Superman and Lois Lane.\"\nBULLET::::- \"Lois Lane\" a song by British indie rock band Farrah from the album \"Moustache\" includes the line \"If you'll be my Lois Lane, I'll be your superman.\"\nBULLET::::- In the TV series \"Women's Murder Club\", the character of Cindy Thomas (Aubrey Dollar), a crime reporter, is jokingly nicknamed Lois Lane by the homicide detective Lindsay Boxer (Angie Harmon).\nBULLET::::- Mandy Moore portrayed Lois Lane in the 2012 YouTube parody short film \"The Death and Return of Superman\", directed and narrated by Max Landis.\n\nBULLET::::- The Dutch girl group Loïs Lane\nBULLET::::- Biblical/Greek origin of name Lois\nBULLET::::- Superman and Lois Lane\n\nBULLET::::- Lois Lane at DC Comics\nBULLET::::- Lois Lane at DC Database Wikia\nBULLET::::- Lois Lane at Smallville Wikia\n"}
{"id": "18566", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18566", "title": "Linker (computing)", "text": "Linker (computing)\n\nIn computing, a linker or link editor is a computer utility program that takes one or more object files generated by a compiler or an assembler and combines them into a single executable file, library file, or another 'object' file.\n\nA simpler version that writes its output directly to memory is called the \"loader\", though loading is typically considered a separate process.\n\nComputer programs typically are composed of several parts or modules; these parts/modules need not all be contained within a single object file, and in such cases refer to each other by means of symbols as addresses into other modules, which are mapped into memory addresses when linked for execution. Typically, an object file can contain three kinds of symbols:\nBULLET::::- defined \"external\" symbols, sometimes called \"public\" or \"entry\" symbols, which allow it to be called by other modules,\nBULLET::::- undefined \"external\" symbols, which reference other modules where these symbols are defined, and\nBULLET::::- local symbols, used internally within the object file to facilitate relocation.\n\nFor most compilers, each object file is the result of compiling one input source code file. When a program comprises multiple object files, the linker combines these files into a unified executable program, resolving the symbols as it goes along.\n\nLinkers can take objects from a collection called a \"library\" or runtime library. Most linkers do not include the whole library in the output; they include only the files that are referenced by other object files or libraries. Library linking may thus be an iterative process, with some modules included requiring additional modules to be linked, and so on. Libraries exist for diverse purposes, and one or more system libraries are usually linked in by default.\n\nThe linker also takes care of arranging the objects in a program's address space. This may involve \"relocating\" code that assumes a specific base address into another base. Since a compiler seldom knows where an object will reside, it often assumes a fixed base location (for example, zero). Relocating machine code may involve re-targeting of absolute jumps, loads and stores.\n\nThe executable output by the linker may need another relocation pass when it is finally loaded into memory (just before execution). This pass is usually omitted on hardware offering virtual memory: every program is put into its own address space, so there is no conflict even if all programs load at the same base address. This pass may also be omitted if the executable is a position independent executable.\n\nOn some Unix variants, such as SINTRAN III, the process performed by a linker (assembling object files into a program) was called \"loading\" (as in loading executable code onto a file). Additionally, in some operating systems, the same program handles both the jobs of linking and loading a program (dynamic linking).\n\nMany operating system environments allow dynamic linking, deferring the resolution of some undefined symbols until a program is run. That means that the executable code still contains undefined symbols, plus a list of objects or libraries that will provide definitions for these. Loading the program will load these objects/libraries as well, and perform a final linking. \n\nThis approach offers two advantages:\nBULLET::::- Often-used libraries (for example the standard system libraries) need to be stored in only one location, not duplicated in every single executable file thus saving limited memory and disk space.\nBULLET::::- If a bug in a library function is corrected by replacing the library, all programs using it dynamically will benefit from the correction after restarting them. Programs that included this function by static linking would have to be re-linked first.\n\nThere are also disadvantages:\nBULLET::::- Known on the Windows platform as \"DLL hell\", an incompatible updated library will break executables that depended on the behavior of the previous version of the library if the newer version is incorrectly not backward compatible.\nBULLET::::- A program, together with the libraries it uses, might be certified (e.g. as to correctness, documentation requirements, or performance) as a package, but not if components can be replaced. (This also argues against automatic OS updates in critical systems; in both cases, the OS and libraries form part of a \"qualified\" environment.)\n\nStatic linking is the result of the linker copying all library routines used in the program into the executable image. This may require more disk space and memory than dynamic linking, but is more portable, since it does not require the presence of the library on the system where it runs. Static linking also prevents \"DLL hell\", since each program includes exactly the versions of library routines that it requires, with no conflict with other programs. A program using just a few routines from a library does not require the entire library to be installed.\n\nAs the compiler has no information on the layout of objects in the final output, it cannot take advantage of shorter or more efficient instructions that place a requirement on the address of another object. For example, a jump instruction can reference an absolute address or an offset from the current location, and the offset could be expressed with different lengths depending on the distance to the target. By generating the most conservative instruction (usually the largest relative or absolute variant, depending on platform) and adding \"relaxation hints\", it is possible to substitute shorter or more efficient instructions during the final link. This step can be performed only after all input objects have been read and assigned temporary addresses; the linker relaxation pass subsequently reassigns addresses, which may in turn allow more relaxations to occur. In general, the substituted sequences are shorter, which allows this process to always converge on the best solution given a fixed order of objects; if this is not the case, relaxations can conflict, and the linker needs to weigh the advantages of either option.\n\nWhile instruction relaxation typically occurs at link-time, inner-module relaxation can already take place as part of the optimising process at compile-time. In some cases, relaxation can also occur at load-time as part of the relocation process or combined with dynamic dead-code elimination techniques.\n\nIn IBM System/360 mainframe environments such as OS/360, including z/OS for the z/Architecture mainframes, this type of program is known as a \"linkage editor\". As the name implies a linkage \"editor\" has the additional capability of allowing the addition, replacement, and/or deletion of individual program sections. Operating systems such as OS/360 have format for executable load-modules containing supplementary data about the component sections of a program, so that an individual program section can be replaced, and other parts of the program updated so that relocatable addresses and other references can be corrected by the linkage editor, as part of the process.\n\nOne advantage of this is that it allows a program to be maintained without having to keep all of the intermediate object files, or without having to re-compile program sections that haven't changed. It also permits program updates to be distributed in the form of small files (originally card decks), containing only the object module to be replaced. In such systems, object code is in the form and format of 80-byte punched-card images, so that updates can be introduced into a system using that medium. In later releases of OS/360 and in subsequent systems, load-modules contain additional data about versions of components modules, to create a traceable record of updates. It also allows one to add, change, or remove an overlay structure from an already linked load module. \n\nThe term \"linkage editor\" should not be construed as implying that the program operates in a user-interactive mode like a text editor. It is intended for batch-mode execution, with the editing commands being supplied by the user in sequentially organized files, such as punched cards, DASD, or magnetic tape, and tapes were often used during the initial installation of the OS.\n\nThe GNU linker (or GNU ld) is the GNU Project's implementation of the Unix command ld. GNU ld runs the linker, which creates an executable file (or a library) from object files created during compilation of a software project. A \"linker script\" may be passed to GNU ld to exercise greater control over the linking process. The GNU linker is part of the GNU Binary Utilities (binutils).\n\nPossible origins of the name \"ld\" are \"LoaD\" and \"Link eDitor\".\n\nGNU linker is free software, distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public License.\n\nBULLET::::- Binary File Descriptor library (libbfd)\nBULLET::::- Compile and go system\nBULLET::::- DLL hell\nBULLET::::- Direct binding\nBULLET::::- Dynamic binding (computing)\nBULLET::::- Dynamic dead code elimination\nBULLET::::- Dynamic dispatch\nBULLET::::- Dynamic library\nBULLET::::- Dynamic linker\nBULLET::::- Dynamic loading\nBULLET::::- Dynamic-link library\nBULLET::::- Library (computing)\nBULLET::::- Loader (computing)\nBULLET::::- Name decoration\nBULLET::::- Prelinking (prebinding)\nBULLET::::- Relocation\nBULLET::::- Smart linking\nBULLET::::- Static library\nBULLET::::- gold (linker)\n\nBULLET::::- David William Barron, \"Assemblers and Loaders\". 1972, Elsevier.\nBULLET::::- C. W. Fraser and D. R. Hanson, \"A Machine Independent Linker\". Software-Practice and Experience 12, 4 (April 1982).\nBULLET::::- IBM Corporation, \"Operating System 360, Linkage Editor, Program Logic Manual\", 1967\nBULLET::::- Douglas W. Jones, \"Assembly Language as Object Code\". Software-Practice and Experience 13, 8 (August 1983)\nBULLET::::- John R. Levine: \"Linkers and Loaders\", Morgan Kaufmann, . 2000\nBULLET::::- Leon Presser, John R. White: \"Linkers and Loaders\". ACM Computing Surveys, Volume 4, Number 3, September 1972, pp. 149–167\nBULLET::::- Norman Ramsey, \"Relocating Machine Instructions by Currying\". (1996)\nBULLET::::- David Salomon, \"Assemblers and Loaders\". 1993\n\nBULLET::::- Ian Lance Taylor's \"Linkers\" blog entries\nBULLET::::- Linkers and Loaders, a Linux Journal article by Sandeep Grover\nBULLET::::- Another Listing of Where to Get a Complete Collection of Free Tools for Assembly Language Development\nBULLET::::- GNU linker manual\nBULLET::::- LLD - The LLVM Linker\n"}
{"id": "18567", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18567", "title": "Legendre symbol", "text": "Legendre symbol\n\n+ Legendre symbol ()for various \"a\" (along top) and \"p\" (along left side). \n! !! 0 !! 1 !! 2 !! 3 !! 4 !! 5 !! 6 !! 7 !! 8 !! 9 !! 10\n! 3\nstyle=\"background:#fafa6a\" 0\nstyle=\"background:#fafa6a\" 1  −1         \n! 5\nstyle=\"background:#fafa6a\" 0\nstyle=\"background:#fafa6a\" 1  −1  −1\nstyle=\"background:#fafa6a\" 1       \n! 7\nstyle=\"background:#fafa6a\" 0\nstyle=\"background:#fafa6a\" 1\nstyle=\"background:#fafa6a\" 1  −1\nstyle=\"background:#fafa6a\" 1  −1  −1     \n! 11\nstyle=\"background:#fafa6a\" 0\nstyle=\"background:#fafa6a\" 1  −1\nstyle=\"background:#fafa6a\" 1\nstyle=\"background:#fafa6a\" 1\nstyle=\"background:#fafa6a\" 1  −1  −1  −1\nstyle=\"background:#fafa6a\" 1  −1\ncolspan=\"12\" class=\"thumbcaption\"\nOnly 0 ≤ \"a\" < \"p\" are shown, since due to the first property below any other \"a\" can be reduced modulo \"p\". Quadratic residues are highlighted in yellow, and correspond precisely to the values 0 and 1.\nIn number theory, the Legendre symbol is a multiplicative function with values 1, −1, 0 that is a quadratic character modulo an odd prime number \"p\": its value at a (nonzero) quadratic residue mod \"p\" is 1 and at a non-quadratic residue (\"non-residue\") is −1. Its value at zero is 0.\n\nThe Legendre symbol was introduced by Adrien-Marie Legendre in 1798 in the course of his attempts at proving the law of quadratic reciprocity. Generalizations of the symbol include the Jacobi symbol and Dirichlet characters of higher order. The notational convenience of the Legendre symbol inspired introduction of several other \"symbols\" used in algebraic number theory, such as the Hilbert symbol and the Artin symbol.\n\nLet formula_1 be an odd prime number. An integer formula_2 is a quadratic residue modulo formula_1 if it is congruent to a perfect square modulo formula_1 and is a quadratic nonresidue modulo formula_1 otherwise. The Legendre symbol is a function of formula_2 and formula_1 defined as\n\nLegendre's original definition was by means of the explicit formula\n\nBy Euler's criterion, which had been discovered earlier and was known to Legendre, these two definitions are equivalent. Thus Legendre's contribution lay in introducing a convenient \"notation\" that recorded quadratic residuosity of \"a\" mod \"p\". For the sake of comparison, Gauss used the notation \"a\"R\"p\", \"a\"N\"p\" according to whether \"a\" is a residue or a non-residue modulo \"p\". For typographical convenience, the Legendre symbol is sometimes written as (\"a\"  \"p\") or (\"a\"/\"p\"). The sequence (\"a\"  \"p\") for \"a\" equal to 0, 1, 2... is periodic with period \"p\" and is sometimes called the Legendre sequence, with {0,1,−1} values occasionally replaced by {1,0,1} or {0,1,0}. Each row in the following table can be seen to exhibit periodicity, just as described.\n\nThe following is a table of values of Legendre symbol formula_10 with \"p\" ≤ 127, \"a\" ≤ 30, \"p\" odd prime.\n\n!1\n!2\n!3\n!4\n!5\n!6\n!7\n!8\n!9\n!10\n!11\n!12\n!13\n!14\n!15\n!16\n!17\n!18\n!19\n!20\n!21\n!22\n!23\n!24\n!25\n!26\n!27\n!28\n!29\n!30\n!3\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\n!5\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\n!7\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\n!11\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\n!13\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\n!17\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\n!19\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\n!23\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\n!29\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffffcc\"0\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\n!31\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\n!37\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\n!41\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\n!43\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\n!47\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\n!53\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\n!59\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\n!61\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\n!67\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\n!71\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\n!73\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\n!79\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\n!83\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\n!89\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\n!97\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\n!101\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\n!103\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\n!107\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\n!109\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\n!113\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\n!127\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ccffff\"−1\nstyle=\"background:#ffccff\"1\n\nThere are a number of useful properties of the Legendre symbol which, together with the law of quadratic reciprocity, can be used to compute it efficiently.\n\nBULLET::::- The Legendre symbol reveals the parity of a non-zero integer mod p. That is, given a generator formula_11, if formula_12then formula_13 is a quadratic residue if and only if formula_14 is even. This also shows that half of the non-zero elements in formula_15 are quadratic residues.\nBULLET::::- If formula_16 then the fact that\nBULLET::::- formula_17 gives us that formula_18 is the square root of the quadratic residue formula_13.\nBULLET::::- The Legendre symbol is periodic in its first (or top) argument: if \"a\" ≡ \"b\" (mod \"p\"), then\nBULLET::::- formula_20\nBULLET::::- The Legendre symbol is a completely multiplicative function of its top argument:\nBULLET::::- formula_21\nBULLET::::- In particular, the product of two numbers that are both quadratic residues or quadratic non-residues modulo \"p\" is a residue, whereas the product of a residue with a non-residue is a non-residue. A special case is the Legendre symbol of a square:\nBULLET::::- formula_22\nBULLET::::- When viewed as a function of \"a\", the Legendre symbol formula_23 is the unique quadratic (or order 2) Dirichlet character modulo \"p\".\nBULLET::::- The first supplement to the law of quadratic reciprocity:\nBULLET::::- formula_24\nBULLET::::- The second supplement to the law of quadratic reciprocity:\nBULLET::::- formula_25\nBULLET::::- Special formulas for the Legendre symbol formula_23 for small values of \"a\":\nBULLET::::- For an odd prime \"p\" ≠ 3,\nBULLET::::- formula_27\nBULLET::::- For an odd prime \"p\" ≠ 5,\nBULLET::::- formula_28\nBULLET::::- The Fibonacci numbers 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, … are defined by the recurrence If \"p\" is a prime number then\nBULLET::::- formula_29\nBULLET::::- This result comes from the theory of Lucas sequences, which are used in primality testing. See Wall–Sun–Sun prime.\n\nLet \"p\" and \"q\" be distinct odd primes. Using the Legendre symbol, the quadratic reciprocity law can be stated concisely:\n\nMany proofs of quadratic reciprocity are based on Legendre's formula\n\nIn addition, several alternative expressions for the Legendre symbol were devised in order to produce various proofs of the quadratic reciprocity law.\n\nBULLET::::- Gauss introduced the quadratic Gauss sum and used the formula\n\nBULLET::::- Kronecker's proof first establishes that\n\nBULLET::::- One of Eisenstein's proofs begins by showing that\n\nBULLET::::- The Jacobi symbol () is a generalization of the Legendre symbol that allows for a composite second (bottom) argument \"n\", although \"n\" must still be odd and positive. This generalization provides an efficient way to compute all Legendre symbols without performing factorization along the way.\nBULLET::::- A further extension is the Kronecker symbol, in which the bottom argument may be any integer.\nBULLET::::- The power residue symbol () generalizes the Legendre symbol to higher power \"n\". The Legendre symbol represents the power residue symbol for \"n\" = 2.\n\nThe above properties, including the law of quadratic reciprocity, can be used to evaluate any Legendre symbol. For example:\n\nOr using a more efficient computation:\nThe article Jacobi symbol has more examples of Legendre symbol manipulation.\n\n\nBULLET::::- Jacobi symbol calculator\n"}
