{"id": "16864", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16864", "title": "Karma", "text": "Karma\n\nKarma (; , ; ) means action, work or deed; it also refers to the spiritual principle of cause and effect where intent and actions of an individual (cause) influence the future of that individual (effect). Good intent and good deeds contribute to good karma and happier rebirths, while bad intent and bad deeds contribute to bad karma and bad rebirths.\n\nThe philosophy of karma is closely associated with the idea of rebirth in many schools of Indian religions (particularly Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism) as well as Taoism. In these schools, karma in the present affects one's future in the current life, as well as the nature and quality of future lives - one's \"saṃsāra\".\n\"Karma\" is the executed \"deed\", \"work\", \"action\", or \"act\", and it is also the \"object\", the \"intent\". Wilhelm Halbfass explains karma (karman) by contrasting it with another Sanskrit word \"kriya\". The word \"kriya\" is the activity along with the steps and effort in action, while \"karma\" is (1) the executed action as a consequence of that activity, as well as (2) the intention of the actor behind an executed action or a planned action (described by some scholars as metaphysical residue left in the actor). A good action creates good karma, as does good intent. A bad action creates bad karma, as does bad intent.\n\nKarma also refers to a conceptual principle that originated in India, often descriptively called the principle of karma, sometimes as the karma theory or the law of karma. In the context of theory, karma is complex and difficult to define. Different schools of Indologists derive different definitions for the karma concept from ancient Indian texts; their definition is some combination of (1) causality that may be ethical or non-ethical; (2) ethicization, that is good or bad actions have consequences; and (3) rebirth. Other Indologists include in the definition of karma theory that which explains the present circumstances of an individual with reference to his or her actions in past. These actions may be those in a person's current life, or, in some schools of Indian traditions, possibly actions in their past lives; furthermore, the consequences may result in current life, or a person's future lives. The law of karma operates independent of any deity or any process of divine judgment.\n\nDifficulty in arriving at a definition of \"karma\" arises because of the diversity of views among the schools of Hinduism; some, for example, consider karma and rebirth linked and simultaneously essential, some consider karma but not rebirth essential, and a few discuss and conclude karma and rebirth to be flawed fiction. Buddhism and Jainism have their own karma precepts. Thus karma has not one, but multiple definitions and different meanings. It is a concept whose meaning, importance and scope varies between Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and other traditions that originated in India, and various schools in each of these traditions. O'Flaherty claims that, furthermore, there is an ongoing debate regarding whether karma is a theory, a model, a paradigm, a metaphor, or a metaphysical stance.\n\nKarma theory as a concept, across different Indian religious traditions, shares certain common themes: causality, ethicization and rebirth.\n\nA common theme to theories of karma is its principle of causality. One of the earliest association of karma to causality occurs in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad of Hinduism. For example, at 4.4.5-6, it states:\n\nThe relationship of karma to causality is a central motif in all schools of Hindu, Jain and Buddhist thought. The theory of karma as causality holds that (1) executed actions of an individual affects the individual and the life he or she lives, and (2) the intentions of an individual affects the individual and the life he or she lives. Disinterested actions, or unintentional actions do not have the same positive or negative karmic effect, as interested and intentional actions. In Buddhism, for example, actions that are performed, or arise, or originate without any bad intent such as covetousness, are considered non-existent in karmic impact or neutral in influence to the individual.\n\nAnother causality characteristic, shared by Karmic theories, is that like deeds lead to like effects. Thus good karma produces good effect on the actor, while bad karma produces bad effect. This effect may be material, moral or emotional — that is, one's karma affects one's happiness and unhappiness. The effect of karma need not be immediate; the effect of karma can be later in one's current life, and in some schools it extends to future lives.\n\nThe consequence or effects of one's karma can be described in two forms: \"phalas\" and \"samskaras\". A \"phala\" (literally, fruit or result) is the visible or invisible effect that is typically immediate or within the current life. In contrast, \"samskaras\" are invisible effects, produced inside the actor because of the karma, transforming the agent and affecting his or her ability to be happy or unhappy in this life and future ones. The theory of karma is often presented in the context of \"samskaras\".\n\nKarmic principle can be understood, suggests Karl Potter, as a principle of psychology and habit. Karma seeds habits (vāsanā), and habits create the nature of man. Karma also seeds self perception, and perception influences how one experiences life events. Both habits and self perception affect the course of one's life. Breaking bad habits is not easy: it requires conscious karmic effort. Thus psyche and habit, according to Potter and others, link karma to causality in ancient Indian literature. The idea of karma may be compared to the notion of a person's \"character\", as both are an assessment of the person and determined by that person's habitual thinking and acting.\n\nThe second theme common to karma theories is ethicization. This begins with the premise that every action has a consequence, which will come to fruition in either this or a future life; thus, morally good acts will have positive consequences, whereas bad acts will produce negative results. An individual's present situation is thereby explained by reference to actions in his present or in previous lifetimes. Karma is not itself \"reward and punishment\", but the law that produces consequence. Halbfass notes, good karma is considered as \"dharma\" and leads to \"punya\" (merit), while bad karma is considered \"adharma\" and leads to \"pāp\" (demerit, sin).\n\nReichenbach suggests that the theories of karma are an ethical theory. This is so because the ancient scholars of India linked intent and actual action to the merit, reward, demerit and punishment. A theory without ethical premise would be a pure causal relation; the merit or reward or demerit or punishment would be same regardless of the actor's intent. In ethics, one's intentions, attitudes and desires matter in the evaluation of one's action. Where the outcome is unintended, the moral responsibility for it is less on the actor, even though causal responsibility may be the same regardless. A karma theory considers not only the action, but also actor's intentions, attitude, and desires before and during the action. The karma concept thus encourages each person to seek and live a moral life, as well as avoid an immoral life. The meaning and significance of karma is thus as a building block of an ethical theory.\n\nThe third common theme of karma theories is the concept of reincarnation or the cycle of rebirths (\"saṃsāra\"). Rebirth is a fundamental concept of Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism. The concept has been intensely debated in ancient literature of India; with different schools of Indian religions considering the relevance of rebirth as either essential, or secondary, or unnecessary fiction. Karma is a basic concept, rebirth is a derivative concept, so suggests Creel; Karma is a fact, asserts Yamunacharya, while reincarnation is a hypothesis; in contrast, Hiriyanna suggests rebirth is a necessary corollary of karma.\n\nRebirth, or \"saṃsāra\", is the concept that all life forms go through a cycle of reincarnation, that is a series of births and rebirths. The rebirths and consequent life may be in different realm, condition or form. The karma theories suggest that the realm, condition and form depends on the quality and quantity of karma. In schools that believe in rebirth, every living being's soul transmigrates (recycles) after death, carrying the seeds of Karmic impulses from life just completed, into another life and lifetime of karmas. This cycle continues indefinitely, except for those who consciously break this cycle by reaching \"moksa\". Those who break the cycle reach the realm of gods, those who don't continue in the cycle.\n\nThe theory of \"karma and rebirth\" raises numerous questions—such as how, when, and why did the cycle start in the first place, what is the relative Karmic merit of one karma versus another and why, and what evidence is there that rebirth actually happens, among others. Various schools of Hinduism realized these difficulties, debated their own formulations, some reaching what they considered as internally consistent theories, while other schools modified and de-emphasized it, while a few schools in Hinduism such as Charvakas, Lokayatana abandoned \"karma and rebirth\" theory altogether. Schools of Buddhism consider karma-rebirth cycle as integral to their theories of soteriology.\n\nThe Vedic Sanskrit word (nominative ') means \"work\" or \"deed\", often used in the context of Srauta rituals.\nIn the Rigveda, the word occurs some 40 times. In Satapatha Brahmana 1.7.1.5, sacrifice is declared as the \"greatest\" of \"works\"; Satapatha Brahmana 10.1.4.1 associates the potential of becoming immortal (\"amara\") with the \"karma\" of the agnicayana sacrifice.\n\nThe earliest clear discussion of the karma doctrine is in the Upanishads. For example, the causality and ethicization is stated in Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 3.2.13 (\"Truly, one becomes good through good \"deeds\", and evil through evil \"deeds\".\")\n\nSome authors state that the \"samsara\" (transmigration) and karma doctrine may be non-Vedic, and the ideas may have developed in the \"shramana\" traditions that preceded Buddhism and Jainism. Others state that some of the complex ideas of the ancient emerging theory of karma flowed from Vedic thinkers to Buddhist and Jain thinkers. The mutual influences between the traditions is unclear, and likely co-developed.\n\nMany philosophical debates surrounding the concept are shared by the Hindu, Jain and Buddhist traditions, and the early developments in each tradition incorporated different novel ideas. For example, Buddhists allowed karma transfer from one person to another and sraddha rites, but had difficulty defending the rationale. In contrast, Hindu schools and Jainism would not allow the possibility of karma transfer.\n\nThe concept of karma in Hinduism developed and evolved over centuries. The earliest Upanishads began with the questions about how and why man is born, and what happens after death. As answers to the latter, the early theories in these ancient Sanskrit documents include \"pancagni vidya\" (the five fire doctrine), \"pitryana\" (the cyclic path of fathers) and \"devayana\" (the cycle-transcending, path of the gods). Those who do superficial rituals and seek material gain, claimed these ancient scholars, travel the way of their fathers and recycle back into another life; those who renounce these, go into the forest and pursue spiritual knowledge, were claimed to climb into the higher path of the gods. It is these who break the cycle and are not reborn. With the composition of the Epics - the common man's introduction to Dharma in Hinduism - the ideas of causality and essential elements of the theory of karma were being recited in folk stories. For example:\nIn the thirteenth book of the Mahabharata, also called the Teaching Book (Anushasana Parva), sixth chapter opens with Yudhishthira asking Bhishma: \"Is the course of a person's life already destined, or can human effort shape one's life?\" The future, replies Bhishma, is both a function of current human effort derived from free will and past human actions that set the circumstances. Over and over again, the chapters of Mahabharata recite the key postulates of karma theory. That is: intent and action (karma) has consequences; karma lingers and doesn't disappear; and, all positive or negative experiences in life require effort and intent. For example:\nOver time, various schools of Hinduism developed many different definitions of karma, some making karma appear quite deterministic, while others make room for free will and moral agency. Among the six most studied schools of Hinduism, the theory of karma evolved in different ways, as their respective scholars reasoned and attempted to address the internal inconsistencies, implications and issues of the karma doctrine. According to Halbfass,\nBULLET::::- The Nyaya school of Hinduism considers karma and rebirth as central, with some Nyaya scholars such as Udayana suggesting that the Karma doctrine implies that God exists.\nBULLET::::- The Vaisesika school does not consider the karma from past lives doctrine very important.\nBULLET::::- The Samkhya school considers karma to be of secondary importance (prakrti is primary).\nBULLET::::- The Mimamsa school gives a negligible role to karma from past lives, disregards \"samsara\" and \"moksa\".\nBULLET::::- The Yoga school considers karma from past lives to be secondary, one's behavior and psychology in the current life is what has consequences and leads to entanglements.\nBULLET::::- According to Professor Wilhelm Halbfass, the Vedanta school acknowledges the karma-rebirth doctrine, but concludes it is a theory that is not derived from reality and cannot be proven, considers it invalid for its failure to explain evil / inequality / other observable facts about society, treats it as a convenient fiction to solve practical problems in Upanishadic times, and declares it irrelevant. In the Advaita Vedanta school, actions in current life have moral consequences and liberation is possible within one's life as jivanmukti (self-realized person).\n\nThe above six schools illustrate the diversity of views, but are not exhaustive. Each school has sub-schools in Hinduism, such as Vedanta school's nondualism and dualism sub-schools. Furthermore, there are other schools of Hinduism such as Charvaka, Lokayata (the materialists) who denied the theory of karma-rebirth as well as the existence of God; to this school of Hindus, the properties of things come from the nature of things. Causality emerges from the interaction, actions and nature of things and people, determinative principles such as karma or God are unnecessary.\n\n\"Karma\" and \"karmaphala\" are fundamental concepts in Buddhism. The concepts of \"karma\" and \"karmaphala\" explain how our intentional actions keep us tied to rebirth in \"samsara\", whereas the Buddhist path, as exemplified in the Noble Eightfold Path, shows us the way out of \"samsara\". \"Karmaphala\" is the \"fruit\", \"effect\" or \"result\" of \"karma\". A similar term is \"karmavipaka\", the \"maturation\" or \"cooking\" of \"karma\". The cycle of rebirth is determined by \"karma\", literally \"action\". In the Buddhist tradition, \"karma\" refers to actions driven by \"intention\" (\"cetanā\"), a deed done deliberately through body, speech or mind, which leads to future consequences. The \"Nibbedhika Sutta\", Anguttara Nikaya 6.63:\n\nHow these intentional actions lead to rebirth, and how the idea of rebirth is to be reconciled with the doctrines of impermanence and no-self, is a matter of philosophical inquiry in the Buddhist traditions, for which several solutions have been proposed. In early Buddhism no explicit theory of rebirth and karma is worked out, and \"the karma doctrine may have been incidental to early Buddhist soteriology.\" In early Buddhism, rebirth is ascribed to craving or ignorance.\nThe Buddha's teaching of karma is not strictly deterministic, but incorporated circumstantial factors, unlike that of the Jains. It is not a rigid and mechanical process, but a flexible, fluid and dynamic process. There is no set linear relationship between a particular action and its results. The karmic effect of a deed is not determined solely by the deed itself, but also by the nature of the person who commits the deed, and by the circumstances in which it is committed. \"Karmaphala\" is not a \"judgement\" enforced by a God, Deity or other supernatural being that controls the affairs of the Cosmos. Rather, \"karmaphala\" is the outcome of a natural process of cause and effect.\nWithin Buddhism, the real importance of the doctrine of karma and its fruits lies in the recognition of the urgency to put a stop to the whole process. The \"Acintita Sutta\" warns that \"the results of kamma\" is one of the four incomprehensible subjects, subjects that are beyond all conceptualization and cannot be understood with logical thought or reason.\nNichiren Buddhism teaches that transformation and change through faith and practice changes adverse karma—negative causes made in the past that result in negative results in the present and future—to positive causes for benefits in the future.\n\nIn Jainism, \"karma\" conveys a totally different meaning from that commonly understood in Hindu philosophy and western civilization. Jain philosophy is the oldest Indian philosophy that completely separates body (matter) from the soul (pure consciousness). In Jainism, karma is referred to as karmic dirt, as it consists of very subtle particles of matter that pervade the entire universe. \"Karmas\" are attracted to the karmic field of a soul due to vibrations created by activities of mind, speech, and body as well as various mental dispositions. Hence the \"karmas\" are the subtle matter surrounding the consciousness of a soul. When these two components (consciousness and karma) interact, we experience the life we know at present.\nJain texts expound that seven \"tattvas\" (truths or fundamentals) constitute reality. These are:\nBULLET::::1. \"Jīva\"- the soul which is characterized by consciousness\nBULLET::::2. \"Ajīva\"- the non-soul\nBULLET::::3. \"Āsrava\"- inflow of auspicious and evil karmic matter into the soul.\nBULLET::::4. \"Bandha\" (bondage)- mutual intermingling of the soul and \"karmas\".\nBULLET::::5. \"Samvara\" (stoppage)- obstruction of the inflow of karmic matter into the soul.\nBULLET::::6. \"Nirjara\" (gradual dissociation)- separation or falling off of part of karmic matter from the soul.\nBULLET::::7. \"Mokṣha\" (liberation)- complete annihilation of all karmic matter (bound with any particular soul).\n\nAccording to Padmanabh Jaini,This emphasis on reaping the fruits only of one's own karma was not restricted to the Jainas; both Hindus and Buddhist writers have produced doctrinal materials stressing the same point. Each of the latter traditions, however, developed practices in basic contradiction to such belief. In addition to \"shrardha\" (the ritual Hindu offerings by the son of deceased), we find among Hindus widespread adherence to the notion of divine intervention in ones fate, while Buddhists eventually came to propound such theories like boon-granting bodhisattvas, transfer of merit and like. Only Jainas have been absolutely unwilling to allow such ideas to penetrate their community, despite the fact that there must have been tremendous amount of social pressure on them to do so.\nThe key points where the theory of karma in Jainism can be stated as follows:\nBULLET::::1. Karma operates as a self-sustaining mechanism as natural universal law, without any need of an external entity to manage them. (absence of the exogenous \"Divine Entity\" in Jainism)\nBULLET::::2. Jainism advocates that a soul attracts \"karmic\" matter even with the thoughts, and not just the actions. Thus, to even think evil of someone would endure a \"karma-bandha\" or an increment in bad karma. For this reason, Jainism emphasise on developing Ratnatraya (The Three Jewels): \"samyak darśana\" (Right Faith), \"samyak jnāna\" (Right Knowledge) and \"samyak charitra\" (Right Conduct).\nBULLET::::3. In Jain theology, a soul is released of worldly affairs as soon as it is able to emancipate from the \"karma-bandha\". In Jainism, \"nirvana\" and \"moksha\" are used interchangeably. \"Nirvana\" represents annihilation of all \"karmas\" by an individual soul and \"moksha\" represents the perfect blissful state (free from all bondage). In the presence of a \"Tirthankara\", a soul can attain \"Kevala Jnana\" (omniscience) and subsequently nirvana, without any need of intervention by the Tirthankara.\nBULLET::::4. The karmic theory in Jainism operates endogenously. Even the \"Tirthankaras\" themselves have to go through the stages of emancipation, for attaining that state.\nBULLET::::5. Jainism treats all souls equally, inasmuch as it advocates that all souls have the same potential of attaining nirvana. Only those who make effort, really attain it, but nonetheless, each soul is capable on its own to do so by gradually reducing its karma.\n\nIn Sikhism, all living beings are described as being under the influence of \"maya's\" three qualities. Always present together in varying mix and degrees, these three qualities of \"maya\" bind the soul to the body and to the earth plane. Above these three qualities is the eternal time. Due to the influence of three modes of Maya's nature, \"jivas\" (individual beings) perform activities under the control and purview of the eternal time. These activities are called \"karma\". The underlying principle is that karma is the law that brings back the results of actions to the person performing them.\n\nThis life is likened to a field in which our karma is the seed. We harvest exactly what we sow; no less, no more. This infallible law of karma holds everyone responsible for what the person is or is going to be. Based on the total sum of past karma, some feel close to the Pure Being in this life and others feel separated. This is the Gurbani's (Sri Guru Granth Sahib) law of karma. Like other Indian and oriental schools of thought, the Gurbani also accepts the doctrines of karma and reincarnation as the facts of nature.\n\nInterpreted as \"Musubi\", a view of karma is recognized in Shintoism as a means of enriching, empowering and life affirming.\n\nKarma is an important concept in Taoism. Every deed is tracked by deities and spirits. Appropriate rewards or retribution follow karma, just like a shadow follows a person.\n\nThe karma doctrine of Taoism developed in three stages. In the first stage, causality between actions and consequences was adopted, with supernatural beings keeping track of everyone's karma and assigning fate (\"ming\"). In the second phase, transferability of karma ideas from Chinese Buddhism were expanded, and a transfer or inheritance of Karmic fate from ancestors to one's current life was introduced. In the third stage of karma doctrine development, ideas of rebirth based on karma were added. One could be reborn either as another human being or another animal, according to this belief. In the third stage, additional ideas were introduced; for example, rituals, repentance and offerings at Taoist temples were encouraged as it could alleviate Karmic burden.\n\nDavid Ownby, a scholar of Chinese history at the University of Montreal, asserts that Falun Gong differs from Buddhism in its definition of the term \"karma\" in that it is taken not as a process of award and punishment, but as an exclusively negative term. The Chinese term \"\"de\"\" or \"virtue\" is reserved for what might otherwise be termed \"good karma\" in Buddhism. Karma is understood as the source of all suffering - what Buddhism might refer to as \"bad karma\". Li says, \"A person has done bad things over his many lifetimes, and for people this results in misfortune, or for cultivators it's karmic obstacles, so there's birth, aging, sickness, and death. This is ordinary karma.\"\n\nFalun Gong teaches that the spirit is locked in the cycle of rebirth, also known as samsara due to the accumulation of karma. This is a negative, black substance that accumulates in other dimensions lifetime after lifetime, by doing bad deeds and thinking bad thoughts. Falun Gong states that karma is the reason for suffering, and what ultimately blocks people from the truth of the universe and attaining enlightenment. At the same time, karma is also the cause of one's continued rebirth and suffering. Li says that due to accumulation of karma the human spirit upon death will reincarnate over and over again, until the karma is paid off or eliminated through cultivation, or the person is destroyed due to the bad deeds he has done.\n\nOwnby regards the concept of karma as a cornerstone to individual moral behaviour in Falun Gong, and also readily traceable to the Christian doctrine of \"one reaps what one sows\". Others say Matthew 5:44 means no unbeliever will not fully reap what they sow until they are Judged by God after death in Hell. Ownby says Falun Gong is differentiated by a \"system of transmigration\", though, \"in which each organism is the reincarnation of a previous life form, its current form having been determined by karmic calculation of the moral qualities of the previous lives lived.\" Ownby says the seeming unfairness of manifest inequities can then be explained, at the same time allowing a space for moral behaviour in spite of them. In the same vein of Li's monism, matter and spirit are one, karma is identified as a black substance which must be purged in the process of cultivation.\n\nLi says that \"Human beings all fell here from the many dimensions of the universe. They no longer met the requirements of the Fa at their given levels in the universe, and thus had to drop down. Just as we have said before, the heavier one's mortal attachments, the further down one drops, with the descent continuing until one arrives at the state of ordinary human beings.\" He says that in the eyes of higher beings, the purpose of human life is not merely to be human, but to awaken quickly on Earth, a \"setting of delusion\", and return. \"That is what they really have in mind; they are opening a door for you. Those who fail to return will have no choice but to reincarnate, with this continuing until they amass a huge amount of karma and are destroyed.\"\n\nOwnby regards this as the basis for Falun Gong's apparent \"opposition to practitioners' taking medicine when ill; they are missing an opportunity to work off karma by allowing an illness to run its course (suffering depletes karma) or to fight the illness through cultivation.\" Benjamin Penny shares this interpretation. Since Li believes that \"karma is the primary factor that causes sickness in people\", Penny asks: \"if disease comes from karma and karma can be eradicated through cultivation of \"xinxing\", then what good will medicine do?\" Li himself states that he is not forbidding practitioners from taking medicine, maintaining that \"What I'm doing is telling people the relationship between practicing cultivation and medicine-taking\". Li also states that \"An everyday person needs to take medicine when he gets sick.\" Schechter quotes a Falun Gong student who says \"It is always an individual choice whether one should take medicine or not.\"\n\nOne of the significant controversies with the karma doctrine is whether it always implies destiny, and its implications on free will. This controversy is also referred to as the moral agency problem; the controversy is not unique to karma doctrine, but also found in some form in monotheistic religions.\n\nThe free will controversy can be outlined in three parts: (1) A person who kills, rapes or commits any other unjust act, can claim all his bad actions were a product of his karma: he is devoid of free will, he can not make a choice, he is an agent of karma, and he merely delivers necessary punishments his \"wicked\" victims deserved for their own karma in past lives. Are crimes and unjust actions due to free will, or because of forces of karma? (2) Does a person who suffers from the unnatural death of a loved one, or rape or any other unjust act, assume a moral agent is responsible, that the harm is gratuitous, and therefore seek justice? Or, should one blame oneself for bad karma over past lives, and assume that the unjust suffering is fate? (3) Does the karma doctrine undermine the incentive for moral education—because all suffering is deserved and consequence of past lives, why learn anything when the balance sheet of karma from past lives will determine one's action and sufferings?\n\nThe explanations and replies to the above free will problem vary by the specific school of Hinduism, Buddhism and Jainism. The schools of Hinduism, such as Yoga and Advaita Vedanta, that have emphasized current life over the dynamics of karma residue moving across past lives, allow free will. Their argument, as well of other schools, are threefold: (1) The theory of karma includes both the action and the intent behind that action. Not only is one affected by past karma, one creates new karma whenever one acts with intent - good or bad. If intent and act can be proven beyond reasonable doubt, new karma can be proven, and the process of justice can proceed against this new karma. The actor who kills, rapes or commits any other unjust act, must be considered as the moral agent for this new karma, and tried. (2) Life forms not only receive and reap the consequence of their past karma, together they are the means to initiate, evaluate, judge, give and deliver consequence of karma to others. (3) Karma is a theory that explains some evils, not all (see moral evil versus natural evil).\n\nOther schools of Hinduism, as well as Buddhism and Jainism that do consider cycle of rebirths central to their beliefs and that karma from past lives affects one's present, believe that both free will (\"Cetanā\") and karma can co-exist; however, their answers have not persuaded all scholars.\n\nAnother issue with the theory of karma is that it is psychologically indeterminate, suggests Obeyesekere. That is, (1) if no one can know what their karma was in previous lives, and (2) if the karma from past lives can determine one's future, then the individual is psychologically unclear what if anything he or she can do now to shape the future, be more happy, or reduce suffering. If something goes wrong such as sickness or failure at work the individual is unclear if karma from past lives was the cause, or the sickness was caused by curable infection and the failure was caused by something correctable.\n\nThis psychological indeterminacy problem is also not unique to the theory of karma; it is found in every religion adopting the premise that God has a plan, or in some way influences human events. As with the karma-and-free-will problem above, schools that insist on primacy of rebirths face the most controversy. Their answers to the psychological indeterminacy issue are the same as those for addressing the free will problem.\n\nSome schools of Asian religions, particularly Popular Theravada Buddhism, allow transfer of karma merit and demerit from one person to another. This transfer is an exchange of non-physical quality just like an exchange of physical goods between two human beings. The practice of karma transfer, or even its possibility, is controversial. Karma transfer raises questions similar to those with substitutionary atonement and vicarious punishment. It defeats the ethical foundations, and dissociates the causality and ethicization in the theory of karma from the moral agent. Proponents of some Buddhist schools suggest that the concept of karma merit transfer encourages religious giving, and such transfers are not a mechanism to transfer bad karma (i.e., demerit) from one person to another.\n\nIn Hinduism, Sraddha rites during funerals have been labelled as karma merit transfer ceremonies by a few scholars, a claim disputed by others. Other schools in Hinduism, such as the Yoga and Advaita Vedantic philosophies, and Jainism hold that karma can not be transferred.\n\nThere has been an ongoing debate about karma theory and how it answers the problem of evil and related problem of theodicy. The problem of evil is a significant question debated in monotheistic religions with two beliefs: (1) There is one God who is absolutely good and compassionate (omnibenevolent), and (2) That one God knows absolutely everything (omniscient) and is all powerful (omnipotent). The problem of evil is then stated in formulations such as, \"why does the omnibenevolent, omniscient and omnipotent God allow any evil and suffering to exist in the world?\" Max Weber extended the problem of evil to Eastern traditions.\n\nThe problem of evil, in the context of karma, has been long discussed in Eastern traditions, both in theistic and non-theistic schools; for example, in Uttara Mīmāṃsā Sutras Book 2 Chapter 1; the 8th century arguments by Adi Sankara in \"Brahmasutrabhasya\" where he posits that God cannot reasonably be the cause of the world because there exists moral evil, inequality, cruelty and suffering in the world; and the 11th century theodicy discussion by Ramanuja in \"Sribhasya\". Epics such as the Mahabharata, for example, suggests three prevailing theories in ancient India as to why good and evil exists one being that everything is ordained by God, another being karma, and a third citing chance events (\"yadrccha\", यदृच्छा). The Mahabharata, which includes Hindu deity Vishnu in the form of Krishna as one of the central characters in the Epic, debates the nature and existence of suffering from these three perspectives, and includes a theory of suffering as arising from an interplay of chance events (such as floods and other events of nature), circumstances created by past human actions, and the current desires, volitions, dharma, adharma and current actions (\"purusakara\") of people. However, while karma theory in the Mahabharata presents alternative perspectives on the problem of evil and suffering, it offers no conclusive answer.\n\nOther scholars suggest that nontheistic Indian religious traditions do not assume an omnibenevolent creator, and some theistic schools do not define or characterize their God(s) as monotheistic Western religions do and the deities have colorful, complex personalities; the Indian deities are personal and cosmic facilitators, and in some schools conceptualized like Plato's Demiurge. Therefore, the problem of theodicy in many schools of major Indian religions is not significant, or at least is of a different nature than in Western religions. Many Indian religions place greater emphasis on developing the karma principle for first cause and innate justice with Man as focus, rather than developing religious principles with the nature and powers of God and divine judgment as focus. Some scholars, particularly of the Nyaya school of Hinduism and Sankara in \"Brahmasutra bhasya\", have posited that karma doctrine implies existence of god, who administers and affects the person's environment given that person's karma, but then acknowledge that it makes karma as violable, contingent and unable to address the problem of evil. Arthur Herman states that karma-transmigration theory solves all three historical formulations to the problem of evil while acknowledging the theodicy insights of Sankara and Ramanuja.\n\nSome theistic Indian religions, such as Sikhism, suggest evil and suffering are a human phenomenon and arises from the karma of individuals. In other theistic schools such as those in Hinduism, particularly its Nyaya school, karma is combined with dharma and evil is explained as arising from human actions and intent that is in conflict with dharma. In nontheistic religions such as Buddhism, Jainism and the Mimamsa school of Hinduism, karma theory is used to explain the cause of evil as well as to offer distinct ways to avoid or be unaffected by evil in the world.\n\nThose schools of Hinduism, Buddhism and Jainism that rely on karma-rebirth theory have been critiqued for their theological explanation of suffering in children by birth, as the result of his or her sins in a past life. Others disagree, and consider the critique as flawed and a misunderstanding of the karma theory.\n\nWestern culture, influenced by Christianity, holds a notion similar to karma, as demonstrated in the phrase \"what goes around comes around\".\n\nMary Jo Meadow suggests karma is akin to \"Christian notions of sin and its effects.\" She states that the Christian teaching on a Last Judgment according to one's charity is a teaching on karma. Christianity also teaches morals such as one reaps what one sows (Galatians 6:7) and live by the sword, die by the sword (Matthew 26:52). Most scholars, however, consider the concept of Last Judgment as different from karma, with karma as an ongoing process that occurs every day in one's life, while Last Judgment, by contrast, is a one-time review at the end of life.\n\nThere is a concept in Judaism called in Hebrew \"midah k'neged midah\", which literally translates to \"value against value,\" but carries the same connotation as the English phrase \"measure for measure.\" The concept is used not so much in matters of law, but rather, in matters of ethics, i.e. how one's actions affects the world will eventually come back to that person in ways one might not necessarily expect. David Wolpe compared \"midah k'neged midah\" to karma.\n\nJung once opined on unresolved emotions and the synchronicity of karma;\nPopular methods for negating cognitive dissonance include meditation, metacognition, counselling, psychoanalysis, etc., whose aim is to enhance emotional self-awareness and thus avoid negative karma. This results in better emotional hygiene and reduced karmic impacts. Permanent neuronal changes within the amygdala and left prefrontal cortex of the human brain attributed to long-term meditation and metacognition techniques have been proven scientifically. This process of emotional maturation aspires to a goal of Individuation or self-actualisation. Such peak experiences are hypothetically devoid of any karma (nirvana or moksha).\n\nThe idea of karma was popularized in the Western world through the work of the Theosophical Society. In this conception, karma was a precursor to the Neopagan \"law of return\" or \"Threefold Law,\" the idea that the beneficial or harmful effects one has on the world will return to oneself. Colloquially this may be summed up as 'what goes around comes around.'\n\nThe Theosophist I. K. Taimni wrote, \"Karma is nothing but the Law of Cause and Effect operating in the realm of human life and bringing about adjustments between an individual and other individuals whom he has affected by his thoughts, emotions and actions.\" Theosophy also teaches that when humans reincarnate they come back as humans only, not as animals or other organisms.\n\nBULLET::::- Adrsta\nBULLET::::- Amor fati\nBULLET::::- Anantarika-karma\nBULLET::::- Causes of Karma\nBULLET::::- Consequentialism\nBULLET::::- Destiny\nBULLET::::- Divine retribution\nBULLET::::- Just-world hypothesis\nBULLET::::- Dharma\nBULLET::::- Ethic of reciprocity\nBULLET::::- Ho'oponopono (Karma section)\nBULLET::::- Just-world hypothesis\nBULLET::::- Karma yoga\nBULLET::::- Luck\nBULLET::::- Moksha\nBULLET::::- Nishkam Karma\nBULLET::::- Pratītyasamutpāda\nBULLET::::- Self-fulfilling prophecy\nBULLET::::- Types of Karma\nBULLET::::- Unintended consequence\nBULLET::::- Work (Christian theology)\nBULLET::::- Saṅkhāra\nBULLET::::- Tibetan Buddhist Philosophy of Karma\n"}
{"id": "16869", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16869", "title": "Knights Templar", "text": "Knights Templar\n\nThe Poor Fellow-Soldiers of Christ and of the Temple of Solomon (), also known as the Order of Solomon's Temple, the Knights Templar or simply the Templars, were a Catholic military order founded in 1119 and recognised in 1139 by the papal bull \"Omne datum optimum\". The order was active until 1312 when it was perpetually suppressed by Pope Clement V by the bull \"Vox in excelso\".\n\nThe Templars became a favoured charity throughout Christendom and grew rapidly in membership and power. They were prominent in Christian finance. Templar knights, in their distinctive white mantles with a red cross, were among the most skilled fighting units of the Crusades. Non-combatant members of the order, who made up as much as 90% of their members, managed a large economic infrastructure throughout Christendom, developing innovative financial techniques that were an early form of banking, building its own network of nearly 1,000 commanderies and fortifications across Europe and the Holy Land, and arguably forming the world's first multinational corporation.\n\nThe Templars were closely tied to the Crusades; when the Holy Land was lost, support for the order faded. Rumours about the Templars' secret initiation ceremony created distrust, and King Philip IV of France – deeply in debt to the order – took advantage of this distrust to destroy them and erase his debt. In 1307, he had many of the order's members in France arrested, tortured into giving false confessions, and burned at the stake. Pope Clement V disbanded the order in 1312 under pressure from King Philip. The abrupt reduction in power of a significant group in European society gave rise to speculation, legend, and legacy through the ages.\n\nAfter Europeans in the First Crusade recaptured Jerusalem from Muslim conquerors in 1099, many Christians made pilgrimages to various sacred sites in the Holy Land. Although the city of Jerusalem was relatively secure under Christian control, the rest of Outremer was not. Bandits and marauding highwaymen preyed upon these Christian pilgrims, who were routinely slaughtered, sometimes by the hundreds, as they attempted to make the journey from the coastline at Jaffa through to the interior of the Holy Land.\nIn 1119, the French knight Hugues de Payens approached King Baldwin II of Jerusalem and Warmund, Patriarch of Jerusalem, and proposed creating a monastic order for the protection of these pilgrims. King Baldwin and Patriarch Warmund agreed to the request, probably at the Council of Nablus in January 1120, and the king granted the Templars a headquarters in a wing of the royal palace on the Temple Mount in the captured Al-Aqsa Mosque. The Temple Mount had a mystique because it was above what was believed to be the ruins of the Temple of Solomon. The Crusaders therefore referred to the Al-Aqsa Mosque as Solomon's Temple, and from this location the new order took the name of \"Poor Knights of Christ and the Temple of Solomon\", or \"Templar\" knights. The order, with about nine knights including Godfrey de Saint-Omer and André de Montbard, had few financial resources and relied on donations to survive. Their emblem was of two knights riding on a single horse, emphasising the order's poverty.\n\nThe impoverished status of the Templars did not last long. They had a powerful advocate in Saint Bernard of Clairvaux, a leading Church figure, the French abbot primarily responsible for the founding of the Cistercian Order of monks and a nephew of André de Montbard, one of the founding knights. Bernard put his weight behind them and wrote persuasively on their behalf in the letter 'In Praise of the New Knighthood', and in 1129, at the Council of Troyes, he led a group of leading churchmen to officially approve and endorse the order on behalf of the church. With this formal blessing, the Templars became a favoured charity throughout Christendom, receiving money, land, businesses, and noble-born sons from families who were eager to help with the fight in the Holy Land. Another major benefit came in 1139, when Pope Innocent II's papal bull \"Omne Datum Optimum\" exempted the order from obedience to local laws. This ruling meant that the Templars could pass freely through all borders, were not required to pay any taxes, and were exempt from all authority except that of the pope.\n\nWith its clear mission and ample resources, the order grew rapidly. Templars were often the advance shock troops in key battles of the Crusades, as the heavily armoured knights on their warhorses would set out to charge at the enemy, ahead of the main army bodies, in an attempt to break opposition lines. One of their most famous victories was in 1177 during the Battle of Montgisard, where some 500 Templar knights helped several thousand infantry to defeat Saladin's army of more than 26,000 soldiers.\n\nAlthough the primary mission of the order was militaristic, relatively few members were combatants. The others acted in support positions to assist the knights and to manage the financial infrastructure. The Templar Order, though its members were sworn to individual poverty, was given control of wealth beyond direct donations. A nobleman who was interested in participating in the Crusades might place all his assets under Templar management while he was away. Accumulating wealth in this manner throughout Christendom and the Outremer, the order in 1150 began generating letters of credit for pilgrims journeying to the Holy Land: pilgrims deposited their valuables with a local Templar preceptory before embarking, received a document indicating the value of their deposit, then used that document upon arrival in the Holy Land to retrieve their funds in an amount of treasure of equal value. This innovative arrangement was an early form of banking and may have been the first formal system to support the use of cheques; it improved the safety of pilgrims by making them less attractive targets for thieves, and also contributed to the Templar coffers.\n\nBased on this mix of donations and business dealing, the Templars established financial networks across the whole of Christendom. They acquired large tracts of land, both in Europe and the Middle East; they bought and managed farms and vineyards; they built massive stone cathedrals and castles; they were involved in manufacturing, import and export; they had their own fleet of ships; and at one point they even owned the entire island of Cyprus. The Order of the Knights Templar arguably qualifies as the world's first multinational corporation.\n\nIn the mid-12th century, the tide began to turn in the Crusades. The Muslim world had become more united under effective leaders such as Saladin. Dissension arose among Christian factions in and concerning the Holy Land. The Knights Templar were occasionally at odds with the two other Christian military orders, the Knights Hospitaller and the Teutonic Knights, and decades of internecine feuds weakened Christian positions, both politically and militarily. After the Templars were involved in several unsuccessful campaigns, including the pivotal Battle of Hattin, Jerusalem was recaptured by Muslim forces under Saladin in 1187. The Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II reclaimed the city for Christians in the Sixth Crusade of 1229, without Templar aid, but only held it briefly for a little more than a decade. In 1244, the Ayyubid dynasty together with Khwarezmi mercenaries recaptured Jerusalem, and the city did not return to Western control until 1917 when, during World War I, the British captured it from the Ottoman Empire.\n\nThe Templars were forced to relocate their headquarters to other cities in the north, such as the seaport of Acre, which they held for the next century. It was lost in 1291, followed by their last mainland strongholds, Tortosa (Tartus in what is now Syria) and Atlit in present-day Israel. Their headquarters then moved to Limassol on the island of Cyprus, and they also attempted to maintain a garrison on tiny Arwad Island, just off the coast from Tortosa. In 1300, there was some attempt to engage in coordinated military efforts with the Mongols via a new invasion force at Arwad. In 1302 or 1303, however, the Templars lost the island to the Egyptian Mamluk Sultanate in the Siege of Arwad. With the island gone, the Crusaders lost their last foothold in the Holy Land.\n\nWith the order's military mission now less important, support for the organization began to dwindle. The situation was complex, however, since during the two hundred years of their existence, the Templars had become a part of daily life throughout Christendom. The organisation's Templar Houses, hundreds of which were dotted throughout Europe and the Near East, gave them a widespread presence at the local level. The Templars still managed many businesses, and many Europeans had daily contact with the Templar network, such as by working at a Templar farm or vineyard, or using the order as a bank in which to store personal valuables. The order was still not subject to local government, making it everywhere a \"state within a state\" – its standing army, though it no longer had a well-defined mission, could pass freely through all borders. This situation heightened tensions with some European nobility, especially as the Templars were indicating an interest in founding their own monastic state, just as the Teutonic Knights had done in Prussia and the Knights Hospitaller were doing in Rhodes.\n\nIn 1305, the new Pope Clement V, based in Avignon, France, sent letters to both the Templar Grand Master Jacques de Molay and the Hospitaller Grand Master Fulk de Villaret to discuss the possibility of merging the two orders. Neither was amenable to the idea, but Pope Clement persisted, and in 1306 he invited both Grand Masters to France to discuss the matter. De Molay arrived first in early 1307, but de Villaret was delayed for several months. While waiting, De Molay and Clement discussed criminal charges that had been made two years earlier by an ousted Templar and were being discussed by King Philip IV of France and his ministers. It was generally agreed that the charges were false, but Clement sent the king a written request for assistance in the investigation. According to some historians, King Philip, who was already deeply in debt to the Templars from his war with the English, decided to seize upon the rumours for his own purposes. He began pressuring the church to take action against the order, as a way of freeing himself from his debts. \nAt dawn on Friday, 13 October 1307 (a date sometimes linked with the origin of the Friday the 13th superstition) King Philip IV ordered de Molay and scores of other French Templars to be simultaneously arrested. The arrest warrant started with the phrase: \"Dieu n'est pas content, nous avons des ennemis de la foi dans le Royaume\" [\"God is not pleased. We have enemies of the faith in the kingdom\"]. Claims were made that during Templar admissions ceremonies, recruits were forced to spit on the Cross, deny Christ, and engage in indecent kissing; brethren were also accused of worshipping idols, and the order was said to have encouraged homosexual practices. The Templars were charged with numerous other offences such as financial corruption, fraud, and secrecy. Many of the accused confessed to these charges under torture (even though the Templars denied being tortured in their written confessions), and their confessions, even though obtained under duress, caused a scandal in Paris. The prisoners were coerced to confess that they had spat on the Cross: \"Moi, Raymond de La Fère, 21 ans, reconnais que [j'ai] craché trois fois sur la Croix, mais de bouche et pas de cœur\" (\"I, Raymond de La Fère, 21 years old, admit that I have spat three times on the Cross, but only from my mouth and not from my heart\"). The Templars were accused of idolatry and were suspected of worshiping either a figure known as Baphomet or a mummified severed head they recovered, amongst other artifacts, at their original headquarters on the Temple Mount that many scholars theorize might have been that of John the Baptist, among other things.\n\nRelenting to Phillip's demands, Pope Clement then issued the papal bull \"Pastoralis praeeminentiae\" on 22 November 1307, which instructed all Christian monarchs in Europe to arrest all Templars and seize their assets. Pope Clement called for papal hearings to determine the Templars' guilt or innocence, and once freed of the Inquisitors' torture, many Templars recanted their confessions. Some had sufficient legal experience to defend themselves in the trials, but in 1310, having appointed the archbishop of Sens, Philippe de Marigny, to lead the investigation, Philip blocked this attempt, using the previously forced confessions to have dozens of Templars burned at the stake in Paris.\n\nWith Philip threatening military action unless the pope complied with his wishes, Pope Clement finally agreed to disband the order, citing the public scandal that had been generated by the confessions. At the Council of Vienne in 1312, he issued a series of papal bulls, including \"Vox in excelso\", which officially dissolved the order, and \"Ad providam\", which turned over most Templar assets to the Hospitallers.\n\nAs for the leaders of the order, the elderly Grand Master Jacques de Molay, who had confessed under torture, retracted his confession. Geoffroi de Charney, Preceptor of Normandy, also retracted his confession and insisted on his innocence. Both men were declared guilty of being relapsed heretics, and they were sentenced to burn alive at the stake in Paris on 18 March 1314. De Molay reportedly remained defiant to the end, asking to be tied in such a way that he could face the Notre Dame Cathedral and hold his hands together in prayer. According to legend, he called out from the flames that both Pope Clement and King Philip would soon meet him before God. His actual words were recorded on the parchment as follows : \"Dieu sait qui a tort et a péché. Il va bientot arriver malheur à ceux qui nous ont condamnés à mort\" (\"God knows who is wrong and has sinned. Soon a calamity will occur to those who have condemned us to death\"). Pope Clement died only a month later, and King Philip died in a hunting accident before the end of the year.\n\nThe remaining Templars around Europe were either arrested and tried under the Papal investigation (with virtually none convicted), absorbed into other Catholic military orders, or pensioned off and allowed to live out their days peacefully. By papal decree, the property of the Templars was transferred to the Knights Hospitaller except in the Kingdoms of Castile, Aragon, and Portugal. Portugal was the first country in Europe where they had settled, occurring only two or three years after the order's foundation in Jerusalem and even having presence during Portugal's conception.\n\nThe Portuguese king, Denis I, refused to pursue and persecute the former knights, as had occurred in all other sovereign states under the influence of the Catholic Church. Under his protection, Templar organizations simply changed their name, from \"Knights Templar\" to the reconstituted \"Order of Christ\" and also a parallel \"Supreme Order of Christ of the Holy See\"; both are considered successors to the Knights Templar.\n\nIn September 2001, a document known as the Chinon Parchment dated 17–20 August 1308 was discovered in the Vatican Secret Archives by Barbara Frale, apparently after having been filed in the wrong place in 1628. It is a record of the trial of the Templars and shows that Clement absolved the Templars of all heresies in 1308 before formally disbanding the order in 1312, as did another Chinon Parchment dated 20 August 1308 addressed to Philip IV of France, also mentioning that all Templars that had confessed to heresy were \"restored to the Sacraments and to the unity of the Church\". This other Chinon Parchment has been well known to historians, having been published by Étienne Baluze in 1693 and by Pierre Dupuy in 1751.\n\nThe current position of the Roman Catholic Church is that the medieval persecution of the Knights Templar was unjust, that nothing was inherently wrong with the order or its rule, and that Pope Clement was pressed into his actions by the magnitude of the public scandal and by the dominating influence of King Philip IV, who was Clement's relative.\n\nThe Templars were organized as a monastic order similar to Bernard's Cistercian Order, which was considered the first effective international organization in Europe. The organizational structure had a strong chain of authority. Each country with a major Templar presence (France, Poitou, Anjou, Jerusalem, England, Aragon (Spain), Portugal, Italy, Tripoli, Antioch, Hungary, and Croatia) had a Master of the Order for the Templars in that region.\n\nAll of them were subject to the Grand Master, appointed for life, who oversaw both the order's military efforts in the East and their financial holdings in the West. The Grand Master exercised his authority via the visitors-general of the order, who were knights specially appointed by the Grand Master and convent of Jerusalem to visit the different provinces, correct malpractices, introduce new regulations, and resolve important disputes. The visitors-general had the power to remove knights from office and to suspend the Master of the province concerned.\n\nNo precise numbers exist, but it is estimated that at the order's peak there were between 15,000 and 20,000 Templars, of whom about a tenth were actual knights.\n\nThere was a threefold division of the ranks of the Templars: the noble knights, the non-noble sergeants, and the chaplains. The Templars did not perform knighting ceremonies, so any knight wishing to become a Knight Templar had to be a knight already. They were the most visible branch of the order, and wore the famous white mantles to symbolize their purity and chastity. They were equipped as heavy cavalry, with three or four horses and one or two squires. Squires were generally not members of the order but were instead outsiders who were hired for a set period of time. Beneath the knights in the order and drawn from non-noble families were the sergeants. They brought vital skills and trades from blacksmiths and builders, including administration of many of the order's European properties. In the Crusader States, they fought alongside the knights as light cavalry with a single horse. Several of the order's most senior positions were reserved for sergeants, including the post of Commander of the Vault of Acre, who was the \"de facto\" Admiral of the Templar fleet. The sergeants wore black or brown. From 1139, chaplains constituted a third Templar class. They were ordained priests who cared for the Templars' spiritual needs. All three classes of brother wore the order's red cross.\n\nStarting with founder Hugues de Payens in 1118–1119, the order's highest office was that of Grand Master, a position which was held for life, though considering the martial nature of the order, this could mean a very short tenure. All but two of the Grand Masters died in office, and several died during military campaigns. For example, during the Siege of Ascalon in 1153, Grand Master Bernard de Tremelay led a group of 40 Templars through a breach in the city walls. When the rest of the Crusader army did not follow, the Templars, including their Grand Master, were surrounded and beheaded. Grand Master Gérard de Ridefort was beheaded by Saladin in 1189 at the Siege of Acre.\n\nThe Grand Master oversaw all of the operations of the order, including both the military operations in the Holy Land and Eastern Europe and the Templars' financial and business dealings in Western Europe. Some Grand Masters also served as battlefield commanders, though this was not always wise: several blunders in de Ridefort's combat leadership contributed to the devastating defeat at the Battle of Hattin. The last Grand Master was Jacques de Molay, burned at the stake in Paris in 1314 by order of King Philip IV.\n\nBernard de Clairvaux and founder Hugues de Payens devised a specific code of conduct for the Templar Order, known to modern historians as the Latin Rule. Its 72 clauses laid down the details of the knights' way of life, including the types of garments they were to wear and how many horses they could have. Knights were to take their meals in silence, eat meat no more than three times per week, and not have physical contact of any kind with women, even members of their own family. A Master of the Order was assigned \"4 horses, and one chaplain-brother and one clerk with three horses, and one sergeant brother with two horses, and one gentleman valet to carry his shield and lance, with one horse\". As the order grew, more guidelines were added, and the original list of 72 clauses was expanded to several hundred in its final form.\n\nThe knights wore a white surcoat with a red cross, and a white mantle also with a red cross; the sergeants wore a black tunic with a red cross on the front and a black or brown mantle. The white mantle was assigned to the Templars at the Council of Troyes in 1129, and the cross was most probably added to their robes at the launch of the Second Crusade in 1147, when Pope Eugenius III, King Louis VII of France, and many other notables attended a meeting of the French Templars at their headquarters near Paris. Under the Rule, the knights were to wear the white mantle at all times: they were even forbidden to eat or drink unless wearing it.\n\nThe red cross that the Templars wore on their robes was a symbol of martyrdom, and to die in combat was considered a great honour that assured a place in heaven. There was a cardinal rule that the warriors of the order should never surrender unless the Templar flag had fallen, and even then they were first to try to regroup with another of the Christian orders, such as that of the Hospitallers. Only after all flags had fallen were they allowed to leave the battlefield.\n\nAlthough not prescribed by the Templar Rule, it later became customary for members of the order to wear long and prominent beards. In about 1240, Alberic of Trois-Fontaines described the Templars as an \"order of bearded brethren\"; while during the interrogations by the papal commissioners in Paris in 1310–1311, out of nearly 230 knights and brothers questioned, 76 are described as wearing a beard, in some cases specified as being \"in the style of the Templars\", and 133 are said to have shaved off their beards, either in renunciation of the order or because they had hoped to escape detection.\n\nInitiation, known as Reception (\"receptio\") into the order, was a profound commitment and involved a solemn ceremony. Outsiders were discouraged from attending the ceremony, which aroused the suspicions of medieval inquisitors during the later trials. New members had to willingly sign over all of their wealth and goods to the order and take vows of poverty, chastity, piety, and obedience. Most brothers joined for life, although some were allowed to join for a set period. Sometimes a married man was allowed to join if he had his wife's permission, but he was not allowed to wear the white mantle.\n\nWith their military mission and extensive financial resources, the Knights Templar funded a large number of building projects around Europe and the Holy Land. Many of these structures are still standing. Many sites also maintain the name \"Temple\" because of centuries-old association with the Templars. For example, some of the Templars' lands in London were later rented to lawyers, which led to the names of the Temple Bar gateway and the Temple Underground station. Two of the four Inns of Court which may call members to act as barristers are the Inner Temple and Middle Temple – the entire area known as Temple, London.\n\nDistinctive architectural elements of Templar buildings include the use of the image of \"two knights on a single horse\", representing the Knights' poverty, and round buildings designed to resemble the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem.\n\nThe Knights Templar were dismantled in the Rolls of the Catholic Church in 1309 with the death of Jacques de Molay; with the suppression of the Order, a number of Knights Templar joined the newly established Order of Christ, which effectively reabsorbed the Knights Templar and its properties in AD 1319, especially in Portugal. The story of the persecution and sudden dissolution of the secretive yet powerful medieval Templars has drawn many other groups to use alleged connections with them as a way of enhancing their own image and mystery. Apart from the Order of Christ, there is no clear historical connection between the Knights Templar and any other modern organization, the earliest of which emerged publicly in the 18th century.\n\nFollowing the dissolution of the Knights Templar, the Order of Christ was erected in 1319 and absorbed many of the Knights Templar into its ranks, along with Knights Templar properties in Portugal. Its headquarters became a castle in Tomar, a former Knights Templar castle.\n\nMany temperance organizations named themselves after the Poor Fellow-Soldiers of Christ and of the Temple of Solomon, citing the belief that the original Knights Templar \"drank sour milk, and also because they were fighting 'a great crusade' against 'this terrible vice' of alcohol\". The largest of these, the International Order of Good Templars (IOGT), grew throughout the world after being started in the 19th century and continues to advocate for the abstinence from alcohol and other drugs; other Orders in this tradition include those of the Templars of Honor and Temperance (Tempel Riddare Orden), which has a large presence in Scandinavia. \n\nThe Sovereign Military Order of the Temple of Jerusalem is a self-styled order established in 1804 and \"accredited as a nongovernmental organization NGO) by the UN in 2001\". It is ecumenical in that it admits Christians of many denominations in its ranks. Its founder, Bernard-Raymond Fabré-Palaprat, produced the Larmenius Charter in order to try to link it with the original Catholic Christian military order.\n\nFreemasonry has incorporated the symbols and rituals of several medieval military orders in a number of Masonic bodies since the 18th century at least. This can be seen in the \"Red Cross of Constantine,\" inspired by the Military Constantinian Order; the \"Order of Malta,\" inspired by the Knights Hospitaller; and the \"Order of the Temple\", inspired by the Knights Templar. The Orders of Malta and the Temple feature prominently in the York Rite. One theory on the origin of Freemasonry claims direct descent from the historical Knights Templar through its final fourteenth-century members who allegedly took refuge in Scotland and aided Robert the Bruce in his victory at Bannockburn. This theory is usually rejected by both Masonic authorities and historians due to lack of evidence.\n\nThe Knights Templar have become associated with legends concerning secrets and mysteries handed down to the select from ancient times. Rumours circulated even during the time of the Templars themselves. Masonic writers added their own speculations in the 18th century, and further fictional embellishments have been added in popular novels such as \"Ivanhoe\", \"Foucault's Pendulum\", and \"The Da Vinci Code\", modern movies such as \"National Treasure\", \"The Last Templar\", \"Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade\", the television series \"Knightfall\", as well as video games such as \"Broken Sword\", \"Deus Ex\" and \"Assassin's Creed\".\n\nBeginning in the 1960s, there have been speculative popular publications surrounding the order's early occupation of the Temple Mount in Jerusalem and speculation about what relics the Templars may have found there, such as the quest for the Holy Grail or the Ark of the Covenant, or the historical accusation of idol worship (Baphomet) transformed into a context of \"witchcraft\".\n\nThe association of the Holy Grail with the Templars has precedents even in 12th-century fiction; Wolfram von Eschenbach's \"Parzival\" calls the knights guarding the Grail Kingdom \"templeisen\", apparently a conscious fictionalisation of the \"templarii\".\n\nBULLET::::- List of Knights Templar sites\nBULLET::::- Temple Society\nBULLET::::- Roger de Flor\n\nBULLET::::- Isle of Avalon, Lundy. \"The Rule of the Knights Templar A Powerful Champion\" The Knights Templar. Mystic Realms, 2010. Web\nBULLET::::- Mario Dal Bello (2013). \"Gli Ultimi Giorni dei Templari,\" Città Nuova,\nBULLET::::- Selwood, Dominic (2013). ”The Knights Templar 1: The Knights”\nBULLET::::- Selwood, Dominic (2013).  ”The Knights Templar 2: Sergeants, Women, Chaplains, Affiliates”\nBULLET::::- Selwood, Dominic (2013).  ”The Knights Templar 3: Birth of the Order”\nBULLET::::- Selwood, Dominic  (2013). ”The Knights Templar 4: Saint Bernard of Clairvaux”\nBULLET::::- Julien Théry, \"Philip the Fair, the Trial of the 'Perfidious Templars' and the Pontificalization of the French Monarchy\", in \"Journal of Medieval Religious Culture\", 39/2 (2013), pp. 117–48\nBULLET::::- Malcolm Barber, Keith Bate. \"The Templars: Selected sources translated and annotated by Malcolm Barber and Keith Bate\" (Manchester University Press, 2002)\nBULLET::::- Addison, Charles. \"The History of the Knights Templar\" (1842)\nBULLET::::- d'Albon, André. \"Cartulaire général de l'ordre du Temple: 1119?–1150 (1913–1922) (at Gallica)\nBULLET::::- Levaye, Patrick. Géopolitique du Catholicisme (Éditions Ellipses, 2007)\n\nBULLET::::- Knights Templar - Ancient History Encyclopedia\n"}
{"id": "16871", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16871", "title": "Kazaa", "text": "Kazaa\n\nKazaa Media Desktop (once stylized as \"KaZaA\", but later usually written \"Kazaa\") started as a peer-to-peer file sharing application using the FastTrack protocol licensed by Joltid Ltd. and operated as Kazaa by Sharman Networks. Kazaa was subsequently under license as a legal music subscription service by Atrinsic, Inc. According to one of its creators, Jaan Tallinn, Kazaa is pronounced ka-ZAH.\n\nKazaa Media Desktop was commonly used to exchange MP3 music files and other file types, such as videos, applications, and documents over the Internet. The Kazaa Media Desktop client could be downloaded free of charge; however, it was bundled with adware and for a period there were \"No spyware\" warnings found on Kazaa's website. During the years of Kazaa's operation, Sharman Networks and its business partners and associates were the target of copyright-related lawsuits, related to the copyright of content distributed via Kazaa Media Desktop on the FastTrack protocol.\n\nBy August 2012, the Kazaa website was no longer active.\n\nKazaa and FastTrack were originally created and developed by Estonian programmers from BlueMoon Interactive including Jaan Tallinn and sold to Swedish Niklas Zennström and Danish Janus Friis (who were later to create Skype and later still Joost and Rdio). Kazaa was introduced by the Dutch company Consumer Empowerment in March 2001, near the end of the first generation of P2P networks typified by the shutdown of Napster in July 2001. Skype itself was based on Kazaa's P2P backend, which allowed users to make a call by directly connecting them with each other.\n\nInitially, some users of the Kazaa network were users of the Morpheus client program, formerly made available by MusicCity. Eventually, the official Kazaa client became more widespread. In February 2002, when Morpheus developers failed to pay license fees, Kazaa developers used an automatic update ability to shut out Morpheus clients by changing the protocol. Morpheus later became a client of the gnutella network.\n\nConsumer Empowerment was sued in the Netherlands in 2001 by the Dutch music publishing body, Buma/Stemra. The court ordered Kazaa's owners to take steps to prevent its users from violating copyrights or else pay a heavy fine. In October 2001 a lawsuit was filed against Consumer Empowerment by members of the music and motion picture industry in the USA. In response Consumer Empowerment sold the Kazaa application to Sharman Networks, headquartered in Australia and incorporated in Vanuatu. In late March 2002, a Dutch court of appeal reversed an earlier judgment and stated that Kazaa was not responsible for the actions of its users. Buma/Stemra lost its appeal before the Dutch Supreme Court in December 2003.\n\nIn 2003, Kazaa signed a deal with Altnet and Streamwaves to try to convert users to paying, legal customers. Searchers on Kazaa were offered a free 30-second sample of songs for which they were searching and directed to sign up for the full-featured Streamwaves service.\n\nHowever, Kazaa's new owner, Sharman, was sued in Los Angeles by the major record labels and motion pictures studios and a class of music publishers. The other defendants in that case (Grokster and MusicCity, makers of the Morpheus file-sharing software) initially prevailed against the plaintiffs on summary judgment (Sharman joined the case too late to take advantage of that ruling). The summary judgment ruling was upheld by the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, but was unanimously reversed by the US Supreme Court in a decision titled \"MGM Studios, Inc. v. Grokster, Ltd.\"\n\nFollowing that ruling in favor of the plaintiff labels and studios, Grokster almost immediately settled the case. Shortly thereafter, on 27 July 2006, it was announced that Sharman had also settled with the record industry and motion picture studios. As part of that settlement, the company agreed to pay $100 million in damages to the four major music companies—Universal Music, Sony BMG, EMI and Warner Music—and an undisclosed amount to the studios. Sharman also agreed to convert Kazaa into a legal music download service. Like the creators of similar products, Kazaa's owners have been taken to court by music publishing bodies to restrict its use in the sharing of copyrighted material.\n\nWhile the U.S. action was still pending, the record industry commenced proceedings against Sharman on its home turf. In February 2004, the Australian Record Industry Association (ARIA) announced its own legal action against Kazaa, alleging massive copyright breaches. The trial began on 29 November 2004. On 6 February 2005, the homes of two Sharman Networks executives and the offices of Sharman Networks in Australia were raided under a court order by ARIA to gather evidence for the trial.\n\nOn 5 September 2005, the Federal Court of Australia issued a landmark ruling that Sharman, though not itself guilty of copyright infringement, had \"authorized\" Kazaa users illegally to swap copyrighted songs. The court ruled six defendants—including Kazaa's owners Sharman Networks, Sharman's Sydney-based boss Nikki Hemming and associate Kevin Bermeister—had knowingly allowed Kazaa users illegally to swap copyrighted songs. The company was ordered to modify the software within two months (a ruling enforceable only in Australia). Sharman and the other five parties faced paying millions of dollars in damages to the record labels that instigated the legal action.\n\nOn 5 December 2005, the Federal Court of Australia ceased downloads of Kazaa in Australia after Sharman Networks failed to modify their software by the December 5 deadline. Users with an Australian IP address were greeted with the message \"Important Notice: The download of the Kazaa Media Desktop by users in Australia is not permitted\" when visiting the Kazaa website. Sharman planned to appeal against the Australian decision, but ultimately settled the case as part of its global settlement with the record labels and studios in the United States.\n\nIn yet another set of related cases, in September 2003, the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) filed suit in civil court against several private individuals who had shared large numbers of files with Kazaa; most of these suits were settled with monetary payments averaging $3,000. Sharman Networks responded with a lawsuit against the RIAA, alleging that the terms of use of the network were violated and that unauthorized client software (such as Kazaa Lite, see below) was used in the investigation to track down the individual file sharers. An effort to throw out this suit was denied in January 2004. However, that suit was also settled in 2006 (see above). Most recently, in Duluth, Minnesota, the recording industry sued Jammie Thomas-Rasset, a 30-year-old single mother. On October 5, 2007, Thomas was ordered to pay the six record companies (Sony BMG, Arista Records LLC, Interscope Records, UMG Recordings Inc., Capitol Records Inc. and Warner Bros. Records Inc.) $9,250 for each of the 24 songs they had focused on in this case. She was accused of sharing a total of 1,702 songs through her Kazaa account. Along with attorney fees, Thomas may owe as much as half a million dollars. Thomas testified that she does not have a Kazaa account, but her testimony was complicated by the fact that she had replaced her computer's hard drive after the alleged downloading took place, and later than she originally said in a deposition before the trial.\n\nThomas-Rasset appealed the verdict and was given a new trial. In June 2009 that jury awarded the recording industry plaintiffs a judgment of $80,000 per song, or $1.92 million. This is less than half of the $150,000 amount authorized by statute.\n\nThe federal court found the award \"monstrous and shocking\" and reduced it to $54,000. The recording industry offered to accept a settlement of $25,000, with the money going to charities that support musicians. Apparently undaunted, Thomas-Rasset was able to obtain a third trial on the issue of damages. In November 2010 she was again ordered to pay for her violation, this time $62,500 per song, for a total of $1.5 million. At last word, her attorneys were examining a challenge to the constitutional validity of massive statutory damages, where actual damages would have been $24.\n\nIn 2006 StopBadware.org identified Kazaa as a spyware application. They identified the following components:\nBULLET::::- Cydoor (spyware): Collects information on the PC's surfing habits and passes it on to Cydoor Desktop Media.\nBULLET::::- B3D (adware): An add-on which causes advertising popups if the PC accesses a website which triggers the B3D code.\nBULLET::::- Altnet (adware): A distribution network for paid \"gold\" files.\nBULLET::::- The Best Offers (adware): Tracks your browsing habits and internet usage to display advertisements similar to your interests.\nBULLET::::- InstaFinder (hijacker): Redirects your URL typing errors to InstaFinder's web page instead of the standard search page.\nBULLET::::- TopSearch (adware): Displays paid songs and media related to your search in Kazaa.\nBULLET::::- RX Toolbar (spyware): The toolbar monitors all the sites you visit with Microsoft Internet Explorer and provides links to competitors' websites.\nBULLET::::- New.net (hijacker): A browser plugin that lets you access several of its own unofficial Top Level Domain names, e.g., .chat and .shop. The main purpose of this was to sell domain names such as www.record.shop which is actually www.record.shop.new.net.\n\nKazaa's legal issues ended after a settlement of $100 million in reparations to the recording industry. Kazaa, including the domain name, was then sold off to Brilliant Digital Entertainment, Inc. Kazaa then operated as a monthly music subscription service allowing users to download unlimited songs, before finally ending the service.\n\nSome users still use the old network on the unauthorized versions of Kazaa, either Kazaa Lite or Kazaa Resurrection, which is still a self-sustaining network where thousands of users still share unrestricted media. This fact was previously stated by Kazaa when they claimed their FastTrack network was not centralized (like the old Napster), but instead a link between millions of computers around the world.\n\nHowever, in the wake of the bad publicity and lawsuits, the number of users on Kazaa Lite has dropped dramatically. They have gone from several millions of users at a given time to mere thousands.\n\nWithout further recourse, and until the lawsuit was settled, the RIAA actively sued thousands of people and college campuses across the U.S. for sharing copyrighted music over the network. Particularly, students were targeted and most were threatened with a penalty of $750 per song. Although the lawsuits were mainly in the U.S., other countries also began to follow suit. Beginning in 2008, however, RIAA announced an end to individual lawsuits.\n\nNapster was able to outlast Kazaa as the former never really took off and only lasted a few years. By 2012, Kazaa's website was inactive, displaying the message \"We thank you for your interest in Kazaa. However we no longer offer a music service.\"; by 2017 kazaa.com no longer existed.\n\nKazaa Lite was an unauthorized modification of the Kazaa Media Desktop application which excluded adware and spyware and provided slightly extended functionality. It became available in April 2002. It was available free of charge, and as of mid-2005 was almost as widely used as the official Kazaa client itself. It connected to the same FastTrack network and thus allowed to exchange files with all Kazaa users, and was created by third party programmers by modifying the binary of the original Kazaa application. Later versions of Kazaa Lite included K++, a memory patcher that removed search limit restrictions, and set one's \"participation level\" to the maximum of 1000. Sharman Networks considers Kazaa Lite to be a copyright violation.\n\nAfter development of Kazaa Lite stopped, K-Lite v2.6, Kazaa Lite Resurrection and Kazaa Lite Tools appeared. Unlike Kazaa Lite, which is a modification of an old version of Kazaa, K-Lite v2.6 and later require the corresponding original KMD executable to run. K-Lite doesn't include any code by Sharman: instead, it runs the user's original Kazaa Media Desktop executable in an environment which removes the malware, spyware and adware and adds features.\nIn November 2004, the developers of K-Lite released K-Lite v2.7, which similarly requires the KMD 2.7 executable.\n\nOther clean variants used an older core (2.02) and thus, K-Lite had some features that others didn't have. K-Lite included multiple search tabs, a custom toolbar, and autostart, a download accelerator, an optional splash screen, preview with option (to view files you are currently downloading), an IP blocker, Magnet links support, and ad blocking, although the clients based on the 2.02 core abstract these functions to third-party programs.\n\nKazaa Lite Tools was an update of the original Kazaa Lite, with modifications to the third-party programs included, it is newer and includes more tools.\n\nKazaa Lite Resurrection (KLR) appeared almost immediately after Kazaa Lite development was stopped in August 2003. KLR was a copy of Kazaa Lite 2.3.3.\n\nBULLET::::- μTorrent\nBULLET::::- WinMX\nBULLET::::- Kazaa Lite\nBULLET::::- Ares\nBULLET::::- Bearshare\nBULLET::::- eMule\nBULLET::::- iMesh\nBULLET::::- LimeWire\nBULLET::::- Napster\nBULLET::::- The Pirate Bay\n\nBULLET::::- \"Malware prevalence in the KaZaA file-sharing network\". Seungwon Shin, Jaeyeon Jung, and Hari Balakrishnan. 2006.\n"}
{"id": "16873", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16873", "title": "Kimono", "text": "Kimono\n\nThe is a traditional Japanese garment, and the national dress of Japan. The kimono is a T-shaped wrapped-front garment constructed of mostly rectangular pieces of fabric, and is sewn with set sleeve lengths, hem lengths and little tailoring to the body. The kimono is split into a number of varieties based on occasion and formality. These are denoted through motifs and motif placement, fabric choice, type of decoration and colour.\n\nThe kimono has a set method of construction, with its own various terms and units of measurement to describe this. Kimono are always worn left collar overlapping the right, unless the wearer happens to be deceased. Kimono are worn with a wide sash called an obi, which can be tied in a variety of ways based on gender, occasion and obi type.\n\nMost variants of kimono are worn with an underkimono called a \"nagajuban\", and kimono may be worn with \"zōri\" or \"geta\", though other forms of footwear can be worn, excluding formal occasions. When wearing traditional footwear such as \"zōri\" or \"geta\", \"tabi\" socks are always worn.\n\nThe word \"kimono\" literally means \"thing to wear\"; it stems from the verb and the noun . The plural of kimono is \"kimono\", as Japanese does not distinguish plural nouns, though in English the plural \"kimonos\" is sometimes used.\nKimono are, in modern times, mostly worn to formal events, but can also be worn as everyday clothing. Kimono can be worn for important public holidays and festivals, weddings and funerals, but there are few occasions a person would be obligated to wear kimono to in the modern day.\n\nOver time, the kimono has garnered a reputation for being uncomfortable and difficult to wear; however, it has experienced a number of revivals in popularity throughout the decades, and since the turn of the century, kimono enthusiasts have grown in number, promoting the garment as a comfortable and fashionable item of dress.\n\nThe people who tend to wear kimono most often - in some cases on a daily basis - are older men and women, geisha, maiko and sumo wrestlers, with sumo wrestlers being required to wear traditional Japanese dress whenever appearing in public.\n\nChinese fashion had a huge influence on Japan from the Kofun period to the early Heian period as a result of mass immigration from the continent and a Japanese envoy to the Tang dynasty. There is an opinion that \"Kimono\" was basically derived from the Chinese clothing in the Wu region. During Japan's Heian period (794–1192 AD), the kimono became increasingly stylized, though one still wore a half-apron, called a \"mo\", over it. During the Muromachi age (1336–1573 AD), the \"Kosode\", a single kimono formerly considered underwear, began to be worn without the hakama (trousers, divided skirt) over it, and thus began to be held closed by an \"obi\" \"belt\". During the Edo period (1603–1867 AD), the sleeves began to grow in length, especially among unmarried women, and the \"Obi\" became wider, with various styles of tying coming into fashion. Since then, the basic shape of both the men's and women's kimono has remained essentially unchanged. Kimono made with exceptional skill from fine materials have been regarded as great works of art.\n\nThe formal kimono was replaced by the more convenient Western clothes and \"yukata\" as everyday wear. After an edict by Emperor Meiji, police, railroad men and teachers moved to Western clothes. The Japanese began shedding kimono in favor of Western dress in the 1870s. The Western clothes became the army and school uniform for boys. After the 1923 Great Kantō earthquake, kimono wearers often became victims of robbery because they could not run very fast due to the restricting nature of the kimono on the body and geta clogs. Also, kimono produced by traditional methods have become too expensive for the average family. A common price for a kimono- and-obi ensemble is over $1,000, according to the Tokyo Wholesalers Association. Many cost far more. Even on some special occasions such as wedding day, an elaborate kimono is de rigueur, most people choose to rent one. The Tokyo Women's & Children's Wear Manufacturers' Association (東京婦人子供服組合) promoted Western clothes. Between 1920 and 1930 the sailor outfit replaced the undivided \"hakama\" in school uniforms for girls.\nThe national uniform, \"Kokumin-fuku\", a type of Western clothes, was mandated for males in 1940. Today most people wear Western clothes and wear the breezier and more comfortable \"yukata\" for special occasions.\n\nIn the Western world, kimono-styled women's jackets, similar to a casual cardigan, gained public attention as a popular fashion item in 2014. Kimono are also worn on special occasions such as coming of age ceremonies and many other traditional Japanese events.\n\nIn 2019, the mayor of Kyoto announced that his staff were working to register “Kimono Culture” on UNESCO's intangible cultural heritage list.\n\nOver time, the proportions of kimono have evolved differently for men and women. Men's kimono should fall approximately to the ankle, with no hip fold – the \"ohashori\". A woman's kimono, however, should be as tall as she is, in order to allow the correct length for the ohashori to be formed. An ideally tailored kimono has sleeves that fall to the wrist when the arms are lowered; however, in informal situations, this is not strictly necessary, and indeed, kimono are worn casually by some women without the ohashori.\n\nKimono textiles can to be classified into two categories: Gofuku(呉服), which indicates silk textiles in general, for luxuries and cotton/hemp Futomono(太物) for everyday wear. Gofuku was named after 呉 (Wú) in ancient China, where the technology of silk fabrics originated from. Cotton clothing is called Momenfuku (木綿服) whereas hemp clothing is called Asafuku (麻服) in Japanese. Cotton/hemp fabrics are generally called as Futomono (太物, Thick materials) as the fiber of these materials are thicker compared to that of silk. Till the end of the Edo period, tailoring of these fabrics were handled respectively at Gofuku store (Gofuku Dana) and Futomono stores (Futomono Dana), however, after the Meiji period, kimono was not worn as daily wear very often and Futomono stores eventually went out of business.\n\nKimono are traditional made from a single bolt of fabric called a \"tanmono\", which varies in size and shape for both men and women. Tanmono are roughly 36 cm wide and 11.5m long for women, and the entire bolt is used to make one kimono. Some men's tanmono are woven especially long to include enough fabric for a haori, juban and kimono as well, as men's kimono can come in matching sets of the same fabric and colour.\n\nThe finished kimono consists of four main strips of fabric – two panels covering the body and two panels forming the sleeves – with additional smaller strips forming the narrow front panels and the collar. Children's kimono commonly consist of just three main panels, as only one width of fabric is needed for the body.\n\nHistorically, kimono were often taken apart for washing in separate panels, and were resewn by hand. Because of the standardised method of construction, and the fact that no fabric is wasted, the kimono can easily be retailored to fit the changing body, or indeed another person.\n\nThe maximum width of the sleeve is dictated by the width of the fabric. The distance from the center of the spine to the end of the sleeve could not exceed twice the width of the fabric. Traditional kimono fabric was typically no more than wide. Thus the distance from spine to wrist could not exceed a maximum of roughly . Modern kimono fabric is woven as wide as to accommodate modern Japanese body sizes. Very tall or heavy people, such as sumo wrestlers, must have kimono custom-made by either joining multiple bolts, weaving custom-width fabric, or using non-standard size fabric.\n\nTraditionally, kimono are sewn by hand; even machine-made kimono require substantial hand-stitching. Kimono fabrics are frequently hand-made and -decorated. Techniques such as \"yūzen\" dye resist are used for applying decoration and patterns to the base cloth. Repeating patterns that cover a large area of a kimono are traditionally done with the \"yūzen\" resist technique and a stencil. Over time there have been many variations in color, fabric, and style, as well as accessories such as the obi.\n\nThe kimono and obi are traditionally made of hemp, linen, silk, silk brocade, silk crepes (such as \"chirimen\") and satin weaves (such as \"rinzu\"). Modern kimono are widely available in less-expensive easy-care fabrics such as rayon, cotton sateen, cotton, polyester and other synthetic fibers. Silk is still considered the ideal fabric.\n\nCustomarily, woven patterns and dyed repeat patterns are considered informal. Formal kimono have free-style designs dyed over the whole surface or along the hem.\n\nThe pattern of the kimono can determine in which season it should be worn. For example, a pattern with butterflies or cherry blossoms would be worn in spring. Watery designs are common during the summer. A popular autumn motif is the russet leaf of the Japanese maple; for winter, designs may include bamboo, pine trees and plum blossoms (three friends of winter).\n\nA popular form of textile art in Japan is shibori (intricate tie dye), found on some of the more expensive kimono and haori kimono jackets. Patterns are created by minutely binding the fabric and masking off areas, then dying it, usually by hand. When the bindings are removed, an undyed pattern is revealed. Shibori work can be further enhanced with yuzen (hand applied) drawing or painting with textile dyes or with embroidery; it is then known as tsujigahana. Shibori textiles are very time-consuming to produce and require great skill, so the textiles and garments created from them are very expensive and highly prized.\n\nOld kimono have historically been recycled in various ways, depending on the type of kimono and its original use. Kimono were shortened, with the okumi taken off and the collar re-sewn, to make haori, or would simply be cut at the waist to create a side-tying jacket. After marriage or a certain age, young women would shorten the sleeves of their kimono, and extra material taken from kimono could be used to lengthen it at the waist, create an obi, or was used to patch similar kimono.\n\nKimono were also used to create dounuki, underkimono worn on top of the juban, and the material would show at the sleeve, hem and collar. Kimono were also used to create juban themselves, and after wearing layered kimono fell out of fashion, create a false underlayer – a hiyoku – was another use for old kimono. They could also be resewn into kimono for children.\n\nHistorically, skilled craftsmen would laboriously cut old silk kimono into strips roughly 1 cm wide to weave into obi, called \"saki-ori\" obi. The technique was a kind of rag-weaving, creating a mostly one-sided obi that was relatively narrow and informal. Saki-ori obi are prized for their craftsmanship and rustic quality today, as they would have taken many hours to create, and saki-ori obi often feature patterns of stripes, checks and arrows. The technique is kept alive to this day by craftspeople interested in rustic arts.\n\nThese terms refer to parts of a kimono:\nBULLET::::- : upper lining on a woman's kimono.\nBULLET::::- : collar.\nBULLET::::- : hem guard.\nBULLET::::- : sleeve below the armhole.\nBULLET::::- : a belt used to tuck excess cloth away from the seeing public.\nBULLET::::- : front main panel, excluding sleeves. The covering portion of the other side of the back, maemigoro is divided into \"right maemigoro\" and \"left maemigoro\".\nBULLET::::- : opening under the sleeve.\nBULLET::::- : front inside panel on the front edge of the left and right, excluding the sleeve of a kimono. Until the collar, down to the bottom of the dress goes, up and down part of the strip of cloth. Have sewn the front body. It is also called \"袵\".\nBULLET::::- : sleeve.\nBULLET::::- : sleeve opening.\nBULLET::::- : kimono armhole.\nBULLET::::- : lower lining.\nBULLET::::- : sleeve pouch.\nBULLET::::- : over-collar (collar protector).\nBULLET::::- : inner collar.\nBULLET::::- : back main panel, excluding sleeves, covering the back portion. They are basically sewn back-centered and consist of \"right ushiromigoro\" and \"left ushiromigoro\", but for wool fabric, the ushiromigoro consists of one piece.\n\nA brand-new women's kimono may easily exceed US$10,000; a complete outfit, with kimono, undergarments, obi, socks, shoes and accessories can easily exceed US$20,000, with a single brand-new obi costing upwards of several thousand dollars.\n\nHowever, most kimono owned by kimono hobbyists or practitioners of the traditional arts are far less expensive. Cheaper and synthetic fabrics can substitute for traditional hand-dyed silk, and modern-day brand-new synthetic kimono are sold as 'washable' and easy to care for. Some people make their own kimono, as kimono do not require a paper pattern or extensive fitting to sew, and can be made of whatever fabrics the owner wants.\n\nMany kimono are also bought second-hand from vintage stores, a lucrative business in Japan, as kimono do not go out of fashion, though certain motifs and colours can be attributed to different eras. These can cost as little as ¥100 (about $0.9) at thrift stores in the Tokyo area, and the Nishijin district of Kyoto is also known for its pre-loved kimono markets. Even antique obi can retail cheaply, though they can be stained and fragile. Women's obi, however, mostly remain an expensive item; though simply-patterned or relatively plain obi can retail second-hand for as little as ¥500 (about $4.5), even a used, well-kept and high-quality obi can cost upwards of $300, as they are often decorated with embroidery, goldwork and hand-painted by craftsmen. Men's obi, even those made from silk, tend to be much less expensive, as they are narrower, shorter and less decorative than those worn by women.\n\nKimono range in variation from extremely formal to very casual. The formality of a woman's kimono is determined mostly by pattern placement, decoration style, fabric choice and colour. The formality of men's kimono differs, in that it is determined more by fabric choice and coordination elements (\"hakama\", haori, etc.) than decoration, as men's kimono tend to be one colour with motifs only visible when looked at closely.\n\nIn both cases, formality is also determined by the number and type of \"kamon\" (crests). Five mon (\"itsutsu mon\") are the most formal, three mon (\"mitsu mon\") are mid-formality, and one mon (\"hitotsu mon\") is the least formal, used for occasions such as tea ceremony. The type of mon adds formality as well, with a \"full sun\" (\"hinata\") mon being the most formal, a \"mid-shadow\" (\"nakakage\") mon being mid-formality, and a \"shadow\" (\"kage\") mon being the least formal. Embroidered mon, called \"nui mon\", are also seen.\n\nFormality can also be determined by the type and colour of accessories, such as weave of \"obijime\" and the style of \"obiage\".\n\nThe typical woman's kimono outfit may consist of up to twelve or more separate pieces; some outfits, such as formal wedding kimono, may require the assistance of licensed kimono dressers, though usually this is due to the wearer's inexperience with kimono and the difficult-to-tie nature of formal \"obi musubi\". Most professional kimono dressers are found in Japan, where they work out of hair salons, as specialist businesses, or freelance.\n\nChoosing an appropriate type of kimono requires knowledge of the wearer's age, occasionally marital status (though less so in modern times), the formality of the occasion at hand, and the season. Choice of fabric is also dependent on these factors, though some fabrics - such as crepe and \"rinzū\" - are never seen in certain varieties of kimono, and some fabrics such as \"shusu\" (satin) silk are barely ever seen in kimono altogether, instead being worn on the obi.\n\nThough length of kimono, collar style and the way the sleeves are sewn on varies for \"susohiki\" kimono, in all other types of women's kimono, the construction generally does not change; the collar is set back slightly into the nape of the neck, the sleeves are only attached at the shoulder, not all the way down the sleeve length, and the kimono's length from shoulder to hem should generally equal the entire height of the woman wearing it, to allow for the \"ohashori\" hip fold.\n\nSleeve length increases for \"furisode\" - young women's formal dress - but young women are not limited to wearing only \"furisode\", as outside of formal occasions that warrant it, can wear all other types of women's kimono such as \"irotomesode\" and \"komon\".\n\n\"Yukata\" () are casual cotton summer kimono. \"Yukata\" were originally very simple indigo and white cotton kimono, little more than a bathrobe never worn outside the house. However, from roughly the mid-1980s onwards, they began to be produced in a wide variety of bright colours, large motifs and loud patterns, responding to a demand for a more casual modern kimono that could be worn to a summer festival.\n\nIn the present day, \"yukata\" are worn with \"hanhaba\" (half-width) or \"heko\" obi, and for women, often accessorised with colour hair accessories. \"Yukata\" are always unlined, and it is possible to dress up a high-end, more subdued \"yukata\" with a relatively casual \"nagoya\" obi - one with a simple dyed design in an informal fabric such as \"ro\" or \"tsumugi\".\n\n\"Furisode\" () (lit., \"swinging sleeve\") kimono are the most formal kimono for a young, often unmarried, woman. They are decorated with colourful patterns across the entirety of the garment, and usually worn to \"seijin shiki\" (Coming of Age Day) or weddings, either by the bride herself or an unmarried younger female relative.\n\nThe sleeves of the furisode average at between 100–110 cm in length. \"Chu-furisode\" (mid-size \"furisode\") have shorter sleeves at roughly 80 cm in length; most \"chu-furisode\" are vintage kimono, as in the modern day \"furisode\" are not worn often enough to warrant buying a more casual form of the dress.\n\n\"Hōmongi\" () literally translates as \"visiting wear\". \"Hōmongi\" are distinguished in their motif placement - the motifs flow across the back right shoulder and back right sleeve, the front left shoulder and front left sleeve, and across the hem, higher at the left than the right. They are always made of silk, and are more formal than \"tsukesage\".\n\n\"Hōmongi\" are first roughly sewn up, the design sketched onto the fabric, before it is taken apart to be dyed again. The \"hōmongi\"'s close relative, the \"tsukesage\", has its patterns dyed on the bolt before sewing up. This method of production can usually distinguish the two, as the motifs on a \"hōmongi\" are likely to cross fluidly over seams in a way a \"tsukesage\" generally will not.\n\n\"Hōmongi\" may be worn by both married and unmarried women; often friends of the bride will wear \"hōmongi\" at weddings (except relatives) and receptions. They may also be worn to formal parties.\n\n\"Iromuji\" () (lit. \"solid colour\") are monochromatic, undecorated kimono mainly worn to tea ceremonies. The dyed silk may have a flat woven pattern - \"iromuji\" suitable for autumn are often made of \"rinzu\" silk. Some \"edo komon\" with incredibly fine patterns may be suitable for tea ceremony, as from a distance they are visually similar to \"iromuji\". \"Iromuji\" may occasionally have one \"kamon\", though likely no more than this, and are always made of silk. \"Shibori\" accessories such as \"obiage\" are never worn with \"iromuji\" if the purpose of wear is a tea ceremony; instead, flat and untextured silks are chosen for accessories.\n\n\"Edo komon\" () is a type of \"komon\" characterised by an extremely small repeating pattern, usually done in white on a coloured background. The \"edo komon\" dyeing technique originated within the samurai classes during the Edo period. \"Edo komon\" are of a similar formality to \"iromuji\", and \"edo komon\" with one \"kamon\" can be worn as low-formality visiting wear; because of this, they are always made of silk, unlike regular \"komon\".\n\n\"Mofuku \" () describes general formal mourning dress, and both men and women wear \"mofuku\". \"Mofuku\" kimono are plain black silk with five \"kamon\", worn with white undergarments and white \"tabi\". Men wear a kimono of the same kind, with a subdued \"obi\" and a black-and-white or black-and-grey striped \"hakama\", worn with black or white zōri.\n\nA completely black mourning ensemble for women - a plain black \"obi\", black \"obijime\" and black \"obiage\" - is usually reserved for those closest to the deceased. Those further away will wear kimono in dark and subdued colours, rather than a plain black kimono with a reduced number of crests. In time periods when kimono were worn more often, those closest to the deceased would slowly begin dressing in coloured kimono over a period of weeks after the death, with the \"obijime\" being the last thing to be changed over to colour.\n\n\"Kurotomesode\" () (black short-sleeve kimono) are formal kimono with a black background and a design along the hem only, worn to formal events such as weddings and wedding parties. The design is seen along the hem only; the further up the body this design reaches, the younger the wearer is considered to be, though for a very young woman an \"irotomesode\" may be chosen instead, \"kurotomesode\" being considered somewhat more mature. The design is either symmetrically placed on the \"fuki\" and \"okumi\" portions of the kimono, or asymmetrically placed along the entirety of the hem, with the design being larger and higher-placed at the left side than the right. Vintage kimono are more likely to have the former pattern placement than the latter, though is not a hard rule.\n\n\"Kurotomesode\" are always made of silk, and may have a \"hiyoku\" - a false lining layer - attached, occasionally with a slightly padded hem. A \"kurotomesode\" usually has between 3 and 5 crests; a \"kurotomesode\" of any number of crests outranks an \"irotomesode\" with less than five. \"Kurotomesode\", though formalwear, are not allowed at the royal court, as black is the colour of mourning, despite the colour designs decorating the kimono itself; outside of the royal court, this distinction for \"kurotomesode\" does not exist. \"Kurotomesode\" are never made of flashy silks like \"rinzū\", but are instead likely to be a matte fabric with little texture.\n\n\"Irotomesode\" () (colour short-sleeve kimono) are slightly lower-ranking formal kimono with roughly the same pattern placement as \"kurotomesode\" on a coloured background. \"Irotomesode\", though worn to formal events, may be chosen when a \"kurotomesode\" would make the wearer appear to be overdressed for the situation. The pattern placement for \"irotomesode\" is roughly identical to \"kurotomesode\", though patterns seen along the \"fuki\" and \"okumi\" may drift slightly into the back hem itself. \"Irotomesode\" with five \"kamon\" are of the same formality as any \"kurotomesode\". \"Irotomesode\" may be made of figured silk such as \"rinzū\".\n\n\"Tsukesage\" () are lower-ranking formalwear, a step below \"hōmongi\", wherein the motifs generally do not cross over the seams of each kimono panel, but have the same placement as a \"hōmongi\". Similarities between the two often lead to confusion, and indeed, sometimes the two are so visually similar that the distinction is difficult to make. \"Tsukesage\" can have between one and three \"kamon\", and can be worn to parties, but not ceremonies or highly formal events.\n\n\"Uchikake\" () are highly formal kimono worn only in bridalwear or on stage. The name \"uchikake\" comes from the verb \"uchikake-ru\", \"to drape upon\", originating in roughly the 16th century from a fashion of the ruling classes of the time to wear kimono (then called \"kosode\", \"small sleeve\") unbelted over the shoulders of one's other garments.\n\n\"Uchikake\" are worn in the same manner in the present day, though unlike their 16th-century counterparts, could never be worn as an everyday kimono as well; they are heavily-decorated, highly-formal garments with thickly-padded hems, designed to trail along the floor as a sort of coat. Bridal \"uchikake\" are either red or white, and often decorated heavily with auspicious motifs. Because they are not designed to be worn with an \"obi\", the designs cover the entirety of the back.\n\n\"Shiromuku\" () are the pure-white wedding kimono worn by the bride for a traditional Japanese Shinto wedding ceremony. Comparable to a \"uchikake\" and sometimes described as just a white \"uchikake\", a \"shiromuku\" is worn for the part of the wedding ceremony, symbolising the purity of the bride coming into the marriage. The bride may later change into a red \"uchikake\" after the ceremony to symbolise good luck.\n\nA \"shiromuku\" will form part of a bridal ensemble with matching or coordinating accessories, such as a bridal \"katsura\", a set of matching kanzashi (usually mock-tortoiseshell), and a \"sensu\" fan tucked into the kimono. Due to the expensive nature of traditional bridal clothing, few are likely to buy brand-new \"shiromuku\"; it is not unusual to rent kimono for special occasions, and Shinto shrines are known to keep and rent out \"shiromuku\" for traditional weddings. Those who do possess \"shiromuku\" already are likely to have inherited them from close family members.\n\n\"Susohiki\" (lit. \"trailing skirt\") kimono are extremely long kimono worn by geisha, actors in kabuki and people performing traditional Japanese dance. A \"susohiki\" can be up to 230 cm long, and are generally no shorter than 200 cm from shoulder to hem; this is to allow the kimono to literally trail along the floor.\n\n\"Susohiki\", apart from their extreme length, are also sewn slightly differently to normal kimono, due to the way they are worn. The collar on a \"susohiki\" is sewn further and deeper back into the nape of the neck, so that it can be pulled down much lower without causing the front of the kimono to ride up. The sleeves are set unevenly onto the body, shorter at the back than at the front, so that the underarm does not show when the collar is set this low.\n\n\"Susohiki\" are also tied differently when they are put on - whereas regular kimono are tied with a visible \"ohashori\", and the side seams kept straight, \"susohiki\" are pulled up somewhat diagonally, to emphasise the hips and ensure the kimono trails nicely on the floor. A small \"ohashori\" is tied, larger at the back than the front, but it wrapped against the body with a red \"momi\" wrap, which is then covered by the \"obi\", rendering it not visible.\n\n\"Jūnihitoe\" () (lit. \"twelve layers\") describes the layered garments worn by court ladies during the Heian period. The \"jūnihitoe\" consisted of up to twelve layered garments, with the innermost garment being the \"kosode\" - the small-sleeved kimono prototype which would eventually go on to become the outermost garment worn.\n\nThe total weight of the \"jūnihitoe\" could be up to 20 kg. The garments were decorated in relatively large motifs, with a more important aspect being the numerous recorded colour combinations an outfit could have.\n\nAn important accessory of this outfit was an elaborate hand fan, which could be tied together by tassels tied onto the end fan bones. These fans were made of cypress wood entirely, with the design painted onto the wide, flat bones themselves, and were known as \"hiōugi\".\n\nNo garments from the Heian period survive, and today the \"jūnihitoe\" can only be seen as a reproduction in museums, movies, festivals and demonstrations. The Imperial Household still officially uses them at some important functions, such as the coronation of the new Empress.\n\nIn contrast to women's kimono, men's kimono outfits are far simpler, typically consisting of five pieces, not including footwear.\n\nMen's kimono sleeves are attached to the body of the kimono with no more than a few inches unattached at the bottom, unlike the women's style of very deep sleeves mostly unattached from the body of the kimono. Men's sleeves are less deep than women's kimono sleeves to accommodate the obi around the waist beneath them, whereas on a woman's kimono, the long, unattached bottom of the sleeve can hang over the obi without getting in the way.\n\nIn the modern era, the principal distinctions between men's kimono are in the fabric. The typical men's kimono is a subdued, dark color; black, dark blues, greens, and browns are common. Fabrics are usually matte. Some have a subtle pattern, and textured fabrics are common in more casual kimono. More casual kimono may be made in slightly brighter colors, such as lighter purples, greens and blues. Sumo wrestlers have occasionally been known to wear quite bright colors such as fuchsia.\n\nThe most formal style of kimono is plain black silk with five \"kamon\" on the chest, shoulders and back. Slightly less formal is the three-\"kamon\" kimono.\n\nThough the kimono is the national dress of Japan, there are many variations on it, some for traditional occasions, and others that co-existed alongside kimono as a separate style of dress. There are also a number of accessories that can be or are worn with kimono, and these vary in occasion and usage as well.\n\nSome accessories and garments are specific to certain religious roles. The are worn only by \"Kannushi\" and \"Miko\" in some Shinto shrine ceremonies, and the is the everyday clothing for a male Zen Buddhist lay-monk, and the favoured garment for \"Komusō\" monks playing the \"shakuhachi\".\n\nOthers are related to traditional art forms in Japan. The is worn by men in some tea ceremonies, and both geisha and maiko wear various accessories and types of kimono not found in everyday dress.\n\nThere are also accessories and garments only worn for certain holidays and occasions; \"okobo\", also known as \"pokkuri\", are worn by children for the \"shichi-go-san\" ceremony and by young women on \"seijin no hi\". Brides opting for a traditional ceremony will wear specific accessories and types of kimono for certain parts of the ceremony. For formal ceremonies, members of Japanese nobility will wear certain types of antiquated kimono such as the and the .\n\nAccessories such as \"kanzashi\" and \"obijime\" may be worn to any occasion and ceremony, though the style of these accessories changes based on formality, and, in the case of maiko, season.\n\nBULLET::::- : A wide undersash used to tie the \"nagajuban\" and the outer \"kimono\" and hold them in place.\n\nBULLET::::- A fur collar, boa or stole (usually white) worn by women over a \"kimono\"; usually on \"furisode\" by young women out celebrating their \"Coming of Age\" at shrines, etc.\n\nBULLET::::- Wooden sandals worn by men and women with \"yukata\". One unique style is worn solely by geisha (see \"okobo\" below). There are also \"Hiyori geta / Masa geta\", \"Taka-ashida geta\", \"Ippon geta / Tengu geta\", \"Pokkuri geta\".\n\nBULLET::::- Traditional Japanese stylized headband, worn to keep sweat off of one's face, and as a symbol of effort or courage by the wearer, especially by those in the military.\nBULLET::::- A divided (\"umanori-bakama\") or undivided skirt (\"andon-bakama\") which resembles a wide pair of trousers, traditionally worn by men but contemporarily also by women in less formal situations. A \"hakama\" typically is pleated and fastened by ribbons, tied around the waist over the obi. Men's \"hakama\" also have a \"koshi ita\", which is a stiff or padded part in the lower back of the wearer. Hakama are worn in several budo arts such as aikido, kendo, iaidō and naginata. Hakama are often worn by women at college graduation ceremonies, and by Miko on shinto shrines. Depending on the pattern and material, hakama can range from very formal to visiting wear.\n\nBULLET::::- A pair of boots (leather or faux leather), with low-to-mid heels, worn with a pair of \"hakama\" (a pair of traditional Japanese trousers); boots are a style of footwear that came in from the West during the Meiji Era; worn by women while wearing a \"hakama\", optional footwear worn by young women, students and teachers at high-school and university graduation ceremonies, and by young women out celebrating their \"Coming of Age\" at shrines, etc., often with a \"hakama\" with \"furisode\" combination.\nBULLET::::- A small box-shaped billfold accessory; sometimes covered in materials to coordinate with the wearer's \"kimono\" or \"obi\". Fastened closed with a cord, and carried tucked-within a person's \"futokoro\", the space within the front of \"kimono\" collar and above the \"obi\". Used for formal occasions that require traditional dress, such as a traditional Shinto wedding or a child's \"Shichi-Go-San\" ceremony. Originally used for practical uses, such as carrying around a woman's \"beni ita\" (lipstick), \"omamori\" (an amulet/talisman), \"kagami\" (mirror), \"tenugui\" (handkerchief), coins, and the like, it now has a more of a decorative role.\n\nBULLET::::- The worker's version of the more formal \"haori\". As winterwear, it is often padded for warmth, giving it insulating properties, as opposed to the somewhat lighter \"happi\". It could be worn outside in the wintertime by fieldworkers out working in the fields, by people at home as a housecoat or a cardigan, and even slept-in over one's bedclothes.\nBULLET::::- A hip- or thigh-length kimono-like overcoat of varied length, which adds formality to an outfit. Haori were originally worn only by men, until it became a fashion for women in the Meiji period. They are now worn by both men and women. The was specifically made for armoured samurai to wear.\n\nBULLET::::- A tasseled, woven string fastener for \"haori\". The most formal color is white (see also \"fusa\" above).\nBULLET::::- A type of \"haori\" traditionally worn by shop keepers, sometimes uniform between the helpers of a shop (not unlike a propaganda kimono, but for advertising business), and is now associated mostly with festivals.\n\nBULLET::::- Are items of Japanese clothing that cover the stomach. They are worn for health, fashion and superstitious reasons.\n\nBULLET::::- Originally a kind of padded over-kimono for warmth, this has evolved into a sleeveless over-kimono like a padded outer vest or pinafore (also similar to a sweater vest or gilet), worn primarily by girls on formal outings such as the \"Shichi-Go-San\" (literally \"seven-five-three\") ceremony for children aged seven, five, and three.\n\nBULLET::::- A modification of the usual split-toe \"tabi\" sock design for use as a \"shoe\", complete with rubber sole. Invented in the early 20th century.\n\nBULLET::::- Traditional Japanese loose-woven two-piece clothing, consisting of a robe-like top and shorts below the waist. Worn by men, women, boys, girls, and even babies, during the hot, humid summer season, in lieu of \"kimono\".\n\nBULLET::::- : A thin garment similar to an undershirt. It is worn under the nagajuban.\n\nBULLET::::- A type of gown-like apron; first designed to protect kimono from food stains, it has baggy sleeves, is as long as the wearer's knees, and fastens with strips of cloth ties that are tied at the back of the neck and the waist. Particularly used when cooking and cleaning, it is worn by Japanese housewives, lunch ladies, cleaners, etc.\n\nBULLET::::- A traditional Japanese oil-paper umbrella/parasol, ideal as an outdoor accessory, come rain or shine. See also Gifu umbrellas.\n\nBULLET::::- A traditional Japanese drawstring bag or pouch, worn like a purse or handbag (vaguely similar to the English reticule), for carrying around personal possessions (money, etc.). A kind of \"sagemono\" (see below).\n\nBULLET::::- The susoyoke and hadajuban combined into a one-piece garment.\n\nBULLET::::- A narrow sash used to aid in dressing up, often made of silk or wool. They are used to hold virtually anything (i.e. a yukata) in place during the process of dressing up, and can be used in many ways depending on what is worn.\nBULLET::::- A traditional Japanese overcoat (not to be confused with a \"haori\" or a \"hifu\"), characterised with a signature square neckline (for showing-off the multiple-collars of the \"kimono\" worn beneath), and for duel-fastenings (either tie, snap or button closures). It is worn over the \"kimono\" for warmth and protection while outdoors on day-outings and long-distance journeys, as a casual housecoat or coatdress in winter, and as an artist's work smock, apron, pinafore, overalls or a tunic), perfect for art-studio and garden tasks. Some \"michiyuki\" will include a hidden pocket beneath the front panel. Although historically there are versions for men, most modern \"michiyuki\" are made for women. There is no standard length, and some can be as long as the \"kimono\"-itself worn beneath it, which is more common for the style of \"michiyuki\" that are designed as rainwear.\nBULLET::::- A long under-\"kimono\" worn by both men and women beneath the main outer garment. Since silk kimono are delicate and difficult to clean, the \"nagajuban\" helps to keep the outer kimono clean by preventing contact with the wearer's skin. Only the collar edge of the nagajuban shows from beneath the outer kimono. Many \"nagajuban\" have removable collars, to allow them to be changed to match the outer garment, and to be easily washed without washing the entire garment. They are often as beautifully ornate and patterned as the outer kimono. Since men's kimono are usually fairly subdued in pattern and color, the \"nagajuban\" allows for discreetly wearing very striking designs and colours. Often worn over a \"hadajuban\" (see above).\n\nBULLET::::- Japanese nightclothes.\nBULLET::::- : An ornament worn suspended from the men's \"obi\", serving as a cordlock or a counterweight. (See also \"ojime\", below).\nBULLET::::- The scarf-like sash, often silk, which is knotted and tied above the obi and tucked into the top of the \"obi\", to hide the \"obi-makura\". Worn with the more formal varieties of kimono, and serves as decorates the top part of an \"obi\" belt; there are many types and designs: \"shibori\", embroidered, etc.; although you can only see a little bit of it, it has an important role as a decoration, and there are different styles of tucking it in and is often more visible with furisode kimono. Used for tying more complex bows with the \"obi\".\n\nBULLET::::- A decorative fastening accessory piece, strung onto the \"obijime\".\nBULLET::::- A thin stiff board that goes over the \"datejime\" and helps keep an \"obi\" in place and prevent it from getting wrinkled. It is worn underneath the second layer of the \"obi\", after wrapping around the body twice. Modern versions have an elastic band or string, so it can be put on before the \"obi\".\n\nBULLET::::- The colourful, decorative ropes, cords or strings, used to assist in tying more complex bows with the \"obi\" and hold an \"obi\" belt in place and helps it keep its shape; also serves as a decoration around the \"obi\" belt. It ties in a knot in the front in the middle of the obi, and the ends are tucked into the sides of itself. An \"ojime\" (see below) was used to fasten the \"obijime\" in place (similar to a \"netsuke\"), and also serves as a decoration.\n\nBULLET::::- Padding used to put volume under the \"obi\" knot (\"musubi\"); to support the bows or ties at the back of the \"obi\" and keep them lifted. It's essential for placing the common \"Taiko\" knot high on the back. \"Obimakura\" is usually covered by the \"obiage\" to hide it and make the entire tie more presentable.\n\nBULLET::::- A type of bead which originated in Japan, and were used to fasten a \"obijime\" in place, like a cordlock. They were also worn between the \"inrō\" and \"netsuke\" and are typically under an inch in length. Each is carved into a particular shape and image, similar to the \"netsuke\" cordlock, though smaller. Similar to a \"netsuke\" (see above).\n\nBULLET::::- A handheld fan (either an or an ), generally of thick paper coated in paint, lacquer or gold leaf, with wooden spines, often lacquered. As well as being used for cooling-off, \"sensu\" fans are used as dancing props and to maintain makeup and are kept in the folds of the \"obi\".\n\nBULLET::::- A flat, thick-bottomed sandal made of bamboo and straw with leather soles, and with metal spikes protruding from the heel of the sole to prevent slipping on ice.\n\nBULLET::::- A thin half-slip-like piece of underwear, like a petticoat, worn by women under their \"nagajuban\".\n\nBULLET::::- A round, hollow Japanese Shinto bell or chime, that contains pellets that sound when agitated. They are somewhat like a jingle bell in form, though the materials produce a coarse, rolling sound. Suzu come in many sizes, ranging from tiny ones on good luck charms (called omamori (お守り)) to large ones at shrine entrances. As an accessory to \"kimono\" wear, \"suzu\" are often part of \"kanzashi\".\n\nBULLET::::- Ankle-high, divided-toe socks usually worn with \"zōri\" or \"geta\". There also exist sturdier, boot-like \"jikatabi\", which are used for example to fieldwork.\n\nBULLET::::- A pair sashes made from either cloth or cord that loops over each shoulder and crosses over the wearer's back, used for holding up the long sleeves of the Japanese kimono; the bottom of the kimono sleeves can then be tucked into the loop, so that they don't hang so low.\n\nBULLET::::- A handy piece of fabric, usually cotton or linen, they can come in a wide variety of colours and patterns, and with a myriad amount of uses—but mostly as a handkerchief, a hand towel, and larger ones can even serve as a napkin, bib, headscarf/kerchief/bandana (or to ad-lib as a \"hachimaki\"), and can double as a \"furoshiki\" (a traditional Japanese wrapping cloth), and even a shawl or a baby sling.\n\nBULLET::::- Japanese slippers worn indoors at home, school or certain companies and public buildings where street shoes are prohibited.\n\nBULLET::::- Traditional sandals made of straw rope and bamboo bark and designed to wrap securely around the wearer's foot and up around the ankle; mostly worn by monks, and others who often travelled long-distance by foot (traders and merchants, etc.).\n\nBULLET::::- The traditional Japanese undergarment (like a loincloth or perizoma) for adult females; it may also be worn as a kimono underskirt, and as a single-layer absorbent bathrobe (worn during or after a bath).\nBULLET::::- Traditional sandals worn by both men and women, similar in design to flip-flops. Their formality ranges from strictly informal to fully formal. They are made of many materials, including cloth, leather, vinyl and woven grass, and can be highly decorated or very simple.\n\nPre-WW2, kimono were commonly worn layered, with three being the standard number of layers worn over the top of undergarments. The layered kimono underneath were known as \"dōnuki\", and were often a patchwork of older or unwearable kimono taken apart for their fabric.\n\nIn modern-day Japan, layered kimono are only seen on the stage, whether for classical dances or in kabuki. A false second layer called a may be attached instead of an entirely separate kimono to achieve this look; it is a type of floating lining, sewn to the kimono only along the centre back and underneath the collar.\n\nThis effect allows it to show at the collar and the hem, and in some kabuki performances such as \"Fuji Musume\", the kimono will be worn with the \"okumi\" flipped back slightly underneath the obi to expose the design on the \"hiyoku\". The \"hiyoku\" can also be seen on some bridal kimono.\n\nIn the past, a kimono would often be entirely taken apart for washing, and then re-sewn for wearing. This traditional washing method is called \"arai hari\". Because the stitches must be taken out for washing, traditional kimono need to be hand sewn. \"Arai hari\" is very expensive and difficult and is one of the causes of the declining popularity of kimono. Modern fabrics and cleaning methods have been developed that eliminate this need, although the traditional washing of kimono is still practiced, especially for high-end garments.\n\nNew, custom-made kimono are generally delivered to a customer with long, loose basting stitches placed around the outside edges. These stitches are called \"shitsuke ito\". They are sometimes replaced for storage. They help to prevent bunching, folding and wrinkling, and keep the kimono's layers in alignment.\n\nLike many other traditional Japanese garments, there are specific ways to fold kimono. These methods help to preserve the garment and to keep it from creasing when stored. Kimono are often stored wrapped in paper called \"tatōshi\".\n\nKimono need to be aired out at least seasonally and before and after each time they are worn. Many people prefer to have their kimono dry cleaned. Although this can be extremely expensive, it is generally less expensive than \"arai hari\" but may be impossible for certain fabrics or dyes.\n\nIn June 2019, Kim Kardashian West launched a new range of shapewear called Kimono. West was heavily criticised over the name of the brand which critics argued disrespected Japanese culture and ignored the significance behind the traditional outfit. Following the launch of the range, the hashtag #KimOhNo began trending on Twitter and the mayor of Kyoto wrote to West to ask her to reconsider the trademark on Kimono. A Change.org petition was also created, which immediately began to receive global support. In response to public pressure, in July 2019, West announced that she would change the name. However, as of August 4, 2019, the trademark filings remain active.\n\nBULLET::::- The Canadian Museum of Civilization – Landscape Kimonos of Itchiku Kubota\nBULLET::::- Tokyo National Museum Look for \"textiles\" under \"decorative arts\".\nBULLET::::- Kyoto National Museum: Textiles\nBULLET::::- The Costume Museum: Costume History in Japan\nBULLET::::- Kimono Fraise; includes directions on how to put on a kimono\nBULLET::::- Immortal Geisha Forums; Comprehensive Resource on Vintage and Modern Kimono Culture\nBULLET::::- Vintage Kimonos from the MEIJI, TAISHŌ & SHŌWA period.\nBULLET::::- Love Kimono!; A lot of knowledge of kimono with pictures.\n\n"}
{"id": "16876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16876", "title": "Kingston upon Thames", "text": "Kingston upon Thames\n\nKingston upon Thames, spelled with hyphens until 1965 and sometimes abbreviated to Kingston, is a town in Greater London, England, southwest of Charing Cross. Located by the River Thames, it is the administrative centre of the Royal Borough of Kingston upon Thames, and identified as a major metropolitan centre in the London Plan.\n\nKingston is about above sea level. It is notable as the ancient market town in which Saxon kings were crowned. Kingston was part of a large ancient parish in the county of Surrey and the town was an ancient borough, reformed in 1835. Since 1965 Kingston has been a part of Greater London. It has been the location of Surrey County Hall from 1893, extraterritorially in terms of local government administration. Most of the town centre is part of the KT1 postcode area, but some areas north of Kingston railway station have the postcode KT2 instead. The 2011 Census recorded the population of the town itself, comprising the four wards of Canbury, Grove, Norbiton and Tudor, as 43,013.\n\nKingston was called \"Cyninges tun\" in AD 838, \"Chingestune\" in 1086, \"Kingeston\" in 1164, \"Kyngeston super Tamisiam\" in 1321 and \"Kingestowne upon Thames\" in 1589. The name means 'the king's manor or estate' from the Old English words \"cyning\" and \"tun\". It belonged to the king in Saxon times and was the earliest royal borough.\n\nThe first surviving record of Kingston is from AD 838 as the site of a meeting between King Egbert of Wessex and Ceolnoth, Archbishop of Canterbury. Kingston lay on the boundary between the ancient kingdoms of Wessex and Mercia, until in the early tenth century when King Athelstan united both to create the kingdom of England. According to the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, two tenth-century kings were consecrated in Kingston: Æthelstan (925), and Æthelred the Unready (978). There are certain other kings who are said to have been crowned there, but for whom the evidence (including the writings of Florence of Worcester and Ralph de Diceto) is less substantial: Edward the Elder (902), Edmund I (939), Eadred (946), Eadwig (956), Edgar the Peaceful (circa 960) and Edward the Martyr (975). It was later thought that the coronations were conducted in the chapel of St Mary, which collapsed in 1730. Tradition dating to the 18th century holds that a large stone recovered from the ruins played a part in the coronations. It was initially used as a mounting block, but in 1850 it was moved to a more dignified place in the market before finally being moved to its current location in the grounds of the Guildhall.\n\nFor much of the 20th century, Kingston was a major military aircraft manufacturing centre specialising in fighter aircraft – first with Sopwith Aviation, H G Hawker Engineering, later Hawker Aircraft, Hawker Siddeley and eventually British Aerospace. The renowned Sopwith Camel, Hawker Fury, Hurricane, Hunter and Harrier were all designed and built in the town and examples of all of these aircraft can be seen today at the nearby Brooklands Museum in Weybridge. Well known aviation personalities Sydney Camm, Harry Hawker and Tommy Sopwith were responsible for much of Kingston's achievements in aviation. British Aerospace finally closed its Lower Ham Road factory in 1992; part of the site was subsequently redeveloped for housing but the riverside part houses a community centre and sports complex. The growth and development of Kingston Polytechnic and its transformation into Kingston University has made Kingston a university town.\n\nKingston upon Thames formed an ancient parish in the Kingston hundred of Surrey. The parish of Kingston upon Thames covered a large area including Hook, Kew, New Malden, Petersham, Richmond, Surbiton, Thames Ditton and East Molesey.\n\nThe town of Kingston was granted a charter by King John in 1200, but the oldest one to survive is from 1208 and this document is housed in the town's archives. Other charters were issued by later kings, including Edward IV's charter that gave the town the status of a borough in 1481.\n\nThe borough covered a much smaller area than the ancient parish, although as new parishes were split off the borough and parish eventually became identical in 1894. The borough was reformed by the Municipal Corporations Act 1835, becoming the Municipal Borough of Kingston-upon-Thames (then spelt with hyphens). It had been known as a Royal borough through custom and the right to the title was confirmed by George V in 1927. Kingston upon Thames has been the seat of Surrey County Council since it moved from Newington in 1893, and remains the seat of the county council to this day, despite not being governed by it.\n\nIn 1965 the local government of Greater London was reorganised and the municipal borough was abolished. Its former area was merged with that of the Municipal Borough of Surbiton and the Municipal Borough of Malden and Coombe, to form the London Borough of Kingston upon Thames. At the request of Kingston upon Thames London Borough Council another Royal Charter was granted by Queen Elizabeth II entitling it to continue using the title \"Royal Borough of Kingston upon Thames\" for the new borough.\n\nKingston was built at the first crossing point of the Thames upstream from London Bridge and a bridge still exists at the same site. It was this 'great bridge' that gave it its early importance in the 13th century. Kingston was occupied by the Romans, and later it was either a royal residence or a royal demesne. There is a record of a council held there in 838, at which Egbert of Wessex, King of Wessex, and his son Ethelwulf of Wessex were present. In the Domesday Book it was held by William the Conqueror. Its domesday assets were: a church, five mills, four fisheries worth 10s, 27 ploughs, of meadow, woodland worth six hogs. It rendered £31 10s (£31.5).\n\nIn 1730 the chapel containing the royal effigies collapsed, burying the sexton, who was digging a grave, the sexton's daughter and another person. The daughter survived this accident and was her father's successor as sexton. Kingston sent members to early Parliaments, until a petition by the inhabitants prayed to be relieved from the burden. Another chapel, the collegiate chapel of St Mary Magdalene, The Lovekyn Chapel, still exists. It was founded in 1309 by a former mayor of London, Edward Lovekyn. It is the only private chantry chapel to survive the Reformation.\n\nWith the coming of the railway in the 1830s, there was much building development to the south of the town. Much of this became the new town of Surbiton, but the Surbiton Park estate, built in the grounds of Surbiton Place in the 1850s, remained part of Kingston during the period of the Municipal Borough of Kingston-upon-Thames.\n\nA permanent military presence was established in the borough with the completion of The Barracks in 1875.\n\nKingston straddles two Parliamentary constituencies: the area north of the railway line is part of Richmond Park, which is represented by Sarah Olney of the Liberal Democrats, and the area south of the railway line (including the ancient town centre) is part of Kingston and Surbiton which is represented by Ed Davey of the Liberal Democrats.\n\nCentral Kingston is a busy predominantly retail centre, with a small number of commercial offices and civic buildings. The shopping centre includes a shopping mall, \"The Bentall Centre\", containing the Bentalls department store and large branches of chain stores found in many British high streets. There is a large branch of the John Lewis department store group, with a Waitrose supermarket in the basement. The Rotunda, in a former Bentalls furniture depository building (a local landmark), includes a bowling alley, fitness centre, a 15-screen Odeon multiplex cinema and a few restaurants. Recent developments along the riverside south of Kingston Bridge have added bars, restaurants and a theatre, the Rose Theatre which opened in 2008 with Sir Peter Hall as the director.\n\nThe ancient market is still held daily in the Market Place, including today such produce as fish, jewellery, exotic foods, local foods and flowers.\n\nKingston's civic buildings include a local museum, public library, modern Crown Court and smaller county court and the Guildhall by the part-culverted mouth of the Hogsmill River which houses Kingston Council and magistrates' court. A short distance away is the County Hall Building which houses the main offices of Surrey County Council. From 1893 to 1965, before Kingston became one of the 32 London boroughs of Greater London, it was the county town of Surrey following the period of 1791–1893 when Newington had this role. Guildford has officially reclaimed this ancient, now ceremonial title as Kingston is no longer administered by Surrey.\n\nKingston's main open space is the River Thames, with its lively frontage of bars and restaurants. Downstream there is a walk through Canbury Gardens towards Teddington Lock. Upstream there is a promenade crossing the Hogsmill river and reaching almost to Surbiton. Eagle Brewery Wharf is a council-owned public space located on the riverside. Across Kingston Bridge is a tree lined river bank fronting the expanse of Hampton Court Park.\nKingston has many pubs and restaurants and several public houses in the centre have become restaurants or bars. The more traditional pubs tend to be in the northern part of the town (Canbury) and include The Canbury Arms, Park Tavern, The Wych Elm and Willoughby Arms. Further south are found the Druid's Head, the Spring Grove, The Cricketers, The Albion Tavern, The Duke of Buckingham, and several small local pubs around Fairfield. The Druid's Head is notable as one of the first taverns to make the famous dessert syllabub in the 18th century. There are several Chinese, Indian, Thai and Italian restaurants.\n\nThe local newspapers are the weekly paid-for \"Surrey Comet\", which celebrated its 150th year in 2004, and the free \"Kingston Guardian\".\n\nIn 2010 retail footprint research, Kingston ranked 25th in terms of retail expenditure in the UK at £810 million, equal to Covent Garden and just ahead of Southampton. This puts it as generating the fifth most amount of money from the retail sector in Greater London, passing Croydon, with just four West End alternatives ahead. In 2005, Kingston was 24th with £864 million.\n\nA notable dramatic arts venue is the Rose Theatre. This theatre opened on 16 January 2008 and seats about 900 people. The audience are arranged around the semi-circular stage. All Saints Church is host to classical choral and music concerts mostly on Saturdays and houses a Frobenius organ. There are a number of choral societies including the Kingston Orpheus Choir and the Kingston Choral Society, an amateur symphony orchestra the Kingston Philharmonia, and the Kingston and District Chamber Music Society. A number of annual festivals are organised by the Council and Kingston Arts Council including Kingston Readers' Festival, Think-in-Kingston and the Festival of the Voice. Kingston University runs the Stanley Picker Gallery and Kingston Museum has a changing gallery on the first floor. A regular singing group at the Rose Theatre caters to schools and families.\nJohn Galsworthy the author was born on Kingston Hill and Jacqueline Wilson grew up, and went to school in Kingston and still lives there today. Both are commemorated at Kingston University – Galsworthy in the newest building and Wilson in the main hall. Also commemorated at the University is photographer Eadweard Muybridge who was born at Kingston and changed the spelling of his first name in reference to the name of the Saxon king on the Coronation Stone. He was a pioneer in the photography of the moving image. R. C. Sherriff the playwright is also associated with Kingston, writing his first play to support Kingston Rowing Club. An earlier writer born in Kingston was John Cleland.\n\nKingston has been covered in literature, film and television. It is where the comic Victorian novel \"Three Men in a Boat\" by Jerome K. Jerome begins; cannons aimed against the Martians in H. G. Wells' \"The War of the Worlds\" are positioned on Kingston Hill; in \"The Rainbow\" by D. H. Lawrence the youngest Brangwen dreams of a job in Kingston upon Thames in a long, lyrical passage; Mr. Knightly in \"Emma\" by Jane Austen regularly visits Kingston, although the narrative never follows him there.\n\nFine art is also a prominent feature in the history of Kingston. Both John Hoyland and Jeremy Moon worked from permanent studios in Kingston and many prominent artists and designers have studied at the university including Fiona Banner, John Bratby, David Nash and Jasper Morrison.\n\nEarly in his music career, the guitarist and singer-songwriter Eric Clapton spent time busking in Kingston upon Thames, having grown up and studied in the area. Rock band Cardiacs were formed in the town.\n\nKingston is mentioned (and used as a filming location) in episodes of Monty Python's Flying Circus. More recently, a scene from \"Mujhse Dosti Karoge\", a Bollywood film starring Hrithik Roshan as the leading actor, was filmed by the toppled telephone boxes sculpture in Old London Road. A scene in the television programme \"The Good Life\" sees Richard Briers get on a 71 bus in 'The Avenue' towards Kingston town centre (albeit this route never served the east side of Surbiton where the series is set). The 1974 Doctor Who story \"Invasion of the Dinosaurs\" used several locations in the town for filming. The 2008 series of \"Primeval\", shown on ITV1 in January, featured almost an entire episode filmed inside the Bentall Centre and John Lewis department stores. Kingston featured in \"Primeval\" again in May 2009 with several scenes shot in and around the Market Place. Nipper, the famous \"His Master's Voice\" (HMV) dog, is buried in the town under Lloyds Bank. His owners lived nearby in Fife Road.\n\nKingston Green Fair was held annually from 1987 to 2008 in Canbury Gardens, next to the river, on the Spring Bank Holiday. The word \"Green\" in the title refers to the ethos of the fair as promoting sustainable development. For instance no meat or other products derived from dead animals were allowed to be sold, and no electricity was permitted on the site unless generated by wind, sun, or bicycle power. Kingston is also home to Crack Comedy Club which opened at The Grey Horse Pub in 2002.\n\nOne of the more unusual sights in Kingston is \"Out of Order\" by David Mach, a sculpture in the form of twelve disused red telephone boxes that have been tipped up to lean against one another in an arrangement resembling dominoes. The work was commissioned in 1988 as part of the landscaping for the new Relief Road, and was described by its creator as \"anti-minimalist\".\n\nThe town is served by two South Western Railway routes advertised from London as to and to , though the second route is a complete loop. There are up to 4 trains an hour Monday - Saturday during off-peak hours. Three railway stations serve the town on this line from London Waterloo station: Kingston, and . Norbiton is east of the town centre near Kingston Hospital, and Hampton Wick is to the west across Kingston Bridge. , Wimbledon and Richmond upon Thames are on the lines. A primary stop exists on the nearby main (express) line in nearby which has a peak hour non-stopping service to Waterloo. The town led to the South Western Main Line being in Surbiton as much of Kingston's wealth and status were as a direct consequence of the road and stagecoach network developed as a result of its crossing on the Thames. Local landowners would not consent to the line coming through their land so in 1838 the rail station was built a few miles out at Surbiton, which was known as \"Kingston Upon Railway\" and led to the development of Surbiton. Kingston recognised the need for a railway, and in the 1860s Kingston opened. However, due to the eastern landowners' resistance, the line had to take a longer route via Richmond upon Thames. Only later did the line receive all the relevant permissions for a closer link, connecting to London Waterloo via .\n\nThe A3 road runs from central London towards Kingston before by-passing the town to the east. The \"Kingston bypass road\" was one of the first arterial roads to be built in Britain. It was originally proposed in 1912 to relieve the pressure of traffic in the town centre, but World War I delayed the start of work until 1924. It was opened by Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin on 28 October 1927. Kingston is also served by the A240, the A307 (Portsmouth Road), A308 and A310.\n\nKingston has a large number of car parks, connected by a one-way system. It is also one of the main centres of the south-west London bus network.\n\nCompared with other outer London boroughs and towns in Surrey, a high proportion of trips are made by bicycle in Kingston. The 2011 census recorded that 2.8% of journeys to work were made by bicycle.\n\nRiverboats run regularly between Kingston and Hampton Court as well as Richmond all during the summer season. There are also direct services to Putney and Westminster from Hampton Court connected by the 10–15-minute interval route 111 to London Heathrow, the destination for X26, an express service also serving the bus station and the Bentall Centre. Local buses, many of which call or terminate at the Cromwell Road or Fairfield bus stations, link the town with nearby residential districts and other towns in neighbouring boroughs.\n\nKingston is the location of Kingston University and Kingston College. Primary schools in the town include Latchmere School, Fernhill School, King Athelstan School and St Agatha's Catholic Primary School. Kingston also is home to Tiffin School, The Tiffin Girls' School and Kingston Grammar School, all of which have large catchment areas across Greater London and Surrey.\n\nThe 12th-century All Saints Church serves the Church of England parish of Kingston which lies ecclesiastically in the Diocese of Southwark, although there has been a church in Kingston since at least 838. The suffragan or Area Bishop of Kingston is the Rt Rev Dr Richard Cheetham. Other Anglican churches in Kingston, of more recent date, are St John the Evangelist and St Luke.\n\nKingston lies in the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Southwark, and there is a Roman Catholic Church dedicated to Saint Agatha.\n\nKingston is also the home of the Kingston Surbiton & District Synagogue. It also has a Quaker meeting house, a Mosque and a Sikh Gurdwara.\n\nLady Booth Road, formally Fairfield Road, is named to commemorate the former location of the Salvation Army citadel.\n\nKingston is the home of four association football clubs, AFC Wimbledon who play at the Kingsmeadow Stadium, Corinthian-Casuals and Kingstonian who play in Tolworth and Chessington & Hook United who play in Chessington. AFC Wimbledon have played in League One since the 2016–17 season, whereas Kingstonian, Corinthian-Casuals and Chessington & Hook United are non-league clubs.\n\nKingston Athletic Club and Polytechnic Harriers are based at the neighbouring Kingsmeadow athletics stadium. This stadium boasts a 400m track which is floodlit, a gym and 5-a-side football facilities. In the 2013 season the men competed in Division 3 of the British Athletics League. Kingston Rugby Club is based on the outskirts of the town, and Kingston Rowing Club is based on the River Thames. Kingston Regatta takes place on the river at the town in July.\n\nThe town has a large leisure centre next to Fairfield named the Kingfisher Centre, which contains an indoor swimming pool and gymnasium. Sport in Kingston is promoted and encouraged by Sport Kingston, an organisation funded by the Royal Borough of Kingston.\n\nKingston Wildcats School of Basketball is a community basketball development club that practices and plays its home fixtures at Chessington Community College, competing in the Surrey League and Basketball England National League.\n\nThe borough was the setting for four cycling events during the 2012 Summer Olympics, the men's road race, women's road race, men's road time trial and women's road time trial. Prior to the opening of the games, Kingston hosted the 2012 Summer Olympics torch relay on two occasions with the flame travelling through the borough on 24 July 2012 and aboard the Gloriana in a cauldron on 27 July 2012 en route to the Olympic Stadium for the opening ceremony.\nKingston is south-east of Twickenham, north-east of Walton-on-Thames, and north-west of Sutton.\n\nKingston upon Thames has been twinned with Oldenburg in Germany since 2010. It also has been historically twinned with the town Delft in the Netherlands.\nIn 2016, Kingston upon Thames has been twinned with Jaffna in Sri Lanka.\n\nBULLET::::- List of people from Kingston upon Thames\n\nBULLET::::- – A guide to the Thames written by the novelist's son\n\nBULLET::::- The Kingston upon Thames Society\n"}
{"id": "16880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16880", "title": "Karnataka", "text": "Karnataka\n\nKarnataka () is a state in the south western region of India. It was formed on 1 November 1956, with the passage of the States Reorganisation Act. Originally known as the State of Mysore, it was renamed \"Karnataka\" in 1973. The state corresponds to the Carnatic region. The capital and largest city is Bangalore.\n\nKarnataka is bordered by the Arabian Sea to the west, Goa to the northwest, Maharashtra to the north, Telangana to the northeast, Andhra Pradesh to the east, Tamil Nadu to the southeast, and Kerala to the south. The state covers an area of , or 5.83 percent of the total geographical area of India. It is the sixth largest Indian state by area. With 61,130,704 inhabitants at the 2011 census, Karnataka is the eighth largest state by population, comprising 30 districts. Kannada, one of the classical languages of India, is the most widely spoken and official language of the state alongside Urdu, Konkani, Marathi, Tulu, Tamil, Telugu, Malayalam, Kodava and Beary. Karnataka also contains some of the only villages in India where Sanskrit is primarily spoken.\n\nThe two main river systems of the state are the Krishna and its tributaries, the Bhima, Ghataprabha, Vedavathi, Malaprabha and Tungabhadra in North Karnataka; Sharavathi in Shimoga and the Kaveri and its tributaries, the Hemavati, Shimsha, Arkavati, Lakshmana Thirtha and Kabini, in the south. Most of these rivers flow out of Karnataka eastward, reaching the sea at the Bay of Bengal.\n\nThough several etymologies have been suggested for the name Karnataka, the generally accepted one is that \"Karnataka\" is derived from the Kannada words \"karu\" and \"nādu\", meaning \"elevated land\". \"Karu Nadu\" may also be read as \"karu\", meaning \"black\" and \"nadu\", meaning \"region\", as a reference to the black cotton soil found in the Bayalu Seeme region of the state. The British used the word Carnatic, sometimes \"Karnatak\", to describe both sides of peninsular India, south of the Krishna.\n\nWith an antiquity that dates to the paleolithic, Karnataka has been home to some of the most powerful empires of ancient and medieval India. The philosophers and musical bards patronised by these empires launched socio-religious and literary movements which have endured to the present day. Karnataka has contributed significantly to both forms of Indian classical music, the Carnatic and Hindustani traditions.\n\nThe economy of Karnataka is the fourth-largest state economy in India with in gross domestic product and a per capita GDP of . Karnataka has the twelfth highest ranking among Indian states in human development index.\n\nKarnataka's pre-history goes back to a paleolithic hand-axe culture evidenced by discoveries of, among other things, hand axes and cleavers in the region. Evidence of neolithic and megalithic cultures have also been found in the state. Gold discovered in Harappa was found to be imported from mines in Karnataka, prompting scholars to hypothesise about contacts between ancient Karnataka and the Indus Valley Civilisation ca. 3300 BCE.\n\nPrior to the third century BCE, most of Karnataka formed part of the Nanda Empire before coming under the Mauryan empire of Emperor Ashoka. Four centuries of Satavahana rule followed, allowing them to control large areas of Karnataka. The decline of Satavahana power led to the rise of the earliest native kingdoms, the Kadambas and the Western Gangas, marking the region's emergence as an independent political entity. The Kadamba Dynasty, founded by Mayurasharma, had its capital at Banavasi; the Western Ganga Dynasty was formed with Talakad as its capital.\nThese were also the first kingdoms to use Kannada in administration, as evidenced by the Halmidi inscription and a fifth-century copper coin discovered at Banavasi. These dynasties were followed by imperial Kannada empires such as the Badami Chalukyas, the Rashtrakuta Empire of Manyakheta and the Western Chalukya Empire, which ruled over large parts of the Deccan and had their capitals in what is now Karnataka. The Western Chalukyas patronised a unique style of architecture and Kannada literature which became a precursor to the Hoysala art of the 12th century. Parts of modern-day Southern Karnataka (Gangavadi) were occupied by the Chola Empire at the turn of the 11th century. The Cholas and the Hoysalas fought over the region in the early 12th century before it eventually came under Hoysala rule.\nAt the turn of the first millennium, the Hoysalas gained power in the region. Literature flourished during this time, which led to the emergence of distinctive Kannada literary metres, and the construction of temples and sculptures adhering to the Vesara style of architecture. The expansion of the Hoysala Empire brought minor parts of modern Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu under its rule. In the early 14th century, Harihara and Bukka Raya established the Vijayanagara empire with its capital, \"Hosapattana\" (later named Vijayanagara), on the banks of the Tungabhadra River in the modern Bellary district. The empire rose as a bulwark against Muslim advances into South India, which it completely controlled for over two centuries.\n\nIn 1565, Karnataka and the rest of South India experienced a major geopolitical shift when the Vijayanagara empire fell to a confederation of Islamic sultanates in the Battle of Talikota. The Bijapur Sultanate, which had risen after the demise of the Bahmani Sultanate of Bidar, soon took control of the Deccan; it was defeated by the Moghuls in the late 17th century. The Bahmani and Bijapur rulers encouraged Urdu and Persian literature and Indo-Saracenic architecture, the Gol Gumbaz being one of the high points of this style. During the sixteenth century, Konkani Hindus migrated to Karnataka, mostly from Salcette, Goa, while during the seventeenth and eighteenth century, Goan Catholics migrated to North Canara and South Canara, especially from Bardes, Goa, as a result of food shortages, epidemics and heavy taxation imposed by the Portuguese.\nIn the period that followed, parts of northern Karnataka were ruled by the Nizam of Hyderabad, the Maratha Empire, the British, and other powers. In the south, the Mysore Kingdom, a former vassal of the Vijayanagara Empire, was briefly independent. With the death of Krishnaraja Wodeyar II, Haidar Ali, the commander-in-chief of the Mysore army, gained control of the region. After his death, the kingdom was inherited by his son Tipu Sultan. To contain European expansion in South India, Haidar Ali and later Tipu Sultan fought four significant Anglo-Mysore Wars, the last of which resulted in Tippu Sultan's death and the incorporation of Mysore into the British Raj in 1799. The Kingdom of Mysore was restored to the Wodeyars and Mysore remained a princely state under the British Raj.\nAs the \"doctrine of lapse\" gave way to dissent and resistance from princely states across the country, Kittur Chennamma, Sangolli Rayanna and others spearheaded rebellions in Karnataka in 1830, nearly three decades before the Indian Rebellion of 1857. However, Kitturu was taken over by the British East India Company even before the doctrine was officially articulated by Lord Dalhousie in 1848. Other uprisings followed, such as the ones at Supa, Bagalkot, Shorapur, Nargund and Dandeli. These rebellions—which coincided with the Indian Rebellion of 1857—were led by Mundargi Bhimarao, Bhaskar Rao Bhave, the Halagali Bedas, Raja Venkatappa Nayaka and others. By the late 19th century, the independence movement had gained momentum; Karnad Sadashiva Rao, Aluru Venkata Raya, S. Nijalingappa, Kengal Hanumanthaiah, Nittoor Srinivasa Rau and others carried on the struggle into the early 20th century.\n\nAfter India's independence, the Maharaja, Jayachamarajendra Wodeyar, allowed his kingdom's accession to India. In 1950, Mysore became an Indian state of the same name; the former Maharaja served as its \"Rajpramukh\" (head of state) until 1975. Following the long-standing demand of the Ekikarana Movement, Kodagu- and Kannada-speaking regions from the adjoining states of Madras, Hyderabad and Bombay were incorporated into the Mysore state, under the States Reorganisation Act of 1956. The thus expanded state was renamed Karnataka, seventeen years later, in 1973. In the early 1900s through the post-independence era, industrial visionaries such as Sir Mokshagundam Visvesvarayya, born in Muddenahalli, Chikballapur district, played an important role in the development of Karnataka's strong manufacturing and industrial base.\n\nThe state has three principal geographical zones:\n\nBULLET::::1. The coastal region of Karavali\nBULLET::::2. The hilly Malenadu region comprising the Western Ghats\nBULLET::::3. The Bayaluseeme region comprising the plains of the Deccan Plateau\nThe bulk of the state is in the Bayaluseeme region, the northern part of which is the second-largest arid region in India. The highest point in Karnataka is the Mullayanagiri hills in Chikmagalur district which has an altitude of . Some of the important rivers in Karnataka are Kaveri, Tungabhadra, Krishna, Malaprabha and the Sharavathi. A large number of dams and reservoirs are constructed across these rivers which richly add to the irrigation and hydel power generation capacities of the state.\nKarnataka consists of four main types of geological formations — the \"Archean complex\" made up of Dharwad schists and granitic gneisses, the \"Proterozoic\" non-fossiliferous sedimentary formations of the Kaladgi and Bhima series, the \"Deccan trappean and intertrappean deposits\" and the tertiary and recent laterites and alluvial deposits. Significantly, about 60% of the state is composed of the \"Archean complex\" which consist of gneisses, granites and charnockite rocks. Laterite cappings that are found in many districts over the Deccan Traps were formed after the cessation of volcanic activity in the early tertiary period. Eleven groups of soil orders are found in Karnataka, viz. Entisols, Inceptisols, Mollisols, Spodosols, Alfisols, Ultisols, Oxisols, Aridisols, Vertisols, Andisols and Histosols. Depending on the agricultural capability of the soil, the soil types are divided into six types, \"viz.\" red, lateritic, black, alluvio-colluvial, forest and coastal soils.\n\nKarnataka experiences four seasons. The winter in January and February is followed by summer between March and May, the monsoon season between June and September and the post-monsoon season from October till December. Meteorologically, Karnataka is divided into three zones — coastal, north interior and south interior. Of these, the coastal zone receives the heaviest rainfall with an average rainfall of about per annum, far in excess of the state average of . Amagaon in Khanapur received of rainfall in the year 2010. In the year 2014, Kokalli in Sirsi taluk received of rainfall. Agumbe and Hulikal were considered the rainiest cities in Karnataka, being one of the wettest regions in the world. The highest recorded temperature was at Raichur and the lowest recorded temperature was at Bidar.\n\nThe following table shows the places with recorded coldest temperature in Karnataka [Year:2019] Source: KSNDMC \n!Rank\n!District\n!Taluk\n!Hobli/Village\n!Temperature in Celsius\n1\nBidar district\nBhalki\nNittur Buzurg\n4\n2\nDharwad district\nDharwad\nGarag\n4.1\n3\nBijapur district\nSindagi\nAlmel\n4.1\n4\nBelgaum district\nHukeri\nHukkeri\n4.1\n5\nTumakuru district\nTumkur\nHebbur\n4.1\n6\nBidar district\nAurad\nKamalnagar\n4.3\n7\nHassan district\nSakleshpur\nBelagodu\n4.3\n8\nBidar district\nBhalki\nHalbarga\n4.7\n9\nChikmagalur district\nMudigere\nBanakal\n4.9\n10\nUttara Kannada\nSirsi\nSampakhanda\n5\n\nAbout of Karnataka (i.e. 20% of the state's geographic area) is covered by forests. The forests are classified as reserved, protected, unclosed, village and private forests. The percentage of forested area is slightly less than the all-India average of about 23%, and significantly less than the 33% prescribed in the National Forest Policy.\n\nAgumbe and Hulikal in Shivamogga District of Western Ghat region is considered as \"Cherrapunji of South India\" (Cherrapunji being the rainiest known place) but some places in Western Ghats region had more rainfall than these two villages. Amagaon in Belgaum District recorded number of 10,068 mm in 2010; Mundrote in Kodagu district recorded 9974 mm in 2011.\n\n! Year\n! Hulikal Rainfall (mm)\n! Agumbe Rainfall (mm)\n! Amagaon Rainfall (mm)\n! Talacauvery Rainfall (mm)\n!Kokalli Rainfall (mm)\n!Nilkund Rainfall (mm)\n!Castle Rock Rainfall (mm)\n!Mundrote Rainfall (mm)\n!Kollur Rainfall (mm)\n3130\n4981\n5560\n1002\n5203\n2682\n4655\n4968\n1458\n3496\n2730\n4367\n3667\n3143\n4254\n8746\n6710\n5956\n5566\n3308\n4464\n7082\n3667\n7199\n6614\n5036\n5398\n6165\n3727\n6715\n4437\n6593\n7083\n9974\n7083\n4002\n5042\n7685\n\nThe following were the top 5 places that recorded highest rainfall in statistics [2010-2017]\n!Rank\n!Hobli/Village\n!District\n!Taluk\n!Year\n!Rainfall in mm\n!Elevation in metres\n1\nAmagaon\nBelgaum district\nKhanapur\n2010\n10,068\n785\n2\nMundrote\nKodagu district/Coorg District\nMadikeri\n2011\n9,974\n585\n3\nHulikal\nShimoga district\nHosanagara\n2013\n9,383\n614\n4\nAgumbe\nShimoga district\nThirthahalli\n2013\n8,770\n643\n5\nKokalli/Kakalli\nUttara Kannada\nSirsi\n2014\n8,746\n780\n}The following places recorded highest rainfall with respect to each year [2010-2017]\n!Year\n!Place\n!Taluk\n!District\n!Rainfall in mm\n!Elevation\n2017\nAgumbe\nThirthahalli\nShimoga district\n6,311\n643\n2016\nAgumbe\nThirthahalli\nShimoga district\n6,449\n643\n2015\nHulikal\nHosanagara\nShimoga district\n6,035\n614\n2014\nKokalli\nSirsi\nUttara Kannada\n8,746\n780\n2013\nHulikal\nHosanagara\nShimoga district\n9,383\n614\n2012\nHulikal\nHosanagara\nShimoga district\n8,409\n614\n2011\nMundrote\nMadikeri\nKodagu district\n9,974\n585\n2010\nAmagaon\nKhanapur\nBelgaum district\n10,068\n785\n\nThere are 30 districts in Karnataka:\n\nBULLET::::- Bagalkote\nBULLET::::- Bangalore Rural\nBULLET::::- Bangalore Urban\nBULLET::::- Belgaum\nBULLET::::- Ballari\nBULLET::::- Bidar\nBULLET::::- Chamarajanagar\nBULLET::::- Chikkaballapur\nBULLET::::- Chikkamagaluru\nBULLET::::- Chitradurga\nBULLET::::- Dakshina Kannada\nBULLET::::- Davanagere\nBULLET::::- Dharwad\nBULLET::::- Gadag\nBULLET::::- Gulbarga\nBULLET::::- Hassan\nBULLET::::- Haveri\nBULLET::::- Kodagu\nBULLET::::- Kolar\nBULLET::::- Koppal\nBULLET::::- Mandya\nBULLET::::- Mysore\nBULLET::::- Raichur\nBULLET::::- Ramanagara\nBULLET::::- Shimoga\nBULLET::::- Tumakuru\nBULLET::::- Udupi\nBULLET::::- Uttara Kannada\nBULLET::::- Vijayapur\nBULLET::::- Yadgir\n\nEach district is governed by a district commissioner or district magistrate. The districts are further divided into sub-divisions, which are governed by sub-divisional magistrates; sub-divisions comprise blocks containing \"panchayats\" (village councils) and town municipalities.\n\nAt the 2011 census, Karnataka's ten largest cities, sorted in order of decreasing population, were Bangalore, Hubli-Dharwad, Mysuru, Gulbarga, Belgaum, Mangalore, Davangere, Bellary, Vijayapur and Shimoga.\n! Rank  City  District  Population (2011)\n1\nBangalore\nBangalore Urban\n8,728,906\n2\nHubli-Dharwad (Hubballi–Dharwad)\nDharwad district\n3\nMysore (Mysuru)\nMysore district\n4\nGulbarga (Kalaburagi)\nGulbarga district\n532,031\n5\nBelgaum (Belagavi)\nBelgaum district\n6\nMangalore (Mangaluru)\nDakshina Kannada district\n7\nDavanagere (Davangere)\nDavanagere district\n435,128\n8\nBellary (Ballari)\nBellary district\n409,444\n9\nVijayapur (Bijapur)\nVijayapur district\n327,427\n10\nShimoga (Shivamogga)\nShimoga district\n322,428\n\nAccording to the 2011 census of India, the total population of Karnataka was 61,095,297 of which 30,966,657 (50.7%) were male and 30,128,640 (49.3%) were female, or 1000 males for every 973 females. This represents a 15.60% increase over the population in 2001. The population density was 319 per km and 38.67% of the people lived in urban areas. The literacy rate was 75.36% with 82.47% of males and 68.08% of females being literate. 84.00% of the population were Hindu, 12.92% were Muslim, 1.87% were Christian, 0.72% were Jains, 0.16% were Buddhist, 0.05% were Sikh and 0.02% were belonging to other religions and 0.27% of the population did not state their religion.\n\nIn 2007 the state had a birth rate of 2.2%, a death rate of 0.7%, an infant mortality rate of 5.5% and a maternal mortality rate of 0.2%. The total fertility rate was 2.2.\n\nIn the field of speciality health care, Karnataka's private sector competes with the best in the world. Karnataka has also established a modicum of public health services having a better record of health care and child care than most other states of India. In spite of these advances, some parts of the state still leave much to be desired when it comes to primary health care.\n\nKarnataka has a parliamentary system of government with two democratically elected houses, the Legislative Assembly and the Legislative Council. The Legislative Assembly consists of 224 members who are elected for five-year terms. The Legislative Council is a permanent body of 75 members with one-third (25 members) retiring every two years.\n\nThe government of Karnataka is headed by the Chief Minister who is chosen by the ruling party members of the Legislative Assembly. The Chief Minister, along with the council of ministers, executes the legislative agenda and exercises most of the executive powers. However, the constitutional and formal head of the state is the Governor who is appointed for a five-year term by the President of India on the advice of the Union government. The people of Karnataka also elect 28 members to the \"Lok Sabha\", the lower house of the Indian Parliament. The members of the state Legislative Assembly elect 12 members to the \"Rajya Sabha\", the upper house of the Indian Parliament.\n\nFor administrative purposes, Karnataka has been divided into four revenue divisions, 49 sub-divisions, 30 districts, 175 \"taluks\" and 745 \"hoblies\" / revenue circles. The administration in each district is headed by a Deputy Commissioner who belongs to the Indian Administrative Service and is assisted by a number of officers belonging to Karnataka state services. The Deputy Commissioner of Police, an officer belonging to the Indian Police Service and assisted by the officers of the Karnataka Police Service, is entrusted with the responsibility of maintaining law and order and related issues in each district. The Deputy Conservator of Forests, an officer belonging to the Indian Forest Service, is entrusted with the responsibility of managing forests, environment and wildlife of the district, he will be assisted by the officers belonging to Karnataka Forest Service and officers belonging to Karnataka Forest Subordinate Service. Sectoral development in the districts is looked after by the district head of each development department such as Public Works Department, Health, Education, Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, etc. The judiciary in the state consists of the Karnataka High Court (\"Attara Kacheri\") in Bangalore, Dharwad, and Gulbarga, district and session courts in each district and lower courts and judges at the \"taluk\" level.\n\nPolitics in Karnataka has been dominated by three political parties, the Indian National Congress, the Janata Dal (Secular) and the Bharatiya Janata Party. Politicians from Karnataka have played prominent roles in federal government of India with some of them having held the high positions of Prime Minister and Vice-President. Border disputes involving Karnataka's claim on the Kasaragod and Solapur districts and Maharashtra's claim on Belgaum are ongoing since the states reorganisation.\nThe official has a \"Ganda Berunda\" in the centre. Surmounting this are four lions facing the four directions, taken from the Lion Capital of Ashoka at Sarnath. The emblem also carries two \"Sharabhas\" with the head of an elephant and the body of a lion.\n\nKarnataka had an estimated GSDP (Gross State Domestic Product) of about US$115.86 billion in the 2014–15 fiscal year. The state registered a GSDP growth rate of 7% for the year 2014–2015. Karnataka's contribution to India's GDP in the year 2014–15 was 7.54%. With GDP growth of 17.59% and per capita GDP growth of 16.04%, Karnataka is on the 6th position among all states and union territories. In an employment survey conducted for the year 2013–2014, the unemployment rate in Karnataka was 1.8% compared to the national rate of 4.9%. A BloombergQuint article argues Karnataka to be India's most prosperous state citing many reasons.\nIn 2011–2012, Karnataka had an estimated poverty ratio of 20.91% compared to the national ratio of 21.92%.\n\nNearly 56% of the workforce in Karnataka is engaged in agriculture and related activities. A total of 12.31 million hectares of land, or 64.6% of the state's total area, is cultivated. Much of the agricultural output is dependent on the southwest monsoon as only 26.5% of the sown area is irrigated.\n\nKarnataka is the manufacturing hub for some of the largest public sector industries in India, including Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, National Aerospace Laboratories, Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, Bharat Earth Movers Limited and HMT (formerly Hindustan Machine Tools), which are based in Bangalore. Many of India's premier science and technology research centres, such as Indian Space Research Organisation, Central Power Research Institute, Bharat Electronics Limited and the Central Food Technological Research Institute, are also headquartered in Karnataka. Mangalore Refinery and Petrochemicals Limited is an oil refinery, located in Mangalore.\n\nThe state has also begun to invest heavily in solar power centred on the Pavagada Solar Park. As of December 2017, the state has installed an estimated 2.2 gigawatts of block solar panelling and in January 2018 announced a tender to generate a further 1.2 gigawatts in the coming years: Karnataka Renewable Energy Development suggests that this will be based on 24 separate systems (or 'blocks') generating 50 megawatts each.\nSince the 1980s, Karnataka has emerged as the pan-Indian leader in the field of IT (information technology). In 2007, there were nearly 2,000 firms operating in Karnataka. Many of them, including two of India's biggest software firms, Infosys and Wipro, are also headquartered in the state. Exports from these firms exceeded 50,000 crores ($12.5 billion) in 2006–07, accounting for nearly 38% of all IT exports from India. The Nandi Hills area in the outskirts of Devanahalli is the site of the upcoming $22 billion, 50 square kilometre BIAL IT Investment Region, one of the largest infrastructure projects in the history of Karnataka. All this has earned the state capital, Bangalore, the sobriquet \"Silicon Valley of India\".\n\nKarnataka also leads the nation in biotechnology. It is home to India's largest biocluster, with 158 of the country's 320 biotechnology firms being based here. The state accounts for 75% of India's floriculture, an upcoming industry which supplies flowers and ornamental plants worldwide.\n\nSeven of India's banks, Canara Bank, Syndicate Bank, Corporation Bank, Vijaya Bank, Karnataka Bank, ING Vysya Bank and the State Bank of Mysore originated in this state. The coastal districts of Udupi and Dakshina Kannada have a branch for every 500 persons—the best distribution of banks in India. In March 2002, Karnataka had 4767 branches of different banks with each branch serving 11,000 persons, which is lower than the national average of 16,000.\n\nA majority of the silk industry in India is headquartered in Karnataka, much of it in Doddaballapura, and the state government intends to invest 70 crore in a \"Silk City\" at Muddenahalli, near Bangalore International Airport.\n\nAir transport in Karnataka, as in the rest of the country, is still a fledgling but fast expanding sector. Karnataka has airports at Bangalore, Mangalore, Belgaum, Hubli, Hampi, Bellary and Mysore with international operations from Bangalore and Mangalore airports.\n\nKarnataka has a railway network with a total length of approximately . Until the creation of the South Western Zone headquartered at Hubli in 2003, the railway network in the state was in the southern and western railway zones. Several parts of the state now come under the South Western Zone with 3 Railway Divisions at Bangalore, Mysore and Hubli, with the remainder under the Southern Railways. Coastal Karnataka is covered under the Southern Railway at Mangalore city, and the Konkan railway network, which was considered India's biggest railway project of the century. Bangalore is well-connected with inter-state destinations, while other towns in the state are not.\nKarnataka has 11 ports, including the New Mangalore Port, a major port and ten minor ports, of which three were operational in 2012. The New Mangalore port was incorporated as the ninth major port in India on 4 May 1974. This port handled 32.04 million tonnes of traffic in the fiscal year 2006–07 with 17.92 million tonnes of imports and 14.12 million tonnes of exports. The port also handled 1015 vessels including 18 cruise vessels during the year 2006–07. Foreigners can enter Mangalore through the New Mangalore Port with the help of Electronic visa (e-visa). Cruise ships from Europe, North America and UAE arrive at New Mangalore Port to visit the tourist places across Coastal Karnataka. The port of Mangalore is among the 4 major ports of India that receive over 25 international cruise ships every year.\n\nThe total lengths of National Highways and state highways in Karnataka are , respectively. The KSRTC, the state public transport corporation, transports an average of 2.2 million passengers daily and employs about 25,000 people. In the late nineties, KSRTC was split into four corporations, viz., The Bangalore Metropolitan Transport Corporation, The North-East Karnataka Road Transport Corporation and The North-West Karnataka Road Transport Corporation with their headquarters in Bangalore, Gulbarga and Hubli respectively, and with the remnant of the KSRTC maintaining operations in the rest of the state from its headquarters at Shantinagar in Bangalore.\n\nThe diverse linguistic and religious ethnicities that are native to Karnataka, combined with their long histories, have contributed immensely to the varied cultural heritage of the state. Apart from Kannadigas, Karnataka is home to Tuluvas, Kodavas and Konkanis. Minor populations of Tibetan Buddhists and tribes like the Soligas, Yeravas, Todas and Siddhis also live in Karnataka. The traditional folk arts cover the entire gamut of music, dance, drama, storytelling by itinerant troupes, etc. \"Yakshagana\" of Malnad and coastal Karnataka, a classical dance drama, is one of the major theatrical forms of Karnataka. Contemporary theatre culture in Karnataka remains vibrant with organisations like \"Ninasam\", \"Ranga Shankara\", \"Rangayana\" and \"Prabhat Kalavidaru\" continuing to build on the foundations laid by Gubbi Veeranna, T. P. Kailasam, B. V. Karanth, K V Subbanna, Prasanna and others. \"Veeragase\", \"Kamsale\", \"Kolata\" and \"Dollu Kunitha\" are popular dance forms. The Mysore style of \"Bharatanatya\", nurtured and popularised by the likes of the legendary Jatti Tayamma, continues to hold sway in Karnataka, and Bangalore also enjoys an eminent place as one of the foremost centres of \"Bharatanatya\".\nKarnataka also has a special place in the world of Indian classical music, with both Karnataka (Carnatic) and Hindustani styles finding place in the state, and Karnataka has produced a number of stalwarts in both styles. The Haridasa movement of the sixteenth century contributed significantly to the development of Karnataka (Carnatic) music as a performing art form. Purandara Dasa, one of the most revered Haridasas, is known as the \"Karnataka Sangeeta Pitamaha\" ('Father of Karnataka a.k.a. Carnatic music'). Celebrated Hindustani musicians like Gangubai Hangal, Mallikarjun Mansur, Bhimsen Joshi, Basavaraja Rajaguru, Sawai Gandharva and several others hail from Karnataka, and some of them have been recipients of the Kalidas Samman, Padma Bhushan and Padma Vibhushan awards. Noted Carnatic musicians include Violin T. Chowdiah, Veena Sheshanna, Mysore Vasudevachar, Doreswamy Iyengar and Thitte Krishna Iyengar.\n\n\"Gamaka\" is another classical music genre based on Carnatic music that is practised in Karnataka. \"Kannada Bhavageete\" is a genre of popular music that draws inspiration from the expressionist poetry of modern poets. The Mysore school of painting has produced painters like Sundarayya, Tanjavur Kondayya, B. Venkatappa and Keshavayya. \"Chitrakala Parishat\" is an organisation in Karnataka dedicated to promoting painting, mainly in the Mysore painting style.\n\n\"Saree\" is the traditional dress of women in Karnataka. Women in Kodagu have a distinct style of wearing the \"saree\", different from the rest of Karnataka. \"Dhoti\", known as \"Panche\" in Karnataka, is the traditional attire of men. Shirt, Trousers and \"Salwar kameez\" are widely worn in Urban areas. \"Mysore Peta\" is the traditional headgear of southern Karnataka, while the \"pagadi\" or \"pataga\" (similar to the Rajasthani turban) is preferred in the northern areas of the state.\n\nRice and \"Ragi\" form the staple food in South Karnataka, whereas \"Jolada rotti\", Sorghum is staple to North Karnataka. \"Bisi bele bath\", \"Jolada rotti\", \"Ragi mudde\", \"Uppittu\", \"Benne Dose\", \"Masala Dose\" and \"Maddur Vade\" are some of the popular food items in Karnataka. Among sweets, \"Mysore Pak\", \"Karadantu\" of Gokak and \"Amingad\", \"Belgaavi Kunda\" and \"Dharwad pedha\" are popular. Apart from this, coastal Karnataka and Kodagu have distinctive cuisines of their own. Udupi cuisine of coastal Karnataka is popular all over India.\n\nAdi Shankaracharya (788–820) chose Sringeri in Karnataka to establish the first of his four \"mathas\" (monastery). Madhvacharya (1238–1317) was the chief proponent of Tattvavada (Philosophy of Reality), popularly known as Dvaita or Dualistic school of Hindu philosophy — one of the three most influential Vedanta philosophies. Madhvacharya was one of the important philosophers during the Bhakti movement. He was a pioneer in many ways, going against standard conventions and norms. According to tradition, Madhvacharya is believed to be the third incarnation of Vayu (Mukhyaprana), after Hanuman and Bhima. The Haridasa devotional movement is considered as one of the turning points in the cultural history of India. Over a span of nearly six centuries, several saints and mystics helped shape the culture, philosophy, and art of South India and Karnataka in particular by exerting considerable spiritual influence over the masses and kingdoms that ruled South India.\n\nThis movement was ushered in by the Haridasas (literally \"servants of Lord Hari\") and took shape in the 13th century – 14th century CE, period, prior to and during the early rule of the Vijayanagara empire. The main objective of this movement was to propagate the Dvaita philosophy of Madhvacharya (Madhva Siddhanta) to the masses through a literary medium known as Dasa Sahitya literature of the servants of the Lord. Purandaradasa is widely recognised as the \"\"Pithamaha\"\" of Carnatic music for his immense contribution. Ramanujacharya, the leading expounder of \"Vishishtadvaita\", spent many years in Melkote. He came to Karnataka in 1098 AD and lived here until 1122 AD. He first lived in Tondanur and then moved to Melkote where the Cheluvanarayana Swamy Temple and a well-organised \"matha\" were built. He was patronised by the Hoysala king, Vishnuvardhana.\n\nIn the twelfth century, Lingayatism emerged in northern Karnataka as a protest against the rigidity of the prevailing social and caste system. Leading figures of this movement were Basava, Akka Mahadevi and Allama Prabhu, who established the Anubhava Mantapa which was the centre of all religious and philosophical thoughts and discussions pertaining to Lingayats. These three social reformers did so by the literary means of \"\"Vachana Sahitya\"\" which is very famous for its simple, straight forward and easily understandable Kannada language. Lingayatism preached women equality by letting women wear \"Ishtalinga\" i.e. Symbol of god around their neck. Basava shunned the sharp hierarchical divisions that existed and sought to remove all distinctions between the hierarchically superior master class and the subordinate, servile class. He also supported inter-caste marriages and Kaayaka Tatva of Basavanna. This was the basis of the Lingayat faith which today counts millions among its followers.\n\nThe Jain philosophy and literature have contributed immensely to the religious and cultural landscape of Karnataka. Islam, which had an early presence on the west coast of India as early as the tenth century, gained a foothold in Karnataka with the rise of the Bahamani and Bijapur sultanates that ruled parts of Karnataka. Christianity reached Karnataka in the sixteenth century with the arrival of the Portuguese and St. Francis Xavier in 1545.\n\nBuddhism was popular in Karnataka during the first millennium in places such as Gulbarga and Banavasi. A chance discovery of edicts and several Mauryan relics at Sannati in Gulbarga district in 1986 has proven that the Krishna River basin was once home to both Mahayana and Hinayana Buddhism. There are Tibetan refugee camps in Karnataka.\n\nMysore Dasara is celebrated as the \"Nada habba\" (state festival) and this is marked by major festivities at Mysore. Bangalore Karaga, celebrated in the heart of Bangalore, is the second most important festival celebrated in Karnataka. \"Ugadi\" (Kannada New Year), Makara Sankranti (the harvest festival), Ganesh Chaturthi, Gowri Habba, Ram Navami, Nagapanchami, Basava Jayanthi, Deepavali, and Ramzan are the other major festivals of Karnataka.\n\nKannada is the official language of the state of Karnataka, as the native language of 66.54% of its population as of 2011 and is one of the classical languages of India. Other linguistic minorities in the state were Urdu (10.83%), Telugu (5.84%), Tamil (3.45%), Marathi (3.38%), Hindi (3.3%), Tulu (2.61%), Konkani (1.29%), Malayalam (1.27%) and Kodava Takk (0.18%).\n\nKannada played a crucial role in the creation of Karnataka: linguistic demographics played a major role in defining the new state in 1956. Tulu, Konkani and Kodava are other minor native languages that share a long history in the state. Urdu is spoken widely by the Muslim population. Less widely spoken languages include Beary bashe and certain languages such as Sankethi. Some of the regional languages in Karnataka are Tulu, Kodava, Konkani and Beary.\n\nKannada features a rich and ancient body of literature including religious and secular genre, covering topics as diverse as Jainism (such as \"Puranas\"), Lingayatism (such as Vachanas), Vaishnavism (such as \"Haridasa Sahitya\") and modern literature. Evidence from edicts during the time of Ashoka (reigned 274–232 BCE) suggest that Buddhist literature influenced the Kannada script and its literature. The Halmidi inscription, the earliest attested full-length inscription in the Kannada language and script, dates from 450 CE, while the earliest available literary work, the \"Kavirajamarga\", has been dated to 850 CE. References made in the \"Kavirajamarga\", however, prove that Kannada literature flourished in the native composition meters such as \"Chattana\", \"Beddande\" and \"Melvadu\" during earlier centuries. The classic refers to several earlier greats (\"purvacharyar\") of Kannada poetry and prose.\n\nKuvempu, the renowned Kannada poet and writer who wrote Jaya Bharata Jananiya Tanujate, the state anthem of Karnataka\nwas the first recipient of the \"Karnataka Ratna\" award, the highest civilian award bestowed by the Government of Karnataka. Contemporary Kannada literature has received considerable acknowledgement in the arena of Indian literature, with eight Kannada writers winning India's highest literary honour, the Jnanpith award.\n\nTulu is spoken mainly in the coastal districts of Udupi and Dakshina Kannada. \"Tulu Mahabharato\", written by Arunabja in the Tigalari script, is the oldest surviving Tulu text. Tigalari script was used by Brahmins to write Sanskrit language. The use of the Kannada script for writing Tulu and non-availability of print in Tigalari script contributed to the marginalisation of Tigalari script. Konkani is mostly spoken in the Uttara Kannada and Dakshina Kannada districts and in parts of Udupi, Konkani use the Kannada script for writing. The Kodavas who mainly reside in the Kodagu district, speak Kodava Takk. Two regional variations of the language exist, the northern \"Mendale Takka\" and the southern \"Kiggaati Takka\". Kodava Takk use the Kannada script for writing. English is the medium of education in many schools and widely used for business communication in most private companies.\n\nAll of the state's languages are patronised and promoted by governmental and quasi-governmental bodies. The \"Kannada Sahitya Parishat\" and the \"Kannada Sahitya Akademi\" are responsible for the promotion of Kannada while the \"Karnataka Konkani Sahitya Akademi\", the \"Tulu Sahitya Akademi\" and the \"Kodava Sahitya Akademi\" promote their respective languages.\n\nAs per the 2011 census, Karnataka had a literacy rate of 75.36%, with 82.47% of males and 68.08% of females in the state being literate. In 2001, the literacy rate of the state were 67.04%, with 76.29% of males and 57.45% of females being literate. The state is home to some of the premier educational and research institutions of India such as the Indian Institute of Science, the Indian Institute of Management, the Indian Institute of Technology Dharwad the National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences, the National Institute of Technology Karnataka and the National Law School of India University.\n\nIn March 2006, Karnataka had 54,529 primary schools with 252,875 teachers and 8.495 million students, and 9498 secondary schools with 92,287 teachers and 1.384 million students. There are three kinds of schools in the state, viz., government-run, private aided (financial aid is provided by the government) and private unaided (no financial aid is provided). The primary languages of instruction in most schools are Kannada and English.\n\nThe syllabus taught in the schools is either of the CBSE, the ICSE or the state syllabus (SSLC) defined by the Department of Public Instruction of the Government of Karnataka. However, some schools follow the NIOS syllabus. The state has two sainik schools — in Kodagu Sainik School in Kodagu and in Bijapur Sainik School in Bijapur.\n\nTo maximise attendance in schools, the Karnataka Government has launched a midday meal scheme in government and aided schools in which free lunch is provided to the students.\n\nStatewide board examinations are conducted at the end of secondary education. Students who qualify are allowed to pursue a two-year pre-university course, after which they become eligible to pursue under-graduate degrees.\n\nThere are 481 degree colleges affiliated with one of the universities in the state, viz. Bangalore University, Gulbarga University, Karnatak University, Kuvempu University, Mangalore University and Mysore University. In 1998, the engineering colleges in the state were brought under the newly formed Visvesvaraya Technological University headquartered at Belgaum, whereas the medical colleges are run under the jurisdiction of the Rajiv Gandhi University of Health Sciences. Some of these baccalaureate colleges are accredited with the status of a deemed university. There are 186 engineering, 39 medical and 41 dental colleges in the state. Udupi, Sringeri, Gokarna and Melkote are well-known places of Sanskrit and Vedic learning. In 2015 the Central Government decided to establish the first Indian Institute of Technology in Karnataka at Dharwad. Tulu and Konkani languages are taught as an optional subject in the twin districts of South Canara and Udupi.\n\nChrist University, CMR University, Manipal Academy Of Higher Education and PES University, REVA University are private universities in Karnataka.\n\n!Rank!!District!!Literacy\n1Udupi 88.57%\n2Bangalore Urban  87.67%\n3Dakshina Kannada (South Canara)  86.24%\n4Uttara Kannada (North Canara) 84.06%\n5Kodagu 82.61%\n\n!Rank!!Taluk!!Literacy\n1Mangaluru (Dakshina Kannada)  92%\n2Karwar (Uttara Kannada)  90%\n3Udupi (Udupi) 89%\n4Madikeri (Kodagu) 88%\n5Sirsi (Uttara Kannada) 88%\n\nThe era of Kannada newspapers started in the year 1843 when Hermann Mögling, a missionary from Basel Mission, published the first Kannada newspaper called \"Mangalooru Samachara\" in Mangalore. The first Kannada periodical, \"Mysuru Vrittanta Bodhini\" was started by Bhashyam Bhashyacharya in Mysore. Shortly after Indian independence in 1948, K. N. Guruswamy founded \"The Printers (Mysore) Private Limited\" and began publishing two newspapers, \"Deccan Herald\" and \"Prajavani\". Presently the \"The Times of India\" and \"Vijaya Karnataka\" are the largest-selling English and Kannada newspapers respectively. A vast number of weekly, biweekly and monthly magazines are under publication in both Kannada and English. \"Udayavani\", \"Kannadaprabha\", \"Samyukta Karnataka\", \"VarthaBharathi\", \"Sanjevani\", \"Eesanje\", \"Hosa digantha\", \"Karavali Ale\" are also some popular dailies published from Karnataka.\n\nDoordarshan is the broadcaster of the Government of India and its channel DD Chandana is dedicated to Kannada. Prominent Kannada channels include Colors Kannada, Zee Kannada and Udaya TV.\n\nKarnataka occupies a special place in the history of Indian radio. In 1935, \"Aakashvani\", the first private radio station in India, was started by Prof. M.V. Gopalaswamy in Mysore. The popular radio station was taken over by the local municipality and later by All India Radio (AIR) and moved to Bangalore in 1955. Later in 1957, AIR adopted the original name of the radio station, \"Aakashavani\" as its own. Some of the popular programs aired by AIR Bangalore included \"Nisarga Sampada\" and \"Sasya Sanjeevini\" which were programs that taught science through songs, plays, and stories. These two programs became so popular that they were translated and broadcast in 18 different languages and the entire series was recorded on cassettes by the Government of Karnataka and distributed to thousands of schools across the state. Karnataka has witnessed a growth in FM radio channels, mainly in the cities of Bangalore, Mangalore and Mysore, which has become hugely popular.\n\nKarnataka's smallest district, Kodagu, is a major contributor to Indian field hockey, producing numerous players who have represented India at the international level. The annual Kodava Hockey Festival is the largest hockey tournament in the world. Bangalore has hosted a WTA tennis event and, in 1997, it hosted the fourth National Games of India. The Sports Authority of India, the premier sports institute in the country, and the Nike Tennis Academy are also situated in Bangalore. Karnataka has been referred to as the cradle of Indian swimming because of its high standards in comparison to other states.\n\nOne of the most popular sports in Karnataka is cricket. The state cricket team has won the Ranji Trophy seven times, second only to Mumbai in terms of success. Chinnaswamy Stadium in Bangalore regularly hosts international matches and is also the home of the National Cricket Academy, which was opened in 2000 to nurture potential international players. Many cricketers have represented India and in one international match held in the 1990s; players from Karnataka composed the majority of the national team. The Royal Challengers Bangalore, an Indian Premier League franchise, the Bengaluru Football Club, an Indian Super League franchise, the Bengaluru Yodhas, a Pro Wrestling League franchise, the Bengaluru Blasters, a Premier Badminton League franchise and the Bengaluru Bulls, a Pro Kabaddi League franchise are based in Bangalore. The Karnataka Premier League is an inter-regional Twenty20 cricket tournament played in the state.\n\nNotable sportsmen from Karnataka include B.S. Chandrasekhar, E. A. S. Prasanna, Anil Kumble, Javagal Srinath, Rahul Dravid, Venkatesh Prasad, Robin Uthappa, Vinay Kumar, Gundappa Vishwanath, Syed Kirmani, Stuart Binny, K. L. Rahul, Mayank Agarwal, Manish Pandey, Karun Nair, Ashwini Ponnappa, Mahesh Bhupathi, Rohan Bopanna, Prakash Padukone who won the All England Badminton Championships in 1980 and Pankaj Advani who has won three world titles in cue sports by the age of 20 including the amateur World Snooker Championship in 2003 and the World Billiards Championship in 2005.\n\nBijapur district has produced some of the best-known road cyclists in the national circuit. Premalata Sureban was part of the Indian contingent at the Perlis Open '99 in Malaysia. In recognition of the talent of cyclists in the district, the state government laid down a cycling track at the B.R. Ambedkar Stadium at a cost of 40 lakh.\n\nSports like \"kho kho\", \"kabaddi\", \"chinni daandu\" and \"goli\" (marbles) are played mostly in Karnataka's rural areas.\n\nKarnataka has a rich diversity of flora and fauna. It has a recorded forest area of which constitutes 20.19% of the total geographical area of the state. These forests support 25% of the elephant and 10% of the tiger population of India. Many regions of Karnataka are as yet unexplored, so new species of flora and fauna are found periodically. The Western Ghats, a biodiversity hotspot, includes the western region of Karnataka. Two sub-clusters in the Western Ghats, viz. Talacauvery and Kudremukh, both in Karnataka, are on the tentative list of World Heritage Sites of UNESCO. The Bandipur and Nagarahole National Parks, which fall outside these subclusters, were included in the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve in 1986, a UNESCO designation. The Indian roller and the Indian elephant are recognised as the state bird and animal while sandalwood and the lotus are recognised as the state tree and flower respectively. Karnataka has five national parks: Anshi, Bandipur, Bannerghatta, Kudremukh and Nagarhole. It also has 27 wildlife sanctuaries of which seven are bird sanctuaries.\n\nWild animals that are found in Karnataka include the elephant, the tiger, the leopard, the gaur, the sambar deer, the chital or spotted deer, the muntjac, the bonnet macaque, the slender loris, the common palm civet, the small Indian civet, the sloth bear, the dhole, the striped hyena and the golden jackal. Some of the birds found here are the great hornbill, the Malabar pied hornbill, the Ceylon frogmouth, herons, ducks, kites, eagles, falcons, quails, partridges, lapwings, sandpipers, pigeons, doves, parakeets, cuckoos, owls, nightjars, swifts, kingfishers, bee-eaters and munias. Some species of trees found in Karnataka are \"Callophyllum tomentosa\", \"Callophyllum wightianum\", \"Garcina cambogia\", \"Garcina morealla\", \"Alstonia scholaris\", \"\", \"Artocarpus hirsutus\", \"Artocarpus lacoocha\", \"Cinnamomum zeylanicum\", \"Grewia tilaefolia\", \"Santalum album\", \"Shorea talura\", \"Emblica officinalis\", \"Vitex altissima\" and \"Wrightia tinctoria\". Wildlife in Karnataka is threatened by poaching, habitat destruction, human-wildlife conflict and pollution.\n\nBy virtue of its varied geography and long history, Karnataka hosts numerous spots of interest for tourists. There is an array of ancient sculptured temples, modern cities, scenic hill ranges, forests and beaches. Karnataka has been ranked as the fourth most popular destination for tourism among the states of India. Karnataka has the second highest number of nationally protected monuments in India, second only to Uttar Pradesh, in addition to 752 monuments protected by the State Directorate of Archaeology and Museums. Another 25,000 monuments are yet to receive protection.\n\nThe districts of the Western Ghats and the southern districts of the state have popular eco-tourism locations including Kudremukh, Madikeri and Agumbe. Karnataka has 25 wildlife sanctuaries and five national parks. Popular among them are Bandipur National Park, Bannerghatta National Park and Nagarhole National Park. The ruins of the Vijayanagara Empire at Hampi and the monuments of Pattadakal are on the list of UNESCO's World Heritage Sites. The cave temples at Badami and the rock-cut temples at Aihole representing the Badami Chalukyan style of architecture are also popular tourist destinations. The Hoysala temples at Belur and Halebidu, which were built with Chloritic schist (soapstone) are proposed UNESCO World Heritage sites. The Gol Gumbaz and Ibrahim Rauza are famous examples of the Deccan Sultanate style of architecture. The monolith of Gomateshwara Bahubali at Shravanabelagola is the tallest sculpted monolith in the world, attracting tens of thousands of pilgrims during the Mahamastakabhisheka festival.\n\nThe waterfalls of Karnataka and Kudremukh are considered by some to be among the \"1001 Natural Wonders of the World\". Jog Falls is India's tallest single-tiered waterfall with Gokak Falls, Unchalli Falls, Magod Falls, Abbey Falls and Shivanasamudra Falls among other popular waterfalls.\n\nSeveral popular beaches dot the coastline, including Murudeshwara, Gokarna, Malpe and Karwar. In addition, Karnataka is home to several places of religious importance. Several Hindu temples including the famous Udupi Sri Krishna Matha, the Marikamba Temple at Sirsi, the Kollur Mookambika Temple, the Sri Manjunatha Temple at Dharmasthala, Kukke Subramanya Temple, Janardhana and Mahakali Temple at Ambalpadi, Sharadamba Temple at Shringeri attract pilgrims from all over India. Most of the holy sites of Lingayatism, like Kudalasangama and Basavana Bagewadi, are found in northern parts of the state. Shravanabelagola, Mudabidri and Karkala are famous for Jain history and monuments. Jainism had a stronghold in Karnataka in the early medieval period with Shravanabelagola as its most important centre. The Shettihalli Rosary Church near Shettihalli, an example of French colonial Gothic architecture, is a rare example of a Christian ruin, is a popular tourist site.\n\nRecently Karnataka has emerged as a center of health care tourism. Karnataka has the highest number of approved health systems and alternative therapies in India. Along with some ISO certified government-owned hospitals, private institutions which provide international-quality services have caused the health care industry to grow by 30% during 2004–05. Hospitals in Karnataka treat around 8,000 health tourists every year.\n\nBULLET::::- Outline of Karnataka\nBULLET::::- Media in Karnataka\nBULLET::::- List of Governors of Karnataka\nBULLET::::- List of districts of Karnataka\nBULLET::::- List of people from Karnataka\nBULLET::::- List of butterflies of Karnataka\nBULLET::::- List of airports in Karnataka\n\nBULLET::::- John Keay, India: A History, 2000, Grove publications, New York,\nBULLET::::- Dr. Suryanath U. Kamath, Concise history of Karnataka, 2001, MCC, Bangalore (Reprinted 2002)\nBULLET::::- Nilakanta Sastri, K.A. (1955). A History of South India, From Prehistoric times to fall of Vijayanagar, OUP, New Delhi (Reprinted 2002) .\nBULLET::::- R. Narasimhacharya, History of Kannada Literature, 1988, Asian Educational Services, New Delhi, Madras, 1988, .\nBULLET::::- K.V. Ramesh, Chalukyas of Vātāpi, 1984, Agam Kala Prakashan, Delhi. . . . . .\nBULLET::::- Malini Adiga (2006), The Making of Southern Karnataka: Society, Polity and Culture in the early medieval period, AD 400–1030, Orient Longman, Chennai,\nBULLET::::- Hermann Kulke and Dietmar Rothermund, A History of India, fourth edition, Routledge, 2004,\nBULLET::::- Foekema, Gerard [2003] (2003). Architecture decorated with architecture: Later medieval temples of Karnataka, 1000–1300 AD. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers Pvt. Ltd. .\n\nBULLET::::- Official Site of Karnataka\n\nBULLET::::- Karnataka \"Encyclopædia Britannica\" entry\n"}
{"id": "16881", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16881", "title": "Kashrut", "text": "Kashrut\n\nKashrut (also kashruth or kashrus, ) is a set of dietary laws dealing with the foods that Jews are permitted to eat and how those foods must be prepared according to Jewish law. Food that may be consumed is deemed kosher ( in English, ), from the Ashkenazi pronunciation of the Hebrew term \"kashér\" (), meaning 'fit' (in this context: 'fit for consumption').\n\nAlthough the details of the laws of \"kashrut\" are numerous and complex, they rest on a few basic principles:\nBULLET::::- Only certain types of animals, birds and fish meeting specific criteria are kosher; the consumption of the flesh of any animals that do not meet these criteria, such as pork and shellfish, is forbidden\nBULLET::::- Kosher mammals and birds must be slaughtered according to a process known as \"shechita\"; blood may never be consumed and it must be removed from meat by a process of salting and soaking in water for the meat to be permissible for use\nBULLET::::- Meat and milk and their derivatives may never be mixed, and separate equipment for the storage and preparation of meat-based and dairy-based foods must be used\n\nEvery food that is considered kosher is also categorized as follows:\nBULLET::::- \"Meat\" products (also called \"b'sari\" or \"fleishig\") are those that contain kosher meat, such as beef, bison or lamb, or kosher poultry such as chicken, goose, duck or turkey, or derivatives of meat, such as animal gelatin; non-animal products that were processed on equipment used for meat or meat-derived products must also be considered as meat (\"b'chezkat basar\")\nBULLET::::- \"Dairy\" products (also called \"halavi\" or \"milchig\") contain milk or any derivatives of milk such as butter or cheese; non-dairy products that were processed on equipment used for milk or milk-derived products must also be considered as milk (\"b'chezkat halav\")\nBULLET::::- \"Parev\" products contain neither meat nor milk or their derivative ingredients, and include foods such as fish, eggs, grains, fruit and produce; they remain \"parev\" if they are not mixed with or processed using equipment that is used for any meat or dairy products.\n\nWhile any produce that grows from the earth, such as fruits, grains, vegetables and mushrooms, are always permissible, laws regarding the status of certain agricultural produce, especially that grown in the Land of Israel, such as tithes and produce of the Sabbatical year, impact their permissibility for consumption.\n\nMost of the basic laws of \"kashrut\" are derived from the Torah's books of Leviticus and Deuteronomy. Their details and practical application, however, are set down in the oral law (eventually codified in the Mishnah and Talmud) and elaborated on in the later rabbinical literature. Although the Torah does not state the rationale for most \"kashrut\" laws, some suggest that they are only tests of obedience, while others have suggested philosophical, practical and hygienic reasons.\n\nOver the past century, many kashrut certification agencies have started to certify products, manufacturers and restaurants as kosher, usually authorizing the use of a proprietary symbol called a \"hechsher\" on products, or issuing a certificate, also called a \"hechsher\", to be displayed by the food establishment, to indicate their approval that they are in compliance with the kosher laws.\n\nJewish philosophy divides the 613 commandments (or \"mitzvot\") into three groups—laws that have a rational explanation and would probably be enacted by most orderly societies (\"mishpatim\"), laws that are understood after being explained but would not be legislated without the Torah's command (\"eidot\"), and laws that do not have a rational explanation (\"chukim\"). Some Jewish scholars say that \"kashrut\" should be categorized as laws for which there is no particular explanation since the human mind is not always capable of understanding divine intentions. In this line of thinking, the dietary laws were given as a demonstration of God's authority, and man must obey without asking why. However, Maimonides believed that Jews were permitted to seek out reasons for the laws of the Torah.\n\nSome theologians have said that the laws of \"kashrut\" are symbolic in character: Kosher animals represent virtues, while non-kosher animals represent vices. The 1st-century BCE Letter of Aristeas argues that the laws \"have been given ... to awake pious thoughts and to form the character\". This view reappears in the work of the 19th century Rabbi Samson Raphael Hirsch.\n\nThe Torah prohibits \"seething the kid (goat, sheep, calf) in its mother's milk\". While the Bible does not provide a reason, it has been suggested that the practice was perceived as cruel and insensitive.\n\nHasidic Judaism believes that everyday life is imbued with channels connecting with Divinity, the \"activation\" of which it sees as helping the Divine Presence to be drawn into the physical world; Hasidism argues that the food laws are related to the way such channels, termed \"sparks of holiness\", interact with various animals. These \"sparks of Holiness\" are released whenever a Jew manipulates any object for a \"holy reason\" (which includes eating); however, not all animal products are capable of releasing their \"sparks of holiness\". The Hasidic argument is that animals are imbued with signs that reveal the release of these sparks, and the signs are expressed in the biblical categorization of ritually \"clean\" and ritually \"unclean\".\n\nAccording to Christian theologian Gordon J. Wenham, the purpose of \"kashrut\" was to help Jews maintain a distinct and separate existence from other peoples; he says that the effect of the laws was to prevent socialization and intermarriage with non-Jews, preventing Jewish identity from being diluted. Wenham argued that since the impact of the food laws was a public affair, this would have enhanced Jewish attachment to them as a reminder of their distinct status as Jews.\n\nThere have been attempts to provide empirical support for the view that Jewish food laws have an overarching health benefit or purpose. One of the earliest is that of Maimonides in \"The Guide for the Perplexed\". In 1953, David Macht, an Orthodox Jew and proponent of the theory of biblical scientific foresight, conducted toxicity experiments on many kinds of animals and fish. His experiment involved lupin seedlings being supplied with extracts from the meat of various animals; Macht reported that in 100% of cases, extracts from ritually \"unclean\" meat inhibited the seedling's growth more than that from ritually \"clean\" meats. At the same time, these explanations are controversial. Scholar Lester L. Grabbe, writing in the \"Oxford Bible Commentary\" on Leviticus, says \"[a]n explanation now almost universally rejected is that the laws in this section have hygiene as their basis. Although some of the laws of ritual purity roughly correspond to modern ideas of physical cleanliness, many of them have little to do with hygiene. For example, there is no evidence that the 'unclean' animals are intrinsically bad to eat or to be avoided in a Mediterranean climate, as is sometimes asserted.\"\n\nThe laws of \"kashrut\" can be classified according to the origin of the prohibition (Biblical or rabbinical) and whether the prohibition concerns the food itself or a mixture of foods.\n\nBiblically prohibited foods include:\nBULLET::::- Non-kosher animals and birds: mammals require certain identifying characteristics (cloven hooves and being ruminants), while birds require a tradition that they can be consumed. Fish require scales and fins (thus excluding catfish, for instance). All invertebrates are non-kosher apart from certain types of locust, on which most communities lack a clear tradition. No reptiles or amphibians are kosher.\nBULLET::::- Carrion (\"nevelah\"): meat from a kosher animal that has not been slaughtered according to the laws of \"shechita\". This prohibition includes animals that have been slaughtered by non-Jews.\nBULLET::::- Injured (\"terefah\"): an animal with a significant defect or injury, such as a fractured bone or particular types of lung adhesions.\nBULLET::::- Blood (\"dam\"): The blood of kosher mammals and fowl is removed through salting, with special procedures for the liver, which is very rich in blood.\nBULLET::::- Particular fats (\"chelev\"): particular parts of the abdominal fat of cattle, goats and sheep must be removed by a process called \"nikkur\".\nBULLET::::- The twisted nerve (\"gid hanasheh\"): the sciatic nerve, as according to Genesis 32:32 the patriarch Jacob's was damaged when he fought with an angel, may not be eaten and is removed by \"nikkur\".\nBULLET::::- A limb of a living animal (\"ever min ha-chai\"): According to Jewish law, God forbade Noah and his descendants to consume flesh torn from a live animal. Hence, Jewish law considers this prohibition applicable even to non-Jews, and therefore, a Jew may not give or sell such meat to a non-Jew.\nBULLET::::- Untithed food (\"tevel\"): produce of the Land of Israel requires the removal of certain tithes, which in ancient times were given to the Kohanim (priests), Levites and the poor (\"terumah\", \"maaser rishon\" and \"maasar ani\" respectively) or taken to the Old City of Jerusalem to be eaten there (\"maaser sheni\").\nBULLET::::- Fruit during the first three years (\"orlah\"): according to Leviticus 19:23, fruit from a tree in the first three years after planting may not be consumed (both in the Land of Israel and the diaspora). This applies also to the fruit of the vine—grapes, and wine produced from them.\nBULLET::::- New grain (\"chadash\"): the Bible prohibits newly grown grain (planted after Passover the previous year) until the second day of Passover; there is debate as to whether this law applies to grain grown outside the Land of Israel.\nBULLET::::- Wine of libation (\"yayin nesekh\"): wine that may have been dedicated to idolatrous practices.\n\nBiblically prohibited mixtures include:\nBULLET::::- Mixtures of meat and milk (\"basar be-chalav\"): this law derives from the broad interpretation of the commandment not to \"cook a kid in its mother's milk\"; other non-kosher foods are permitted for non-dietary use (e.g. to be sold to non-Jews), but Jews are forbidden to benefit from mixtures of meat and milk in any way.\nBULLET::::- Different species of plants grown together (\"kilayim\"): in the Land of Israel different species of plants are to be grown separately and not in close proximity according to Leviticus 19:19 and Deuteronomy 22:9–11. A specific subdivision of this law is \"kil'ei ha-kerem\", the prohibition of planting any grain or vegetable near a grapevine; this law applies to Jews throughout the world, and a Jew may not derive benefit from such produce.\n\nRabbinically prohibited foods include:\nBULLET::::- Non-Jewish milk (\"chalav akum\"): milk that may have an admixture of milk from non-kosher animals (see below for current views on this prohibition).\nBULLET::::- Non-Jewish cheese (\"gevinat akum\"): cheese that may have been produced with non-kosher rennet.\nBULLET::::- Non-Jewish wine (\"stam yeinam\"): wine that while not produced for idolatrous purposes may otherwise have been poured for such a purpose or alternatively when consumed will lead to intermarriage.\nBULLET::::- Food cooked by a non-Jew (\"bishul akum\"): this law was enacted for concerns of intermarriage.\nBULLET::::- Non-Jewish bread (\"pat akum\"): this law was enacted for concerns of intermarriage.\nBULLET::::- Health risk (\"sakanah\"): certain foods and mixtures are considered a health risk, such as mixtures of fish and meat.\n\nOnly meat from particular species is permissible. Mammals that \"both\" chew their cud (ruminate) and have cloven hooves can be kosher. Animals with one characteristic but not the other (the camel, the hyrax, and the hare because they have no cloven hooves, and the pig because it does not ruminate) are specifically excluded. In 2008, a rabbinical ruling determined that giraffes and their milk are eligible to be considered kosher. The giraffe has both split hooves and chews its cud, characteristics of animals considered kosher. Findings from 2008 show that giraffe milk curdles, meeting kosher standards. Although kosher, the giraffe is not slaughtered today because the process would be very costly. Giraffes are difficult to restrain, and their use for food could cause the species to become endangered.\n\nNon-kosher birds are listed outright but the exact \"zoological\" references are disputed and some references refer to families of birds (24 are mentioned). The Mishnah refers to four signs provided by the sages. First, a \"dores\" (predatory bird) is not kosher. Additionally, kosher birds possess three physical characteristics: an extra toe in the back (which does not join the other toes in supporting the leg), a \"zefek\" (crop), and a \"korkoban\" (gizzard) with a peelable lumen. However, individual Jews are barred from merely applying these regulations alone; an established tradition (\"masorah\") is necessary to allow birds to be consumed, even if it can be substantiated that they meet all four criteria. The only exception to this is the turkey. There was a time when certain authorities considered the signs sufficient, so Jews started eating this bird without a \"masorah\" because it possesses all the signs (\"simanim\") in Hebrew.\n\nFish must have fins and scales to be kosher. Shellfish and other non-fish water animals fauna are not kosher. (See kosher species of fish.) Insects are not kosher, except for certain species of kosher locust. Generally, any animal that eats other animals, whether they kill their food or eat carrion, is not kosher, as well as any animal that has been partially eaten by other animals.\n\n! Class\n! Forbidden kinds\n\nMeat and milk (or derivatives) may not be mixed in the sense that meat and dairy products are not served at the same meal, served or cooked in the same utensils, or stored together. Observant Jews have separate sets of dishes, and sometimes different kitchens, for meat and milk, and wait anywhere between one and six hours after eating meat before consuming milk products. The \"milchig\" and \"fleishig\" (lit. \"milky\" and \"meaty\") utensils and dishes are the commonly referred to Yiddish delineations between dairy and meat ones, respectively.\n\nMammals and fowl must be slaughtered by a trained individual (a \"shochet\") using a special method of slaughter, \"shechita\". Among other features, \"shechita\" slaughter severs the jugular vein, carotid artery, esophagus, and trachea in a single continuous cutting movement with an unserrated, sharp knife. Failure of any of these criteria renders the meat of the animal unsuitable. The body of the slaughtered animal must be checked after slaughter to confirm that the animal had no medical condition or defect that would have caused it to die of its own accord within a year, which would make the meat unsuitable. These conditions (\"treifot\") include 70 different categories of injuries, diseases, and abnormalities whose presence renders the animal non-kosher. It is forbidden to consume certain parts of the animal, such as certain fats (\"chelev\") and the sciatic nerves from the legs, the process of excision being done by experts before the meat is sold. As much blood as possible must be removed through the \"kashering\" process; this is usually done through soaking and salting the meat, but the liver, as it is rich in blood, is grilled over an open flame. Fish (and kosher locusts, for those who follow the traditions permitting them) must be killed before being eaten, but no particular method has been specified in Jewish law. Legal aspects of ritual slaughter are governed not only by Jewish law but civil law as well.\n\nWhen an animal is ritually slaughtered (\"shechted\") the raw meat is traditionally cut, rinsed and salted, prior to cooking. Salting of raw meat draws out the blood that lodges on the inner surface of the meat. Salting is made with any coarse grain of salt, while the meat is laid over a grating or colander to allow for drainage, and where the salt is allowed to remain on the meat for the duration of time that it takes to walk one biblical mile (appx. 18– 24 minutes). Afterward, the residue of salt is rinsed away with water, and the meat cooked. Meat that is roasted requires no prior salting, as fire acts as a natural purgatory of blood.\n\nA late Commentary on the Shulchan Arukh known as the \"Taz\" (\"Turei Zahav\"), on \"Yoreh De'ah\" 69:5:16, writes that the pieces of meat can be \"very thick\" when salting. The Yemenite Jewish practice, however, follows Rabbi Saadiah Gaon who required that the meat not be larger than half a \"rotal\" (i.e. ca. 216 grams) when salting. This allows the effects of the salt to penetrate. Some Orthodox Jewish communities require the additional stricture of submersing raw meat in boiling water prior to cooking it, a practice known as \"ḥaliṭah\" (), “blanching.” This was believed to constrict the blood lodged within the meat, to prevent it from oozing out when the meat was eaten. The raw meat is left in the pot of boiling water for as long as it takes for the meat to whiten on its outer layer. If someone wanted to use the water for soup after making \"ḥaliṭah\" in the same pot, he could simply scoop out the film, froth and scum that surface in the boiling water. \"Ḥaliṭah\" is not required when roasting meat over a fire, as the fire constricts the blood.\n\nUtensils used for non-kosher foods become non-kosher, and make even otherwise kosher food prepared with them non-kosher. Some such utensils, depending on the material they are made from, can be made suitable for preparing kosher food again by immersion in boiling water or by the application of a blowtorch.Food prepared in a manner that violates the \"Shabbat\" (Sabbath) may not be eaten; although in certain instances it is permitted after the Shabbat is over.\n\nPassover has stricter dietary rules, the most important of which is the prohibition on eating leavened bread or derivatives of this, which are known as \"chametz\". This prohibition is derived from Exodus 12:15. Utensils used in preparing and serving \"chametz\" are also forbidden on Passover unless they have been ritually cleansed (\"kashered\"). Observant Jews often keep separate sets of meat and dairy utensils for Passover use only. In addition, some groups follow various eating restrictions on Passover that go beyond the rules of \"kashrut\", such as not eating \"gebrochts\" or garlic.\n\nBiblical rules also control the use of agriculture produce, for example, with respect to their tithing, or when it is permitted to eat them or to harvest them, and what must be done to make them suitable for human consumption. For produce grown in the Land of Israel a modified version of the biblical tithes must be applied, including \"Terumat HaMaaser\", \"Maaser Rishon\", \"Maaser Sheni\", and \"Maasar Ani\" (untithed produce is called \"tevel\"); the fruit of the first three years of a tree's growth or replanting are forbidden for eating or any other use as \"orlah\"; produce grown in the Land of Israel on the seventh year obtains \"k'dushat shvi'it\", and unless managed carefully is forbidden as a violation of the \"Shmita\" (Sabbatical Year). Some rules of \"kashrut\" are subject to different rabbinical opinions. For example, many hold that the rule against eating \"chadash\" (new grain) before the 16th of the month Nisan does not apply outside the Land of Israel.\n\nMany vegetarian restaurants and producers of vegetarian foods acquire a \"hechsher\", certifying that a Rabbinical organization has approved their products as being kosher. The \"hechsher\" usually certifies that certain vegetables have been checked for insect infestation and steps have been taken to ensure that cooked food meets the requirements of \"bishul Yisrael\". Vegetables such as spinach and cauliflower must be checked for insect infestation. The proper procedure for inspecting and cleaning varies by species, growing conditions, and views of individual rabbis.\n\nA \"Pareve\" (or \"Parve\") food is one which is neither meat nor dairy. Fish fall into this category, as well as any food which is not animal-derived.\n\nEggs are also considered \"pareve\" despite being an animal product.\n\nSome processes convert a meat or dairy derived product into a pareve one. For example, rennet is sometimes made from stomach linings, yet is acceptable for making kosher cheese. Gelatins derived from kosher animal sources (which were ritually slaughtered) are also \"pareve\". Other gelatin-like products from non-animal sources such as agar agar and carrageenan are \"pareve\" by nature. Fish gelatin, like all kosher fish products, is \"pareve\".\n\nJewish law generally requires that bread be kept \"parve (i.e.,\" not kneaded with meat or dairy products nor made on meat or dairy equipment).\n\n\"Kashrut\" has procedures by which equipment can be cleaned of its previous non-kosher or meat/dairy use, but those may be inadequate for vegetarians, those with allergies, or adherents to other religious statutes. For example, dairy manufacturing equipment can be cleaned well enough that the rabbis grant \"pareve\" status to products manufactured with it but someone with a strong allergic sensitivity to dairy products might still react to the dairy residue. That is why some products that are legitimately pareve carry \"milk\" warnings.\n\nIf smoked, under normal circumstances there is no reason cannabis (marijuana) would not be kosher, although some rabbis apply this only to medical cannabis, not recreational usage. However, this is excepting that smoking it typically involves lighting a spark, so it would not be appropriate for example after sundown on Shabbat. If cannabis is \"eaten\", as cannabis edibles are, on the other hand, the issue is not as clear cut, as there may be small insects inside which are not kosher. For the observant it is recommended to only use brands that are certified as kosher. For cannabis grown in Israel, the plants must observe \"shmittah\", but this does not apply to cannabis from elsewhere.\n\nThough it is not a food product, some tobacco receives a year-long Kosher certification. This year long certification means that the tobacco is certified also for Passover where different restrictions may be in place. Tobacco may, for example, come into contact with some \"chametz\" grains that are strictly forbidden during Passover and the certification is a guarantee that it is free from this type of contamination. In Israel this certification is given by a private kashrut rabbinic group Beit Yosef, but Chief Rabbinate has objected to granting of any certification by rabbis because of health risks from tobacco.\n\nWith the advent of genetic engineering, a whole new type of food has been brought into the world, and scholars in both academia and Judaic faith have differing viewpoints on whether these new strains of foods are to be considered kosher or not. The first genetically modified animal approved by the FDA for human consumption is the AquAdvantage salmon, and while salmon is normally an acceptably kosher food, this modified organism has a gene from a nonkosher organism.\n\nIn 2015, the Committee on Jewish Law and Standards of the Rabbinical Assembly released a document regarding genetically modified organisms, stating that modification of gene sequences via the introduction of foreign DNA in order to convey a specific capability in the new organism is allowable, that entirely new species should not be intentionally created, and that the health implications of genetically modified foods must be considered on an individual basis.\n\nSome put forth that this intermixing of species is against the teachings of the Talmud and thus against Jewish Law and nonkosher. Others argue that the one in sixty parts law of kashrut is of significance, and that the foreign gene accounts for the less than 1/60 of the animal and thus the modified salmon is kosher.\n\nCertain foods must be prepared in whole or in part by Jews. This includes grape wine, certain cooked foods (\"bishul akum\"), cheese (\"g'vinat akum\"), and according to some also butter (\"chem'at akum\"); dairy products (Hebrew: חלב ישראל chalav Yisrael \"milk of Israel\"); and bread (Pas Yisroel).\n\nAlthough reading the label of food products can identify obviously non-kosher ingredients, some countries allow manufacturers to omit identification of certain ingredients. Such \"hidden\" ingredients may include lubricants and flavorings, among other additives; in some cases, for instance, the use of \"natural\" flavorings, these ingredients are more likely to be derived from non-kosher substances. Furthermore, certain products, such as fish, have a high rate of mislabeling, which may result in a non-kosher fish being sold in a package labeled as a species of kosher fish.\n\nProducers of foods and food additives can contact Jewish religious authorities to have their products certified as \"kosher\": this involves a visit to the manufacturing facilities by an individual rabbi or a committee from a rabbinic organization, who will inspect the production methods and contents, and if everything is sufficiently \"kosher\" a certificate would be issued.\n\nManufacturers sometimes identify the products that have received such certification by adding particular graphical symbols to the label. These symbols are known in Judaism as \"hechsherim\". Due to differences in \"kashrut\" standards held by different organizations, the \"hechsheirim\" of certain Jewish authorities may at times be considered invalid by other Jewish authorities. The certification marks of the various rabbis and organisations are too numerous to list, but one of the most commonly used in the United States of America is that of the Union of Orthodox Congregations, who use a \"U\" inside a circle (\"O-U\"), symbolising the initials of \"Orthodox Union\". In Britain, a commonly used symbol is the \"KLBD\" logo of the London Beth Din. A single \"K\" is sometimes used as a symbol for \"kosher\", but since many countries do not allow letters to be trademarked (the method by which other symbols are protected from misuse), it only indicates that the company producing the product claims that it is kosher.\n\nMany of the certification symbols are accompanied by additional letters or words to indicate the category of the product, according to Jewish law; the categorisation may conflict with legal classifications, especially in the case of food that Jewish law regards as \"dairy\", but legal classification does not.\nBULLET::::- D—Dairy\nBULLET::::- DE—Dairy equipment\nBULLET::::- M—Meat, including poultry\nBULLET::::- Pareve—Food that is neither meat nor dairy\nBULLET::::- Fish\nBULLET::::- P—Passover-related (\"P\" is not used for \"Pareve\")\n\nIn many cases constant supervision is required because, for various reasons, such as changes in manufacturing processes, products that once were kosher may cease to be so. For example, a kosher lubricating oil may be replaced by one containing tallow, which many rabbinic authorities view as non-kosher. Such changes are often coordinated with the supervising rabbi, or supervising organization, to ensure that new packaging does not suggest any \"hechsher\" or \"kashrut\". In some cases, however, existing stocks of pre-printed labels with the \"hechsher\" may continue to be used on the now non-kosher product. An active grapevine among the Jewish community discusses which products are now questionable, as well as products which have become kosher but whose labels have yet to carry the \"hechsher\". Some newspapers and periodicals also discuss \"kashrut\" products.\n\nProducts labeled kosher-style are non-kosher products that have characteristics of kosher foods, such as all-beef hot dogs, or are flavored or prepared in a manner consistent with Ashkenazi practices, like dill pickles. The designation usually refers to delicatessen items.\n\nFood producers often look to expand their markets or marketing potential, and offering kosher food has become a way to do that. The uniqueness of kosher food was advertised as early as 1849. In 1911 Procter & Gamble became the first company to advertise one of their products, Crisco, as kosher. Over the next two decades, companies such as Lender's Bagels, Maxwell House, Manischewitz, and Empire evolved and gave the kosher market more shelf-space. In the 1960s, Hebrew National hotdogs launched a \"we answer to a higher authority\" campaign to appeal to Jews and non-Jews alike. From that point on, \"kosher\" became a symbol for both quality and value. The kosher market quickly expanded, and with it more opportunities for kosher products. Menachem Lubinsky, founder of the Kosherfest trade fair, estimates as many as kosher consumers and in sales of kosher products in the USA.\n\nIn 2014 the Israeli Defense Forces decided to allow female kosher supervisors to work in its kitchens on military bases, and the first women kosher inspectors were \ncertified in Israel.\n\nAdvertising standards laws in many jurisdictions prohibit the use of the phrase \"kosher\" in a product's labeling unless the producer can show that the product conforms to Jewish dietary laws; however, different jurisdictions often define the legal qualifications for conforming to Jewish dietary laws differently. For example, in some places the law may require that a rabbi certify the \"kashrut\" nature, in others the rules of \"kosher\" are fully defined in law, and in others still it is sufficient that the manufacturer only believes that the product complies with Jewish dietary regulations. In several cases, laws restricting the use of the term \"kosher\" have later been determined to be illegal religious interference.\n\nIn the United States, the cost of certification for mass-produced items is typically minuscule, and is usually more than offset by the advantages of being certified. In 1975 \"The New York Times\" estimated the cost per item for obtaining kosher certification at 6.5 millionths of a cent ($0.000000065) per item for a General Foods frozen-food item. According to a 2005 report by Burns & McDonnell, most US national certifying agencies are non-profit, only charging for supervision and on-site work, for which the on-site supervisor \"typically makes less per visit than an auto mechanic does per hour\". However, re-engineering an existing manufacturing process can be costly. Certification usually leads to increased revenues by opening up additional markets to Jews who keep kosher, Muslims who keep halal, Seventh-day Adventists who keep the main laws of Kosher Diet, vegetarians, and the lactose-intolerant who wish to avoid dairy products (products that are reliably certified as \"pareve\" meet this criterion). According to the Orthodox Union, one of the largest kashrut organizations in the United States, \"when positioned next to a competing non-kosher brand, a kosher product will do better by 20%\".\n\nIn some European communities there is a special tax imposed on the purchase of kosher meat to help support the community's educational institutions. In 2009 delegates at a meeting of the Rabbinical Council of Europe broadly agreed that the tax which supports the rabbinate, \"mikvo’os\" and other communal facilities should be reduced. \"While the supermarket Tesco sells a whole chicken for £2, its kosher counterpart of similar weight costs five to six times more.\"\n\nMany Jews observe \"kashrut\" partially, by abstaining from pork or shellfish, or by not drinking milk with a meat dish. Some keep kosher at home but will eat in a non-kosher restaurant. In 2012, one analysis of the specialty food market in North America estimated that only 15% of kosher consumers were Jewish. Muslims, Hindus, and people with allergies to dairy foods often consider the \"kosher-pareve\" designation as an assurance that a food contains no animal-derived ingredients, including milk and all of its derivatives. However, since \"kosher-pareve\" foods may contain honey, eggs, or fish, vegans cannot rely on the certification.\n\nAbout a sixth of American Jews or 0.3% of the American population fully keep kosher, and there are many more who do not strictly follow all the rules but still abstain from some prohibited foods (especially pork). The Seventh-day Adventist Church, a Christian denomination, has a health message that expects adherence to the kosher dietary laws.\n\nA 2013 survey found that 22% of American Jews surveyed claimed to keep kosher in the home.\n\nIn Ancient Hebrew the word \"kosher\" () means \"be advantageous\", \"proper\", \"suitable\", or \"succeed\" according to the Brown-Driver-Briggs Hebrew and English Lexicon. In Modern Hebrew it generally refers to \"kashrut\", but it can also sometimes mean \"proper\". For example, the Babylonian Talmud uses \"kosher\" in the sense of \"virtuous\" when referring to Darius I as a \"kosher king\"; Darius, a Persian king (reigned 522-486 BCE), fostered the building of the Second Temple. In colloquial English, \"kosher\" often means \"legitimate\", \"acceptable\", \"permissible\", \"genuine\", or \"authentic\".\n\nThe word \"kosher\" can form part of some common product names. Sometimes it is used as an abbreviation of \"koshering\", meaning the process for making something \"kosher\"; for example, \"kosher salt\" is a form of salt with irregularly shaped crystals, making it particularly suitable for preparing meat according to the rules of \"kashrut\", because the increased surface area of the crystals absorbs blood more effectively. At other times \"kosher\" can occur as a synonym for \"Jewish tradition\"; for example, a \"kosher dill\" pickle is simply a pickle made in the traditional manner of Jewish New York City pickle-makers, using a generous addition of garlic to the brine, and is not necessarily compliant with the traditional Jewish food laws.\n\nAlthough the term Kosher is mainly used in relation to food, it is sometimes used in other areas. Some Orthodox retailers sell Kosher cell phones which are stripped-down devices with limited features.\n\nBULLET::::- Abomination (Judaism)\nBULLET::::- Ahimsa (non-violence to living beings)\nBULLET::::- Buddhist cuisine\nBULLET::::- Buddhist vegetarianism\nBULLET::::- Christian dietary laws\nBULLET::::- Comparison of Islamic and Jewish dietary laws\nBULLET::::- Hindu dietary laws\nBULLET::::- Islamic dietary laws\nBULLET::::- Jewish cuisine\nBULLET::::- Eco-Kashrut\nBULLET::::- Israeli cuisine\nBULLET::::- Jewish vegetarianism\nBULLET::::- Jewish Veg\nBULLET::::- Kosher certification agency\nBULLET::::- Sabbath food preparation\nBULLET::::- Jhatka\nBULLET::::- Kosher tax\nBULLET::::- Kosher tax conspiracy theory\nBULLET::::- Treef\nBULLET::::- Treif\n\nBULLET::::- Isaac Klein, \"A Guide to Jewish Religious Practice\", JTSA, 1992\nBULLET::::- David C. Kraemer, \"Jewish Eating and Identity Throughout the Ages\", Routledge, 2008\nBULLET::::- James M. Lebeau, \"The Jewish Dietary Laws: Sanctify Life\", United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism, New York, 1983\nBULLET::::- Yacov Lipschutz, \"Kashruth: A Comprehensive Background and Reference Guide to the Principles of Kashruth\". New York: Mesorah Publications Ltd, 1989\nBULLET::::- Jordan D. Rosenblum, \"The Jewish Dietary Laws in the Ancient World\". Cambridge University Press, 2016.\n\nBULLET::::- Chabad.org: Kosher\nBULLET::::- Kashrut.com\nBULLET::::- OU Kosher\nBULLET::::- Aish.com: ABCs of Kosher\nBULLET::::- Jewfaq.org: Kashrut - Jewish Dietary Laws\n"}
{"id": "16882", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16882", "title": "KLM", "text": "KLM\n\nKLM Royal Dutch Airlines, legally \"Koninklijke Luchtvaart Maatschappij N.V.\" (literal translation: Royal Aviation Company, Inc.), is the flag carrier airline of the Netherlands. KLM is headquartered in Amstelveen, with its hub at nearby Amsterdam Airport Schiphol. It is part of the Air France–KLM group, and a member of the SkyTeam airline alliance. Founded in 1919, KLM is the oldest airline in the world still operating under its original name and had 35,488 employees and a fleet of 119 (excluding subsidiaries) . KLM operates scheduled passenger and cargo services to 145 destinations.\nIn 1919, a young aviator lieutenant named Albert Plesman sponsored the ELTA aviation exhibition in Amsterdam. The exhibition was a great success; after it closed several Dutch commercial interests intended to establish a Dutch airline, which Plesman was nominated to head. In September 1919, Queen Wilhelmina awarded the yet-to-be-founded KLM its \"Royal\" (\"\"Koninklijke\"\") predicate. On 7 October 1919, eight Dutch businessmen, including Frits Fentener van Vlissingen, founded KLM as one of the first commercial airline companies. Plesman became its first administrator and director.\n\nThe first KLM flight took place on 17 May 1920. KLM's first pilot, Jerry Shaw, flew from Croydon Airport, London, to Amsterdam. The flight was flown using a leased Aircraft Transport and Travel De Haviland DH-16, registration G-EALU, which was carrying two British journalists and some newspapers. In 1920, KLM carried 440 passengers and 22 tons of freight. In April 1921, after a winter hiatus, KLM resumed its services using its pilots, and Fokker F.II and Fokker F.III aircraft. In 1921, KLM started scheduled services.\nKLM's first intercontinental flight took off on 1 October 1924. The final destination was Jakarta (then called 'Batavia'), Java, in the Dutch East Indies; the flight used a Fokker F.VII with registration H-NACC and was piloted by Van der Hoop. In September 1929, regular scheduled services between Amsterdam and Batavia commenced. Until the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939, this was the world's longest-distance scheduled service by airplane. By 1926, it was offering flights to Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Brussels, Paris, London, Bremen, Copenhagen, and Malmö, using primarily Fokker F.II and Fokker F.III aircraft.\n\nIn 1930, KLM carried 15,143 passengers. The Douglas DC-2 was introduced on the Batavia service in 1934. The first experimental transatlantic KLM flight was between Amsterdam and Curaçao in December 1934 using the Fokker F.XVIII \"Snip\". The first of the airline's Douglas DC-3 aircraft were delivered in 1936; these replaced the DC-2s on the service via Batavia to Sydney. KLM was the first airline to serve Manchester's new Ringway airport, starting June 1938. KLM was the only civilian airline to receive the Douglas DC-5; the airline used two of them in the West Indies and sold two to the East Indies government, and is thus the only airline to have operated all Douglas 'DC' models other than the DC-1.\n\nWhen Germany invaded the Netherlands on 10 May 1940, several KLM aircraft—mostly DC-3s and a few DC-2s—were en route to or from the Far East, or were operating services in Europe. Five DC-3s and one DC-2 were taken to Britain. During the war, these aircraft and crew members flew scheduled passenger flights between Bristol and Lisbon under BOAC registration.\n\nThe Douglas DC-3 PH-ALI \"Ibis\", then registered as G-AGBB, was attacked by the Luftwaffe on 15 November 1942, 19 April 1943, and finally on 1 June 1943 as BOAC Flight 777, killing all passengers and crew. Some KLM aircraft and their crews ended up in the Australia-Dutch East Indies region, where they helped transport refugees from Japanese aggression in that area.\n\nAlthough operations paused in Europe, KLM continued to fly and expand in the Caribbean.\n\nAfter the end of the Second World War in August 1945, KLM immediately started to rebuild its network. Since the Dutch East Indies were in a state of revolt, Plesman's priority was to re-establish KLM's route to Batavia. This service was reinstated by the end of 1945. Domestic and European flights resumed in September 1945, initially with a fleet of Douglas DC-3s and Douglas DC-4s. On 21 May 1946, KLM was the first continental European airline to start scheduled transatlantic flights between Amsterdam and New York City using Douglas DC-4 aircraft. By 1948, KLM had reconstructed its network and services to Africa, North and South America, and the Caribbean resumed.\n\nLong-range, pressurized Lockheed Constellations and Douglas DC-6s joined KLM's fleet in the late 1940s; the Convair 240 short-range pressurized twin-engined airliner began European flights for the company in late 1948.\n\nDuring the immediate post-war period, the Dutch government expressed interest in gaining a majority stake in KLM, thus nationalizing it. Plesman wanted KLM to remain a private company under private control; he allowed the Dutch government to acquire a minority stake in the airline. In 1950, KLM carried 356,069 passengers. The expansion of the network continued in the 1950s with the addition of several destinations in western North America. KLM's fleet expanded with the addition of new versions of the Lockheed Constellation and Lockheed Electra, of which KLM was the first European airline to fly.\nOn 31 December 1953, the founder and president of KLM, Albert Plesman, died at the age of 64. He was succeeded as president by Fons Aler. After Plesman's death, the company and other airlines entered a difficult economic period. The conversion to jet aircraft placed a further financial burden on KLM. The Netherlands government increased its ownership of the company to two-thirds, thus nationalizing it. The board of directors remained under the control of private shareholders.\n\nOn 25 July 1957, the airline introduced its flight simulator for the Douglas DC-7C – the last KLM aircraft with piston engines – which opened the transpolar route from Amsterdam via Anchorage to Tokyo on 1 November 1958. Each crew flying the transpolar route over the Arctic was equipped with a winter survival kit, including a 7.62 mm selective-fire AR-10 carbine for use against polar bears, in the event the plane was forced down onto the polar ice.\n\nThe four-engine turboprop Vickers Viscount 800 was introduced on European routes in 1957. Beginning in September 1959, KLM introduced the four-engine turboprop Lockheed L-188 Electra onto some of its European and Middle Eastern routes. In March 1960, the airline introduced the first Douglas DC-8 jet into its fleet. In 1961, KLM reported its first year of losses. In 1961, the airline's president Fons Aler was succeeded by Ernst van der Beugel. This change of leadership, however, did not lead to a reversion of KLM's financial difficulties. Van der Beugel resigned as president in 1963 due to health reasons. Horatius Albarda was appointed to succeed Ernst van der Beugel as president of KLM in 1963. Alberda initiated a reorganization of the company, which led to the reduction of staff and air services. In 1965, Alberda died in an air crash and was succeeded as president by Dr. Gerrit van der Wal. Van der Wal forged an agreement with the Dutch government that KLM would be once again run as a private company. By 1966, the stake of the Dutch government in KLM was reduced to a minority stake of 49.5%. In 1966, KLM introduced the Douglas DC-9 on European and Middle East routes.\nThe new terminal buildings at Amsterdam Airport Schiphol opened in April 1967, and in 1968 the stretched Douglas DC-8-63 (\"Super DC-8\") entered service. With 244 seats, it was the largest airliner at the time. KLM was the first airline to put the higher-gross-weight Boeing 747-200B, powered by Pratt & Whitney JT9D engines, into service in February 1971; this began the airline's use of widebody jets. In March 1971, KLM opened its current headquarters in Amstelveen. In 1972, it purchased the first of several McDonnell Douglas DC-10 aircraft—McDonnell Douglas's response to Boeing's 747.\n\nIn 1973, Sergio Orlandini was appointed to succeed Gerrit van der Wal as president of KLM. At the time, KLM, as well as other airlines, had to deal with overcapacity. Orlandini proposed to convert KLM 747s to \"combis\" that could carry a combination of passengers and freight in a mixed configuration on the main deck of the aircraft. In November 1975, the first of these seven Boeing 747-200B Combi aircraft were added to the KLM fleet. The airline previously operated DC-8 passenger and freight combi aircraft as well and currently operates Boeing 747-400 combi aircraft.\n\nThe 1973 oil crisis, which caused difficult economic conditions, led KLM to seek government assistance in arranging debt refinancing. The airline issued additional shares of stock to the government in return for its money. In the late 1970s, the government's stake had again increased to a majority of 78%, re-nationalizing it. The company management remained under the control of private stakeholders.\n\nIn 1980, KLM carried 9,715,069 passengers. In 1983, it reached an agreement with Boeing to convert ten of its Boeing 747-200 aircraft (Three 747-200Bs and Seven 747-200Ms) into Boeing 747-300s with the stretched-upper-deck modification. The work started in 1984 at the Boeing factory in Everett, Washington, and finished in 1986. The converted aircraft were called Boeing 747-200SUD or 747-300, which the airline operated in addition to three newly built Boeing 747-300s manufactured from the ground up. In 1983, KLM took delivery of the first of ten Airbus A310 passenger jets. Sergio Orlandini retired in 1987 and was succeeded as president of KLM by Jan de Soet. In 1986, the Dutch government's shareholding in KLM was reduced to 54.8 percent. It was expected that this share would be further reduced during the decade. The Boeing 747-400 was introduced into KLM's fleet in June 1989.\n\nWith the liberalization of the European market, KLM started developing its hub at Amsterdam Airport Schiphol by feeding its network with traffic from affiliated airlines. As part of its development of a worldwide network, KLM acquired a 20% stake in Northwest Airlines in July 1989. In 1990, KLM carried 16,000,000 passengers. KLM president Jan de Soet retired at the end of 1990 and was succeeded in 1991 by Pieter Bouw. In December 1991, KLM was the first European airline to introduce a frequent flyer loyalty program, which was called \"Flying Dutchman\".\n\nIn January 1993, the United States Department of Transportation granted KLM and Northwest Airlines anti-trust immunity, which allowed them to intensify their partnership. As of September 1993, the airlines operated their flights between the United States and Europe as part of a joint venture. In March 1994, KLM and Northwest Airlines introduced World Business Class on intercontinental routes. KLM's stake in Northwest Airlines was increased to 25% in 1994.\n\nKLM introduced the Boeing 767-300ER in July 1995. In January 1996, KLM acquired a 26% share in Kenya Airways, the flag-carrier airline of Kenya. In 1997, Pieter Bouw resigned as president of KLM and was succeeded by Leo van Wijk. In August 1998, KLM repurchased all regular shares from the Dutch government to make KLM a private company. On 1 November 1999, KLM founded AirCares, a communication and fundraising platform supporting worthy causes and focusing on underprivileged children.\n\nKLM renewed its intercontinental fleets by replacing the Boeing 767s, Boeing 747-300s, and eventually, the McDonnell Douglas MD-11s with Boeing 777-200ERs and Airbus A330-200s. Some 747s were withdrawn from service first. The MD-11s remained in service until October 2014. The first Boeing 777 was received on 25 October 2003, while the first Airbus A330-200 was introduced on 25 August 2005.\n\nOn 30 September 2003, Air France and KLM agreed to a merger plan in which Air France and KLM would become subsidiaries of a holding company called Air France–KLM. Both airlines would retain their own brands; both Charles de Gaulle Airport and Amsterdam Airport Schiphol would become key hubs. In February 2004, the European Commission and United States Department of Justice approved the proposed merger of the airlines. In April 2004, an exchange offer in which KLM shareholders exchanged their KLM shares for Air France shares took place. Since 5 May 2004, Air France–KLM has been listed on the Euronext exchanges in Paris, Amsterdam and New York. In September 2004, the merger was completed by creation of the Air France–KLM holding company. The merger resulted in the world's largest airline group and should have led to an estimated annual cost-saving of between €400 million and €500 million.\n\nIt did not appear that KLM's longstanding joint venture with Northwest Airlines—which merged with Delta Air Lines in 2008—was affected by the merger with Air France. KLM and Northwest joined the SkyTeam alliance in September 2004. Also in 2004, senior management came under fire for providing itself with controversial bonuses after the merger with Air France, while 4,500 jobs were lost at KLM. After external pressure, management gave up on these bonuses.\n\nIn March 2007, KLM started to use the Amadeus reservation system, along with partner Kenya Airways. After 10 years as president of the airline, Leo van Wijk resigned from his position and was succeeded by Peter Hartman.\n\nBeginning in September 2010, KLM integrated the passenger division of Martinair into KLM, transferring all personnel and routes. By November 2011, Martinair consisted of only the cargo and maintenance division. In March 2011, KLM and InselAir reached an agreement for mutual cooperation on InselAir destinations, thus expanding its passenger services. Beginning 27 March 2011, KLM passengers could fly to all InselAir destinations through InselAir's hubs in Curaçao and Sint Maarten. This cooperation was extended to a codeshare agreement in 2012. In early 2018, the cooperation with Inselair was terminated, including any interlining agreements, after Inselair found itself in financial difficulties which forced the airline to sell off part of its fleet and cancel some of its routes.\n\nOn 20 February 2013, KLM announced that Peter Hartman would resign as president and CEO of KLM on 1 July 2013. He was succeeded by Camiel Eurlings. Hartman remained employed by the company until he retired on 1 January 2014. On 15 October 2014, KLM announced that Eurlings, in joint consultation with the supervisory board, had decided to immediately resign as president and CEO. As of this date, he was succeeded by Pieter Elbers. KLM received the award for \"Best Airline Staff Service\" in Europe at the World Airline Awards 2013. This award represents the rating for an airline's performance across both airport staff and cabin staff combined. It is the second consecutive year that KLM won this award; in 2012 it was awarded with this title as well. On 19 June 2012, KLM made the first transatlantic flight fueled partly by sustainable biofuels to Rio de Janeiro. This was the longest distance any aircraft had flown on biofuels.\n\nIn 2019, KLM celebrates its centennial, as it was founded in 1919. Since it is the oldest airline still operating under its original name, it is the first airline to achieve this feat.\n\nKey business and operating results of KLM are shown below (as at year ending 31 December):\n!style=\"background: #00A1E4;\"  \n!style=\"background: #00A1E4;\"  2011\n!style=\"background: #00A1E4;\"  2012\n!style=\"background: #00A1E4;\"  2013\n!style=\"background: #00A1E4;\"  2014\n!style=\"background: #00A1E4;\"  2015\n!style=\"background: #00A1E4;\"  2016\n!style=\"background: #00A1E4;\"  2017\n!style=\"background: #00A1E4;\"  2018\n! align=center10,955\n! align=center573\n! align=center35,410\n! align=center34.2\n! align=center89.1\n! align=center107.7\n! align=center214\n\n, KLM's corporate leader is its president and chief executive officer (CEO) Pieter Elbers, who replaced Camiel Eurlings suddenly on 15 October 2014. The president and CEO is part of the larger Executive Committee, which manages KLM and consists of the statutory managing directors and executive vice-presidents of KLM's business units that are represented in the Executive Committee. The supervision and management of KLM are structured in accordance with the \"two-tier model\"; the Board of Managing Directors is supervised by a separate and independent Supervisory Board. The Supervisory Board also supervises the general performance of KLM. The Board of Managing Directors is formed by the four Managing Directors, including the CEO. Nine Supervisory Directors comprise the Supervisory Board.\n\nKLM's head office is located in Amstelveen, on a site near Schiphol Airport. The airline's current headquarters was built between 1968 and 1970. Before the opening of the new headquarters, the airline's head office was on the property of Schiphol Airport in Haarlemmermeer.\n\nCompanies in which KLM has a stake include:\n\n!CompanyTypePrincipal activitiesIncorporated inGroup's equity shareholding\nAir Antwerp BVSubsidiaryAirlineBelgium25%\nTransavia Airlines CVSubsidiaryAirlineNetherlands100%\nTransavia France (via Transavia Airlines CV)SubsidiaryAirlineFrance4%\nKLM Cityhopper BVSubsidiaryAirlineNetherlands100%\nKLM Cityhopper UK Ltd.SubsidiaryAirlineUnited Kingdom100%\nKLM AsiaSubsidiaryAirlineTaiwan100%\nMartinair Holland NVSubsidiaryCargo airlineNetherlands100%\nEPCOR BVSubsidiaryMaintenanceNetherlands100%\nKLM Catering Services Schiphol BVSubsidiaryCatering servicesNetherlands100%\nKLM Equipment Services BVSubsidiaryEquipment supportNetherlands100%\nKLM Financial ServicesSubsidiaryFinancingNetherlands100%\nKLM Flight Academy BVSubsidiaryFlight academyNetherlands100%\nKLM Health Services BVSubsidiaryHealth servicesNetherlands100%\nKLM UK Engineering Ltd.SubsidiaryEngineering and maintenanceUnited Kingdom100%\nCygnificSubsidiarySales and serviceNetherlands100%\nSchiphol Logistics ParkJoint controlled entityLogisticsNetherlands53% (45% voting right)\n\nSubsidiaries, associates, and joint ventures of KLM in the past include:\n\n!Company  Type  Year of establishment  Year of rejection  Notes  References\nAir UK  Associate  align=center1987  align=center1998  Renamed KLM uk upon obtaining majority stake  align=center\nBraathens  Joint Venture  align=center1998  align=center2003  align=center—  align=center\nBuzz  Subsidiary  align=center2000  align=center2003  Sold to Ryanair  align=center \nDe Kroonduif Subsidiary  align=center1955  align=center1963  Acquired by Garuda Indonesia  align=center\nKLM alps Subsidiary  align=center1998  align=center2001  Franchise agreement with Air Engiadina and Air Alps  align=center\nKLM exel  Subsidiary  align=center1991  align=center2004  align=center—  align=center\nKLM Helicopters  Subsidiary  align=center1965  align=center1998  Sold to Schreiner Airways  align=center\nKLM Interinsulair Bedrijf (KLM-IIB)  Subsidiary  align=center1947  align=center1949  Nationalized and renamed Garuda Indonesia  align=center\nKLM uk  Subsidiary  align=center1998  align=center2002  Merged with KLM Cityhopper  align=center\nNetherLines  Subsidiary  align=center1988  align=center1991  Merged with NLM CityHopper and formed KLM Cityhopper  align=center\nNLM CityHopper  Subsidiary  align=center1966  align=center1991  Merged with NetherLines and formed KLM Cityhopper  align=center\nHigh Speed Alliance  Subsidiary  align=center2007  align=center2014  5% (10% voting) share before it became NS International  align=center\n\nKLM also worked closely with ALM Antillean Airlines in the Caribbean in order to provide air service for the Dutch controlled islands in the region with KLM aircraft such as the Douglas DC-8 and McDonnell Douglas DC-9-30 being operated by KLM flight crews on behalf of ALM.\n\nKLM Asia () is a wholly KLM-owned subsidiary registered in Taiwan. The airline was established in 1995 to operate flights to Taipei without compromising the traffic rights held by KLM for destinations in the People's Republic of China.\n\nThe livery of KLM Asia uses the same color scheme and livery of the original KLM but the only notable difference is that it lacks Dutch national symbols, such as the flag of the Netherlands and KLM's stylised Dutch Crown logo. Instead, it features a special KLM Asia logo. \n\nThe airline has seven Boeing 777-200ER and two Boeing 777-300ER. KLM Asia initially operated the Amsterdam-Bangkok-Taipei route with a B747-400 Combi or a B747-400 non-combi aircraft. Since March 2012, it has operated the revised Amsterdam-Taipei-Manila route with Boeing 777-200ER/-300ER aircraft. Some aircraft are already painted in the revised KLM Asia livery of 2014.\n\nKLM Asia aircraft are also occasionally used to service other destinations in the wider KLM network.\n\nDirk Roosenburg designed the KLM logo at its establishment in 1919; he intertwined the letter K, L, and M, and gave them wings and a crown. The crown was depicted to denote KLM's royal status, which was granted at KLM's establishment. The logo became known as the \"vinklogo\" in reference to the common chaffinch. The KLM logo was largely redesigned in 1961 by F.H.K. Henrion. The crown, redesigned using a line, four blue circles and a cross, was retained. In 1991, the logo was further revised by Chris Ludlow of Henrion, Ludlow & Schmidt. In addition to its main logo, KLM displays its alliance status in its branding, including \"Worldwide Reliability\" with Northwest Airlines (1993–2002) and the SkyTeam alliance (2004–present).\n\nKLM has utilized several major liveries since its founding, with numerous variations on each. Initially, many aircraft featured a bare-metal fuselage with a stripe above the windows bearing the phrase \"The Flying Dutchman\". The rudder was divided into three segments and painted to match the Dutch flag. Later aircraft types sometimes bore a white upper fuselage, and additional detail striping and titling. In the mid-1950s, the livery was changed to feature a split cheatline in two shades of blue on a white upper fuselage and angled blue stripes on the vertical stabilizer. The tail stripes were later enlarged and made horizontal, and the then-new crown logo was placed in a white circle. The final major variation of this livery saw the vertical stabilizer painted completely white with the crown logo in the center. All versions of this livery had small \"KLM Royal Dutch Airlines\" titles, first in red, and later in blue.\n\nSince 1971, the KLM livery has primarily featured a bright blue fuselage, with variations on the striping and details. Originally a wide, dark blue cheatline covered the windows and was separated from the light grey lower fuselage by a thin white stripe. The KLM logo was placed centrally on the white tail and the front of the fuselage. In December 2002, KLM introduced an updated livery in which the white strip was removed and the dark-blue cheatline was significantly narrowed. The bright blue colour was retained and now covers most of the fuselage. The KLM logo was placed more centrally on the fuselage while its position on the tail and the tail design remained the same. In 2014, KLM modified its livery with a swooping cheatline that wraps around the entire forward fuselage. The livery was first introduced on Embraer 190s.\n\nIn April 2010, KLM introduced new uniforms for its female cabin attendants, ground attendants and pilots at KLM and KLM Cityhopper. The new uniform was designed by Dutch couturier Mart Visser. It retains the KLM blue colour that was introduced in 1971 and adds a touch of orange—the national colour of the Netherlands.\n\nKLM has used several slogans for marketing throughout its operational history:\nBULLET::::- \"\"The businessman travels, sends, and receives by KLM\"\" (translated from Dutch) (1920s)\nBULLET::::- \"\"The Flying Dutchman\"\"\nBULLET::::- \"\"Bridging the World\"\" (1994)\nBULLET::::- \"\"The Reliable Airline\"\"\nBULLET::::- \"\"Journeys of Inspiration\"\" (2009–present)\n\nKLM has an extensive presence on social media platforms and also runs a blog. Customers can make inquiries through these channels. The airline also uses these networks to inform customers of KLM news, marketing campaigns and promotions.\n\nThe airline's use of social media platforms to reach customers peaked when the Icelandic volcano Eyjafjallajökull erupted in April 2010, causing widespread disruption to air traffic. Customers used the social networks to contact the airline, which used them to provide information about the situation. Following the increased use of social media, KLM created a centralized, public social media website named the Social Media Hub in October 2010.\n\nKLM has developed several services based on these social platforms, including:\nBULLET::::- \"Meet & Seat\"; this service allows passengers to find information about people who will be on the same KLM flight by connecting their Facebook or LinkedIn profiles to the flight. Meet & Seat facilitates contact with fellow travelers who have the same background or interests. By launching Meet & Seat, KLM became the first airline to integrate social networking into its regular flight process.\nBULLET::::- \"Trip Planner\"; this platform uses Facebook to organize a trip with Facebook friends.\nBULLET::::- Twitterbots; KLM operates several Twitterbots, including one to request the current status of a flight and one to request the lowest KLM fares to a destination on a specified date or month.\n\nIn June 2013, KLM launched its own 3D strategy game \"Aviation Empire\" for iOS and Android platforms. The game allows users to experience airline management. Players manage KLM from its establishment until the present; they can by investing in a fleet, build a network with international destinations and develop airports. The game combines the digital world with the real world by enabling the unlocking of airports by GPS check-ins.\n\nKLM started KLM AirCares, a program that aids underprivileged children in developing countries to which KLM flies, in 1999. The airline collects money and airmiles from passengers. In 2012, new applications for support from the program were suspended because it needed an overhaul.\n\nKLM and its partners serve 133 destinations in 70 countries on five continents from their hub at Amsterdam Schiphol Airport. Codeshare agreements bring the total amount of destinations available via KLM to 826.\n\nKLM has codeshare agreements with the following airlines:\nBULLET::::- Aer Lingus\nBULLET::::- Aeroflot\nBULLET::::- Aerolíneas Argentinas\nBULLET::::- Aeroméxico\nBULLET::::- Air Astana\nBULLET::::- Air Europa\nBULLET::::- Air France\nBULLET::::- Air Malta\nBULLET::::- Air Mauritius\nBULLET::::- Air Serbia\nBULLET::::- airBaltic\nBULLET::::- Alitalia\nBULLET::::- Bangkok Airways\nBULLET::::- Belavia\nBULLET::::- Bulgaria Air\nBULLET::::- China Airlines\nBULLET::::- China Eastern Airlines\nBULLET::::- China Southern Airlines\nBULLET::::- Copa Airlines\nBULLET::::- Croatia Airlines\nBULLET::::- Czech Airlines\nBULLET::::- Delta Air Lines\nBULLET::::- Etihad Airways\nBULLET::::- Garuda Indonesia\nBULLET::::- Georgian Airways\nBULLET::::- Gol Transportes Aéreos\nBULLET::::- Kenya Airways\nBULLET::::- Korean Air\nBULLET::::- kulula.com\nBULLET::::- Malaysia Airlines\nBULLET::::- Oman Air\nBULLET::::- Pegasus Airlines\nBULLET::::- Qantas\nBULLET::::- Saudia\nBULLET::::- Sichuan Airlines\nBULLET::::- Surinam Airways\nBULLET::::- TAAG Angola Airlines\nBULLET::::- TAROM\nBULLET::::- Transavia\nBULLET::::- Ukraine International Airlines\nBULLET::::- Ural Airlines\nBULLET::::- Vietnam Airlines\nBULLET::::- WestJet\nBULLET::::- Widerøe\nBULLET::::- XiamenAir\n, the KLM fleet (excluding its subsidiaries KLM Cityhopper, Transavia and Martinair) consists of the following aircraft:\n+ KLM fleet\n! rowspan=\"2\"  Aircraft \n! rowspan=\"2\"  In service\n! rowspan=\"2\"  Orders\n! colspan=\"4\"  Passengers\n! rowspan=\"2\"  Notes\n! style=\"width:25px;\"  B\n! style=\"width:25px;\"  E+\n! style=\"width:25px;\"  E\n! style=\"width:25px;\"  Total\nAirbus A330-200\n8\n18\n36\n214\n268\n\nAirbus A330-300\n5\n30\n40\n222\n292\n\nBoeing 737-700\n16\n20\n6\n106\n132\nTo be retired in 2022\nBoeing 737-800\n31\n20\n6\n150\n176\n\nBoeing 737-900\n5\n28\n18\n138\n184\nOne (PH-BXO) in SkyTeam livery\nBoeing 747-400\n3\n35\n36\n337\n408\nrowspan=\"2\"All to be retired by 2021To be replaced by Boeing 787 Dreamliner and Boeing 777\nBoeing 747-400M\n6\n35\n36\n197\n268\n\n15\n34\n40\n242\n316\n\nBoeing 777-300ER\n14\n2\n34\n40\n334\n408\nOne (PH-BVA) in OrangePride livery.One (PH-BVD) in SkyTeam livery\nBoeing 787-9\n13\n30\n48\n216\n294\n\nBoeing 787-10\n3\n12\n38\n36\n270\n344\nOne (PH-BKA) in 100th aniversary livery.\n! colspan=\"8\" KLM Cargo fleet\n\n3\ncolspan=\"4\"Cargo\nOperated by Martinair\n!Total\n!122\n!14\n!colspan=\"4\" class=\"unsortable\" \nKLM's first of 8 Boeing 787-10 aircraft was delivered on 28 June 2019; it featured 100th anniversary markings.\n\nOn 19 June 2013, KLM had ordered 7 Airbus A350-900s. In June 2019, Air France–KLM announced that KLM will not take up any of the group's ordered A350s, because of fleet rationalization purposes.\n\nCEO Ben Smith has announced at Air France's Investor Day (5 November 2019) in Paris that \"in the near future\" KLM will only use the 777 and 787 as their long-haul fleet, retiring their 13 A330's. This move will make KLM an all-Boeing airline.\n\nOver the years, KLM has operated the following aircraft types:\n+ KLM historical fleet\n!Aircraft\n!Total\n!Introduced\n!Retired\n!Notes\nAirbus A310-200\n11\n1983\n1997\n\nAirbus A330-200\n8\n2005\n\nAirbus A330-300\n5\n2012\n\nBAC 1-11-301AG\n1\n1968\n1968\nLeased from British Eagle.Operated from Rotterdam to London service in full KLM colours.\nBoeing 737-200\n3\n1988\n1995\n\nBoeing 737-300\n19\n1986\n2011\n\nBoeing 737-400\n19\n1989\n2013\n\nBoeing 737-700\n2\n2008\n\nrowspan=\"3\"Boeing 747-200B\n1\nrowspan=\"2\"1971\nrowspan=\"2\"1991\n\n3\n\n1\n1971\n1977\nBoeing 747-200M\n7\n1975\n1986\n\nBoeing 747-200B/SUD\n3\n1985\n2003\n\nBoeing 747-200/SUD/SF\n2\n1998\n2003\nConverted from two Boeing 747-200M/SUD aircraft.\nrowspan=\"2\"Boeing 747-200M/SUD\n5\nrowspan=\"2\"1985\n2003\n\n2\n1998\n\nBoeing 747-300M\n3\n1983\n2003\n\nBoeing 747-400\n22\n1989\n\nBoeing 747-400M\n10\n1989\nLaunch customers of the type.Last operator of Boeing 747-400M.\nBoeing 767-300ER\n12\n1995\n2007\n\nConvair 240\n1948\n1959\n\nConvair 340\n1953\n1964\n\nDe Havilland DH.16\n1920\n1924\n\nDouglas C-54 Skymaster\n2\nrowspan=\"3\"1945\nrowspan=\"3\"1959\nrowspan=\"3\"\nDouglas C-54A Skymaster\n16\nDouglas C-54B Skymaster\n3\nDouglas DC-2\n1934\n1946\n\nDouglas DC-3\n1936\n1964\n\nDouglas DC-4-1009\n6\n1946\n1958\n\nDouglas DC-5\n4\n1940\n1941\n\nDouglas DC-6\n1948\n1963\n\nDouglas DC-7\n1953\n1966\n\nDouglas DC-8 Family\n37\n1960\n1985\n\nDouglas DC-9-10\n6\n1966\n1989\n\nMcDonnell Douglas DC-9-30\n12\nrowspan=\"2\"1967\nrowspan=\"2\"1989\nrowspan=\"2\"\nMcDonnell Douglas DC-9-30C\n6\nFokker F.II\n1920\n1924\n\nFokker F.III\n1921\n1930\n\nFokker F.IX\n1930\n1936\n\nFokker F.VII\n1925\n1936\n\nFokker F.VIII\n1927\n1940\n\nFokker F.XII\n1931\n1936\n\nFokker F.XVIII\n1932\n1946\n\nFokker F.XX\n1933\n1936\n\nFokker F.XXII\n1935\n1939\n\nFokker F.XXXVI\n1935\n1939\n\nLockheed L-049 Constellation\n7\nrowspan=\"3\"1946\nrowspan=\"3\"\nLockheed L-749 Constellation\n13\n\nLockheed L-749A Constellation\n7\n\nLockheed L-1049C Super Constellation\n13\nrowspan=\"3\"1953\nrowspan=\"3\"1966\nrowspan=\"3\"\nLockheed L-1049G Constellation\n6\nLockheed L-1049H Constellation\n3\nLockheed L-188C Electra\n12\n1959\n1969\n\nLockheed Super Electra-14\n5\n1938\n1948\n\nMcDonnell Douglas DC-10-30\n12\n1972\n1995\n\nMcDonnell Douglas MD-11\n10\n1993\n2014\nLast passenger commercial operator.Three aircraft are currently stored.\nVickers V.803 Viscount\n9\n1957\n1966\n\nKLM has several aircraft painted in special liveries; they include:\nBULLET::::- PH-BVA, a Boeing 777-300ER, features an orange forward fuselage that fades into the standard blue to commemorate the Netherlands national team's participation in the 2016 Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro.\nBULLET::::- PH-KZU, a Fokker F70, has been applied with a special livery featuring Anthony Fokker, the founder of Fokker, commemorating the airline's long-standing history with Fokker aircraft and the phase-out of the Fokker 70 aircraft in October 2017.\nBULLET::::- Several aircraft bear the silver SkyTeam alliance livery, including PH-BVD (a 777-300ER), PH-BXO (a 737-900), and PH-EZX (a KLM Cityhopper ERJ-190).\nBULLET::::- PH-BKA, a Boeing 787-10, features the standard KLM livery with a 100 wrapped around its lettering on the plane, this is because of the 100 years of being an established airline.\n\nKLM has three cabin classes for international long-haul routes; World Business Class, Economy Comfort and Economy. Personal screens with audio-video on-demand, satellite telephone, SMS, and e-mail services are available in all cabins on all long-haul aircraft. European short-haul and medium-haul flights have Economy seats in the rear cabin, and Economy Comfort and Europe Business in the forward cabin.\n\nWorld Business Class is KLM's long-haul business class product. Seats in the older World Business Class are wide and have a pitch. Seats can be reclined into a 170-degree angled flat bed with a length of . Seats are equipped with a personal entertainment system with audio and video on demand in the armrest, privacy canopy, massage function and laptop power ports. World Business Class seating is in a 2–2–2 abreast arrangement on all Airbus A330s.\n\nIn March 2013, KLM introduced a new World Business Class seat to the long-haul fleet. Dutch designer Hella Jongerius designed the new cabin. The diamond-type seat is manufactured by B/E Aerospace and is installed on all Boeing 747-400s and Boeing 777s. The new seats are fully flat and offer -high definition personal entertainment systems. When fully flat, the bed is about long. The cabin features a cradle-to-cradle carpet made from old uniforms woven in an intricate pattern, which is combined with new pillows and curtains with a similar design.\n\nA completely new design of Business Class seat was introduced with the launch of KLM's Boeing 787; this aircraft's business class seats are based on the Zodiac Cirrus platform used by Air France. The new seats lie fully flat, with a 1-2-1 layout so every passenger has direct aisle access, a large side-storage area and HD video screen. Dutch design group Viktor & Rolf has designed and provides amenity kits to World Business Class passengers. A new design will be introduced each year and the color of the kits will change every six months. The kit contains socks, eye mask, toothbrush, toothpaste, earplugs and Viktor & Rolf lip balm.\n\nEurope Business Class is KLM's and KLM Cityhopper's short-haul business-class. Europe Business Class seats are wide and have an average pitch of . Middle seats in rows of three are blocked to increase passengers' personal space. Europe Business Class seats feature extra legroom and recline further than regular Economy Class seats. In-seat power is available on all Boeing 737 aircraft. Europe Business Class has no personal entertainment. Seating is arranged 3–3 abreast with the middle seat blocked on the Boeing 737 aircraft, and a 2–2 abreast arrangement on the Embraer 190 aircraft.\n\nEconomy Comfort is the premium economy class offered on all KLM and KLM Cityhopper flights. Economy Comfort seats on long-haul flights have more pitch than Economy Class, a pitch and recline up to ; double the recline of Economy. Economy Comfort seats on short-haul flights have more pitch, totaling , and can recline up to (40%) further. Except for the increased pitch and recline, seating and service in Economy Comfort is the same as in Economy Class. Economy Comfort is located in a separate cabin before the Economy Class; passengers can exit the aircraft before Economy passengers.\n\nEconomy Comfort seats can be reserved by Economy Class passengers. The service is free for passengers with a full-fare ticket, for Flying Blue Platinum members and Delta Air Lines SkyMiles Platinum or Diamond members. Discounts apply for Flying Blue Silver or Gold members, SkyTeam Elite Plus members and Delta SkyMiles members.\n\nThe Economy Class seats on long-haul flights have a pitch and are wide. All seats are equipped with adjustable winged headrests, a PTV with AVOD, and a personal handset satellite telephone that can be used with a credit card. Economy Class seats in Airbus A330-300 aircraft are also equipped with in-seat power. The Economy Class seats on short-haul flights have a pitch and are wide. The Economy Class seats on short-haul flights do not feature any personal entertainment. The long-haul Economy Class seating is in a 3–4–3 abreast arrangement on the Boeing 747-400, Boeing 777-300ER aircraft and on Boeing 777-200ER aircraft, a 3-3-3 abreast arrangement on the Boeing 787-9 aircraft, and a 2–4–2 abreast arrangement on the Airbus A330 aircraft. The short-haul Economy Class seating is in a 3–3 abreast arrangement on the Boeing 737 aircraft and a 2–2 abreast arrangement on the Embraer 175 and 190 aircraft, and the seats on these aircraft are wide.\n\nKLM's in-flight entertainment system is available in all classes on all widebody aircraft; it provides all passengers with Audio/Video on Demand (AVOD). The system includes interactive entertainment including movies, television programs, music, games, and language courses. About 80 movies including recent releases, classics and world cinema are available in several languages. The selection is changed every month. The in-flight entertainment system can be used to send SMS text messages and emails to the ground. Panasonic's 3000i system is installed on all Boeing 747-400, Boeing 777-200ER, and on most of the Airbus A330-200 aircraft. All Airbus A330-300 and Boeing 777-300ER aircraft, and some Airbus A330-200 aircraft are fitted with the Panasonic eX2 in-flight entertainment system.\n\nKLM provides a selection of international newspapers to its passengers on long-haul flights; on short-haul flights they are only offered to Europe Business Class passengers. A selection of international magazines is available for World Business Class passengers on long-haul flights. All passengers are provided with KLM's in-flight magazine, the \"Holland Herald.\" On board flights to China, South Korea and Japan, the airline offers in-flight magazines \"EuroSky\" (China and Japan), in either Chinese or Japanese, and \"Wings of Europe\" (South Korea) in Korean. On 29 May 2013, KLM and Air France launched a pilot scheme to test in-flight Wi-Fi internet access. Each airline equipped one Boeing 777-300ER in its fleet with Wi-Fi, which passengers can use with their Wi-Fi-enabled devices. Wireless service was available after the aircraft reached in altitude.\n\nWorld Business Class passengers are served a three-course meal. Each year KLM partners with a leading Dutch chef to develop the dishes that are served on board. Passengers in Europe Business Class are served either a cold meal, a hot main course, or a three-course meal depending on the duration of the flight. All chicken served in World and Europe Business Class meets the standards of the Dutch Beter Leven Keurmerk (Better Life Quality Mark). KLM partnered with Dutch designer Marcel Wanders to design the tableware of World and European Business Class.\n\nEconomy Class passengers on long-haul flights are served a hot meal and a snack, and second hot meal or breakfast, depending on the duration of the flight. On short-haul flights, passengers are served sandwiches or a choice of sweet or savoury snack, depending on the duration and time of the day. If the flight is at least two hours long, \"stroopwafel\" cookies are served before the descent. Most alcoholic beverages are free-of-charge for all passengers. After a successful trial period, KLM introduced à la carte meals in Economy Class on 14 September 2011; Dutch, Japanese, Italian, cold delicacies, and Indonesian meals are offered.\n\nSpecial meals, include children's, vegetarian, medical, and religious meals, can be requested in each class up to 24 or 36 hours before departure. On flights to India, China, South Korea, and Japan, KLM offers authentic Asian meals in all classes. Meals served on KLM flights departing from Amsterdam are provided by KLM Catering Services.\n\nIn September 2016, KLM launched the world's first in-flight draft beer under the partnership with Heineken. The new service made its premiere aboard a flight to Curacao in the airline's World Business Class cabin.\n\nSince the 1950s, KLM has presented its World Business Class passengers with a Delft blue miniature traditional Dutch house. These miniatures are reproductions of real Dutch houses and are filled with Dutch genever. Initially the houses were filled with Bols liqueur, which in 1986 was changed to Bols young genever.\n\nIn 1952, KLM started to give the houses to its First Class passengers. With the elimination of First Class in 1993, the houses were handed out to all Business Class passengers. The impetus for these houses was a rule aimed at curtailing a previously widespread practise of offering incentives to passengers by limiting the value of gifts given by airlines to 0.75 US cents. KLM did not bill the Delft Blue houses as a gift, but as a last drink on the house, which was served in the house.\n\nEvery year, a new house is presented on 7 October, the anniversary of KLM's founding in 1919. The number on the last-presented house thus represents the number of years KLM has been in operation. Special edition houses—the Dutch Royal Palace and the 17th century Cheese Weighing House \"De Waag\" in Gouda—are offered to special guests, such as VIPs and honeymoon couples.\n\nKLM offers various check-in methods to its passengers, who can check in for their flights at self-service check-in kiosks at the airport, via the Internet, or a mobile telephone or tablet. At destinations where these facilities are not available, check-in is by an airline representative at the counter. Electronic boarding passes can be received on a mobile device while boarding passes can be printed at airport kiosks.\n\nSince 4 July 2008 KLM, in cooperation with Amsterdam Airport Schiphol, has been offering self-service baggage drop-off to its passengers. The project started with a trial that included one drop-off point. The number of these points has gradually increased; there are 12 of them. KLM passengers can now drop off their bags themselves. Before they are allowed to do that they are being checked by a KLM employee.\n\nIn November 2012, KLM started a pilot scheme at Amsterdam Airport Schiphol to test self-service boarding. Passengers boarded the aircraft without any interference of a gate agent by scanning their boarding passes, which opened a gate. KLM partner airline Air France ran the same pilot at its hub at Paris-Charles de Gaulle Airport. The pilot ran until March 2013, which was followed by an evaluation.\n\nKLM is the first airline to offer self-service transfer kiosks on its European and intercontinental routes for passengers connecting through Amsterdam Airport Schiphol. The kiosks enable connecting passengers to view flight details of connecting flights, to change seat assignments or upgrade to a more comfortable seat. When a passenger misses a connecting flight, details about alternative flights can be viewed on the kiosk and a new boarding pass can be printed. Passengers who are entitled to coupons for a beverage, meal, the use of a telephone, or a travel discount can have these printed at the kiosk.\n\nKLM has bus services for customers living in certain cities without flights from KLM, transporting them to airports where they may board KLM flights. It operates buses from Nijmegen railway station and Arnhem Central Station in the Netherlands to Amsterdam Schiphol, and from Ottawa Railway Station to Montreal Dorval Airport in Canada. In addition KLM has codeshares with Thalys and SNCF services so passengers from various French cities may travel to Charles de Gaulle Airport and passengers from Belgium may go to Schiphol (from Antwerp) or Charles de Gaulle (from Brussels).\n\nAir France-KLM's frequent flyer program, Flying Blue, awards miles based on the distance traveled, ticket fare and class of service. Other airlines that adopted the Flying Blue programme include Air Europa, Garuda Indonesia, Kenya Airways, Aircalin, and TAROM. Miles can also be earned from all other SkyTeam partners. Membership in the program is free. Two types of miles can be earned within the Flying Blue program; Award Miles and Level Miles. Award Miles can be exchanged for rewards and expire after 20 months without flying. Level Miles are used to determine membership level and remain valid until 31 December of each year.\n\nAward Miles can be earned on Flying Blue partner airlines including Air Corsica, Airlinair, Bangkok Airways, Chalair Aviation, Comair, Copa Airlines, Gol Transportes Aéreos, Japan Airlines, Malaysia Airlines, Qantas, TAAG Angola, Twin Jet, and Ukraine International Airlines, as well as SkyTeam partners. Award Miles are redeemable for free tickets, upgrades to a more expensive seating class, extra baggage allowance, and lounge access. They can also be donated to charity through KLM AirCares, or can be spent in the Flying Blue Store.\n\nThe Flying Blue programme is divided into four tiers; Ivory, Silver (SkyTeam Elite), Gold (SkyTeam Elite Plus) and Platinum (SkyTeam Elite Plus). Then, you have the special tiers, such as Platinum For Life, ultimate platinum, ultimate platinum skipper, club2000 skipper (for those who did something special for KLM, cannot be requested but will be distributed by KLM). The membership tier depends on the number of Level Miles earned and is recalculated each calendar year. Flying Blue privileges are additive by membership tier; higher tiers include all benefits listed for prior tiers. There is an additional fifth tier, Platinum for Life, which can be obtained after 10 consecutive years of Platinum membership. After the Platinum for Life status is obtained, re-qualification is not required. Level Miles can be earned with Air France, KLM, Air Europa, Kenya Airways, TAROM, and other SkyTeam partners. Qualification levels and general benefits with SkyTeam airline partners of the Flying Blue tiers are:\n\nThe Tenerife disaster, which occurred on 27 March 1977, remains the accident with the highest number of airliner passenger fatalities, as well as the most recent and notable incident involving a KLM aircraft. 583 people died when a KLM Boeing 747-200B attempted to take off without clearance, and collided with a taxiing Pan Am Boeing 747-100 at Los Rodeos Airport on the Canary Island of Tenerife, Spain. No one on the KLM 747 survived while 61 of the 396 passengers and crew on the Pan Am aircraft survived. Pilot error from the KLM aircraft was the primary cause. Owing to a communication misunderstanding, the KLM captain thought he had clearance for takeoff. Another cause was dense fog, meaning the KLM flight crew was unable to see the Pan Am aircraft on the runway until immediately prior to the collision. The accident had a lasting influence on the industry, particularly in the area of communication. An increased emphasis was placed on using standardized phraseology in air traffic control (ATC) communication by both controllers and pilots alike, thereby reducing the chance for misunderstandings. As part of these changes, the word \"takeoff\" was removed from general usage, and is only spoken by ATC when clearing an aircraft to take off.\n\nBULLET::::- On 24 April 1924, Fokker F.III H-NABS departed from Lympne to Rotterdam. The aircraft disappeared. It was presumed to have crashed into the sea, killing the pilot and both passengers.\nBULLET::::- On 25 June 1925, Fokker F.III H-NABM struck trees and crashed at Locquignol, France while flying too low in poor visibility, killing all four on board.\nBULLET::::- On 9 July 1926, Fokker F.VII H-NACC crashed in thick fog near Wolverthem, Belgium, killing both pilots.\nBULLET::::- On 22 August 1927, Fokker F.VIII H-NADU crashed near Sevenoaks, England. One crewmember was killed.\nBULLET::::- On 14 July 1928, Fokker F.VIII H-NABR crashed at Waalhaven after striking several ship masts after takeoff; one passenger drowned when the fuselage sank. Yes\nBULLET::::- On 6 December 1931, Fokker F.VII PH-AFO crashed at Bangkok while attempting to take off with 4 crew and 3 passengers. 3 crewmembers including both pilots and 2 passengers were killed. The cause of the accident was an open ventilation hatch above the cockpit which spoiled lift and prevented the aircraft from taking off. The plane departed the end of the runway, struck a berm, and came to rest upside down in a rice field.\nBULLET::::- On 20 December 1934, KLM Douglas DC-2 PH-AJU \"\"Uiver\"\" crashed at Rutbah Wells, Iraq, killing all occupants. The aircraft had participated in the Mac Robertson Air Race in October 1934, and won the handicap division. It was on its first flight after return from the race and was en route to the Netherlands East Indies carrying Christmas mail when it crashed.\nBULLET::::- On 6 April 1935, KLM Fokker F.XII PH-AFL \"\"Leeuwerik\"\" struck a mountain from Brilon, Germany after it encountered severe snow and thunderstorms, killing all seven on board.\nBULLET::::- On 14 July 1935, KLM Fokker F.XXII PH-AJQ \"\"Kwikstaart\"\" crashed and burned just outside Schiphol after both left side engines failed due to a defect in the fuel system, killing four crew and two passengers. Fourteen occupants survived.\nBULLET::::- On 20 July 1935, KLM Douglas DC-2 PH-AKG \"\"Gaai\"\" crashed near the San Bernardino Pass near Pian San Giacomo, killing all three crew and all 10 passengers.\nBULLET::::- On 9 December 1936, KLM Douglas DC-2 PH-AKL \"\"Lijster\"\" crashed into a house after taking off from Croydon Airport, London. The accident killed 15 of the 17 people on board the aircraft.\nBULLET::::- On 3 April 1937, KLM Douglas DC-3 PH-ALP \"\"Pluvier\"\" was being delivered to KLM when it struck Mount Baldy, Arizona, killing all eight on board.\nBULLET::::- On 28 July 1937, KLM Douglas DC-2 PH-ALF \"\"Flamingo\"\" crashed in a field near Beert, Belgium. The crash was caused by an in-flight fire and killed all 15 on board.\nBULLET::::- On 6 October 1937, KLM Douglas DC-3 PH-ALS \"\"Specht\"\" crashed on take-off from Talang Betoetoe Airport, killing three crew and one passenger; the co-pilot and seven passengers survived.\nBULLET::::- On 14 November 1938, KLM Douglas DC-3 PH-ARY \"\"IJsvogel\"\" struck the ground and crashed near Schiphol Airport for unknown reasons, killing six of 19 on board.\nBULLET::::- On 9 December 1938, KLM Lockheed Model 14 Super Electra PH-APE \"\"Ekster\"\" crashed on take-off from Schiphol Airport because of engine failure while on a training flight, killing the four crew.\nBULLET::::- On 10 June 1939, KLM Koolhoven F.K.43 \"\"Krekel\"\" stalled and crashed at Vlissingen, killing all three on board.\n\nBULLET::::- On 28 December 1941, KNILM Douglas DC-3 PK-ALN \"\"Nandoe\"\" (formerly KLM PH-ALN) was destroyed on the ground by Japanese fighters at Medan, North Sumatera, Dutch East Indies, killing all crew members and passengers.\nBULLET::::- On 14 November 1946, a KLM Douglas C-47 crashed at Schiphol Airport during a failed landing in poor weather. All 21 passengers, including the Dutch writer Herman de Man, and the five crew were killed.\nBULLET::::- On 26 January 1947, KLM Douglas DC-3 PH-TCR crashed after take-off from Copenhagen, killing all 22 on board, including Prince Gustaf Adolf of Sweden.\nBULLET::::- On 20 October 1948, KLM Lockheed L-049 Constellation PH-TEN \"\"Nijmegen\"\" crashed near Prestwick, Scotland, killing all 40 aboard.\nBULLET::::- On 23 June 1949, KLM Lockheed L-749 Constellation PH-TER \"\"Roermond\"\", piloted by Hans Plesman—the son of CEO Albert Plesman—crashed into the sea off Bari, killing 33 occupants.\nBULLET::::- On 12 July 1949, KLM Lockheed L-749 Constellation PH-TDF \"\"Franeker\"\" crashed into a hill in Jagruti Nagar, Ghatkopar near Bombay (now Mumbai), India, killing all 45 aboard. Thirteen of those killed were American news correspondents.\n\nBULLET::::- On 2 February 1950, KLM Douglas C-47A PH-TEU crashed in the North Sea off the Dutch coast due to an apparent in-flight fire, killing all seven on board. The aircraft was operating an Amsterdam-London passenger service.\nBULLET::::- On 22 March 1952, Flight 592, a Douglas DC-6 (PH-TBJ \"\"Koningin Juliana\"\") crashed at Frankfurt while flying too low, killing 45 of the 47 occupants.\nBULLET::::- On 23 August 1954, Flight 608, a Douglas DC-6B (PH-DFO, \"\"Willem Bontekoe\"\") crashed between Shannon, Ireland, and Schiphol in the North Sea, from IJmuiden for reasons unknown. All 21 passengers and crew died.\nBULLET::::- On 5 September 1954, Flight 633, a Lockheed Super Constellation, ditched in the River Shannon after takeoff from Shannon Airport. Twenty eight of the 56 people on board (46 passengers and 10 crew) were killed.\nBULLET::::- On 14 July 1957, Flight 844, a Lockheed Super Constellation, crashed in the sea near Biak, after takeoff from Mokmer Airport at Biak on its way to Manila. The pilot made a low farewell pass over the island, but the aircraft lost altitude, crashed into the sea and exploded. Nine crew and 49 passengers died; there were 10 survivors.\nBULLET::::- On 14 August 1958, Flight 607-E, a Lockheed Super Constellation flying from Amsterdam to New York via Shannon, crashed into the ocean off the coast of County Galway, Ireland, killing all 99 on board.\nBULLET::::- On 12 June 1961, Flight 823, a Lockheed L-188 Electra, crashed on approach to Cairo International Airport due to pilot error, killing 20 of 36 on board.\nBULLET::::- On 25 October 1968, KLM Aerocarto Douglas C-47A PH-DAA flew into Tafelberg Mountain, Suriname, following an engine failure while on a survey flight. The aircraft collided with the mountain in cloudy conditions, killing three of the five people on board.\n\nBULLET::::- On 2 September 1921, KLM de Havilland DH.9 (H-NABP) crashed on landing at Waalhaven following engine failure; the pilot was unhurt. This was the first accident involving a KLM aircraft.\nBULLET::::- On 26 October 1921, KLM Fokker F.III (H-NABL) crashed while on approach to Rotterdam from London. The aircraft landed in low visibility, struck the ground and crashed upside down. The pilot, the sole occupant, survived and although the aircraft was written off, it was rebuilt and re-registered H-NABR and returned to service, but was destroyed in a 1928 crash.\nBULLET::::- On 4 November 1925, KLM Fokker F.III (H-NABI) crashed in an open field at Hamburg shortly after takeoff in poor weather; all three on board survived.\nBULLET::::- On 17 July 1935, KLM DC-2 (PH-AKM, \"\"Maraboe\"\") crashed and burned on takeoff from Bushehr, Iran after the right main gear broke off due to an uneven runway. All occupants were rescued.\nBULLET::::- On 6 June 1939, KLM DC-2 (PH-AKN, \"\"Nachtegaal\"\") crashed at Schiphol Airport during a single-engine training flight, killing one person on the ground; all four crew survived. The aircraft was rebuilt and returned to service until it was destroyed in a German air raid on 10 May 1940.\nBULLET::::- On 10 May 1940, during the German invasion of the Netherlands, nine KLM aircraft (five DC-2s and four DC-3s) were destroyed in a German air raid at Schiphol Airport by aircraft from KG 4.\nBULLET::::- On 6 November 1946, KLM Douglas DC-3 (PH-TBO) crashed near Shere on approach to Croydon Airport after a flight from Amsterdam. All 20 passengers and crew survived the accident. The altimeter had been set incorrectly.\nBULLET::::- On 27 December 1947, KLM C-47 (PH-TCV) crashed near Leeuwarden after the left wing struck a church steeple; the aircraft belly-landed and skidded across some ditches which broke off both propellers. All 15 on board survived.\nBULLET::::- On 23 March 1952, KLM Lockheed L-749A Constellation (PH-TFF, \"\"Venlo\"\") suffered a No. 3 propeller fatigue failure and subsequent engine fire during landing in Bangkok. All 44 passengers and crew escaped shortly before the fire completely consumed the aircraft. A Thai ground crewman ran into the burning aircraft and returned with an infant who had been left behind.\nBULLET::::- On 1 January 1953, KLM C-54B (PH-TDL) force-landed in the desert 17 miles from Dhahran Airport due to fuel exhaustion after the crew diverted twice due to poor visibility. All 66 passengers and crew on board survived.\nBULLET::::- On 25 May 1953, KLM Convair 240 (PH-TEI, \"\"Paulus Potter\"\") lost altitude just after takeoff from Schiphol Airport. The aircraft belly-landed on the runway and slid off, crossed a road and came to rest in a field. All 34 passengers and crew survived, however, two people who were watching the aircraft died when the aircraft crossed the road. The crew had retracted the flaps too soon during takeoff.\nBULLET::::- On 25 November 1973, Flight 861 was hijacked over Iraq by Palestinian terrorists. The aircraft took off in Amsterdam and was bound for Tokyo. After several hours it made its final landing in Dubai. The passengers were released earlier in Malta. Everyone survived the hijacking.\nBULLET::::- On 4 September 1976, Flight 366, a McDonnell Douglas DC-9-33RC (PH-DNM) flying from Malaga to Amsterdam with an intermediate stop in Nice, was hijacked shortly after takeoff from Nice by Palestinian terrorists. After aborted attempts to land in Tunis, the aircraft landed in Larnaca, Cyprus. After refuelling, the hijackers attempted to reach Palestine before the aircraft was turned around by Israeli F4 Phantoms. After returning to Cyprus, the passengers were released unharmed and the hijackers surrendered.\nBULLET::::- On 28 November 2004, Flight 1673, a Boeing 737-400 (PH-BTC), suffered a birdstrike upon rotation from Amsterdam Airport Schiphol. The aircraft continued onwards to Barcelona International Airport, where the nose gear collapsed. No injuries or casualties were reported. The aircraft was written off.\n\nBULLET::::- Jacob Veldhuyzen van Zanten, pilot\nBULLET::::- Ingrid de Caluwé\nBULLET::::- Bob Hiensch, Flight attendant\nBULLET::::- Joop van Werkhoven\nBULLET::::- Leo Visser, pilot\nBULLET::::- Lisa Westerhof, pilot\nBULLET::::- King Willem-Alexander, guest pilot\n\nBULLET::::- Air transport in the Netherlands\nBULLET::::- List of airports in the Netherlands\nBULLET::::- List of companies of the Netherlands\n\nBULLET::::- Official website\nBULLET::::- Official website of Air France-KLM\nBULLET::::- A century KLM\n"}
{"id": "16883", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16883", "title": "Kansas City Royals", "text": "Kansas City Royals\n\nThe Kansas City Royals are an American professional baseball team based in Kansas City, Missouri. They compete in Major League Baseball (MLB) as a member team of the American League (AL) Central division. The team was founded as an expansion franchise in 1969, and has participated in four World Series, winning in 1985 and 2015, and losing in 1980 and 2014.\n\nThe name \"Royals\" pays homage to the American Royal, a livestock show, horse show, rodeo, and championship barbeque competition held annually in Kansas City since 1899 as well as the identical names of two former negro league baseball teams that played in the first half of the 20th century (one a semi-pro team based in Kansas City in the 1910s and 1920s that toured the Midwest and a California Winter League team based in Los Angeles in the 1940s that was managed by Chet Brewer and included Satchel Paige and Jackie Robinson on its roster). The Los Angeles team had personnel connections to the Monarchs but could not use the Monarchs name. The name also fits into something of a theme for other professional sports franchises in the city, including the Kansas City Chiefs of the NFL, the former Kansas City Kings of the NBA, and the former Kansas City Monarchs of the Negro National League.\n\nIn 1968, the team held a name-the-team contest that received more than 17,000 entries. Sanford Porte, a bridge engineer from the suburb of Overland Park, Kansas was named the winner for his “Royals” entry. His reason had nothing to do with royalty. “Kansas City’s new baseball team should be called the Royals because of Missouri’s billion-dollar livestock income, Kansas City’s position as the nation’s leading stocker and feeder market and the nationally known American Royal parade and pageant,” Porte wrote. The team's board voted 6–1 on the name, with the only opposition coming from team owner Ewing Kauffman, who eventually changed his vote and said the name had grown on him.\n\nEntering the American League in 1969 along with the Seattle Pilots, the club was founded by Kansas City businessman Ewing Kauffman. The franchise was established following the actions of Stuart Symington, then-United States Senator from Missouri, who demanded a new franchise for the city after the Athletics (Kansas City's previous major league team that played from 1955 to 1967) moved to Oakland, California in 1968. Since April 10, 1973, the Royals have played at Kauffman Stadium, formerly known as Royals Stadium.\n\nThe new team quickly became a powerhouse, appearing in the playoffs seven times from 1976 to 1985, winning one World Series championship and another AL pennant, led by stars such as Amos Otis, Hal McRae, John Mayberry, George Brett, Frank White, Willie Wilson, and Bret Saberhagen. The team remained competitive throughout the early 1990s, but then had only one winning season from 1995 to 2012. For 28 consecutive seasons (1986–2013), the Royals did not qualify to play in the MLB postseason, one of the longest postseason droughts during baseball's current wild-card era. The team broke this streak in 2014 by securing the franchise's first wild card berth and advancing to the 2014 World Series, where they lost to the San Francisco Giants in seven games. The Royals followed this up by winning the team's first AL Central division title in 2015 and defeating the New York Mets in five games in the 2015 World Series to win their first World Series championship in 30 seasons.\n\nThe Royals began play in 1969 in Kansas City, Missouri. In their inaugural game, on April 8, 1969, the Royals defeated the Minnesota Twins 4–3 in 12 innings. The Royals went 69–93 in their first season, highlighted by Lou Piniella, who won the AL Rookie of the Year Award.\n\nThe team was quickly built through a number of trades engineered by its first General Manager, Cedric Tallis, who picked up center fielder Amos Otis, who became the team's first great star, first baseman John Mayberry, who provided power, second baseman Cookie Rojas, shortstop Fred Patek, designated hitter Hal McRae, and others. The Royals also invested in a strong farm system and soon developed such future stars as pitchers Paul Splittorff, Dennis Leonard, and Steve Busby, infielders George Brett and Frank White, and outfielder Al Cowens. Under these young players, the Royals started to build a young core set up for future success.\n\nIn 1971, the Royals had their first winning season, with manager Bob Lemon leading them to a second-place finish. In 1973, under manager Jack McKeon, the Royals adopted their iconic \"powder blue\" road uniforms and moved from Municipal Stadium to the brand-new Royals Stadium (now known as Kauffman Stadium).\n\nThe 1973 All-Star Game was hosted at Royals Stadium, with Otis and Mayberry in the AL starting lineup. The event was previously held at Municipal Stadium in 1960, when the Athletics were based in Kansas City.\n\nManager Whitey Herzog replaced McKeon in 1975, and the Royals quickly became the dominant franchise in the American League's Western Division. After a second-place, 91 win season, they won three straight division championships from 1976 to 1978, including the franchises only 100 win season in 1977. However, the Royals lost to the New York Yankees in three straight American League Championship Series encounters.\n\nAfter the Royals finished in second place in 1979, Herzog was fired and replaced by Jim Frey. Under Frey and a legendary .390 season from George Brett, the Royals rebounded in 1980 and advanced to the ALCS, where they again faced the Yankees. The Royals vanquished the Yankees in a three-game sweep punctuated by a Brett's home run off of Yankees' star relief pitcher Goose Gossage. After reaching their first World Series, the Royals fell to the Philadelphia Phillies in six games. Game 6 was also significant because it remains the most-watched game in World Series history with a television audience of 54.9 million viewers.\n\nIn July 1983, while the Royals were headed for a second-place finish behind the Chicago White Sox another chapter in the team's rivalry with the New York Yankees occurred. In what has come to be known as \"the Pine Tar Incident\", umpires discovered illegal placement of pine tar (more than 18 inches up the handle) on third baseman George Brett's bat after he had hit a two-run home run off Gossage that put the Royals up 5–4 in the top of the 9th. After Yankee Manager Billy Martin came out of the dugout to talk to home plate umpire Tim McClelland, McClelland and the other umpires mulled over the bat (measuring it over home plate, touching it, etc.). McClelland then pointed to Brett in the dugout and gave the \"out\" sign, disallowing the home run. Enraged, Brett stormed out of the dugout toward McClelland and Martin, and McClelland ejected Brett. The homer was later reinstated by AL President Lee MacPhail, and the Royals won the game after it was resumed several weeks later.\n\nThe 1983 season was also notable for some transitional changes in the Royals organization. First, owner Ewing Kauffman sold 49% of his interest to Memphis developer Avron Fogelman. Second, John Schuerholz was named general manager. Schuerholz soon bolstered the farm system with pitchers Bud Black, Danny Jackson, Mark Gubicza, David Cone, and Bret Saberhagen, as well as hitters such as Kevin Seitzer.\n\nThanks to the sudden and surprising maturation (specifically, in pitching) of most of the aforementioned players, the Royals won their fifth division championship in 1984, relying on Brett's bat and the young pitching staff of Saberhagen, Gubicza, Charlie Leibrandt, Black and Jackson. The Royals were then swept by the Detroit Tigers in the American League Championship Series. The Tigers went on to win the World Series.\n\nIn the 1985 regular season the Royals topped the Western Division for the sixth time in ten years, led by Bret Saberhagen's Cy Young Award-winning performance and George Brett's self-described best \"all around year.\" Throughout the ensuing playoffs, the Royals came back from 2–0 and 3–1 deficits, but managed to win the Series. In game three, with KC down 2 games to 0, George Brett homered twice and doubled off the fence in right field to put Kansas City back into the series. With the Royals down three-games-to-one in the American League Championship Series against the Toronto Blue Jays, the Royals eventually rallied to win the series 4–3.\n\nIn the 1985 World Series (nicknamed the \"I-70 Series\" because the two teams are both located in the state of Missouri and connected by Interstate 70) against the cross-state St. Louis Cardinals, the Royals again fell behind, three games to one. After Danny Jackson pitched the Royals to a 6–1 win in game five, the Cardinals and Royals headed back to Kansas City for game six. Facing elimination, the Royals trailed 1–0 in the bottom of the 9th inning, when Jorge Orta led off, hitting a bouncing ground ball to Cardinals 1st basemen Jack Clark, who flipped the ball back to pitcher Todd Worrell at first base. The ball beat Orta to the bag, but umpire Don Denkinger called him safe, and following a dropped popup by Clark and a pass ball the Royals rallied to score two runs, winning on a walk-off single from pinch hitter Dane Iorg to send the series to game seven. In game seven Bret Saberhagen shutout the Cardinals as Kansas City dominated the Cardinals 11–0, clinching their first title in franchise history.\n\nThe Royals maintained a reputation as one of the American League West's top teams throughout the late 1980s. The club posted a winning record in three of the four seasons following its 1985 World Series championship, while developing young stars such as Bo Jackson, Tom Gordon, and Kevin Seitzer. The Royals finished the 1989 season with a 92–70 record (third-best in the major leagues) but did not qualify for the playoffs, finishing second in their division behind the eventual World Series champion Oakland Athletics.\n\nAt the end of the 1989 season, the team boasted a powerhouse pitching rotation, including the AL Cy Young Award-winner Bret Saberhagen (who set franchise record 23 wins that year), two-time All-Star Mark Gubicza (a 15-game winner in 1989) and 1989 AL Rookie of the Year runner-up Tom Gordon (who won 17 games that year). But the organization felt it was still missing a few necessary pieces to give its divisional rival Oakland Athletics a run for their money. So prior to the 1990 season, the Royals acquired Mark Davis, the 1989 National League Cy Young Award-winner and league leader in saves, signing him to a 4-year, $13 million contract (the largest annual salary in baseball history at the time). The Royals also signed starting pitcher Storm Davis, who was coming off a career-high 19-game win season (third-best in the AL), to a three-year $6 million contract. Despite the promising off-season moves, the team suffered critical bullpen injuries while both newly signed Davises experienced lackluster seasons in 1990. The Royals concluded the season with a 75–86 record, in second-to-last place in the AL West (and with the worst franchise record since 1970). Bo Jackson—the team's potential future franchise player—suffered a devastating hip injury while playing football in the off-season, so the Royals waived him during spring training in 1991.\n\nThough the team dropped out of contention from 1990 to 1992, the Royals still could generally be counted on to post winning records through the strike-shortened 1994 season. With no playoff appearances despite the winning records during this era, many of the team's highlights instead centered around the end of George Brett's career, such as his third and final batting title in 1990—which made him the first player to win batting titles in three different decades—and his 3,000th hit.\n\nAt the start of the 1990s, the Royals had been hit with a double-whammy when General Manager John Schuerholz departed in 1990 and team owner Ewing Kauffman died in 1993. Shortly before Kauffman's death, he set up an unprecedented complex succession plan to keep the team in Kansas City. The team was donated at his death to the Greater Kansas City Community Foundation and Affiliated Trusts with operating decisions of the team decided by a five-member group chaired by Wal-Mart executive David Glass. According to the plan the Royals had six years to find a local owner for the team before opening ownership to an outside bidder. The new owners would be required to say they would keep the team in Kansas City. Kauffman had feared that new owners would move it noting, \"No one would want to buy a baseball team that consistently loses millions of dollars and had little prospect of making money because it was in a small city.\" If no owner could be found the Kauffman restrictions were to end on January 1, 2002, and the team was to be sold to the highest bidder. In 1999, New York City lawyer and minor league baseball owner Miles Prentice, vowing not to move the team, bid $75 million for the team. This was the minimum amount Kauffman had stipulated the team could be sold for. MLB rejected Prentice's first bid without specifying any reason. In a final round of bids on March 13, 2000, the Foundation voted to accept Glass' bid of $96 million, rejecting Prentice's revised bid of $115 million.\n\nDuring the interregnum under Foundation ownership, the team declined. In 1994 season, the Royals reduced payroll by trading pitcher David Cone and outfielder Brian McRae, then continued their salary dump in the 1995 season. The team payroll, which had previously remained among the league's highest, was sliced in half from $40.5 million in 1994 (fourth-highest in the major leagues) to $18.5 million in 1996 (second-lowest in the major leagues).\n\nAs attendance slid and the average MLB salary continued to rise, rather than pay higher salaries or lose their players to free agency, the Royals traded their remaining stars such as Kevin Appier, Johnny Damon and Jermaine Dye. By 1999, the team's payroll had fallen again to $16.5 million. Making matters worse, most of the younger players that the Royals received in exchange for these All-Stars proved of little value, setting the stage for an extended downward spiral. Indeed, the Royals set a franchise low with a .398 winning percentage (64–97 record) in 1999, and lost 97 games again in 2001.\n\nIn the middle of this era, in 1997, the Royals declined the opportunity to switch to the National League as part of a realignment plan to introduce the Arizona Diamondbacks and Tampa Bay Devil Rays as expansion teams. The Milwaukee Brewers made the switch instead.\n\nIn 2002, the Royals set a new team record for futility, losing 100 games for the first time in franchise history. They fired manager Tony Muser, and he was replaced by Tony Peña.\n\nThe 2003 season saw a temporary end to the losing, when manager Tony Peña, in his first full season with the club, guided the team to its first winning record (83–79) since 1994 and finished in third place in the AL Central. He was named the American League Manager of the Year for his efforts and shortstop Ángel Berroa was named AL Rookie of the Year.\n\nFrom the 2004 season through the 2012 season, the Royals posted nine consecutive losing records–the longest streak in team history. In six of those seasons the team finished in last place in the American League Central, and in eight of those nine seasons the team lost at least 90 games. The worst seasons came in 2004–2006, when the Royals lost at least 100 games each year and set the franchise's all-time record for losses (56–106 in 2005).\n\nPicked by many to win their division in 2004 after faring well in the free agent market, the Royals got off to a disappointing start and by late June were back in a rebuilding mode, releasing veteran reliever Curtis Leskanic and trading veteran reliever Jason Grimsley and superstar center fielder Carlos Beltrán for prospects, all within a week of each other.\n\nThe team subsequently fell apart completely, losing 104 games and breaking the franchise record set just two years earlier. The Royals did, however, see promising seasons from two rookies, center fielder David DeJesus and starting pitcher Zack Greinke. The team continued a youth movement in 2005, but finished with a 56–106 record (.346), a full 43 games out of first place, marking the third time in four seasons that the team reestablished the mark for worst record in franchise history. The season also saw the Royals lose 19 games in a row, a franchise record. During the season manager Tony Peña quit and was replaced by interim manager Bob Schaefer until the Indians' bench coach Buddy Bell was chosen as the next manager. Looking for a quick turnaround, general manager Allard Baird signed several veteran players prior to the 2006 season, including Doug Mientkiewicz, Mark Grudzielanek, Joe Mays and Scott Elarton. Nevertheless, the Royals struggled through another 100-loss season in 2006, becoming just the eleventh team in major league history to lose 100 games in three straight seasons. During the season Baird was fired as GM and replaced by Dayton Moore.\n\nKansas City entered the 2007 season looking to rebound from four out of five seasons ending with at least 100 losses. The Royals outbid the Cubs and Blue Jays for free agent righty Gil Meche, signing him to five-year, $55 million contract, the largest contract in Royals history. Reliever Octavio Dotel also inked a one-year, $5 million contract. The team also added several new prospects, including Alex Gordon and Billy Butler. Among Dayton Moore's first acts as General Manager was instating a new motto for the team: \"True. Blue. Tradition.\" In June 2007, the Royals had their first winning month since July 2003 and followed it up with a winning July. The Royals finished the season 69–93, but 2007 marked the club's first season with fewer than 100 losses since 2003. Manager Buddy Bell resigned following the 2007 season.\n\nThe Royals hired Trey Hillman, formerly the manager of the Nippon Ham Fighters and a minor league manager with the New York Yankees, to be the 15th manager in franchise history. The 2008 season began with the release of fan favorite Mike Sweeney and the trade of Ángel Berroa to the Dodgers. Through 13 games in 2008, the Royals were 8–5 and in first place in the AL Central, a vast improvement over their start from the previous season. However, by the All-Star break, the Royals were again in losing territory, with their record buoyed only by a 13–5 record in interleague play, the best in the American League. The team finished the season in fourth place with a 75–87 record.\n\nPrior to the 2009 season, the Royals renovated Kauffman Stadium. After the season began, the Royals ended April at the top of the AL Central, all of which raised excitement levels among fans. However, the team faded as the season progressed and finished the year with a final record of 65–97, in a fourth place tie in its division. The season was highlighted by starter Zack Greinke, who did not allow an earned run in the first 24 innings of the season, went on to finish the year with a Major League-leading 2.16 earned run average, and won the American League Cy Young Award. Greinke joined Bret Saberhagen (in 1985 and 1989) and David Cone (in 1994) as the only three players in Royals history to receive the award.\n\nThe Royals began the 2010 season with a rocky start, and after the team's record fell to 12–23, manager Trey Hillman was fired. Former Milwaukee Brewers skipper Ned Yost took over as manager. At the end of the 2010 season, the Royals finished with a 67–95 record, in last place in the division for the sixth time in seven years. The Royals also set a dubious franchise record during the season, allowing 42 runs in a three-day span from July 25 to 27. The Royals began 2011 with a hot start with a 10–4 record after 14 games, but success faded as the season progressed. The Royals last had a .500 record at 22–22, and by the All-Star break, the Royals had a record of 37–54, the worst in the American League. Almost all of the Royals' bullpen was called up in 2011 and the call up of the infielders Eric Hosmer, Mike Moustakas, Manny Piña, Johnny Giavotella, and Salvador Pérez. Hosmer won the AL Rookie of the Month award in July and September and finished the season with 19 home runs. Moustakas collected a fifteen-game hitting streak, which tied the largest such streak by a Royal rookie. The Royals finished the 2011 season with a 71–91 record. The 2012 team saw more of the same, as they improved by one game to 72–90.\n\nThe 2012 Major League Baseball All-Star Game was hosted by the Royals at Kauffman Stadium on July 10, 2012 (in addition to the 2012 Home Run Derby, All-Star Futures Game and Taco Bell All-Star Legends and Celebrity Softball Game during the All-Star break), which the National League won 8–0. The 2012 season marked the third time the \"Midsummer Classic\" was held in Kansas City.\n\nOn December 10, 2012, in an attempt to strengthen the pitching staff (which was among the worst in baseball in 2012), the Royals traded for Rays pitchers James Shields and Wade Davis giving Tampa top prospects Wil Myers, Jake Odorizzi, Mike Montgomery, and Patrick Leonard. This trade helped catalyze a return to winning records.\n\nIn the 2013 season, the Royals remained over .500 nearly most of April during regular season play. The team also did not commit an error in its first seven games (for innings) for the first time in team history. On September 22, the Royals won their 82nd game of the season to clinch the franchise's first winning season since 2003. The Royals finished the season 86–76, securing the team's best winning percentage since 1994.\n\nThe 2014 season was even more successful, featuring a return to the postseason for the first time in 29 years, and what would unfold as a historic playoff run to the 2014 World Series.\n\nAnchored by the HDH Line (Bullpen trio of Kelvin Herrera, Wade Davis, and Greg Holland), the bullpen became one of the most dominant in MLB history.\n\nEntering the 2014 season, the Royals had the longest playoff drought of any team in the four main American professional sports leagues (NFL, MLB, NHL, and NBA). On July 21, 2014, the Royals had a losing record (48–50) and were eight games behind the Detroit Tigers in the AL Central standings. But spurred by a 22–5 record from July 22 to August 19 coinciding with a mediocre 12–15 stretch by the Tigers, the team surged into first place in the AL Central. The Royals reached the top of the division standings on August 11, after winning their eighth game in a row. This marked the latest date the Royals had led their division since August 29, 2003. The team retained its division lead for a month, before falling out of first-place permanently on September 12. They finished the 2014 regular season with a record 89–73, still the most wins for the Royals since 1989. Though the team finished one game behind Detroit in the AL Central, the Royals secured their first-ever wild card berth.\n\nAfter qualifying for the postseason, the Royals embarked on a record-setting eight-game winning streak. They hosted the Oakland Athletics in the 2014 American League Wild Card Game and won 9–8 on a Salvador Pérez walk-off single in the 12th inning, having earlier rallied back from a 7–3 deficit in the eighth. The Royals then swept the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim in the 2014 American League Division Series. In Game 1 of the ALDS, the score was 2–2 going into the 11th inning, when Mike Moustakas hit a game-winning solo home run. The next day, Kansas City beat the Angels 4–1 in another extra-innings affair, in the process setting an MLB postseason record of three straight extra-inning wins. The Royals then completed the sweep at home, winning 8–3 in game three and advancing to the 2014 American League Championship Series against the Baltimore Orioles.\n\nIn the opening game of the ALCS on October 11, 2014, the Royals defeated the Orioles 8–6, with two home runs in the 10th inning. Thus, in eight extra innings over five postseason games in 2014, they succeeded in hitting four homers in extra innings, more than any team in the history of Major League Baseball. In the second ALCS game, the Royals again beat the Orioles 6–4, behind Lorenzo Cain's four hits, including an RBI single. After game three, the ALCS was delayed one day due to rainy weather, when the Royals hosted the Orioles at Kauffman Stadium on October 14, 2014. Pitcher Jeremy Guthrie allowed only one run as KC beat the Orioles 2–1, taking a 3–0 lead in the series. In Game four, the Royals completed the sweep of the Orioles with another 2–1 win to advance to the World Series for the first time since 1985. The win marked the team's eighth consecutive postseason win in one year, breaking a major league record previously held by the Colorado Rockies in 2007 and Cincinnati Reds in 1976. It also marked the Royals' 11th win in a row overall in postseason play, dating back to the franchise's final three wins of the 1985 Series, the third-longest multi-year postseason streak in baseball history.\n\nThe Royals faced the San Francisco Giants in the 2014 World Series. They had home-field advantage, due to the American League's win in the 2014 All-Star Game.\n\nAfter setting an AL record by winning eight straight games to reach the World Series, the Royals opened the series by losing 7–1 in the first game against starter Madison Bumgarner. The Royals bounced back with a 7–2 win in game two to tie the series at 1–1. The Royals won game three in San Francisco 3–2 to take the series lead for the first time. In game four, the Royals lost 11–4, which tied the series with the Giants. In game five, they lost 5–0 to the Giants against starter Madison Bumgarner. In game six, the Royals beat the Giants 10–0. In game seven, the Royals started RHP Jeremy Guthrie against Giants pitcher Tim Hudson. Guthrie lasted innings before he was replaced by Kelvin Herrera, who himself lasted innings. He was then replaced by Wade Davis, who pitched in two innings. Closer Greg Holland ended the game. On the Giants side, Hudson lasted only innings before he was replaced by Jeremy Affeldt, who was later replaced by Madison Bumgarner. The Royals lost game seven, 3–2, with the tying run (Alex Gordon) on third base in the bottom of the ninth with two outs, when Salvador Pérez fouled out to Pablo Sandoval to end the game and the series.\n\nAfter earning a wild-card entry to the playoffs in 2014, in 2015 the Royals won the franchise's first division title since 1985 and first Central division title ever (the Central was created in 1994). The Royals went on to win the 2015 World Series – the first championship for the Royals since 1985 – beating the New York Mets four games to one.\n\nThe Royals entered the 2015 All-Star break with the best record in the American League (52–34). The team continued its momentum into the second half of the season, and on July 26, Royals management traded three prospects Brandon Finnegan, John Lamb, and Cody Reed for 2014 All-Star pitcher Johnny Cueto to help bolster its starting pitching rotation, as well as trading for super-utility player Ben Zobrist. The team ended the regular season with a record of 95–67, best in the American League, and the organization's best since 1980.\n\nThe Royals faced the Houston Astros in the ALDS. Down 2–1 in the series and trailing 6–2 in the 8th inning of Game 4, the Royals rallied for 5 runs en route to a 9–6 win before Cueto's gem in Game 5 powered the Royals to a second consecutive ALCS. The Royals defeated the Toronto Blue Jays in Game 6, to win the 2015 ALCS and earn a trip to face the New York Mets in the 2015 World Series.\n\nThe Royals beat the New York Mets 4 games to 1 to become the 2015 World Series champions. It was the Royals' first World Series title since 1985. The series win was sealed after the Royals beat the Mets 7–2 in the 12th inning of Game 5. The Royals rallied in the 9th inning down 2–0 to tie the score 2–2, forcing the game into extra innings. The five-run 12th inning was initiated by a Perez single and Dyson pinch-running for him. This was followed by a single from Christian Colon, doubles from both Alcides Escobar and Lorenzo Cain, scoring runs from Jarrod Dyson, Colon, Paulo Orlando (who reached base on an error by Daniel Murphy), Escobar and Ben Zobrist (who was intentionally walked). Wade Davis, who hadn't allowed a run yet that postseason, closed out the game with a flawless 12th, allowing a hit and striking out Wilmer Flores to end the game and win the World Series for the Royals.\n\nThe Royals followed up their World Series victory with an underachieving, injury-riddled campaign in 2016. The Royals had an inconsistent season in which they fittingly finished 81–81, third place in the division and out of the playoffs. This season is notable for the debut of future star Whit Merrifield. The 2017 season marked the end of the past World Series core. Pitcher Yordano Ventura was killed in a car crash on January 22, and the Royals wore patches that said 'ACE 30' on their jerseys for the 2017 season to honor Ventura. Wade Davis was traded in the off season, and after a second consecutive non-playoff season, finishing 80–82, stars Lorenzo Cain and Eric Hosmer left the team in free agency.\n\nAlthough Hosmer and Cain left in free agency, the Royals were still able to resign Mike Moustakas and Alcides Escobar. In 2018, the team started a new rebuild, trading Moustakas mid-season for prospects, and giving playing time to young players like Adalberto Mondesi, Ryan O'Hearn, and Brad Keller. Despite this, the team finished with a 58-win season, the team's fewest wins total since 2005. The season also marked the emergence of Merrifield as a star, as he led the Major Leagues in hits (192) and stolen bases (45).\n\nOn August 30, 2019 it was announced that John Sherman, a minority owner of the Cleveland Indians, had agreed to purchase the team from David Glass for a reported amount of $1 billion. The Royals finished the 2019 season one game better at 59-103 and manager Yost announced that he would retire at the end of the season after ten seasons and a franchise record 746 wins. Merrifield once again led the league in hits, while Jorge Soler led the American League with 48 home runs and three players paced the league in triples (Mondesi, Merrifield and Hunter Dozier, with 10 apiece).\n\nThe Royals' most prominent rivalry is with the intrastate St. Louis Cardinals. For geographic reasons, the teams long played exhibition games, but a true rivalry began with the Royals' victory over the Cardinals in the 1985 World Series, known as the \"I-70 Series.\" Notably, the manager for the Cardinals in the series was Whitey Herzog, who had been the Royals' manager from 1975 to 1979, and led Kansas City to the franchise's first three playoff appearances – in 1976, 1977, and 1978 – before getting fired just shortly after the Royals were eliminated from the playoffs in 1979. Interleague play in 1997 allowed the I-70 Series to be revived in non-exhibition games. The first few seasons of the series were rather even, with the Cardinals holding a slight advantage with a 14–13 record through the 2003 season. Through the 2016 season, the Cardinals hold the series advantage 51–39.\n\nFrom 1976 to 1980, the Royals faced the New York Yankees four times in five years in the American League Championship Series. The Yankees won in 1976, 1977 and 1978, while the Royals won in 1980. In a 2013 article about the 1983 Pine Tar Incident involving the two teams, Lou Pinella said: \"As a team, we didn't really like Kansas City. We had played them in the '76, '77 and '78 postseason and beaten them every time. There was no love lost between the teams. We didn't like each other. They were our big rivals...\" George Brett agreed: \"I hated everyone on the Yankees, I really did. I hated 'em all, back in that era.\"\n\nBULLET::::- 5 George Brett 1989–1993\nBULLET::::- 20 Frank White 1989–1990\nBULLET::::- 29 Mike Sweeney 2003–2007\n\n colspan=\"5\" style=\";\"Kansas City Royals in the Missouri Sports Hall of Fame\n! style=\";\"No.\n! style=\";\"Player\n! style=\";\"Position\n! style=\";\"Tenure\n! style=\";\"Notes\n\nThe Royals have retired the numbers of former players George Brett (No. 5) and Frank White (No. 20). Former manager Dick Howser's No. 10 was retired following his death in 1987. Former Brooklyn Dodgers player Jackie Robinson's No. 42 is retired throughout Major League Baseball.\n\nNo. 29, worn by Royals greats Dan Quisenberry (238 saves, 2.55 ERA) and Mike Sweeney (.299 batting average, 197 home runs, 837 RBI), has not been assigned since Sweeney's departure in 2007. Additionally, the team has not issued No. 30, worn by pitcher Yordano Ventura, since his death in 2017.\n\n+Key\n!scope=\"row\" Year\nYear inducted\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"background:#ffb;\"Bold \nMember of the National Baseball Hall of Fame\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"background:#ffb;\"\nMember of the Baseball Hall of Fame as a member of the Royals\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"background:#cfc;\" Bold\nRecipient of the Hall of Fame's Ford C. Frick Award\n\n! style=\";\"Inducted\n! style=\";\"No.\n! style=\";\"Player\n! style=\";\"Position\n! style=\";\"Tenure\nrowspan=21986  40  Steve Busby  SP  1972–1980\nrowspan=31987  10  Dick Howser  Manager  1981–1986\nrowspan=21989  22  Dennis Leonard  SP  1974–1986\nrowspan=31992  —  Joe Burke  GM<br>President  1974–1981<br>1981–1992\nrowspan=21996  —  Muriel Kauffman  Executive and wife of Ewing  1969–1995\nrowspan=22000  24  style=\"background:#ffb;\"Whitey Herzog  Manager  1975–1979\n\n\"Statistics current through December 1, 2018\"\n! class=\"unsortable\" style=\";\"# !! style=\";\"Manager !! style=\";\"Seasons !! style=\";\"Wins !! style=\";\"Losses !! style=\";\"Pct !! style=\";\"PA !! style=\";\"PW !! style=\";\"PL !! style=\";\"WS\n!colspan=\"3\" style=\";\"Totals !! style=\";\"3842 !! style=\";\"4119 !! style=\";\" !! style=\";\"9 !! style=\";\"40 !! style=\";\"34 !! style=\";\"2\n\n! style=\";\"Level\n! style=\";\"Team\n! style=\";\"League\n! style=\";\"Location\nrowspan=2\"Rookie-Advanced\"\nrowspan=2 Rookie\n\nBULLET::::- Highest batting average: .390, George Brett (1980)\nBULLET::::- Most games: 162, Al Cowens (1977), Hal McRae (1977), Carlos Beltrán (2002), Billy Butler (2013), Alcides Escobar (2014, 2016), Whit Merrifield (2019), Jorge Soler (2019)\nBULLET::::- Most runs: 136, Johnny Damon (2000)\nBULLET::::- Most hits: 230, Willie Wilson (1980)\nBULLET::::- Highest slugging %: .664, George Brett (1980)\nBULLET::::- Most doubles: 54, Hal McRae (1977)\nBULLET::::- Most triples: 21, Willie Wilson (1985)\nBULLET::::- Most home runs: 48, Jorge Soler (2019)\nBULLET::::- Most grand slams: 3, Danny Tartabull (1988)\nBULLET::::- Most RBIs: 144, Mike Sweeney (2000)\nBULLET::::- Most stolen bases: 83, Willie Wilson (1979)\nBULLET::::- Most wins: 23, Bret Saberhagen (1989)\nBULLET::::- Lowest ERA: 2.08, Roger Nelson (1972)\nBULLET::::- Strikeouts: 244, Dennis Leonard (1977)\nBULLET::::- Most strikeouts, single game: 16, Danny Duffy (2016)\nBULLET::::- Most strikeouts, Reliever: 109, Wade Davis (2014)\nBULLET::::- Complete games: 21, Dennis Leonard (1977)\nBULLET::::- Shutouts: 6, Roger Nelson (1972)\nBULLET::::- Saves: 47, Greg Holland (2013)\n\nBULLET::::- Highest batting average: .306, Jose Offerman\nBULLET::::- Most games: 2,707, George Brett\nBULLET::::- Most runs: 1,583, George Brett\nBULLET::::- Most hits: 3,154, George Brett\nBULLET::::- Highest Slugging %: .518, Danny Tartabull\nBULLET::::- Most doubles: 665, George Brett\nBULLET::::- Most triples: 137, George Brett\nBULLET::::- Most home runs: 317, George Brett\nBULLET::::- Most RBIs: 1,596, George Brett\nBULLET::::- Most stolen bases: 612, Willie Wilson\nBULLET::::- Most wins: 166, Paul Splittorff\nBULLET::::- Lowest ERA: 2.55, Dan Quisenberry\nBULLET::::- Strikeouts: 1,458, Kevin Appier\nBULLET::::- Complete games: 103, Dennis Leonard\nBULLET::::- Shutouts: 23, Dennis Leonard\nBULLET::::- Saves: 304, Jeff Montgomery\n\n, the Royals affiliate radio station is KCSP 610AM, the station having entered into a new four-year deal starting from the 2015 season. The radio announcers are Denny Matthews and Ryan Lefebvre, with Steve Stewart and Steve Physioc.\n\nTelevised games are aired on Fox Sports Kansas City, a branch of Fox Sports Midwest. For the 2012 season, Ryan Lefebvre will be joined by Jeff Montgomery for about 20 games while the rest of the broadcasts will be covered by former Angels announcer duo of Rex Hudler and Steve Physioc. During the 2016 season, the Royals averaged an 11.7 rating and 105,000 viewers on primetime TV broadcasts.\n\nOn February 22, 2007, Matthews was selected as the 2007 recipient of the Ford C. Frick Award, presented annually for major contributions to baseball broadcasting.\n\nSluggerrr is the mascot of the Royals. Sluggerrr is a lion, and made his first appearance on April 5, 1996.\nOn game day, Sluggerrr can be found giving aggressive encouragement to players and fans, pitching in the \"Little K\", and firing hot dogs from an air cannon into the stands between innings.\n\nBULLET::::- Kansas City Royals Baseball Academy\n\nBULLET::::- Around the Horn in KC – Official MLBlog of the Kansas City Royals front office\nBULLET::::- CBS SportsLine.com\nBULLET::::- Sports E-Cyclopedia\n"}
{"id": "16887", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16887", "title": "Kosher (disambiguation)", "text": "Kosher (disambiguation)\n\nKosher is food that may be consumed according to the \"Kashrut\", or Jewish dietary laws.\n\nKosher may also refer to:\nBULLET::::- Kosher (band), an American punk rock band formed in 1995 in Warrensburg, Missouri\nBULLET::::- Kosher Gym, a fitness club on Coney Island Avenue in the Midwood section of Flatbush, Brooklyn\n\nBULLET::::- Absolutely Kosher Records, a California-based record label\nBULLET::::- Chametz, the dietary laws of Passover\nBULLET::::- Kosher dill, a style of pickled cucumber\nBULLET::::- Kosher foods\nBULLET::::- Kosher locust, an insect considered kosher under Jewish dietary laws\nBULLET::::- Kosher restaurant, a restaurant or similar establishment specializing in kosher foods\nBULLET::::- Kosher salt, a form of coarse salt used for \"kashering\"\nBULLET::::- Kosher style, food made with a kosher appearance but without any claim to be kosher\nBULLET::::- Kosher tax, an urban legend and antisemitic conspiracy theory\nBULLET::::- Kosher wine\nBULLET::::- Koshur\nBULLET::::- Alternative Kosher, In Israel, obtaining a non-Chief Rabbinate Kosher certificate.\n"}
{"id": "16890", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16890", "title": "Klingon language", "text": "Klingon language\n\nThe Klingon language (\"codice_1\", , in \"codice_2\" ) is the constructed language spoken by the fictional Klingons in the \"Star Trek\" universe.\n\nDescribed in the 1985 book \"The Klingon Dictionary\" by Marc Okrand and deliberately designed to sound \"alien\", it has a number of typologically uncommon features. The language's basic sound, along with a few words, was first devised by actor James Doohan (\"Scotty\") and producer Jon Povill for \"\". That film marked the first time the language had been heard on screen. In all previous appearances, Klingons spoke in English, even to each other. Klingon was subsequently developed by Okrand into a full-fledged language.\n\nKlingon is sometimes referred to as \"Klingonese\" (most notably in the \"\" episode \"The Trouble with Tribbles\", where it was actually pronounced by a Klingon character as \"Klingonee\" ), but among the Klingon-speaking community, this is often understood to refer to another Klingon language called Klingonaase that was introduced in John M. Ford's 1984 \"Star Trek\" novel \"The Final Reflection,\" and appears in other \"Star Trek\" novels by Ford.\n\nThe play \"A Klingon Christmas Carol\" is the first production that is primarily in Klingon (only the narrator speaks English). The opera \"codice_3\" is entirely in Klingon.\n\nA small number of people are capable of conversing in Klingon. Its vocabulary, heavily centered on \"Star Trek\"-Klingon concepts such as spacecraft or warfare, can sometimes make it cumbersome for everyday use.\n\nAlthough mentioned in the original \"Star Trek\" series episode \"The Trouble with Tribbles\", the Klingon language first appeared on-screen in \"\" (1979). According to the actor who spoke the lines, Mark Lenard, James Doohan recorded the lines he had written on a tape, and Lenard transcribed the recorded lines in a way he found useful in learning them.\n\nFor \"\" (1984), director Leonard Nimoy and writer-producer Harve Bennett wanted the Klingons to speak a structured language instead of random gibberish, and so commissioned a full language, based on the phrases Doohan had originated, from Marc Okrand, who had earlier constructed four lines of Vulcan dialogue for \"\".\n\nOkrand enlarged the lexicon and developed a grammar based on Doohan's original dozen words. The language appeared intermittently in later films featuring the original cast (for example, in \"\" (1989) and in \"\" (1991), where translation difficulties served as a plot device).\n\nTwo \"non-canon\" dialects of Klingon are hinted at in the novelization of \"\", as Saavik speaks in Klingon to the only Klingon officer aboard Cpt. Kruge's starship after his death, as the survivors of the \"Enterprise\"'s self-destruction transport up from the crumbling Genesis Planet to the Klingon ship. The surviving officer, Maltz, states that he speaks the \"Rumaiy\" dialect, while Saavik is speaking to him in the \"Kumburan\" dialect of Klingon, per Maltz's spoken reply to her.\n\nWith the advent of the series \"\" (1987)—in which one of the main characters, Worf, was a Klingon—and successors, the language and various cultural aspects for the fictional species were expanded. In the \"\" episode \"A Matter of Honor\", several members of a Klingon ship's crew speak a language that is not translated for the benefit of the viewer (even Commander Riker, enjoying the benefits of a universal translator, is unable to understand) until one Klingon orders the others to \"speak their [i.e., human] language\".\n\nA small number of non-Klingon characters were later depicted in \"Star Trek\" as having learned to speak Klingon, notably Jean-Luc Picard and Jadzia Dax.\n\nHobbyists around the world have studied the Klingon language. Six Klingon translations of works of world literature have been published: \"codice_4\" (\"the Epic of Gilgamesh\"), \"codice_5\" (\"Hamlet\"), \"codice_6\" (\"Much Ado About Nothing\"), \"codice_7\" (\"Tao Te Ching\"), \"codice_8\" (\"the Art of War\") and \"codice_9\" (\"the Little Prince\"). The Shakespearean choices were inspired by a remark from High Chancellor Gorkon in \"\", who said, \"You have not experienced Shakespeare until you have read him in the original Klingon.\" In the bonus material on the DVD, screenwriter Nicholas Meyer and actor William Shatner both explain that this was an allusion to the German myth that Shakespeare was in fact German.\n\nThe Klingon Language Institute exists to promote the language.\n\nCBS Television Studios owns the copyright on the official dictionary and other canonical descriptions of the language. While constructed languages (\"conlangs\") are viewed as creations with copyright protection, natural languages are not protected, excluding dictionaries and/or other works created with them. Mizuki Miyashita and Laura Moll note, \"Copyrights on dictionaries are unusual because the entries in the dictionary are not copyrightable as the words themselves are facts, and facts can not be copyrighted. However, the formatting, example sentences, and instructions for dictionary use are created by the author, so they are copyrightable.\"\n\nOkrand had studied some Native American and Southeast Asian languages, and phonological and grammatical features of these languages \"worked their way into Klingon, but for the most part, not by design.\" Okrand himself has stated that a design principle of the Klingon language was dissimilarity to existing natural languages in general, and English in particular. He therefore avoided patterns that are typologically common and deliberately chose features that occur relatively infrequently in human languages. This includes above all the highly asymmetric consonant inventory and the basic word order.\n\nA small number of people are capable of conversing in Klingon. Arika Okrent guessed in her book \"In the Land of Invented Languages\" that there might be 20–30 fluent speakers. Its vocabulary, heavily centered on \"Star Trek\"–Klingon concepts such as spacecraft or warfare, can sometimes make it cumbersome for everyday use. For instance, while words for \"transporter ionizer unit\" (\"codice_10\") or \"bridge\" (of a ship) (\"codice_11\") have been known since close to the language's inception, the word for \"bridge\" in the sense of a crossing over water (\"codice_12\") was unknown until August 2012. Nonetheless, mundane conversations are possible among skilled speakers.\n\nOne Klingon speaker, d'Armond Speers, raised his son Alec to speak Klingon as a first language, whilst the boy's mother communicated with him in English. Alec rarely responded to his father in Klingon, although when he did, his pronunciation was \"excellent\". After Alec's fifth birthday, Speers reported that his son eventually stopped responding to him when spoken to in Klingon as he clearly did not enjoy it, so Speers switched to English.\n\nIn 2007, a report surfaced that Multnomah County, Oregon, was hiring Klingon translators for its mental health program in case patients came into a psychiatric hospital speaking nothing but Klingon. Most circulations of the report seemingly implied that this was a problem that health officials faced before; however, the original report indicated that this was just a precaution for a hypothetical and that said translator would only be paid on an as needed basis. After the report was misinterpreted, the County issued another release noting that releasing the original report was a \"mistake\".\n\nIn May 2009, Simon & Schuster, in collaboration with Ultralingua Inc., a developer of electronic dictionary applications, announced the release of a suite of electronic Klingon language software for most computer platforms including a dictionary, a phrasebook, and an audio learning tool.\n\nIn September 2011, Eurotalk released the \"Learn Klingon\" course in its \"Talk Now!\" series. The language is displayed in both Latin and pIqaD fonts, making this the first language course written in pIqaD and approved by CBS and Marc Okrand. It was translated by Jonathan Brown and Okrand and uses the codice_13 TrueType font.\n\nIn August 2016, a company in the United Kingdom, Bidvine, began offering Klingon lessons as one of their services.\n\nIn March 2018, the popular language learning site Duolingo opened a beta course in Klingon.\n\nThere are Klingon language meetings and linguists or students are interested in researching this topic, even writing essays about the language or its users. In the media (music, literature and television) Klingon is also used frequently as a reference to Star Trek.\n\nIn 2010, a Chicago Theatre company presented a version of Charles Dickens' \"A Christmas Carol\" in Klingon language and a Klingon setting. On September 25, 2010, the Washington Shakespeare Company (now known as WSC Avant Bard) performed selections from \"Hamlet\" and \"Much Ado About Nothing\" in the Klingon language in Arlington, Virginia. The performance was proposed by Okrand in his capacity as chairman of the group's board. This performance was reprised on February 27, 2011 featuring Stephen Fry as the Klingon Osric and was filmed by the BBC as part of a 5-part documentary on language entitled \"Fry's Planet Word\".\n\nGoogle Search and \"Minecraft\" each have a Klingon language setting.\n\nThe 2003–2010 version of the puzzle globe logo of Wikipedia, representing its multilingualism, contained a Klingon character. When updated in 2010, the Klingon character was removed from the logo, and substituted with one from the Ge'ez script. A was started in June 2004 at \"tlh.wikipedia.org\". It was permanently locked in August 2005 and moved to Wikia. The Klingon Wiktionary was closed in 2008.\n\nThe file management software XYplorer has been translated into Klingon by its developer.\n\nMicrosoft's Bing Translator attempts to translate Klingon from and to other languages. It can do a good job with individual words, and with phrases included in its training corpus, but it is not well tuned for Klingon's system of prefixes and suffixes. For example, codice_14 \"You must study it\" is rendered instead as \"They Must Study.\"\n\nIn July 2015, when Conservative Welsh Assembly Member Darren Millar formally asked the Welsh Economy Minister Edwina Hart about the Welsh Government's policy funding research into sightings of UFOs at Cardiff Airport, a press officer in the Minister's office issued a written reply in Klingon: codice_15, which was translated as: \"The minister will reply in due course. However this is a non-devolved matter.\"\n\nWith the digital only release of \"\" in 2017, streaming service Netflix announced it would provide Klingon subtitles for the entire first season. They can be enabled like any other language provided by the streaming service, and are shown as the phonetic pronunciation rather than Klingon script.\n\nBULLET::::- Duolingo features a course for Klingon, which was released on March 15, 2018 and is now in beta testing.\nBULLET::::- The Klingon Language Institute provides a Learn Klingon Online series of lessons to its members. The first few lessons are free to sample.\n\nAn important concept to spoken and written Klingon is canonicity. Only words and grammatical forms introduced by Marc Okrand are considered canonical Klingon by the KLI and most Klingonists. However, as the growing number of speakers employ different strategies to express themselves, it is often unclear as to what level of neologism is permissible. New vocabulary has been collected in a list maintained by the KLI until 2005 and has since then been followed up by Klingon expert Lieven Litaer.\n\nWithin the fictional universe of \"Star Trek\", Klingon is derived from the original language spoken by the messianic figure Kahless the Unforgettable, who united the Klingon home-world of codice_16 under one empire more than 1500 years ago. Many dialects exist, but the standardized dialect of prestige is almost invariably that of the sitting emperor.\n\nThe Klingon Language Institute regards the following works as canon Klingon; they serve as sources of Klingon vocabulary and grammar for all other works.\n\nBULLET::::- Books\n\nBULLET::::- Audio tapes\n\nBULLET::::- Electronic resources\n\nBULLET::::- Other sources\n\nThe letters in parentheses following each item (if any) indicate the acronym of each source - used when quoting canon.\n\n! Latin transcription !! Klingon script !! IPA\n\nKlingon has been developed with a phonology that, while based on human natural languages, is intended to sound alien to human ears. When initially developed, Paramount Pictures (owners of the \"Star Trek\" franchise) wanted the Klingon language to be guttural and harsh and Okrand wanted it to be unusual, so he selected sounds that combined in ways not generally found in other languages. The effect is mainly achieved by the use of a number of retroflex and uvular consonants in the language's inventory. Klingon has twenty-one consonants and five vowels. Klingon is normally written in a variant of the Latin alphabet. The orthography of this transliteration is case-sensitive, that is, upper and lower case letters are not interchangeable (uppercase letters mostly represent sounds different from those expected by English speakers), although with the exception of Q/q there are no Minimal pairs between case. In other words, while \"tlhingan hol\", meaning Klingon language, is incorrect, it cannot be misread as anything but a(n erroneous) form of \"tlhIngan Hol\", but \"Qat\" (be popular) is not the same as \"qat\" (accompany) . In the discussion below, standard Klingon orthography appears in \"\", and the phonemic transcription in the International Phonetic Alphabet is written between \"/slashes/\".\n\nThe inventory of consonants in Klingon is spread over a number of places of articulation. In spite of this, the inventory has many gaps: Klingon has no velar plosives, and only one sibilant fricative. Deliberately, this arrangement is very different from that of most human languages. The combination of an aspirated voiceless alveolar plosive and a voiced retroflex plosive is particularly unusual.\n\n! rowspan=\"2\" colspan=2  \n! rowspan=\"2\"  Labial\n! colspan=\"2\"  Coronal\n! rowspan=\"2\"  Postalveolar<br> / palatal\n! rowspan=\"2\"  Dorsal\n! rowspan=\"2\"  Glottal\n! \n\n! rowspan=2 Plosive\n! \n! rowspan=2 Affricate\n! \n! rowspan=2 Fricative\n\n! colspan=2 Nasal\n\n! colspan=2 Trill\n! colspan=2 Approximant\n\nThere are a few dialectal pronunciation differences (it is not known if the aforementioned non-canon \"Kumburan\" or \"Rumaiy\" dialects of \"codice_1\" hinted at in the novelization might differ):\n\nBULLET::::- In the Krotmag dialect and are realized as nasal stops and\nBULLET::::- In the Tak'ev dialect and are pre-nasalized oral stops and\nIn the Morskan dialect:\nBULLET::::- is a central affricate\nBULLET::::- is realized as glottal syllable-initially and deleted syllable-finally\nBULLET::::- is realized as a velar fricative\n\nIn contrast to its consonants, Klingon's inventory of vowels is simple, and similar to those of many human languages, such as Spanish or Japanese. There are five vowels spaced more or less evenly around the vowel space, with two back rounded vowels, one back unrounded vowel, and two front or near-front unrounded vowels. The vowel inventory is asymmetrical in that the back rounded vowels are tense and the front vowels are lax.\n\nThe two front vowels, and , represent sounds that are found in English, but are more open and lax than a typical English speaker might assume when reading Klingon text written in the Latin alphabet, thus causing the consonants of a word to be more prominent. This enhances the sense that Klingon is a clipped and harsh-sounding language.\n\nBULLET::::- Vowels\n\nDiphthongs can be analyzed phonetically as the combination of the five vowels plus one of the two semivowels and (represented by and , respectively). Thus, the combinations , , , , , , and are possible. There are no words in the Klingon language that contain * or *.\n\nKlingon follows a strict syllable structure. A syllable must start with a consonant (including the glottal stop) followed by one vowel. In prefixes and rare other syllables, this is enough. More commonly, this consonant-vowel pair is followed by one consonant or one of three biconsonantal codas: /-codice_45 -codice_46 -codice_47/. Thus, \"codice_48\" \"record\", \"codice_49\" \"poison\" and \"codice_50\" \"targ\" (a type of animal) are all legal syllable forms, but *\"codice_51\" and *\"codice_52\" are not. Despite this, one suffix takes the shape vowel+consonant: the endearment suffix codice_53.\n\nIn verbs, the stressed syllable is usually the verbal stem itself, as opposed to a prefix or any suffixes, except when a suffix ending with codice_54 is separated from the verb by at least one other suffix, in which case the suffix ending in codice_54 is also stressed. In addition, stress may shift to a suffix that is meant to be emphasized.\n\nIn nouns, the final syllable of the stem (the noun itself, excluding any affixes) is stressed. If any syllables ending in codice_54 are present, the stress shifts to those syllables.\n\nThe stress in other words seems to be variable, but this is not a serious issue because most of these words are only one syllable in length. There are some words which should fall under the rules above, but do not, although using the standard rules would still be acceptable.\n\nKlingon is an agglutinative language, using mainly affixes in order to alter the function or meaning of words. Some nouns have inherently plural forms, such as \"codice_57\" \"plate\" (vs. codice_58 \"plates\"), but most nouns require a suffix to express plurality explicitly. Depending on the type of noun (body part, being capable of using language, or neither) the suffix changes. For beings capable of using language, the suffix is \"codice_59,\" as in \"codice_60,\" meaning \"Klingons,\" or \"codice_61,\" meaning \"enemies\". For body parts, the plural suffix is \"codice_62,\" as in \"codice_63,\" \"eyes\". For items that are neither body parts nor capable of speech, the suffix is \"codice_64,\" such as in \"codice_65\" (\"stars\"), or \"codice_66\" (\"targs\") for a Klingon animal somewhat resembling a boar. (However, a plural suffix is never obligatory. To say \"The stars are beautiful\", \"codice_67\" and \"codice_68\" are equally grammatical, although the second can also mean \"The star is beautiful\".)\n\nThe words \"codice_69\" and \"codice_70\", which on their own mean \"man\" and \"woman\" respectively, can be used in compound words to refer to the referent's sex. For example, from \"codice_71\" (\"child\") this process derives \"codice_72\" (\"son\") and \"codice_73\" (\"daughter\").\n\nKlingon nouns take suffixes to indicate grammatical number. There are three noun classes, two levels of deixis, and a possession and syntactic function. In all, twenty-nine noun suffixes from five classes may be employed: \"codice_74\" \"for my beloved true friends\". A word may carry no more than one suffix from each class, and the classes have a specific order of appearance.\n\nVerbs in Klingon take a prefix indicating the number and person of the subject and object, whereas suffixes are taken from nine ordered classes and a special suffix class called rovers. Each of the four known rovers has a unique rule controlling its position among the suffixes in the verb. Verbs are marked for aspect, certainty, predisposition and volition, dynamic, causative, mood, negation, and honorific. The Klingon verb has two moods: indicative and imperative.\n\nThe most common word order in Klingon is object–verb–subject, and, in most cases, the word order is the exact reverse of English for an equivalent sentence:\n\nAn important aspect of Klingon grammar is its \"ungrammaticality\". As with for example Japanese, shortening of communicative statements is common, and is called \"Clipped Klingon\" (\"codice_76\" or, more simply, \"codice_77\") and Ritualized Speech. Clipped Klingon is especially useful in situations where speed is a decisive factor. Grammar is abbreviated, and sentence parts deemed to be superfluous are dropped. Intentional ungrammaticality is widespread, and it takes many forms. It is exemplified by the practice of \"codice_78\", which Marc Okrand translates as \"to misfollow the rules\" or \"to follow the rules wrongly\".\n\nWhen written in the Latin alphabet, Klingon is unusual in being case-sensitive, with some letters written in capitals and others in lowercase. In one contrast, \"codice_25\" and \"codice_31\", there is an actual case-sensitive pair representing two different consonants. Capitals are generally reserved for uvular or retroflex consonants pronounced further back in the mouth or throat than is normal for the corresponding English sounds, as with \"codice_28\", \"codice_31\", and \"codice_33\". However, \"codice_34\", pronounced like the in German \"ach\" or Scottish \"loch\", is further forward in the throat than English /h/. One phoneme, the vowel \"codice_85\", is written capital to look more like the IPA symbol for the sound /ɪ/, and can pose problems when writing Klingon in sans-serif fonts such as Arial, as it looks almost the same as the consonant \"codice_42\".\n\nThis has led some Klingon enthusiasts to write it lowercase like the other vowels (\"i\") to prevent confusion, but this use is non-canonical. Instead, a serif font that clearly distinguishes \"codice_85\" and \"codice_42\", such as Courier or Courier New, has traditionally been employed for writing Klingon in the Latin alphabet. In any case, it can be disambiguated through context, as codice_85 never occurs next to another vowel, unlike codice_42. The apostrophe, denoting the glottal stop, is considered a letter, not a punctuation mark.\n\nKlingon is often written in (in-universe, \"transliterated to\") the Latin alphabet as used above, but on the television series, the Klingons use their own alien writing system. In \"The Klingon Dictionary\", this alphabet is named as \"codice_2\", but no information is given about it. When Klingon symbols are used in \"Star Trek\" productions, they are merely decorative graphic elements, designed to emulate real writing and create an appropriate atmosphere. Enthusiasts have settled on the name \"codice_2\" for this writing system.\n\nThe Astra Image Corporation designed the symbols currently used to \"write\" Klingon for \"\", although these symbols are often incorrectly attributed to Michael Okuda. They based the letters on the Klingon battlecruiser hull markings (three letters) first created by Matt Jefferies and on Tibetan writing because the script has sharp letter forms—used as a testament to the Klingons' love for knives and blades.\n\nFor April Fools' Day in 2013, Nokia and typography company Dalton Maag claimed to have used \"communication devices to far-flung star systems\" to assist them in localizing the Nokia Pure font to the Klingon writing system. Though the explanation was of course humorous in nature, as part of the practical joke a series of real fonts based upon the most commonly used \"codice_2\" character mapping were in fact developed, and have been made available for free download.\n\nA design principle of the Klingon language is the great degree of lexical-cultural correlation in the vocabulary. For example, there are several words meaning \"to fight\" or \"to clash against,\" each having a different degree of intensity. There is an abundance of words relating to warfare and weaponry and also a great variety of curses (cursing is considered a fine art in Klingon culture). This helps lend a particular character to the language.\n\nThere are many in-jokes built into the language. For example, the word for \"pair\" is codice_95, a reference to the original \"Siamese twins\" Chang and Eng; a guitar is a codice_96 (i.e. Les Paul); the word for \"torture\" is codice_97; \"hangover\" is codice_98, and the word for \"fish\" is \"codice_99\".\n\nSources for the vocabulary include English (albeit heavily disguised), and also Yiddish: codice_100 for \"buttocks\" (from תּחת \"tuches\" spelled backwards), and codice_101 for \"ache, pain, sore\" (cf. \"oy vey\").\n\nMany English words do not have direct translations into Klingon. To express \"hello\", the nearest equivalent is codice_102, meaning \"What do you want?\", with \"goodbye\" translated as codice_103, \"Success!\".\n\nBULLET::::- codice_104\nBULLET::::- codice_105\nBULLET::::- codice_106\nBULLET::::- codice_107\nBULLET::::- codice_108\nBULLET::::- codice_109\n\nBULLET::::- Klingon culture\nBULLET::::- Klingon grammar\nBULLET::::- Stovokor, a death metal band whose lyrics are written in Klingon\nBULLET::::- \"codice_3\", the first Klingon opera\nBULLET::::- \"Klingon Christmas Carol\", a staged adaptation of Charles Dickens's \"A Christmas Carol\" in Klingon\n\nBULLET::::- Bernard Comrie, 1995, \"The Paleo-Klingon numeral system\". \"HolQeD\" 4.4: 6–10.\nBULLET::::- Klingon ConScript Unicode Registry (CSUR)\nBULLET::::- pIqaD Support\nBULLET::::- \"Klingon (pIqaD)\" Unicode font (codice_111–codice_112)\nBULLET::::- Klingon text converter (transliteration)\n\nBULLET::::- Klingon Language Institute\nBULLET::::- Klingonska Akademien\nBULLET::::- qepHom Saarbrücken The largest annual Klingon language meeting in Europe\nBULLET::::- Klingon Language Wiki Open encyclopedia about the Klingon language\nBULLET::::- Klingon and its User: A Sociolinguistic Profile, a sociolinguistics MA thesis\nBULLET::::- Is Klingon an Ohlonean language? A comparison of Mutsun and Klingon\nBULLET::::- Omniglot: Klingon Alphabet\nBULLET::::- Eatoni Ergonomics' Klingon page includes BDF, TTF fonts and a Klingon text entry demo\nBULLET::::- paqʼbatlh: The Klingon Epic\nBULLET::::- Klingon speaking chatbot\nBULLET::::- Klingon word list and spell checker\nBULLET::::- photo editor translated into Klingon\n"}
{"id": "16892", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16892", "title": "Kid Icarus", "text": "Kid Icarus\n\nKid Icarus, known in Japan as Light Mythology: Palutena's Mirror, is an action platform video game for the Family Computer Disk System in Japan and the Nintendo Entertainment System in Europe and North America. It was released in Japan in December 1986, in Europe in February 1987, and in North America in July 1987.\n\nThe plot of \"Kid Icarus\" revolves around protagonist Pit's quest for three sacred treasures, which he must equip to rescue the Greek-inspired fantasy world Angel Land and its ruler, the goddess Palutena. The player controls Pit through platform areas while fighting monsters and collecting items. Their objective is to reach the end of the levels, and to find and defeat boss monsters that guard the three treasures. The game was developed by Nintendo's Research and Development 1 division, and co-developed with TOSE, who helped with additional programming. It was designed by Toru Osawa and Yoshio Sakamoto, directed by Satoru Okada, and produced by Gunpei Yokoi.\n\nDespite its mixed critical reception, \"Kid Icarus\" is a cult classic. Reviewers praised the game for its music and its mixture of gameplay elements from different genres, but criticized its graphics and high difficulty level. It was included in several lists of the best games compiled by \"IGN\" and \"Nintendo Power\".\n\nIt was later re-released for the Game Boy Advance in Japan in 2004. The game was released on the Wii's Virtual Console in 2007 and the Wii U's Virtual Console in 2013. A 3D Classics remake of the game was released in Japan in 2011 and in North America, Europe, and Australia in 2012. In 2016, \"Kid Icarus\" was included on the North American and PAL region releases of the NES Classic Edition. It is also released on Nintendo Switch Online in 2019.\n\nA sequel, \"\", was released for the Game Boy in 1991. A third entry in the series, \"\", was released for Nintendo 3DS in March 2012, after Pit's inclusion as a playable character in the 2008 game \"Super Smash Bros. Brawl\".\n\n\"Kid Icarus\" is an action platformer with role-playing elements. The player controls the protagonist Pit through two-dimensional levels, which contain monsters, obstacles and items. Pit's primary weapon is a bow with an unlimited supply of arrows that can be upgraded with three collectable power items: the guard crystal shields Pit from enemies, the flaming arrows hit multiple targets, and the holy bow increases the range of the arrows. These upgrades will work only if Pit's health is high enough. The game keeps track of the player's score, and increases Pit's health bar at the end of a level if enough points were collected.\n\nThroughout the stages, the player may enter doors to access seven different types of chambers. Stores and black markets offer items in exchange for hearts, which are left behind by defeated monsters. Treasure chambers contain items, enemy nests give the player an opportunity to earn extra hearts, and hot springs restore Pit's health. In the god's chamber, the strength of Pit's bow and arrow may be increased depending on several factors, such as the number of enemies defeated and the amount of damage taken in battle. In the training chamber, Pit will be awarded with one of the three power items if he passes a test of endurance.\n\nThe game world is divided into three stages – the underworld, the over world (Earth) and the sky world. Each stage encompasses three unidirectional area levels and a fortress. The areas of the underworld and sky world stages have Pit climb to the top, while those of the surface world are side-scrolling levels. The fortresses at the end of the stages are labyrinths with non-scrolling rooms, in which the player must find and defeat a gatekeeper boss. Within a fortress, Pit may buy a check sheet, pencil and torch to guide him through the labyrinth. A single-use item, the hammer, can destroy stone statues, which frees a flying soldier called a Centurion that will aid the player in boss battles. For each of the bosses destroyed, Pit receives one of three sacred treasures that are needed to access the fourth and final stage, the sky temple. This last portion abandons the platforming elements of the previous levels, and resembles a scrolling shooter. \n\nThe game is set in Angel Land, which is a fantasy world with a Greek mythology theme. The backstory of \"Kid Icarus\" is described in the instruction booklet: before the events of the game, Earth was ruled by Palutena: Goddess of Light and Medusa: Goddess of Darkness. Palutena bestowed the people with light to make them happy. Medusa hated the humans, dried up their crop, and turned them to stone. Enraged by this, Palutena transformed Medusa into a monster and banished her to the Underworld. Out of revenge, Medusa conspired with the monsters of the Underworld to take over Palutena's residence the Palace in the Sky. She launched a surprise attack, and stole the three sacred treasures — the Mirror Shield, the Light Arrows and the Wings of Pegasus — which deprived Palutena's army of its power. After her soldiers had been turned to stone by Medusa, Palutena was defeated in battle and imprisoned deep inside the Palace in the Sky.\n\nWith her last power, she sent a bow and arrow to the young angel Pit. He escapes from his prison in the Underworld and sets out to save Palutena and Angel Land. Throughout the course of the story, Pit retrieves the three sacred treasures from the fortress gatekeepers at their respective fortresses in the Underworld, the Overworld, and the Skyworld. Afterward, he equips himself with the treasures and storms the sky temple where he defeats Medusa and rescues Palutena. The game has five different endings; depending on the player's performance, Palutena may present Pit with headgear or transform him into a full-grown angel. In the Japanese version, the best ending from the English version does not exist, and instead another bad ending is present.\n\nThis game was designed at Nintendo's Research and Development 1 (R&D1) division, while the programming was handled by the external company Intelligent Systems (known as \"Myth of Light: The Mirror of Palutena\" at the time). The game was developed for the Family Computer Disk System (FDS) because the peripheral's Disk Card media allowed for three times the storage capacity of the Family Computer's (and NES's) console's cartridges. Combined with the possibility to store the players' progress, the floppy disk format enabled the developers to create a longer game with a more extensive game world. \"Myth of Light: The Mirror of Palutena\" was Toru Osawa's debut as a video game designer, and he was the only staff member working on the game at the beginning of the project. Osawa (credited in the U.S. version as Inusawa) intended to make \"Light Myth: Palutena's Mirror\" an action game with role-playing elements, and wrote a story rooted in Greek mythology, which he had always been fond of. He drew the pixel art, and wrote the technical specifications, which were the basis for the playable prototype that was programmed by Intelligent Systems. After Nintendo's action-adventure \"Metroid\" had been finished, more staff members were allotted to the development of \"Myth of Light: The Mirror of Palutena\".\n\nThe game was directed by Satoru Okada (credited as S. Okada), and produced by the general manager of the R&D1 division, Gunpei Yokoi (credited as G. Yokoi). Hirokazu Tanaka (credited as Hip Tanaka) composed the music for \"Myth of Light: The Mirror of Palutena\". Yoshio Sakamoto (credited as Shikao.S) joined the team as soon as he had returned from his vacation after the completion of \"Metroid\". He streamlined the development process, and made many decisions that affected the game design of \"Myth of Light: The Mirror of Palutena\". Several out-of-place elements were included in the game, such as credit cards, a wizard turning player character Pit into an eggplant, and a large, moving nose that was meant to resemble composer Tanaka. Sakamoto attributed this unrestrained humor to the former personnel of the R&D1 division, which he referred to as \"strange\". Osawa said that he had originally tried to make \"Myth of Light: The Mirror of Palutena\" completely serious, but opted for a more humorous approach after objections from the team.\n\nTo meet the game's projected release date of December 19, 1986, the staff members worked overtime and often stayed in the office at night. They used torn cardboard boxes as beds, and covered themselves in curtains to resist the low temperatures of the unheated development building. Eventually, \"Myth of Light: The Mirror of Palutena\" was finished and entered production a mere three days before the release date. Several ideas for additional stages had to be dropped because of these scheduling conflicts. In February and July 1987, respectively, a cartridge-based version was published for the NES in Europe and North America under the name \"Kid Icarus\". For this release, the graphics of the ending were updated, and staff credits were added to the game. Unlike the Japanese version (\"Myth of Light: The Mirror of Palutena\"), which saves the player's progress on the Disk Card, the English version (\"Kid Icarus\") uses a password system to return to a game after the console was turned off.\n\nIn August 2004, \"Myth of Light: The Mirror of Palutena\" was re-released as part of the \"Famicom Mini Disk System Selection\" for the Game Boy Advance. The game was released on the Wii's Virtual Console on January 23, 2007 in Japan, on February 12, 2007 in North America, and on February 23, 2007 in Europe and Australia; it was released on the Wii U's Virtual Console on August 14, 2013 in Japan, on July 11, 2013 in Europe and Australia, and on July 25, 2013 in North America. Passwords that were valid in the NES version do not work in the Virtual Console version due to the checksum algorithm being changed. In 2016, \"Kid Icarus\" was included on the North American and PAL region releases of the NES Classic Edition.\n\nA 3D Classics remake of \"Kid Icarus\" was published for the Nintendo 3DS handheld console. The remake features stereoscopic 3D along with updated graphics including backgrounds, which the original lacked. It also uses the same save system as the Family Computer Disk System version does, as opposed to the Password system from the NES version. The 3D Classics version also utilizes the Family Computer Disk System's music and sound effects (utilizing the extra sound channel not available in the NES version).\n\nThe game became available for purchase on the Nintendo eShop on January 18, 2012 in Japan, on February 2, 2012 in Europe, on April 12, 2012 in Australia and on April 19, 2012 in North America. The game was available early for free via download code to users who registered two selected 3DS games with Nintendo in Japan, Europe and Australia: in Japan, it was available to users who registered any two Nintendo 3DS titles on Club Nintendo between October 1, 2011 and January 15, 2012 with the game available for download starting December 19, 2011; in Europe, it was available to users who registered any two of a selection of Nintendo 3DS titles on Club Nintendo between November 1, 2011 and January 31, 2012, with the first batch of emails with codes being sent out on January 5, 2012; in Australia, it was available to users who registered any two of a selection of Nintendo 3DS titles on Club Nintendo between November 1, 2011 and March 31, 2012, with the first batch of emails with codes being sent out in January 2012. In North America, download codes for the 3D Classics version were given to customers who pre-ordered \"\" at select retailers when they picked up the game itself, which released on March 23, 2012, allowing them to obtain the game before its release for purchase.\n\n\"Kid Icarus\" had shipped 1.76 million copies worldwide by late 2003, and has gained a cult following. In 2001 \"Game Informer\" ranked it the 83rd best game ever made. They claimed that despite its high level of difficulty and frustration, it was fun enough to be worth playing. The game has been met with mixed reviews from critics over the years. In October 1992, a staff writer of the UK publication \"Nintendo Magazine System\" said that \"Kid Icarus\" was \"pretty good fun\", but did not \"compare too well\" to other platform games, owing in part to its \"rather dated\" graphics. \"Retro Gamer\" magazine's Stuart Hunt called \"Kid Icarus\" an \"unsung hero of the NES\" that \"looks and sounds pretty\". He described the music by Hirokazu Tanaka as \"sublime\", and the enemy characters as \"brilliantly drawn\". Although he considered the blend of gameplay elements from different genres a success, he said that \"Kid Icarus\" suffered from \"frustrating\" design flaws, such as its high difficulty level. Jeremy Parish of \"1UP.com\" expressed his disagreement with the game's status as an \"unfairly forgotten masterpiece\" among its substantial Internet following. He found \"Kid Icarus\" to be \"underwhelming\", \"buggy\" and \"pretty annoying\", and noted that it exhibited \"shrill music[, ...] loose controls and some weird design decisions\". Notwithstanding his disapproval of these elements, Parish said that the game was \"[not] terrible, or even bad – just a little lacking.\" He recommended players to buy the Virtual Console version, if only because it allowed them to experience \"Kid Icarus\" \"with a fresh perspective\".\n\n\"GameSpot\"s Frank Provo reviewed the Virtual Console version of the game. He noted that the gameplay of \"Kid Icarus\" was \"[not] the most unique blueprint for a video game\", but that it had been \"fairly fresh back in 1987\". He considered the difficulty level \"excessive\", and found certain areas to be designed \"solely to frustrate players\". Provo said that the presentation of the game had \"[not] aged gracefully\". Despite his favorable comments on the Grecian scenery, he criticized the graphics for its small, bicolored and barely animated sprites, its black backgrounds, and the absence of multiple scrolling layers. He thought that the music was \"nicely composed\", but that the sound effects were \"all taps and thuds\". He was dissatisfied with the emulation of the game, as the Virtual Console release preserves the slowdown problems of the original NES version, but has its cheat codes removed. Provo closed his review with a warning for potential buyers: he said that players could appreciate \"Kid Icarus\" for its \"straightforward gameplay and challenging level layouts\", but might \"find nothing special in the gameplay and recoil in horror at the unflinching difficulty.\" Lucas M. Thomas of \"IGN\" noted that the game design was \"odd\" and \"not Nintendo's most focused\". He thought that it had \"[not] aged in as timeless a manner as many other first-party Nintendo games from the NES era,\" and described \"Kid Icarus\" as \"one of those games that made a lot more sense back in the '80s, accompanied by a tips and tricks strategy sheet.\" He complimented the theme music, which he considered \"heroic and memorable\". In his review of the Virtual Console release, Thomas frowned upon Nintendo's decision to remove the NES cheat codes, and called the omission \"nonsensical\". He found it to be \"not an issue worthy of a prolonged rant\", but said that \"[Nintendo has] willfully edited its product, and damaged its nostalgic value in the process\".\n\n\"Kid Icarus\" was included in \"IGN\"s lists of the top 100 NES games and the top 100 games of all time; it came in 20th and 84th place, respectively. The game was inducted into \"GameSpy\"s \"Hall of Fame\", and was voted 54th place in \"Nintendo Power\"s top 200 Nintendo games. \"Nintendo Power\" also listed it as the 20th best NES video game, and praised it for its \"unique vertically scrolling stages, fun platforming, and infectious 8-bit tunes\", in spite of its \"unmerciful difficulty\".\n\nA Game Boy sequel to \"Kid Icarus\", titled \"\", was released in North America in November 1991, and in Europe on May 21, 1992. It was developed by Nintendo in cooperation with the independent company Tose, and largely adopts the gameplay mechanics of its predecessor. \"Kid Icarus: Of Myths and Monsters\" remained the last installment in the series for over 20 years.\n\nPit is a recurring character in the American animated television series \"\", albeit erroneously named as \"Kid Icarus\", and made cameo appearances in Nintendo games such as \"Tetris\", \"F-1 Race\" and \"Super Smash Bros. Melee\". He became a playable character in the fighting game \"Super Smash Bros. Brawl\", for which his appearance was redesigned.\n\nIn 2008, there were rumors of a three-dimensional \"Kid Icarus\" game for the Wii that was allegedly developed by the German American studio Factor 5. However, the title was said to be in production without the approval of Nintendo, and Factor 5 cancelled multiple projects following the closure of its American branch in early 2009. In a 2010 interview, Yoshio Sakamoto was asked about a \"Kid Icarus\" game for the Wii, to which he replied that he was not aware of any plans to revive the franchise. A new series entry for the Nintendo 3DS, \"\", was eventually revealed at the E3 2010 trade show and was released in 2012. The game is a 3D shooter, and was developed by Project Sora, the company of \"Super Smash Bros.\" designer Masahiro Sakurai.\n"}
{"id": "16893", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16893", "title": "Kansas City (disambiguation)", "text": "Kansas City (disambiguation)\n\nMost broadly, Kansas City is the 14-county Kansas City metropolitan area in the U.S. states of Missouri and Kansas, with the primary central counties of Jackson County, Missouri and Johnson County, Kansas along with the principle municipality of Kansas City, Missouri.\n\nKansas City may also refer to:\nBULLET::::- Kansas City, Missouri, principle municipality of the Kansas City metropolitan area\nBULLET::::- Kansas City, Kansas the smaller Kansas City, third-largest city in Kansas and not the principle municipality of the Kansas City metropolitan area.\nBULLET::::- North Kansas City, Missouri, northern suburb\nBULLET::::- Kansas City, Oregon, an unincorporated community west of Portland, Oregon, U.S.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Kansas City\" (film), a 1996 film by Robert Altman\nBULLET::::- Kansas City jazz, a style of jazz that originated in Kansas City, Missouri in the 1920s and 1930s\nBULLET::::- \"Kansas City\" (Leiber and Stoller song) - covered by Wilbert Harrison in 1959\nBULLET::::- \"Kansas City\" (Sneaky Sound System song)\nBULLET::::- \"Kansas City\" (\"Oklahoma!\"), a song from \"Oklahoma!\"\nBULLET::::- \"Jim Jackson's Kansas City Blues\", a 1927 song by Jim Jackson\nBULLET::::- \"The Kansas City Song\", a song by Buck Owens and the Buckaroos\nBULLET::::- \"Kansas City\", a song by Okkervil River\nBULLET::::- \"Kansas City\", a song by Melissa Etheridge from her 2012 studio album \"4th Street Feeling\"\nBULLET::::- \"Kansas City\", a song by The New Basement Tapes on their 2014 album \"\"\n\nBULLET::::- Kansas City Roos, the athletic program of the University of Missouri–Kansas City\nBULLET::::- Kansas City standard, a digital data format for storing computer programs and data on music/audio cassette tapes\nBULLET::::- Kansas City lowball, a nickname for Deuce-to-seven lowball poker\nBULLET::::- Kansas City (ABA), a former American Basketball Association team in Kansas City, Missouri\n\nBULLET::::- City of Kansas City, a Wabash streamliner train\nBULLET::::- City of St. Louis (train), aka \"City of Kansas City\", a Union Pacific streamliner train\nBULLET::::- List of cities in Kansas\nBULLET::::- Kansas (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- KC (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- KSC (disambiguation)\n"}
{"id": "16894", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16894", "title": "Kylie Minogue", "text": "Kylie Minogue\n\nKylie Ann Minogue, (; born 28 May 1968), often known simply as Kylie, is an Australian singer, songwriter and actress. Throughout her career, Minogue has been known for reinventing herself in fashion and music. She is described as a style icon and has been recognised with several honorific nicknames, most notably the \"Princess of Pop\". Minogue is also recognised as the highest-selling female Australian artist of all time. Born and raised in Melbourne, she has worked and lived in the United Kingdom since the 1990s. Minogue achieved recognition starring in the Australian soap opera \"Neighbours\", where she played tomboy mechanic Charlene Robinson. She came to prominence as a recording artist in the late 1980s and released four bubblegum and dance-pop-influenced studio albums produced by Stock Aitken Waterman and released by PWL. By the time she released her fourth album in the early 1990s, she had amassed several top ten singles in the UK and Australia, including \"I Should Be So Lucky\", \"The Loco-Motion\", \"Hand on Your Heart\", \"Better the Devil You Know\" and \"Step Back in Time\". Minogue, however, felt alienated and dissatisfied with the little creative control she had over her music.\n\nIn 1992, she left PWL and signed with Deconstruction Records, where she released \"Kylie Minogue\" (1994) and \"Impossible Princess\" (1997), both of which received positive reviews from critics, with the latter being often described as her most personal and best work. Returning to more mainstream dance-oriented music, Minogue signed to Parlophone and released her disco-influenced seventh studio album \"Light Years\" (2000), which was preceded by lead single \"Spinning Around\". The follow-up, \"Fever\" (2001) became her best-selling album to date and was a breakthrough for Minogue in markets where she had little recognition previously. Its lead single, \"Can't Get You Out of My Head\" became one of the most successful singles of the 2000s, selling over five million units. She continued reinventing her image and experimenting with a range of genres on her next albums, which produced successful singles such as \"Slow\", \"2 Hearts\" and \"All the Lovers\".\n\nMinogue made her film debut in \"The Delinquents\" (1989) and portrayed Cammy in \"Street Fighter\" (1994). She has also appeared in the films \"Moulin Rouge!\" (2001), \"Jack & Diane\", and \"Holy Motors\" (2012). In 2014, she appeared as a judge on the third series of \"The Voice UK\" and \"The Voice Australia\". Her other ventures include product endorsements, children's books and fashion.\n\nMinogue has sold 70 million records worldwide and has earned numerous awards and accolades, including a Grammy Award, three Brit Awards, 17 ARIA Music Awards, two MTV Europe Music Award and two MTV Video Music Award. She has mounted several successful and critically acclaimed concert tours for which she received a Mo Award for Australian Performer of the Year in 2001 and 2003. Minogue was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire in the 2008 New Year Honours for services to Music. She was appointed by the French government as a Chevalier (knight) of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres for her contribution to the enrichment of French culture. In 2005, while Minogue was on her , she was diagnosed with breast cancer. After treatment, she resumed the tour under the title , which critics viewed as a \"triumph\". Minogue was awarded an honorary Doctor of Health Science (D.H.Sc.) degree by Anglia Ruskin University for her work in raising awareness for breast cancer. On the 25th anniversary of the ARIA Music Awards in 2011, she was inducted by the Australian Recording Industry Association into the ARIA Hall of Fame.\n\nKylie Ann Minogue was born on 28 May 1968 in Melbourne, Australia. Her father, Ronald Charles Minogue, is a fifth generation Australian and has Irish ancestry; her mother, Carol Ann Jones, came from Maesteg, Wales. Jones had lived in Wales until age ten when her mother and father, Millie and Denis Jones, decided to move to Australia for a better life. Just before Kylie's birth, Ron qualified as an accountant and worked through several jobs while Carol worked as a professional dancer. Kylie's younger brother, Brendan, is a news cameraman in Australia, while her younger sister Dannii Minogue is also a singer and television host. The Minogue family frequently moved around various suburbs in Melbourne to sustain their living expenses, which Kylie found unsettling as a child. After the birth of Dannii, the family moved to South Oakleigh. Kylie would often stay at home reading, sewing and learning to play the violin and piano. As money was tight, Ron worked as an accountant at a family-owned car company and Carol worked as a tea lady at a local hospital. After moving to Surrey Hills, Melbourne, Minogue attended Studfield Primary School briefly before attending Camberwell Primary School. She went on to Camberwell High School. During her schooling years, Minogue found it difficult to make friends. She got her HSC (graduated high school) with subjects including Arts and Graphics and English. Minogue described herself as being of \"average intelligence\" and \"quite modest\" during her high school years. Growing up, she and her sister Dannii took singing and dancing lessons.\n\nA ten-year-old Minogue accompanied Dannii to a hearing arranged by the sisters' aunt, Suzette, and, while producers found Dannii too young, Alan Hardy gave Kylie a minor role in soap opera \"The Sullivans\" (1979). She also appeared in another small role in \"Skyways\" (1980). In 1985, she was cast in one of the lead roles in \"The Henderson Kids\". Minogue took time off school to film \"The Henderson Kids\" and while Carol was not impressed, Minogue felt that she needed the independence to make it into the entertainment industry. During filming, co-star Nadine Garner labelled Minogue \"fragile\" after producers yelled at her for forgetting her lines; she would often cry on set. Minogue was dropped from the second season of the show after producer Alan Hardy felt the need for her character to be \"written off\". In retrospect, Hardy stated that removing her from the showing \"turned out to be the best thing for her\". Interested in following a career in music, Minogue made a demo tape for the producers of weekly music programme \"Young Talent Time\", which featured Dannii as a regular performer. Kylie gave her first television singing performance on the show in 1985 but was not invited to join the cast. Kylie was cast in the soap opera \"Neighbours\" in 1986, as Charlene Mitchell, a schoolgirl turned garage mechanic. \"Neighbours\" achieved popularity in the UK, and a story arc that created a romance between her character and the character played by Jason Donovan culminated in a wedding episode in 1987 that attracted an audience of 20 million British viewers. Minogue became the first person to win four Logie Awards in one year and was the youngest recipient of the \"Gold Logie\" as the country's \"Most Popular Television Performer\", with the result determined by public vote.\n\nDuring a Fitzroy Football Club benefit concert with other \"Neighbours\" cast members, Minogue performed \"I Got You Babe\" as a duet with actor John Waters, and \"The Loco-Motion\" as an encore. She was subsequently signed to a recording contract with Mushroom Records in 1987. Her first single, \"The Locomotion\", spent seven weeks at number one on the Australian singles charts and became the country's highest-selling single in the 1980s. She received the ARIA Award for the year's highest-selling single. Its success resulted in Minogue travelling to England with Mushroom Records executive Gary Ashley to work with producers Stock, Aitken & Waterman. They knew little of Minogue and had forgotten that she was arriving; as a result, they wrote \"I Should Be So Lucky\" while she waited outside the studio. The song reached number one in the United Kingdom, Australia, Germany, Finland, Switzerland, Israel and Hong Kong. Minogue won her second consecutive ARIA Award for the year's highest-selling single, and received a \"Special Achievement Award\". Minogue's debut album, \"Kylie\" was released in July 1988. The album is a collection of dance-oriented pop tunes and spent more than a year on the UK Albums Chart, including several weeks at number one. It went gold in the United States, while the single \"The Locomotion\" reached number three on the U.S. \"Billboard\" Hot 100 chart, and number one on the Canadian dance chart. The single \"Got to Be Certain\" became her third consecutive number one single on the Australian music charts. Later in the year, she left \"Neighbours\" to focus on her music career. Minogue also collaborated with Jason Donovan for the song \"Especially for You\", which peaked at number-one in the United Kingdom and, in December 2014, sold its one millionth copy in the UK. Minogue was sometimes referred to as \"the Singing Budgie\" by her detractors over the coming years. In a review of the album \"Kylie\" for AllMusic, Chris True described the tunes as \"standard, late-80s ... bubblegum\", but added, \"her cuteness makes these rather vapid tracks bearable\".\n\nMinogue's second album, \"Enjoy Yourself\" was released in October 1989. It was a success in the United Kingdom, Europe, New Zealand, Asia and Australia and spawned the UK number one singles \"Hand on Your Heart\" and \"Tears on My Pillow\". However, it failed to sell well throughout North America and Minogue was dropped by her American record label Geffen Records. She then embarked on her first concert tour, the Enjoy Yourself Tour, in the United Kingdom, Europe, Asia and Australia in February 1990. She was also one of the featured vocalists on the remake of \"Do They Know It's Christmas?\". Minogue's debut film, \"The Delinquents\" was released in December 1989. The movie received mixed reviews by critics but proved popular with audiences. In the UK it grossed more than £200,000, and in Australia, it was the fourth-highest grossing local film of 1989 and the highest grossing local film of 1990. From 1989 to 1991, Minogue dated INXS frontman Michael Hutchence.\n\nMinogue's third album, \"Rhythm of Love\" was released in November 1990 and was described as \"leaps and bounds more mature\" than her previous albums. Her relationship with Michael Hutchence was also seen as part of her departure from her earlier persona. Its lead single, \"Better the Devil You Know\" peaked at number two in the UK and four in her native Australia. The making of the \"Better the Devil You Know\" video was the first time Minogue \"felt part of the creative process\". She said: \"I wasn’t in charge but I had a voice. I’d bought some clothes on King's Road for the video. I saw a new way to express my point of view creatively.\" \"Rhythm of Love\"'s second and fourth single, \"Step Back in Time\" and \"Shocked\" were both a top ten hit in the UK and Australia. She then embarked on the Rhythm of Love Tour in February 1991.\n\nMinogue's fourth album, \"Let's Get to It\" was released in October 1991 and reached number 15 on the UK Albums Chart. It was her first album to fail to reach the top ten. While the first single from the album, \"Word Is Out\", became her first single to miss the top ten of the UK Singles Chart, subsequent singles \"If You Were with Me Now\" and \"Give Me Just a Little More Time\" both reached the top five. In support of the album, she embarked on the Let's Get to It Tour in October. She later expressed her opinion that she was stifled by Stock, Aitken and Waterman, saying, \"I was very much a puppet in the beginning. I was blinkered by my record company. I was unable to look left or right.\" Her first \"Greatest Hits\" album was released in August 1992. It reached number one in the United Kingdom and number three in Australia. The singles from the album, \"What Kind of Fool\" and her cover version of Kool & the Gang's \"Celebration\" both reached the top twenty of the UK Singles Chart.\n\nMinogue's signing with Deconstruction Records in 1993 marked a new phase in her career. Her fifth album, \"Kylie Minogue\", was released in September 1994 and was a departure from her previous efforts as it \"no longer featured the Stock-Aitken-Waterman production gloss\", with critics praising Minogue's vocals and the album production. It was produced by dance music producers the Brothers In Rhythm, namely Dave Seaman and Steve Anderson, who had previously produced \"Finer Feelings\", her last single with PWL. As of 2015, Anderson continued to be Minogue's musical director. The lead single, \"Confide in Me\", spent four weeks at number one on the Australian singles chart. The next two singles from the album, \"Put Yourself in My Place\" and \"Where Is the Feeling?\", reached the top twenty on the UK Singles Chart, while the album peaked at number four on the UK Albums Chart, eventually selling 250,000 copies.\n\nDuring this period, Minogue made a guest appearance as herself in an episode of the comedy \"The Vicar of Dibley\". Director Steven E. de Souza saw Minogue's cover photo in Australia's \"Who Magazine\" as one of \"The 30 Most Beautiful People in the World\" and offered her a role opposite Jean-Claude Van Damme in the film \"Street Fighter\". The film was a moderate success, earning US$70 million in the US, but received poor reviews, with \"The Washington Post\"s Richard Harrington calling Minogue \"the worst actress in the English-speaking world\". She had a minor role in the 1996 film \"Bio-Dome\" starring Pauly Shore and Stephen Baldwin. She also appeared in the 1995 short film \"Hayride to Hell\" and in the 1997 film \"Diana & Me\". In 1995, Minogue collaborated with Australian artist Nick Cave for the song \"Where the Wild Roses Grow\". Cave had been interested in working with Minogue since hearing \"Better the Devil You Know\", saying it contained \"one of pop music's most violent and distressing lyrics\". The music video for their song was inspired by John Everett Millais's painting \"Ophelia\" (1851–1852), and showed Minogue as the murdered woman, floating in a pond as a serpent swam over her body. The single received widespread attention in Europe, where it reached the top 10 in several countries, and reached number two in Australia. The song won ARIA Awards for \"Song of the Year\" and \"Best Pop Release\". Following concert appearances with Cave, Minogue recited the lyrics to \"I Should Be So Lucky\" as poetry in London's Royal Albert Hall.\n\nBy 1997, Minogue was in a relationship with French photographer Stéphane Sednaoui, who encouraged her to develop her creativity. Inspired by a mutual appreciation of Japanese culture, they created a visual combination of \"geisha and manga superheroine\" for the photographs taken for Minogue's sixth album \"Impossible Princess\" and the video for \"German Bold Italic\", Minogue's collaboration with Towa Tei. She drew inspiration from the music of artists such as Shirley Manson and Garbage, Björk, Tricky and U2, and Japanese pop musicians such as Pizzicato Five and Towa Tei. The album featured collaborations with musicians including James Dean Bradfield and Sean Moore of the Manic Street Preachers. \"Impossible Princess\" garnered some negative reviews upon its release in 1997, but would be praised as Minogue's most personal and best work in retrospective reviews. In 2003, \"Slant Magazine\"'s Sal Cinquemani called it a \"deeply personal effort\" and \"Minogue’s best album to date\", while Evan Sawdey, from \"PopMatters\", described \"Impossible Princess\" as \"one of the most crazed, damn-near perfect dance-pop albums ever created\" in a 2008 review. Mostly a dance album, Minogue countered suggestions that she was trying to become an indie artist.\n\nAcknowledging that she had attempted to escape the perceptions of her that had developed during her early career, Minogue commented that she was ready to \"forget the painful criticism\" and \"accept the past, embrace it, use it\". The music video for \"Did It Again\" paid homage to her earlier incarnations. Retitled \"Kylie Minogue\" in the UK following the death of Diana, Princess of Wales, it became the lowest-selling album of her career. At the end of the year, a campaign by \"Virgin Radio\" stated, \"We've done something to improve Kylie's records: we've banned them.\" In Australia, the album was a success and spent 35 weeks on the album chart. Minogue's Intimate and Live tour in 1998 was extended due to demand. She gave several live performances in Australia, including the 1998 Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras, and the opening ceremonies of Melbourne's Crown Casino, and Sydney's Fox Studios in 1999 (where she performed Marilyn Monroe's \"Diamonds Are a Girl's Best Friend\") as well as a Christmas concert in Dili, East Timor, in association with the United Nations Peace-Keeping Forces. She played a small role in the Australian-made Molly Ringwald 2000 film \"Cut\".\n\nIn 1999, Minogue performed a duet with the Pet Shop Boys' on their \"Nightlife\" album and spent several months in Barbados performing in Shakespeare's \"The Tempest\". She then appeared in the film \"Sample People\" and recorded a cover version of Russell Morris's \"The Real Thing\" for the soundtrack. She signed with Parlophone in April, who wanted to re-establish Minogue as a pop artist. Her seventh studio album, \"Light Years\", was released on 25 September 2000. \"NME\" magazine called it a \"fun, perfectly-formed\" record, which saw Minogue \"dropping her considerable concern for cool and bouncing back to her disco-pop roots\". It was a commercial success, becoming Minogue's first number-one album in her native Australia. The lead single, \"Spinning Around\", debuted atop the UK Singles Chart in July, making her only the second artist to have a number-one single in three consecutive decades (after Madonna). Its accompanying video featured Minogue in revealing gold hotpants, which came to be regarded as a \"trademark\". Three other singles—\"On a Night Like This\", \"Kids\" (with Robbie Williams), and \"Please Stay\"—peaked in the top ten in the United Kingdom.\n\nAn elaborate art book titled \"Kylie\", featuring contributions by Minogue and creative director William Baker, was published by Booth-Clibborn in March 2000. At the time, she began a romantic relationship with model James Gooding. In October, Minogue performed at both the closing ceremonies of 2000 Sydney Olympics and in the opening ceremony of the Paralympics. Her performance of ABBA's \"Dancing Queen\" was chosen as one of the most memorable Olympic closing ceremony moments by Kate Samuelson of \"TNT\". The following year, she embarked on the On a Night Like This Tour, which was inspired by the style of Broadway shows and the musicals of the 1930s. She also made a brief cameo as The Green Fairy in Baz Luhrmann's \"Moulin Rouge!\", which earned her an MTV Movie Award nomination in 2002. \"Spinning Around\" and \"Light Years\" consecutively won the ARIA Award for Best Pop Release in 2000 and 2001.\nIn September 2001, Minogue released \"Can't Get You Out of My Head\", the lead single from her eighth studio album, \"Fever\". It reached number one in over forty countries and sold 5 million copies, becoming Minogue's most successful single to date. The accompanying music video featured the singer sporting an infamous hooded white jumpsuit with deep plunging neckline. The remaining singles—\"In Your Eyes\", \"Love at First Sight\" and \"Come into My World\"—all peaked in the top ten in Australia and the United Kingdom. Released on 1 October, \"Fever\" topped the charts in Australia, Austria, Germany, Ireland, and the United Kingdom, eventually achieving worldwide sales in excess of six million. Dominique Leone from \"Pitchfork\" praised its simple and \"comfortable\" composition, terming it a \"mature sound from a mature artist, and one that may very well re-establish Minogue for the VH1 generation\". \nThe warmly reception towards the album led to its release in the United States in February 2002 by Capitol Records, Minogue's first in 13 years. It debuted on the \"Billboard\" 200 at number three, her highest-charting album in the region, while peaking at number 10 on the Canadian Albums Chart.\n\nTo support the album, Minogue headlined her KylieFever2002 tour in Europe and Australia, which ran from April to August 2002. She performed several songs from the setlist in a series of Jingle Ball concerts in the United States in 2002–2003. In May 2002, Minogue and Gooding announced the end of their relationship after two and a half years. She received four accolades at the ARIA Music Awards of 2002, including Highest Selling Single and Single of the Year for \"Can't Get You Out of My Head\". That same year, she won her first Brit Award for International Female Solo Artist and Best International Album for \"Fever\". In 2003, she received her first Grammy nomination for Best Dance Recording for \"Love at First Sight\", before winning the award for \"Come into My World\" the following year, marking the first time an Australian music artist had won in a major category since Men at Work in 1983.\n\nIn November 2003, Minogue released her ninth studio album \"Body Language\" following an invitation-only concert, titled \"Money Can't Buy\", at the Hammersmith Apollo in London. The album downplayed the disco style and was inspired by 1980s artists such as Scritti Politti, The Human League, Adam and the Ants and Prince, blending their styles with elements of hip hop. The sales of the album were lower than anticipated after the success of \"Fever\", though the first single, \"Slow\", was a number-one hit in the United Kingdom and Australia. Two more singles from the album were released: \"Red Blooded Woman\" and \"Chocolate\". In the US, \"Slow\" reached number-one on the club chart and received a Grammy Award nomination in the Best Dance Recording category. \"Body Language\" achieved first week sales of 43,000 and declined significantly in the second week.\n\nIn November 2004, Minogue released her second official greatest hits album entitled \"Ultimate Kylie\". The album yielded two singles: \"I Believe in You\" and \"Giving You Up\". \"I Believe in You\" was later nominated for a Grammy Award in the category of \"Best Dance Recording\". In March 2005, Minogue commenced her . After performing in Europe, she travelled to Melbourne, where she was diagnosed with breast cancer, forcing her to cancel the tour. She underwent surgery in May 2005 and commenced chemotherapy treatment soon after. It was announced in January 2006 that she had finished chemotherapy and the disease \"had no recurrence\" after the surgery. She would continue her treatment for the next months. In December 2005, Minogue released a digital-only single, \"Over the Rainbow\", a live recording from her Showgirl tour. Her children's book, \"The Showgirl Princess\", written during her period of convalescence, was published in October 2006, and her perfume, \"Darling\", was launched in November. The range was later augmented by eau de toilettes including Pink Sparkle, Couture and Inverse.\n\nMinogue resumed her then cancelled tour in November 2006, under the title . Her dance routines had been reworked to accommodate her medical condition, with slower costume changes and longer breaks introduced between sections of the show to conserve her strength. The media reported that Minogue performed energetically, with the \"Sydney Morning Herald\" describing the show as an \"extravaganza\" and \"nothing less than a triumph\". She voiced Florence in the animated film \"The Magic Roundabout\", based on the television series of the same name. She finished her voice role back in 2002, before it was released in 2005 in Europe. A year later, she reprised the role and recorded the theme song for the American edition, re-titled as \"Doogal\", which grossed $26,691,243 worldwide.\n\nIn November 2007, Minogue released her tenth and much-discussed \"comeback\" album, \"X\". The electro-styled album included contributions from Guy Chambers, Cathy Dennis, Bloodshy & Avant and Calvin Harris. The album received some criticism for the triviality of its subject matter in light of Minogue's experiences with breast cancer. \"X\" and its lead single, \"2 Hearts\", entered at number one on the Australian albums and singles charts, respectively. In the United Kingdom, \"X\" initially attracted lukewarm sales, although its commercial performance eventually improved. Follow-up singles from the album, \"In My Arms\" and \"Wow\", both peaked inside the top ten of the UK Singles Chart. In the US, the album was nominated at the 2009 Grammy Awards for Best Electronic/Dance Album.\n\nMinogue began a relationship with French actor Olivier Martinez after meeting him at the 2003 Grammy Awards ceremony. They ended their relationship in February 2007, but remained on friendly terms. Minogue was reported to have been \"saddened by false [media] accusations of [Martinez's] disloyalty\". She defended Martinez, and acknowledged the support he had given during her treatment for breast cancer. As part of the promotion of her album, Minogue was featured in \"\", a documentary filmed during 2006 and 2007 as she resumed her Showgirl: The Homecoming Tour. She also appeared in \"The Kylie Show\", which featured her performances as well as comedy sketches. She co-starred in the 2007 \"Doctor Who\" Christmas special episode, \"Voyage of the Damned\", as Astrid Peth. The episode was watched by 13.31 million viewers, which was the show's highest viewing figure since 1979. In May 2008, Minogue embarked on the European leg of the KylieX2008 tour, her most expensive tour to date with production costs of £10 million. The tour was generally acclaimed and sold well. She was then appointed a Chevalier of the French Ordre des Arts et des Lettres, the junior grade of France's highest cultural honour. In July, she was officially invested by The Prince of Wales as an Officer of the Order of the British Empire. She also won the \"Best International Female Solo Artist\" award at the 2008 BRIT Awards. In September, she made her Middle East debut as the headline act at the opening of Atlantis, The Palm, an exclusive hotel resort in Dubai, and from November, she continued her \"KylieX2008\" tour, taking the show to cities across South America, Asia and Australia. The tour visited 21 countries, and was considered a success, with ticket sales estimated at $70,000,000. In 2009, Minogue hosted the BRIT Awards with James Corden and Mathew Horne. She then embarked on the For You, for Me tour which was her first North American concert tour. She was also featured in the Hindi movie, \"Blue\", performing an A. R. Rahman song. Minogue was in a relationship with model Andrés Velencoso from 2008 to 2013.\n\nIn July 2010, Minogue released her eleventh studio album, \"Aphrodite\". The album featured new songwriters and producers including Stuart Price as executive producer. Price also contributed to song writing along with Minogue, Calvin Harris, Jake Shears, Nerina Pallot, Pascal Gabriel, Lucas Secon, Keane's Tim Rice-Oxley and Kish Mauve. The album received favourable reviews from most music critics; Rob Sheffield from \"Rolling Stone\" labelled the album Minogue's \"finest work since 1997's underrated \"Impossible Princess\"\" and Tim Sendra from Allmusic commended Minogue's choice of collaborators and producers, commenting that the album is the \"work of someone who knows exactly what her skills are and who to hire to help showcase them to perfection\". \"Aphrodite\" debuted at number-one in the United Kingdom, exactly twenty two years after her first number one hit in the United Kingdom. The album's lead single, \"All the Lovers,\" was a success and became her thirty-third top ten single in the United Kingdom, though subsequent singles from the album, \"Get Outta My Way\", \"Better than Today\", and \"Put Your Hands Up\", failed to reach the top ten of the UK Singles Chart. However, all the singles released from the album have topped the US \"Billboard\" Hot Dance Club Songs chart.\n\nMinogue recorded a duet with synthpop duo Hurts on their song \"Devotion\", which was included on the group's album \"Happiness\". She was then featured on Taio Cruz's single \"Higher\". The result was successful, peaking inside the top twenty in several charts and reaching number one on the US Hot Dance Club Charts. At the time, Minogue also held the third spot on the chart with \"Higher\", her collaboration with British recording artist Taio Cruz, becoming the first artist to claim two of the top three spots at the same time in the American dance chart's history. To conclude her recordings in 2010, she released the extended play \"A Kylie Christmas\", which included covers of Christmas songs including \"Let It Snow\" and \"Santa Baby\". Minogue embarked on the in February 2011, travelling to Europe, North America, Asia, Australia and Africa. With a stage set inspired by the birth of the love goddess Aphrodite and Grecian culture and history, it was greeted with positive reviews from critics, who praised the concept and the stage production. The tour was a commercial success, grossing a total of US$60 million and ranking at number six and twenty-one on the mid year and annual Pollstar Top Concert Tours of 2011 respectively.\n\nIn March 2012, Minogue began a year-long celebration for her 25 years in the music industry, which was often called \"K25\". The anniversary started with her embarking on the Anti Tour in England and Australia, which featured b-sides, demos and rarities from her music catalogue. The tour was positively received for its intimate atmosphere and was a commercial success, grossing over two million dollars from four shows. She then released the single \"Timebomb\" in May, the greatest hits compilation album, \"The Best of Kylie Minogue\" in June and the singles box-set, \"K25 Time Capsule\" in October. She performed at various events around the world, including Sydney Mardi Gras, Queen Elizabeth II's \"Diamond Jubilee Concert\", and BBC Proms in the Park London 2012. Minogue released the compilation album, \"The Abbey Road Sessions\" in October. The album contained reworked and orchestral versions of her previous songs. It was recorded at London's Abbey Road Studios and was produced by Steve Anderson and Colin Elliot. The album received favourable reviews from music critics and debuted at number-two in the United Kingdom. The album spawned two singles, \"Flower\" and \"On a Night Like This\". Minogue returned to acting and starred in two films: a cameo appearance in the American independent film \"Jack & Diane\" and a lead role in the French film \"Holy Motors\". \"Jack & Diane\" opened at the Tribeca Film Festival on 20 April 2012, while \"Holy Motors\" opened at the 2012 Cannes Film Festival, which Minogue attended.\n\nIn January 2013, Minogue and her manager Terry Blamey, whom she had worked with since the start of her singing career, parted ways. The following month, she signed to Roc Nation for a management deal. In September, she was featured on Italian singer-songwriter Laura Pausini's single \"Limpido\", which was a number-one hit in Italy and received a nomination for \"World's Best Song\" at the 2013 World Music Awards. In the same month, Minogue was hired as a coach for the third series of BBC One's talent competition \"The Voice UK\", alongside record producer and Black Eyed Peas member, will.i.am, Kaiser Chiefs' lead singer Ricky Wilson and singer Sir Tom Jones. The show opened with 9.35 million views from the UK, a large percentage increase from the second season. It accumulated an estimated 8.10 million viewers on average. Minogue's judging and personality on the show were singled out for praise. Ed Power from \"The Daily Telegraph\" gave the series premiere 3 stars, praising Minogue for being \"glamorous, agreeably giggly [and] a card-carrying national treasure\". In November, she was hired as a coach for the third season of \"The Voice Australia\".\n\nIn March 2014, Minogue released her twelfth studio album, \"Kiss Me Once\". The album featured contributions from Sia Furler, Mike Del Rio, Cutfather, Pharrell Williams, MNEK and Ariel Rechtshaid. It peaked at number one in Australia and number two in the United Kingdom. The singles from the album, \"Into the Blue\" and \"I Was Gonna Cancel\", did not chart inside the top ten of the UK Singles Chart, peaking at number 12 and number 59 respectively. In August, Minogue performed a seven-song set at the closing ceremony of the 2014 Commonwealth Games, donning a custom Jean Paul Gaultier corset. In September, she embarked on the Kiss Me Once Tour. In January 2015, Minogue appeared as a guest vocalist on Giorgio Moroder's single \"Right Here, Right Now\" providing her 12th number one hit on the U.S. Dance Chart on 18 April 2015.\n\nIn March, Minogue's contract with Parlophone Records ended, leaving her future music releases with Warner Music Group in Australia and New Zealand. The same month, she parted ways with Roc Nation. In April, Minogue played tech reporter Shauna in a two episode arc on the ABC Family series, \"Young & Hungry\". Minogue also appeared as Susan Riddick in the disaster film \"San Andreas\", released in May and starring Dwayne Johnson and Carla Gugino. In September 2015, an extended play with Fernando Garibay titled \"Kylie + Garibay\" was released. Garibay and Giorgio Moroder served as producers for the extended play. In November, Minogue was a featured artist on the track, \"The Other Boys\" by Nervo, alongside Jake Shears and Nile Rodgers. This became her thirteenth chart topper on the U.S Dance Chart, lifting her position in the list of artists with the most U.S. Dance Chart number ones to equal 8th alongside Whitney Houston, Enrique Iglesias and Lady Gaga. In December 2015, Minogue was the guest on BBC Radio 4's \"Desert Island Discs\". Her choices included \"Dancing Queen\" by ABBA, \"Purple Rain\" by Prince and \"Need You Tonight\" by INXS. Minogue released her first Christmas album, \"Kylie Christmas\" in November 2015. In 2016, she recorded the theme song \"This Wheel's on Fire\", from the soundtrack \"\". Minogue's holiday album \"Kylie Christmas\", was re-released in November entitled as \"\". In November 2015, Minogue confirmed she was dating British actor Joshua Sasse. On 20 February 2016, their engagement was announced in the \"Forthcoming Marriages\" section of \"The Daily Telegraph\", but in February 2017, Minogue confirmed the couple had ended their relationship.\n\nIn February 2017, Minogue signed a new record deal with BMG Rights Management. In December 2017, Minogue and BMG had struck a joint-deal with Mushroom Music Labels — under the sub-division label Liberator to release her new album in Australia and New Zealand. In 2017, Minogue worked with writers and producers for her fourteenth studio album, including Sky Adams and Richard Stannard, and recorded the album in London, Los Angeles and Nashville, with the latter profoundly influencing the record. Minogue's album \"Golden\" was released in April 2018 with \"Dancing\" serving as its lead single. The album debuted at number one in the UK and Australia. With this feat, she has reached the top position of the UK Albums Chart in four consecutive decades, from the 1980s to the 2010s. Tim Sendra from AllMusic labelled \"Golden\" a \"darn bold\" for an artist of Minogue's longevity, stating \"The amazing thing about the album, and about Minogue, is that she pulls off the country as well as she's pulled off new wave, disco, electro, murder ballads, and everything else she's done in her long career.\" \"Golden\" also received criticism, with \"Pitchfork\"'s Ben Cardew claiming that it \"sounds like someone playing at country music, rather than someone who understands it.\"\n\nMinogue released a greatest hits compilation \"\" on 28 June 2019, featuring \"New York City\" as the lead single. The album reached number one in her native Australia and in the UK, becoming her seventh album to reach the top spot in the latter. On 30 June, Minogue made her debut at the Glastonbury Festival, fourteen years after her breast cancer diagnosis forced her to cancel her 2005 headlining slot. Performing in the Legends Slot, Minogue's set featured guest appearances from Nick Cave and Chris Martin. Her set received rave reviews from critics, with \"The Guardian\" declaring it a \"solid-gold\", \"peerless\" and \"phenomenal\". It was a big hit with fans, with Minogue's performance being the most-watched set of the BBC coverage (earning three million viewers, ahead of the nearest competitor, The Killers who received 1.4 million) and reportedly breaking records for the most attended Glastonbury set in history. Minogue will also appear in her own Christmas television special, \"Kylie's Secret Night\", scheduled to air on Channel 4 in December 2019.\n\nMinogue explained that she first became interested in pop music during her adolescence: \"I first got into pop music in 1981, I'd say. It was all about Prince, Adam + the Ants, that whole New Romantic period. Prior to that, it was the Jackson 5, Donna Summer, and my dad's records - the Stones and Beatles.\" She would also listen to the records of Olivia Newton-John and ABBA. Minogue claimed that she \"wanted to be\" Newton-John while growing up. Her producer, Pete Waterman, recalled Minogue during the early years of her music career with the observation: \"She was setting her sights on becoming the new Prince or Madonna ... What I found amazing was that she was outselling Madonna four to one, but still wanted to be her.\" Minogue came to prominence in the music scene as a bubblegum pop singer and was deemed a \"product of the Stock, Aitken & Waterman Hit Factory\". Musician Nick Cave, who worked with Minogue in some occasions, was a major influence on her artistic development. She told \"The Guardian\": \"He’s definitely infiltrated my life in beautiful and profound ways.\" Throughout her career, Minogue's work was also influenced by Cathy Dennis, D Mob, Scritti Politti, Björk, Tricky, U2 and Pizzicato Five, among others.\nMinogue has been known for her soft soprano vocal range. Tim Sendra of \"AllMusic\" reviewed her album \"Aphrodite\" and said that Minogue's \"slightly nasal, girl-next-door vocals serve her needs perfectly.\" According to Fiona MacDonald from \"Madison\" magazine, Kylie \"has never shied away from making some brave but questionable artistic decisions\". In musical terms, Minogue has worked with many genres in pop and dance music. However, her signature music has been contemporary disco music. Her first studio albums with Stock, Aitken, and Waterman present a more bubblegum pop influence, with many critics comparing her to American recording artist Madonna. Chris True from \"Allmusic\", reviewed her debut \"Kylie\" and found her music \"standard late-'80s Stock-Aitken-Waterman bubblegum\", however he stated that she presented the most personality of any 1980s recording artist. He said of her third album \"Rhythm of Love\", from the early 1990s, \"The songwriting is stronger, the production dynamic, and Kylie seems more confident vocally.\" At the time of her third studio album, \"She began to trade in her cutesy, bubblegum pop image for a more mature one, and in turn, a more sexual one.\" Chris True stated that during her relationship with Michael Hutchence, \"her shedding of the near-virginal façade that dominated her first two albums, began to have an effect, not only on how the press and her fans treated her, but in the evolution of her music.\"\n\nFrom Minogue's work on her sixth studio album, \"Impossible Princess\", her songwriting and musical content began to change. She was constantly writing down words, exploring the form and meaning of sentences. She had written lyrics before, but called them \"safe, just neatly rhymed words and that's that\". Sal Cinquemani from \"Slant Magazine\" said that the album bears a resemblance to Madonna's \"Ray of Light\". He said that she took inspiration from \"both the Brit-pop and electronica movements of the mid-'90s\", saying that \"Impossible Princess is the work of an artist willing to take risks\". Her next effort, \"Light Years\" is a disco-influenced dance-pop record, with \"AllMusic\"'s Chris True calling it \"Arguably one of the best disco records since the '70s\". True stated that her eighth album, \"Fever\", \"combines the disco-diva comeback of \"Light Years\" with simple dance rhythms\". Her ninth album, \"Body Language\" was quite different from her musical experiments in the past as it was a \"successful\" attempt at broadening her sound with electro and hip-hop for instance. Incorporating styles of dance music with funk, disco and R&B, the album was listed on \"Q\"s \"Best Albums of 2003\".\n\nCritics said Minogue's tenth record \"X\" did not feature enough \"consistency\" and Chris True called the tracks \"cold, calculated dance-pop numbers.\" Tim Sendra of \"AllMusic\" said that her eleventh album \"Aphrodite\" \"rarely strays past sweet love songs or happy dance anthems\" and \"the main sound is the kind of glittery disco pop that really is her strong suit.\" Sendra found \"Aphrodite\" \"One of her best, in fact.\" Minogue's fourteenth studio album, \"Golden\" were heavily influenced by country music, although maintaining her dance-pop sensibilities. Sal Cinquemani from \"Slant Magazine\" wrote that \"\"Golden\" further bolsters Minogue's reputation for taking risks—and artfully sets the stage for her inevitable disco comeback.\"\n\nMinogue's efforts to be taken seriously as a recording artist were initially hindered by the perception that she had not \"paid her dues\" and was no more than a manufactured pop star exploiting the image she had created during her stint on \"Neighbours\". Minogue acknowledged this viewpoint, saying, \"If you're part of a record company, I think to a degree it's fair to say that you're a manufactured product. You're a product and you're selling a product. It doesn't mean that you're not talented and that you don't make creative and business decisions about what you will and won't do and where you want to go.\"\n\nIn 1993, Baz Luhrmann introduced Minogue to photographer Bert Stern, notable for his work with Marilyn Monroe. Stern photographed her in Los Angeles and, comparing her to Monroe, commented that Minogue had a similar mix of vulnerability and eroticism. Throughout her career, Minogue has chosen photographers who attempt to create a new \"look\" for her, and the resulting photographs have appeared in a variety of magazines, from the cutting edge \"The Face\" to the more traditionally sophisticated \"Vogue\" and \"Vanity Fair\", making the Minogue face and name known to a broad range of people. Stylist William Baker has suggested that this is part of the reason she entered mainstream pop culture in Europe more successfully than many other pop singers who concentrate solely on selling records.\n\nBy 2000, Minogue was considered to have achieved a degree of musical credibility for having maintained her career longer than her critics had expected. Her progression from the wholesome \"girl next door\" to a more sophisticated performer with a flirtatious and playful persona attracted new fans. Her \"Spinning Around\" video led to some media outlets referring to her as \"SexKylie\", and sex became a stronger element in her subsequent videos. In September 2002, she was ranked 27 on VH1's 100 Sexiest Artists list. She was also named one of the 100 Hottest Women of All-Time by \"Men's Health\" in 2013. William Baker described her status as a sex symbol as a \"double edged sword\", observing that \"we always attempted to use her sex appeal as an enhancement of her music and to sell a record. But now it has become in danger of eclipsing what she actually is: a pop singer.\" After 20 years as a performer, Minogue was described as a fashion \"trend-setter\" and a \"style icon who constantly reinvents herself\".\n\nMinogue has been inspired by and compared to Madonna throughout her career. She received negative comments that her Rhythm of Love tour in 1991 was too similar visually to Madonna's Blond Ambition World Tour, for which critics labelled her a Madonna wannabe. Writing for the \"Observer Music Monthly\", Rufus Wainwright described Minogue as \"the anti-Madonna. Self-knowledge is a truly beautiful thing and Kylie knows herself inside out. She is what she is and there is no attempt to make quasi-intellectual statements to substantiate it. She is the gay shorthand for joy.\" Kathy McCabe for \"The Telegraph\" noted that Minogue and Madonna follow similar styles in music and fashion, but concluded, \"Where they truly diverge on the pop-culture scale is in shock value. Minogue's clips might draw a gasp from some but Madonna's ignite religious and political debate unlike any other artist on the planet ... Simply, Madonna is the dark force; Kylie is the light force.\" Minogue has said of Madonna, \"Her huge influence on the world, in pop and fashion, meant that I wasn't immune to the trends she created. I admire Madonna greatly but in the beginning she made it difficult for artists like me, she had done everything there was to be done\", and \"Madonna's the Queen of Pop, I'm the princess. I'm quite happy with that.\"\n\nIn January 2007, Madame Tussauds in London unveiled its fourth waxwork of Minogue; only Queen Elizabeth II has had more models created. During the same week a bronze cast of her hands was added to Wembley Arena's \"Square of Fame\". In 2007, a bronze statue of Minogue was unveiled at Melbourne Docklands for permanent display.\n\nIn March 2010, Minogue was declared by researchers as the \"most powerful celebrity in Britain\". The study examined how marketers identify celebrity and brand partnerships. Mark Husak, head of Millward Brown's UK media practice, said: \"Kylie is widely accepted as an adopted Brit. People know her, like her and she is surrounded by positive buzz\". In 2016, according to the Sunday Times Rich List, Minogue had a net worth of £55 million.\n\nMinogue is regarded as a gay icon, which she has encouraged with comments including \"I am not a traditional gay icon. There's been no tragedy in my life, only tragic outfits\" and \"My gay audience has been with me from the beginning ... they kind of adopted me.\" Her status as a gay icon has been attributed to her music, fashion sense and career longevity. Author Constantine Chatzipapatheodoridis wrote about Minogue's appeal to gay men in \"Strike a Pose, Forever: The Legacy of Vogue...\" and observed that she \"frequently incorporates camp-inflected themes in her extravaganzas, drawing mainly from the disco scene, the S/M culture, and the burlesque stage.\" In \"Beautiful Things in Popular Culture\" (2007), Marc Brennan stated that Minogue's work \"provides a gorgeous form of escapism\". Minogue has explained that she first became aware of her gay audience in 1988, when several drag queens performed to her music at a Sydney pub, and she later saw a similar show in Melbourne. She said that she felt \"very touched\" to have such an \"appreciative crowd\", and this encouraged her to perform at gay venues throughout the world, as well as headlining the 1994 Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras. Minogue has one of the largest gay followings in the world.\n\nThroughout her career, Minogue has been known for reinventing herself in fashion and musical content. In 2012, Dino Scatena of \"The Sydney Morning Herald\" wrote about Minogue, \"A quarter of a century ago, a sequence of symbiotic events altered the fabric of Australian popular culture and set in motion the transformation of a 19-year-old soap actor from Melbourne into an international pop icon.\" Scatena also described her as \"Australia's single most successful entertainer and a world-renowned style idol\". \n\nPointing out the several reinventions in Minogue's image, Larissa Dubecki from \"The Age\" labelled her the \"Mother of Reinvention\", while \"Entertainment Weekly\"'s Ernest Macias opined: \"[with] a panache for fabulous fashion, and her unequivocal disco-pop sound, Minogue has established herself as a timeless icon.\" Paula Joye of \"The Sydney Morning Herald\" wrote that \"Minogue’s fusion of fashion and music has made a huge contribution to the style \"zeitgeist\".\" Fiona MacDonald from \"Madison\" acknowledged Kylie as \"one of the handful of singers recognised around the world by her first name alone. And yet despite becoming an international music superstar, style icon and honorary Brit, those two syllables still seem as Australian as the smell of eucalyptus or a barbeque on a hot day.\"\n\nMinogue has been recognised with a number of honorific nicknames, most notably the \"Princess of Pop\". Jon O'Brien of AllMusic reviewed her box-set \"\" and stated that it \"contains plenty of moments to justify her position as one of the all-time premier pop princesses.\" In January 2012, \"NME\" critics ranked her single \"Can't Get You Out of My Head\" at number four on their Greatest Pop Songs in History list. In February 2012, VH1 ranked Minogue at number 47 on its 100 Greatest Women in Music list, and number 49 on the 50 Greatest Women of the Video Era. Channel 4 listed her as one of the world's greatest pop stars. Minogue's work has influenced pop and dance artists including September, Diana Vickers, The Veronicas, Slayyyter and Paris Hilton. In 2007, French avant-garde guitarist Noël Akchoté released \"So Lucky\", featuring solo guitar versions of tunes recorded by Minogue.\n\nMinogue has received a number of accolades, including a Grammy Award, three Brit Awards, 17 ARIA Music Awards, two MTV Video Music Award, two MTV Europe Music Award and six Mo Award, including the Australian Performer of the Year in 2001 and 2003. In 2008, she was honoured with Music Industry Trust's award for recognition of her 20-year career and was hailed as \"an icon of pop and style\", becoming the first female musician to receive a Music Industry Trust award. In April 2017, the Britain-Australia Society recognised Minogue with its 2016 award for outstanding contribution to the improving of relations and bilateral understanding between Britain and Australia. The citation reads: \"In recognition of significant contributions to the Britain-Australia relationship as an acclaimed singer, songwriter, actor and iconic personality in both countries\". The award was announced at a reception in Australia House but was personally presented the next day by Prince Philip, Patron of the Society, at Windsor Castle.\n\nIn June 2012, The Official Chart Company revealed that Minogue is the 12th best selling singer in the United Kingdom to date, and the third best selling female artist, selling over 10.1 million albums. According to the British Phonographic Industry (BPI), all her studio albums have been certified, and with her singles as well, she has a total of 27 certified records. She has sold between 60 and 70 million records worldwide. In January 2011, Minogue received a \"Guinness World Records\" citation for having the most consecutive decades with top five albums in the UK, with all her albums doing so. Minogue and American singer Madonna are the only artists to have had reached the top position of the UK Albums Chart in four consecutive decades, from the 1980s to the 2010s. In 2004, she held the record for the most singles at number one in the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA) singles chart, with a total of nine. In November 2011, on the twenty-fifth anniversary of the ARIA Music Awards, she was inducted by the Australian Recording Industry Association into the ARIA Hall of Fame. \"The Sydney Morning Herald\"'s Paula Joye declared Minogue as \"the most successful Australian female recording artist of all time\".\n\nMinogue's songs have garnered some accolades throughout her career. In 2011, she made history for having two songs inside the top three on the U.S. Dance Club Songs chart, with her singles \"Better than Today\" and \"Higher\" charting at one and three, respectively. In December 2016, \"Billboard\" ranked her as the 18th most successful dance artist of all-time. Her single \"Can't Get You Out Of My Head\" was named the most-played track of the 2000s. The song eventually became the third best-selling UK single and the most-played song in the UK in 2001. As of 2012, \"Can't Get You Out of My Head\" was the 72nd song featured on UK's Official Top 100 Biggest Selling Singles of All Time.\n\nMinogue was diagnosed with breast cancer at age 36 in May 2005, leading to the postponement of the remainder of her Showgirl: The Greatest Hits Tour and her withdrawal from the Glastonbury Festival. Her hospitalisation and treatment in Melbourne resulted in a brief but intense period of media coverage, particularly in Australia, where then Prime Minister John Howard issued a statement of support. As media and fans began to congregate outside the Minogue residence in Melbourne, Victorian Premier Steve Bracks warned the international media that any disruption of the Minogue family's rights under Australian privacy laws would not be tolerated.\n\nMinogue underwent surgery on 21 May 2005 at Cabrini Hospital in Malvern and commenced chemotherapy treatment soon after. After the surgery, the disease \"had no recurrence\". On 8 July 2005, she made her first public appearance after surgery when she visited a children's cancer ward at Melbourne's Royal Children's Hospital. She returned to France where she completed her chemotherapy treatment at the Institut Gustave-Roussy in Villejuif, near Paris. In January 2006, Minogue's publicist announced that she had finished chemotherapy, and her treatment continued for the next months. On her return to Australia for her concert tour, she discussed her illness and said that her chemotherapy treatment had been like \"experiencing a nuclear bomb\". While appearing on \"The Ellen DeGeneres Show\" in 2008, Minogue said that her cancer had originally been misdiagnosed. She commented, \"Because someone is in a white coat and using big medical instruments doesn't necessarily mean they're right\", but later spoke of her respect for the medical profession.\n\nMinogue was acknowledged for the impact she made by publicly discussing her cancer diagnosis and treatment. In May 2008, the French Cultural Minister Christine Albanel said, \"Doctors now even go as far as saying there is a \"Kylie effect\" that encourages young women to have regular checks.\" She has been cited as an example of cases where more women have undergone regular checks for cancer symptoms after publicity around famous people being diagnosed with cancer. Television host Giuliana Rancic cited Minogue's cancer story as \"inspirational\" when she too was diagnosed with cancer.\n\nMinogue has helped fundraise on many occasions. In 1989, she participated in recording \"Do They Know It's Christmas?\" under the name Band Aid II to help raise money. In early 2010, Minogue along with many other artists (under the name Helping Haiti) recorded a cover version of \"Everybody Hurts\". The single was a fundraiser to help after the 2010 Haiti earthquake. She also spent a week in Thailand after the 2005 tsunami. During her 2011 Aphrodite World Tour, the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami struck Japan, which was on her itinerary. She declared she would continue to tour there, stating, \"I was here to do shows and I chose not to cancel, Why did I choose not to cancel? I thought long and hard about it and it wasn't an easy decision to make.\" While she was there, she and Australian Prime Minister Julia Gillard were star guests at an Australian Embassy fundraiser for the disaster.\n\nIn 2008, Minogue pledged her support for a campaign to raise money for abused children, to be donated to the British charities ChildLine and the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children. According to the source, around $93 million was raised. She spoke out in relation to the cause, saying: \"Finding the courage to tell someone about being abused is one of the most difficult decisions a child will ever have to make.\" In 2010 and 2012, she was involved in supporting the AIDS Support Gala, which was held by the American Foundation for Aids Research (Amfar).\n\nSince Minogue's breast cancer diagnosis in 2005, she has been a sponsor and ambassador for the cause. In May 2010, she held a breast cancer campaign for the first time. She later spoke about the cause saying \"It means so much to me to be part of this year's campaign for Fashion Targets Breast Cancer. I wholeheartedly support their efforts to raise funds for the vital work undertaken by Breakthrough Breast Cancer.\" For the cause, she \"posed in a silk sheet emblazoned with the distinctive target logo of Fashion Targets Breast Cancer\" for photographer Mario Testino. In April 2014, Minogue had launched a new campaign entitled One Note Against Cancer, which is a charity organisation to help cancer research.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Kylie\" (1988)\nBULLET::::- \"Enjoy Yourself\" (1989)\nBULLET::::- \"Rhythm of Love\" (1990)\nBULLET::::- \"Let's Get to It\" (1991)\nBULLET::::- \"Kylie Minogue\" (1994)\nBULLET::::- \"Impossible Princess\" (1997)\nBULLET::::- \"Light Years\" (2000)\nBULLET::::- \"Fever\" (2001)\nBULLET::::- \"Body Language\" (2003)\nBULLET::::- \"X\" (2007)\nBULLET::::- \"Aphrodite\" (2010)\nBULLET::::- \"Kiss Me Once\" (2014)\nBULLET::::- \"Kylie Christmas\" (2015)\nBULLET::::- \"Golden\" (2018)\n\nBULLET::::- Disco in Dream (1989)\nBULLET::::- Enjoy Yourself Tour (1990)\nBULLET::::- Rhythm of Love Tour (1991)\nBULLET::::- Let's Get to It Tour (1991)\nBULLET::::- Intimate and Live (1998)\nBULLET::::- On a Night Like This (2001)\nBULLET::::- KylieFever2002 (2002)\nBULLET::::- (2005)\nBULLET::::- (2006–2007)\n\nBULLET::::- KylieX2008 (2008–2009)\nBULLET::::- For You, for Me (2009)\nBULLET::::- (2011)\nBULLET::::- Anti Tour (2012)\nBULLET::::- Kiss Me Once Tour (2014–2015)\nBULLET::::- Kylie Summer 2015 (2015)\nBULLET::::- A Kylie Christmas (2015–2016)\nBULLET::::- Kylie Presents: Golden (2018)\nBULLET::::- Golden Tour (2018–2019)\nBULLET::::- Summer 2019 (2019)\n\n+ Selected films\n! Year\n! Title\n! Role\n\n+ Selected television\n! Year\n! Title\n! Role\n! class=\"unsortable\"  Notes\n\nBULLET::::- Honorific nicknames in popular music\nBULLET::::- List of artists who reached number one on the U.S. Dance Club Songs chart\nBULLET::::- List of artists who reached number one on the UK Singles Chart\nBULLET::::- List of awards and nominations received by Kylie Minogue\nBULLET::::- List of best-selling singles worldwide\nBULLET::::- List of songs recorded by Kylie Minogue\n\n\n"}
{"id": "16897", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16897", "title": "Knight", "text": "Knight\n\nA knight is a man granted an honorary title of knighthood by a monarch, bishop or other political or religious leader for service to the monarch or a Christian church, especially in a military capacity.\nHistorically, in Europe, knighthood was conferred upon mounted warriors. During the High Middle Ages, knighthood was considered a class of lower nobility. By the Late Middle Ages, the rank had become associated with the ideals of chivalry, a code of conduct for the perfect courtly Christian warrior. Often, a knight was a vassal who served as an elite fighter, a bodyguard or a mercenary for a lord, with payment in the form of land holdings. The lords trusted the knights, who were skilled in battle on horseback. Knighthood in the Middle Ages was closely linked with horsemanship (and especially the joust) from its origins in the 12th century until its final flowering as a fashion among the high nobility in the Duchy of Burgundy in the 15th century. This linkage is reflected in the etymology of \"chivalry\", \"cavalier\" and related terms. The special prestige accorded to mounted warriors in Christendom finds a parallel in the \"furusiyya\" in the Muslim world, and the Greek \"hippeis\" (ἱππεῖς) and Roman \"eques\" of classical antiquity.\n\nIn the late medieval period, new methods of warfare began to render classical knights in armour obsolete, but the titles remained in many nations. The ideals of chivalry were popularized in medieval literature, particularly the literary cycles known as the Matter of France, relating to the legendary companions of Charlemagne and his men-at-arms, the paladins, and the Matter of Britain, relating to the legend of King Arthur and his knights of the Round Table.\n\nToday, a number of orders of knighthood continue to exist in Christian Churches, as well as in several historically Christian countries and their former territories, such as the Roman Catholic Order of the Holy Sepulchre and Order of Malta, the Protestant Order of Saint John, as well as the English Order of the Garter, the Swedish Royal Order of the Seraphim, and the Royal Norwegian Order of St. Olav. Each of these orders has its own criteria for eligibility, but knighthood is generally granted by a head of state, monarch, or prelate to selected persons to recognise some meritorious achievement, as in the British honours system, often for service to the Church or country. The modern female equivalent in the United Kingdom is Dame.\n\nThe word \"knight\", from Old English \"cniht\" (\"boy\" or \"servant\"), is a cognate of the German word \"Knecht\" (\"servant, bondsman, vassal\"). This meaning, of unknown origin, is common among West Germanic languages (cf Old Frisian \"kniucht\", Dutch \"knecht\", Danish \"knægt\", Swedish \"knekt\", Norwegian \"knekt\", Middle High German \"kneht\", all meaning \"boy, youth, lad\"). Middle High German had the phrase \"guoter kneht\", which also meant knight; but this meaning was in decline by about 1200.\n\nThe meaning of \"cniht\" changed over time from its original meaning of \"boy\" to \"household retainer\". Ælfric's homily of St. Swithun describes a mounted retainer as a \"cniht\". While \"cnihtas\" might have fought alongside their lords, their role as household servants features more prominently in the Anglo-Saxon texts. In several Anglo-Saxon wills \"cnihtas\" are left either money or lands. In his will, King Æthelstan leaves his cniht, Aelfmar, eight hides of land.\n\nA \"rādcniht\", \"riding-servant\", was a servant on horseback.\n\nA narrowing of the generic meaning \"servant\" to \"military follower of a king or other superior\" is visible by 1100. The specific military sense of a knight as a mounted warrior in the heavy cavalry emerges only in the Hundred Years' War. The verb \"to knight\" (to make someone a knight) appears around 1300; and, from the same time, the word \"knighthood\" shifted from \"adolescence\" to \"rank or dignity of a knight\".\n\nAn Equestrian (Latin, from \"eques\" \"horseman\", from \"equus\" \"horse\") was a member of the second highest social class in the Roman Republic and early Roman Empire. This class is often translated as \"knight\"; the medieval knight, however, was called \"miles\" in Latin (which in classical Latin meant \"soldier\", normally infantry).\n\nIn the later Roman Empire, the classical Latin word for horse, \"equus\", was replaced in common parlance by the vulgar Latin \"caballus\", sometimes thought to derive from Gaulish \"caballos\". From \"caballus\" arose terms in the various Romance languages cognate with the (French-derived) English \"cavalier\": Italian \"cavaliere\", Spanish \"caballero\", French \"chevalier\" (whence \"chivalry\"), Portuguese \"cavaleiro\", and Romanian \"cavaler\". The Germanic languages have terms cognate with the English \"rider\": German \"Ritter\", and Dutch and Scandinavian \"ridder\". These words are derived from Germanic \"rīdan\", \"to ride\", in turn derived from the Proto-Indo-European root \"reidh-\".\n\nIn ancient Rome there was a knightly class \"Ordo Equestris\" (order of mounted nobles). Some portions of the armies of Germanic peoples who occupied Europe from the 3rd century AD onward had been mounted, and some armies, such as those of the Ostrogoths, were mainly cavalry. However, it was the Franks who generally fielded armies composed of large masses of infantry, with an infantry elite, the comitatus, which often rode to battle on horseback rather than marching on foot. When the armies of the Frankish ruler Charles Martel defeated the Umayyad Arab invasion at the Battle of Tours in 732, the Frankish forces were still largely infantry armies, with elites riding to battle but dismounting to fight.\n\nIn the Early Medieval period any well-equipped horseman could be described as a knight, or \"miles\" in Latin. The first knights appeared during the reign of Charlemagne in the 8th century. As the Carolingian Age progressed, the Franks were generally on the attack, and larger numbers of warriors took to their horses to ride with the Emperor in his wide-ranging campaigns of conquest. At about this time the Franks increasingly remained on horseback to fight on the battlefield as true cavalry rather than mounted infantry, with the discovery of the stirrup, and would continue to do so for centuries afterwards. Although in some nations the knight returned to foot combat in the 14th century, the association of the knight with mounted combat with a spear, and later a lance, remained a strong one. The older Carolingian ceremony of presenting a young man with weapons influenced the emergence of knighthood ceremonies, in which a noble would be ritually given weapons and declared to be a knight, usually amid some festivities.These mobile mounted warriors made Charlemagne's far-flung conquests possible, and to secure their service he rewarded them with grants of land called benefices. These were given to the captains directly by the Emperor to reward their efforts in the conquests, and they in turn were to grant benefices to their warrior contingents, who were a mix of free and unfree men. In the century or so following Charlemagne's death, his newly empowered warrior class grew stronger still, and Charles the Bald declared their fiefs to be hereditary. The period of chaos in the 9th and 10th centuries, between the fall of the Carolingian central authority and the rise of separate Western and Eastern Frankish kingdoms (later to become France and Germany respectively) only entrenched this newly landed warrior class. This was because governing power and defense against Viking, Magyar and Saracen attack became an essentially local affair which revolved around these new hereditary local lords and their \"demesnes\".\n\nIn the course of the 12th century knighthood became a social rank, with a distinction being made between \"milites gregarii\" (non-noble cavalrymen) and \"milites nobiles\" (true knights). As the term \"knight\" became increasingly confined to denoting a social rank, the military role of fully armoured cavalryman gained a separate term, \"man-at-arms\". Although any medieval knight going to war would automatically serve as a man-at-arms, not all men-at-arms were knights. The first military orders of knighthood were those of the Knights Hospitallers and of the Holy Sepulchre, both founded at the First Crusade of 1099, followed by the Order of Saint Lazarus (1100), Knights Templars (1118) and the Teutonic Knights (1190). At the time of their foundation, these were intended as monastic orders, whose members would act as simple soldiers protecting pilgrims. It was only over the following century, with the successful conquest of the Holy Land and the rise of the crusader states, that these orders became powerful and prestigious.\n\nThe great European legends of warriors such as the paladins, the Matter of France and the Matter of Britain popularized the notion of chivalry among the warrior class. The ideal of chivalry as the ethos of the Christian warrior, and the transmutation of the term \"knight\" from the meaning \"servant, soldier\", and of \"chevalier\" \"mounted soldier\", to refer to a member of this ideal class, is significantly influenced by the Crusades, on one hand inspired by the military orders of monastic warriors, and on the other hand also cross-influenced by Islamic (Saracen) ideals of \"furusiyya\".\n\nThe institution of knights was already well-established by the 10th century. While the knight was essentially a title denoting a military office, the term could also be used for positions of higher nobility such as landholders. The higher nobles grant the vassals their portions of land (fiefs) in return for their loyalty, protection, and service. The nobles also provided their knights with necessities, such as lodging, food, armour, weapons, horses, and money. The knight generally held his lands by military tenure which was measured through military service that usually lasted 40 days a year. The military service was the \"quid pro quo\" for each knight's fief. Vassals and lords could maintain any number of knights, although knights with more military experience were those most sought after. Thus, all petty nobles intending to become prosperous knights needed a great deal of military experience. A knight fighting under another's banner was called a \"knight bachelor\" while a knight fighting under his own banner was a \"knight banneret\".\n\nA knight had to be born of nobility – typically sons of knights or lords. In some cases commoners could also be knighted as a reward for extraordinary military service. Children of the nobility were cared for by noble foster-mothers in castles until they reached age seven.\n\nThe seven-year-old boys were given the title of \"page\" and turned over to the care of the castle's lords. They were placed on an early training regime of hunting with huntsmen and falconers, and academic studies with priests or chaplains. Pages then become assistants to older knights in battle, carrying and cleaning armour, taking care of the horses, and packing the baggage. They would accompany the knights on expeditions, even into foreign lands. Older pages were instructed by knights in swordsmanship, equestrianism, chivalry, warfare, and combat (but using wooden swords and spears).\n\nWhen the boy turned 15, he became a \"squire\". In a religious ceremony, the new squire swore on a sword consecrated by a bishop or priest, and attended to assigned duties in his lord's household. During this time the squires continued training in combat and were allowed to own armour (rather than borrowing it).Squires were required to master the “\"seven points of agilities\"” – riding, swimming and diving, shooting different types of weapons, climbing, participation in tournaments, wrestling, fencing, long jumping, and dancing – the prerequisite skills for knighthood. All of these were even performed while wearing armour.\n\nUpon turning 21, the squire was eligible to be knighted.\n\nThe accolade or knighting ceremony was usually held during one of the great feasts or holidays, like Christmas or Easter, and sometimes at the wedding of a noble or royal. The knighting ceremony usually involved a ritual bath on the eve of the ceremony and a prayer vigil during the night. On the day of the ceremony, the would-be knight would swear an oath and the master of the ceremony would dub the new knight on the shoulders with a sword. Squires, and even soldiers, could also be conferred direct knighthood early if they showed valor and efficiency for their service; such acts may include deploying for an important quest or mission, or protecting a high diplomat or a royal relative in battle.\n\nKnights were expected, above all, to fight bravely and to display military professionalism and courtesy. When knights were taken as prisoners of war, they were customarily held for ransom in somewhat comfortable surroundings. This same standard of conduct did not apply to non-knights (archers, peasants, foot-soldiers, etc.) who were often slaughtered after capture, and who were viewed during battle as mere impediments to knights' getting to other knights to fight them.\n\nChivalry developed as an early standard of professional ethics for knights, who were relatively affluent horse owners and were expected to provide military services in exchange for landed property. Early notions of chivalry entailed loyalty to one's liege lord and bravery in battle, similar to the values of the Heroic Age. During the Middle Ages, this grew from simple military professionalism into a social code including the values of gentility, nobility and treating others reasonably. In \"The Song of Roland\" (c. 1100), Roland is portrayed as the ideal knight, demonstrating unwavering loyalty, military prowess and social fellowship. In Wolfram von Eschenbach's \"Parzival\" (c. 1205), chivalry had become a blend of religious duties, love and military service. Ramon Llull's \"Book of the Order of Chivalry\" (1275) demonstrates that by the end of the 13th century, chivalry entailed a litany of very specific duties, including riding warhorses, jousting, attending tournaments, holding Round Tables and hunting, as well as aspiring to the more æthereal virtues of \"faith, hope, charity, justice, strength, moderation and loyalty.\"\n\nKnights of the late medieval era were expected by society to maintain all these skills and many more, as outlined in Baldassare Castiglione's \"The Book of the Courtier\", though the book's protagonist, Count Ludovico, states the \"first and true profession\" of the ideal courtier \"must be that of arms.\" \"Chivalry\", derived from the French word \"chevalier\" ('cavalier'), simultaneously denoted skilled horsemanship and military service, and these remained the primary occupations of knighthood throughout the Middle Ages.\n\nChivalry and religion were mutually influenced during the period of the Crusades. The early Crusades helped to clarify the moral code of chivalry as it related to religion. As a result, Christian armies began to devote their efforts to sacred purposes. As time passed, clergy instituted religious vows which required knights to use their weapons chiefly for the protection of the weak and defenseless, especially women and orphans, and of churches.\n\nIn peacetime, knights often demonstrated their martial skills in tournaments, which usually took place on the grounds of a castle. Knights can parade their armour and banner to the whole court as the tournament commenced. Medieval tournaments were made up of martial sports called \"hastiludes\", and were not only a major spectator sport but also played as a real combat simulation. It usually ended with many knights either injured or even killed. One contest was a free-for-all battle called a \"melee\", where large groups of knights numbering hundreds assembled and fought one another, and the last knight standing was the winner. The most popular and romanticized contest for knights was the \"joust\". In this competition, two knights charge each other with blunt wooden lances in an effort to break their lance on the opponent's head or body or unhorse them completely. The loser in these tournaments had to turn his armour and horse over to the victor. The last day was filled with feasting, dancing and minstrel singing.\n\nBesides formal tournaments, they were also unformalized judicial duels done by knights and squires to end various disputes. Countries like Germany, Britain and Ireland practiced this tradition. Judicial combat was of two forms in medieval society, the feat of arms and chivalric combat. The feat of arms were done to settle hostilities between two large parties and supervised by a judge. The chivalric combat was fought when one party's honor was disrespected or challenged and the conflict could not be resolved in court. Weapons were standardized and must be of the same caliber. The duel lasted until the other party was too weak to fight back and in early cases, the defeated party were then subsequently executed. Examples of these brutal duels were the judicial combat known as the Combat of the Thirty in 1351, and the trial by combat fought by Jean de Carrouges in 1386. A far more chivalric duel which became popular in the Late Middle Ages was the \"pas d'armes\" or \"passage of arms\". In this hastilude, a knight or a group of knights would claim a bridge, lane or city gate, and challenge other passing knights to fight or be disgraced. If a lady passed unescorted, she would leave behind a glove or scarf, to be rescued and returned to her by a future knight who passed that way.\n\nOne of the greatest distinguishing marks of the knightly class was the flying of coloured banners, to display power and to distinguish knights in battle and in tournaments. Knights are generally \"armigerous\" (bearing a coat of arms), and indeed they played an essential role in the development of heraldry. As heavier armour, including enlarged shields and enclosed helmets, developed in the Middle Ages, the need for marks of identification arose, and with coloured shields and surcoats, coat armoury was born. Armourial rolls were created to record the knights of various regions or those who participated in various tournaments.\n\nKnights and the ideals of knighthood featured largely in medieval and Renaissance literature, and have secured a permanent place in literary romance. While chivalric romances abound, particularly notable literary portrayals of knighthood include \"The Song of Roland\", \"Cantar de Mio Cid\", The Twelve of England, Geoffrey Chaucer's \"The Knight's Tale\", Baldassare Castiglione's \"The Book of the Courtier\", and Miguel de Cervantes' \"Don Quixote\", as well as Sir Thomas Malory's \"Le Morte d'Arthur\" and other Arthurian tales (Geoffrey of Monmouth's \"Historia Regum Britanniae\", the Pearl Poet's \"Sir Gawain and the Green Knight\", etc.).\n\nGeoffrey of Monmouth's \"Historia Regum Britanniae\" (\"History of the Kings of Britain\"), written in the 1130s, introduced the legend of King Arthur, which was to be important to the development of chivalric ideals in literature. Sir Thomas Malory's \"Le Morte d'Arthur\" (\"The Death of Arthur\"), written in 1469, was important in defining the ideal of chivalry, which is essential to the modern concept of the knight, as an elite warrior sworn to uphold the values of faith, loyalty, courage, and honour.\n\nInstructional literature was also created. Geoffroi de Charny's \"Book of Chivalry\" expounded upon the importance of Christian faith in every area of a knight's life, though still laying stress on the primarily military focus of knighthood.\n\nIn the early Renaissance greater emphasis is laid upon courtliness. The ideal courtier—the chivalrous knight—of Baldassarre Castiglione's \"The Book of the Courtier\" became a model of the ideal virtues of nobility. Castiglione's tale took the form of a discussion among the nobility of the court of the Duke of Urbino, in which the characters determine that the ideal knight should be renowned not only for his bravery and prowess in battle, but also as a skilled dancer, athlete, singer and orator, and he should also be well-read in the humanities and classical Greek and Latin literature.\n\nLater Renaissance literature, such as Miguel de Cervantes's \"Don Quixote\", rejected the code of chivalry as unrealistic idealism. The rise of Christian humanism in Renaissance literature demonstrated a marked departure from the chivalric romance of late medieval literature, and the chivalric ideal ceased to influence literature over successive centuries until it saw some pockets of revival in post-Victorian literature.\n\nBy the end of the 16th century, knights were becoming obsolete as countries started creating their own professional armies that were quicker to train, cheaper and easier to mobilize. The advancement of high-powered firearms eradicated the use of plate armour, as the time it took to train soldiers with guns was much less compared to that of the knight. The cost of equipment was also significantly lower, and guns had a reasonable chance to easily penetrate a knight's armour. In the 14th century the use of infantrymen armed with pikes and fighting in close formation also proved effective against heavy cavalry, such as during the Battle of Nancy, when Charles the Bold and his armoured cavalry were decimated by Swiss pikemen. As the feudal system came to an end, lords saw no further use of knights. Many landowners found the duties of knighthood too expensive and so contented themselves with the use of squires. Mercenaries also became an economic alternative to knights when conflicts arose.\n\nArmies of the time started adopting a more realistic approach to warfare than the honor-bound code of chivalry. Soon, the remaining knights were absorbed into professional armies. Although they had a higher rank than most soldiers because of their valuable lineage, they lost their distinctive identity that previously set them apart from common soldiers. As the age of knights dissolved, some still survived as knightly orders who still exist even by the end of the Medieval Age. They adopted newer technology while still retaining their age-old chivalric traditions. Examples of holy orders that existed beyond the Middle Ages were the Knights Hospitaller and Teutonic Knights.\n\nBULLET::::- Sovereign Military Order of Malta, founded during the First Crusade, 1099\nBULLET::::- Order of the Holy Sepulchre, also founded during the First Crusade in circa 1099\nBULLET::::- Order of Saint Lazarus established about 1100\nBULLET::::- Knights Templar, founded 1118, disbanded 1307\nBULLET::::- Teutonic Knights, established about 1190, and ruled the Monastic State of the Teutonic Knights in Prussia until 1525\nOther orders were established in the Iberian peninsula, under the influence of the orders in the Holy Land and the Crusader movement of the Reconquista:\nBULLET::::- Order of Aviz, established in Avis in 1143\nBULLET::::- Order of Alcántara, established in Alcántara in 1156\nBULLET::::- Order of Calatrava, established in Calatrava in 1158\nBULLET::::- Order of Santiago, established in Santiago in 1164.\n\nAfter the Crusades, the military orders became idealized and romanticized, resulting in the late medieval notion of chivalry, as reflected in the Arthurian romances of the time. The creation of chivalric orders was fashionable among the nobility in the 14th and 15th centuries, and this is still reflected in contemporary honours systems, including the term \"order\" itself. Examples of notable orders of chivalry are:\nBULLET::::- the Order of Saint George, founded by Charles I of Hungary in 1325/6\nBULLET::::- the Order of the Most Holy Annunciation, founded by Count Amadeus VI in 1346\nBULLET::::- the Order of the Garter, founded by Edward III of England around 1348\nBULLET::::- the Order of the Dragon, founded by King Sigismund of Luxemburg in 1408\nBULLET::::- the Order of the Golden Fleece, founded by Philip III, Duke of Burgundy in 1430\nBULLET::::- the Order of Saint Michael, founded by Louis XI of France in 1469\nBULLET::::- the Order of the Thistle, founded by King James VII of Scotland (also known as James II of England) in 1687\nBULLET::::- the Order of the Elephant, which may have been first founded by Christian I of Denmark, but was founded in its current form by King Christian V in 1693\nBULLET::::- the Order of the Bath, founded by George I in 1725\nFrom roughly 1560, purely honorific orders were established, as a way to confer prestige and distinction, unrelated to military service and chivalry in the more narrow sense. Such orders were particularly popular in the 17th and 18th centuries, and knighthood continues to be conferred in various countries:\n\nBULLET::::- The United Kingdom (see British honours system) and some Commonwealth of Nations countries such as New Zealand;\nBULLET::::- Some European countries, such as The Netherlands, Belgium and Spain among others (see below).\nBULLET::::- The Holy See — see Papal Orders of Chivalry.\n\nThere are other monarchies and also republics that also follow this practice. Modern knighthoods are typically conferred in recognition for services rendered to society, which are not necessarily martial in nature. The British musician Elton John, for example, is a Knight Bachelor, thus entitled to be called Sir Elton. The female equivalent is a \"Dame\", for example Dame Julie Andrews.\n\nIn the United Kingdom, honorific knighthood may be conferred in two different ways:\n\nThe first is by membership of one of the \"pure\" Orders of Chivalry such as the Order of the Garter, the Order of the Thistle and the dormant Order of Saint Patrick, of which all members are knighted. In addition, many British Orders of Merit, namely the Order of the Bath, the Order of St Michael and St George, the Royal Victorian Order and the Order of the British Empire are part of the British honours system, and the award of their highest ranks (Knight/Dame Commander and Knight/Dame Grand Cross), comes together with an honorific knighthood, making them a cross between orders of chivalry and orders of merit. By contrast, membership of other British Orders of Merit, such as the Distinguished Service Order, the Order of Merit and the Order of the Companions of Honour does not confer a knighthood.\n\nThe second is being granted honorific knighthood by the British sovereign without membership of an order, the recipient being called Knight Bachelor.\n\nIn the British honours system the knightly style of \"Sir\" and its female equivalent \"Dame\" are followed by the given name only when addressing the holder. Thus, Sir Elton John should be addressed as \"Sir Elton\", not \"Sir John\" or \"Mr John\". Similarly, actress Dame Judi Dench should be addressed as \"Dame Judi\", not \"Dame Dench\" or \"Ms Dench\".\n\nWives of knights, however, are entitled to the honorific pre-nominal \"Lady\" before their husband's surname. Thus Sir Paul McCartney's ex-wife was formally styled \"Lady McCartney\" (rather than \"Lady Paul McCartney\" or \"Lady Heather McCartney\"). The style \"Dame Heather McCartney\" could be used for the wife of a knight; however, this style is largely archaic and is only used in the most formal of documents, or where the wife is a Dame in her own right (such as Dame Norma Major, who gained her title six years before her husband Sir John Major was knighted). The husbands of Dames have no honorific pre-nominal, so Dame Norma's husband remained John Major until he received his own knighthood. Since the reign of Edward VII a clerk in holy orders in the Church of England has not normally received the accolade on being appointed to a degree of knighthood. He receives the insignia of his honour and may place the appropriate letters after his name or title but he may not be called Sir and his wife may not be called Lady. This custom is not observed in Australia and New Zealand, where knighted Anglican clergymen routinely use the title \"Sir\". Ministers of other Christian Churches are entitled to receive the accolade. For example, Sir Norman Cardinal Gilroy did receive the accolade on his appointment as Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire in 1969. A knight who is subsequently ordained does not lose his title. A famous example of this situation was The Revd Sir Derek Pattinson, who was ordained just a year after he was appointed Knight Bachelor, apparently somewhat to the consternation of officials at Buckingham Palace. A woman clerk in holy orders may be made a Dame in exactly the same way as any other woman since there are no military connotations attached to the honour. A clerk in holy orders who is a baronet is entitled to use the title Sir.\n\nOutside the British honours system it is usually considered improper to address a knighted person as 'Sir' or 'Dame'. Some countries, however, historically \"did\" have equivalent honorifics for knights, such as Cavaliere in Italy (e.g. \"Cavaliere\" Benito Mussolini), and Ritter in Germany and the Austro-Hungarian Empire (e.g. Georg \"Ritter\" von Trapp\").\nState Knighthoods in the Netherlands are issued in three orders, the Order of William, the Order of the Netherlands Lion, and the Order of Orange Nassau. Additionally there remain a few hereditary knights in the Netherlands.\n\nIn Belgium, honorific knighthood (not hereditary) can be conferred by the King on particularly meritorious individuals such as scientists or eminent businessmen, or for instance to astronaut Frank De Winne, the second Belgian in space. This practice is similar to the conferral of the dignity of Knight Bachelor in the United Kingdom. In addition, there still are a number of hereditary knights in Belgium (see below).\n\nIn France and Belgium, one of the ranks conferred in some Orders of Merit, such as the Légion d'Honneur, the Ordre National du Mérite, the Ordre des Palmes académiques and the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres in France, and the Order of Leopold, Order of the Crown and Order of Leopold II in Belgium, is that of \"Chevalier\" (in French) or \"Ridder\" (in Dutch), meaning Knight.\n\nIn the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth the monarchs tried to establish chivalric orders but the hereditary lords who controlled the Union did not agree and managed to ban such assemblies. They feared the King would use Orders to gain support for absolutist goals and to make formal distinctions among the peerage which could lead to its legal breakup into two separate classes, and that the King would later play one against the other and eventually limit the legal privileges of hereditary nobility. But finally in 1705 King managed to establish the Order of the White Eagle which remains Poland's most prestigious order of that kind. The head of state (now the President as the acting Grand Master) confers knighthoods of the Order to distinguished citizens, foreign monarchs and other heads of state. The Order has its Chapter. There were no particular honorifics that would accompany a knight's name as historically all (or at least by far most) of its members would be royals or hereditary lords anyway. So today, a knight is simply referred to as \"Name Surname, knight of the White Eagle (Order)\".\n\nIn continental Europe different systems of hereditary knighthood have existed or do exist. \"Ridder\", Dutch for \"knight\", is a hereditary noble title in the Netherlands. It is the lowest title within the nobility system and ranks below that of \"Baron\" but above \"Jonkheer\" (the latter is not a title, but a Dutch honorific to show that someone belongs to the untitled nobility). The collective term for its holders in a certain locality is the Ridderschap (e.g. Ridderschap van Holland, Ridderschap van Friesland, etc.). In the Netherlands no female equivalent exists. Before 1814, the history of nobility is separate for each of the eleven provinces that make up the Kingdom of the Netherlands. In each of these, there were in the early Middle Ages a number of feudal lords who often were just as powerful, and sometimes more so than the rulers themselves. In old times, no other title existed but that of knight. In the Netherlands only 10 knightly families are still extant, a number which steadily decreases because in that country ennoblement or incorporation into the nobility is not possible anymore.\n\nLikewise \"Ridder\", Dutch for \"knight\", or the equivalent French \"Chevalier\" is a hereditary noble title in Belgium. It is the second lowest title within the nobility system above \"Écuyer\" or \"Jonkheer/Jonkvrouw\" and below \"Baron\". Like in the Netherlands, no female equivalent to the title exists. Belgium still does have about 232 registered knightly families.\n\nThe German and Austrian equivalent of an hereditary knight is a \"Ritter\". This designation is used as a title of nobility in all German-speaking areas. Traditionally it denotes the second lowest rank within the nobility, standing above \"Edler\" (noble) and below \"Freiherr\" (baron). For its historical association with warfare and the landed gentry in the Middle Ages, it can be considered roughly equal to the titles of \"Knight\" or \"Baronet\".\n\nIn the Kingdom of Spain, the Royal House of Spain grants titles of knighthood to the successor of the throne. This knighthood title known as Order of the Golden Fleece is among the most prestigious and exclusive Chivalric Orders. This Order can also be granted to persons not belonging to the Spanish Crown, as the former Emperor of Japan Akihito, the current Queen of United Kingdom Elizabeth II or the important Spanish politician of the Spanish democratic transition Adolfo Suárez, among others.\n\nThe Royal House of Portugal historically bestowed hereditary knighthoods to holders of the highest ranks in the Royal Orders. Today, the head of the Royal House of Portugal Duarte Pio, Duke of Braganza bestows hereditary knighthoods for extraordinary acts of sacrifice and service to the Royal House. There are very few hereditary knights and they are entitled to wear a breast star with the crest of the House of Braganza.\n\nIn France, the hereditary knighthood existed in regions formerly under Holy Roman Empire control. One family ennobled with that title is the house of Hauteclocque (by letters patents of 1752), even if its most recent members used a pontifical title of count.\n\nItaly and Poland also had the hereditary knighthood that existed within the nobility system.\n\nThere are traces of the Continental system of hereditary knighthood in Ireland. Notably all three of the following belong to the Hiberno-Norman FitzGerald dynasty, created by the Earls of Desmond, acting as Earls Palatine, for their kinsmen.\nBULLET::::- Knight of Kerry or Green Knight (FitzGerald of Kerry) — the current holder is Sir Adrian FitzGerald, 6th Baronet of Valencia, 24th Knight of Kerry. He is also a Knight of Malta, and has served as President of the Irish Association of the Sovereign Military Order of Malta.\nBULLET::::- Knight of Glin or Black Knight (FitzGerald of Limerick) — now dormant.\nBULLET::::- White Knight (see Edmund Fitzgibbon) — now dormant.\n\nAnother Irish family were the O'Shaughnessys, who were created knights in 1553 under the policy of surrender and regrant (first established by Henry VIII of England). They were attainted in 1697 for participation on the Jacobite side in the Williamite wars.\n\nSince 1611, the British Crown has awarded a hereditary title in the form of the baronetcy. Like knights, baronets are accorded the title \"Sir\". Baronets are not peers of the Realm, and have never been entitled to sit in the House of Lords, therefore like knights they remain commoners in the view of the British legal system. However, unlike knights, the title is hereditary and the recipient does not receive an accolade. The position is therefore more comparable with hereditary knighthoods in continental European orders of nobility, such as \"ritter\", than with knighthoods under the British orders of chivalry. However, unlike the continental orders, the British baronetcy system was a modern invention, designed specifically to raise money for the Crown with the purchase of the title.\n\nWomen were appointed to the Order of the Garter almost from the start. In all, 68 women were appointed between 1358 and 1488, including all consorts. Though many were women of royal blood, or wives of knights of the Garter, some women were neither. They wore the garter on the left arm, and some are shown on their tombstones with this arrangement. After 1488, no other appointments of women are known, although it is said that the Garter was conferred upon Neapolitan poet Laura Bacio Terricina, by King Edward VI. In 1638, a proposal was made to revive the use of robes for the wives of knights in ceremonies, but this did not occur. Queens consort have been made Ladies of the Garter since 1901 (Queens Alexandra in 1901, Mary in 1910 and Elizabeth in 1937). The first non-royal woman to be made Lady Companion of the Garter was The Duchess of Norfolk in 1990, the second was The Baroness Thatcher in 1995 (post-nominal: LG). On 30 November 1996, Lady Fraser was made Lady of the Thistle, the first non-royal woman (post-nominal: LT). (See Edmund Fellowes, \"Knights of the Garter\", 1939; and Beltz: \"Memorials of the Order of the Garter\"). The first woman to be granted a knighthood in modern Britain seems to have been H.H. Nawab Sikandar Begum Sahiba, Nawab Begum of Bhopal, who became a Knight Grand Commander of the Order of the Star of India (GCSI) in 1861, at the foundation of the order. Her daughter received the same honor in 1872, as well as her granddaughter in 1910. The order was open to \"princes and chiefs\" without distinction of gender. The first European woman to have been granted an order of knighthood was Queen Mary, when she was made a Knight Grand Commander of the same order, by special statute, in celebration of the Delhi Durbar of 1911. She was also granted a damehood in 1917 as a Dame Grand Cross, when the Order of the British Empire was created (it was the first order explicitly open to women). The Royal Victorian Order was opened to women in 1936, and the Orders of the Bath and Saint Michael and Saint George in 1965 and 1971 respectively.\n\nMedieval French had two words, chevaleresse and chevalière, which were used in two ways: one was for the wife of a knight, and this usage goes back to the 14th century. The other was possibly for a female knight. Here is a quote from Menestrier, a 17th-century writer on chivalry: \"It was not always necessary to be the wife of a knight in order to take this title. Sometimes, when some male fiefs were conceded by special privilege to women, they took the rank of chevaleresse, as one sees plainly in Hemricourt where women who were not wives of knights are called chevaleresses.\" Modern French orders of knighthood include women, for example the Légion d'Honneur (Legion of Honor) since the mid-19th century, but they are usually called chevaliers. The first documented case is that of Angélique Brûlon (1772–1859), who fought in the Revolutionary Wars, received a military disability pension in 1798, the rank of 2nd lieutenant in 1822, and the Legion of Honor in 1852. A recipient of the Ordre National du Mérite recently requested from the order's Chancery the permission to call herself \"chevalière,\" and the request was granted (AFP dispatch, Jan 28, 2000).\n\nAs related in \"Orders of Knighthood, Awards and the Holy See\" by H. E. Cardinale (1983), the Order of the Blessed Virgin Mary was founded by two Bolognese nobles Loderingo degli Andalò and Catalano di Guido in 1233, and approved by Pope Alexander IV in 1261. It was the first religious order of knighthood to grant the rank of militissa to women. However, this order was suppressed by Sixtus V in 1558.\n\nAt the initiative of Catherine Baw in 1441, and 10 years later of Elizabeth, Mary, and Isabella of the house of Hornes, orders were founded which were open exclusively to women of noble birth, who received the French title of chevalière or the Latin title of equitissa. In his Glossarium (s.v. militissa), Du Cange notes that still in his day (17th century), the female canons of the canonical monastery of St. Gertrude in Nivelles (Brabant), after a probation of 3 years, are made knights (militissae) at the altar, by a (male) knight called in for that purpose, who gives them the accolade with a sword and pronounces the usual words.\n\nTo honour those women who defended Tortosa against an attack by the Moors, Ramon Berenguer IV, Count of Barcelona, created the Order of the Hatchet (\"Orden de la Hacha\") in 1149.\n\nBULLET::::- Adrian von Bubenberg\nBULLET::::- Andrew Moray\nBULLET::::- Balian of Ibelin\nBULLET::::- Bertrand du Guesclin\nBULLET::::- Bohemond I of Antioch\nBULLET::::- El Cid\nBULLET::::- Francis Drake\nBULLET::::- Francisco Pizarro\nBULLET::::- Franz von Sickingen\nBULLET::::- Gerard Thom\nBULLET::::- Geoffroi de Charny\nBULLET::::- Godfrey of Bouillon\nBULLET::::- Götz von Berlichingen\nBULLET::::- Henry Percy (Hotspur)\nBULLET::::- Heinrich von Bulow (Grotekop)\nBULLET::::- Heinrich von Winkelried\nBULLET::::- Hernán Cortés\nBULLET::::- Hugues de Payens\nBULLET::::- Jean III d'Aa of Gruuthuse\nBULLET::::- Jean Le Maingre\nBULLET::::- Joanot Martorell\nBULLET::::- John Hawkwood\nBULLET::::- Philip Riedesel zu Camberg\nBULLET::::- Pierre Terrail, seigneur de Bayard\nBULLET::::- Roger Bigod\nBULLET::::- Roger Mortimer\nBULLET::::- Ruggero di Lauria\nBULLET::::- Simon de Montfort\nBULLET::::- Stibor of Stiboricz\nBULLET::::- Suero de Quinones\nBULLET::::- William Clito\nBULLET::::- William Marshal\nBULLET::::- William Wallace\nBULLET::::- Zawisza Czarny\n\nBULLET::::- Accolade\nBULLET::::- \"Auxilium ad filium militem faciendum et filiam maritandam\"\nBULLET::::- Chivalric orders\nBULLET::::- Spanish military orders\nBULLET::::- Destrier\nBULLET::::- Heavy cavalry\nBULLET::::- Knightly virtues\nBULLET::::- Knight-errant\nBULLET::::- Knight banneret\nBULLET::::- Knight bachelor\nBULLET::::- Black knight\nBULLET::::- Imperial Knight\nBULLET::::- Medieval warfare\nBULLET::::- Nobility\nBULLET::::- Orders, decorations, and medals of the United Kingdom\nBULLET::::- Papal Orders of Chivalry\n\nBULLET::::- Aswaran\nBULLET::::- Baghatur\nBULLET::::- Boyar\nBULLET::::- Cataphract\nBULLET::::- Condottieri\nBULLET::::- Conquistador\nBULLET::::- Equites\nBULLET::::- Eagle warrior\nBULLET::::- Hwarang\nBULLET::::- Janissaries\nBULLET::::- Juramentado\nBULLET::::- Kshatriya\nBULLET::::- Legion of Honour\nBULLET::::- Maharlika\nBULLET::::- Medjay\nBULLET::::- Pasha\nBULLET::::- Praetorian Guard\nBULLET::::- Rajput\nBULLET::::- Samurai\nBULLET::::- Sipahi\nBULLET::::- Timawa\nBULLET::::- Youxia\n\nBULLET::::- Arnold, Benjamin. \"German Knighthood, 1050-1300\". Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1985.\nBULLET::::- Bloch, Marc. \"Feudal Society\", 2nd ed. Translated by Manyon. London: Routledge & Keagn Paul, 1965.\nBULLET::::- Bluth, B. J. \"Marching with Sharpe\". London: Collins, 2001.\nBULLET::::- Boulton, D'Arcy Jonathan Dacre. \"The Knights of the Crown: The Monarchical Orders of Knighthood in Later Medieval Europe, 1325–1520\". 2d revised ed. Woodbridge, UK: Boydell Press, 2000.\nBULLET::::- Bull, Stephen. \"An Historical Guide to Arms and Armour\". London: Studio Editions, 1991.\nBULLET::::- Carey, Brian Todd; Allfree, Joshua B; Cairns, John. \"Warfare in the Medieval World\", UK: Pen & Sword Military, June 2006.\nBULLET::::- Church, S. and Harvey, R. (Eds.) (1994) Medieval knighthood V: papers from the sixth Strawberry Hill Conference 1994. Boydell Press, Woodbridge\nBULLET::::- Edge, David; John Miles Paddock (1988) \"Arms & Armor of the Medieval Knight\". Greenwich, CT: Bison Books Corp.\nBULLET::::- Edwards, J. C. \"What Earthly Reason? The replacement of the longbow by handguns.\" \"Medieval History Magazine\", Is. 7, March 2004.\nBULLET::::- Embleton, Gerry. \"Medieval Military Costume\". UK: Crowood Press, 2001.\nBULLET::::- Forey, Alan John. \"The Military Orders: From the Twelfth to the Early Fourteenth Centuries\". Basingstoke, Hampshire, UK: Macmillan Education, 1992.\nBULLET::::- Hare, Christopher. \"Courts & camps of the Italian renaissance\". New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1908.\nBULLET::::- Kaeuper, Richard and Kennedy, Elspeth \"The Book of Chivalry of Geoffrey De Charny : Text, Context, and Translation.\" 1996.\nBULLET::::- Keen, Maurice. \"Chivalry\". Yale University Press, 2005.\nBULLET::::- Laing, Lloyd and Jennifer Laing. \"Medieval Britain: The Age of Chivalry\". New York: St. Martin's Press, 1996.\nBULLET::::- Oakeshott, Ewart. \"A Knight and his Horse\", 2nd ed. Chester Springs, PA: Dufour Editions, 1998.\nBULLET::::- Robards, Brooks. \"The Medieval Knight at War\". London: Tiger Books, 1997.\nBULLET::::- (Republished Baltimore: Genealogical Publishing Co., 1970).\nBULLET::::- Williams, Alan. \"The Metallurgy of Medieval Arms and Armour\", in \"Companion to Medieval Arms and Armour\". Nicolle, David, ed. Woodbridge, UK: Boydell Press, 2002.\n"}
{"id": "16898", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16898", "title": "Kara Sea", "text": "Kara Sea\n\nThe Kara Sea (, \"Karskoye more\") is part of the Arctic Ocean north of Siberia. It is separated from the Barents Sea to the west by the Kara Strait and Novaya Zemlya, and from the Laptev Sea to the east by the Severnaya Zemlya archipelago. It is named after the Kara River (flowing into Baydaratskaya Bay), which is now relatively insignificant but which played an important role in the Russian conquest of northern Siberia. The Kara River name is derived from a Nenets word meaning \"hummocked ice\".\n\nThe Kara Sea's northern limit is marked geographically by a line running from Cape Kohlsaat in Graham Bell Island, Franz Josef Land, to Cape Molotov (Arctic Cape), the northernmost point of Komsomolets Island in Severnaya Zemlya.\n\nThe Kara Sea is roughly long and wide with an area of around and a mean depth of .\n\nIts main ports are Novy Port and Dikson and it is important as a fishing ground although the sea is ice-bound for all but two months of the year. Significant discoveries of petroleum and natural gas, the East-Prinovozemelsky field, an extension of the West Siberian Oil Basin, have been made but have not yet been developed. In 2014, US government sanctions resulted in Exxon having until September 26 to discontinue its operations in the Kara Sea.\n\nThe International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Kara Sea as follows:\n\nThere are many islands and island groups in the Kara Sea. Unlike the other marginal seas of the Arctic, where most islands lie along the coasts, in the Kara Sea many islands, like the Arkticheskiy Institut Islands, the Izvesti Tsik Islands, the Kirov Islands, Uedineniya or Lonely Island, Vize Island, and Voronina Island are located in the open sea of its central regions.\n\nThe largest group in the Kara Sea is by far the Nordenskiöld Archipelago, with five large subgroups and over ninety islands. Other important islands in the Kara Sea are Bely Island, Dikson Island, Taymyr Island, the Kamennyye Islands and Oleni Island. Despite the high latitude all islands are unglaciated except for Ushakov Island at the extreme northern limit of the Kara Sea.\n\nWater circulation patterns in the Kara Sea are complex. The Kara Sea tends to be sea ice covered between September and May , and between May and August heavily influenced by freshwater run-off (roughly 1200 km yr ) from the Russian rivers (e.g., Ob, Yenisei, Pyasina, Pur, and Taz). The Kara Sea is also affected by the water inflow from the Barents Sea, which brings 0.6 Sv in August and 2.6 Sv in December . The advected water originates from the Atlantic, but it was cooled and mixed with freshwater in the Barents Sea before it reaches the Kara Sea . Simulations with the Hamburg shelf ocean model (HAMSOM) suggest that no typical water current pattern consists in the Kara Sea throughout the year. Depending on the freshwater run-off, the dominant wind patterns, and the sea ice formation, the water currents change . \n\nThe Kara Sea was formerly known as Oceanus Scythicus or Mare Glaciale and it appears with these names in 16th century maps. Since it is closed by ice most of the year it remained largely unexplored until the late nineteenth century.\n\nIn 1556 Stephen Borough sailed in the \"Searchthrift\" to try to reach the Ob River, but he was stopped by ice and fog at the entrance to the Kara Sea. Not until 1580 did another English expedition, under Arthur Pet and Charles Jackman, attempt its passage. They too failed to penetrate it, and England lost interest in searching for the Northeast Passage.\n\nIn 1736–1737 Russian Admiral Stepan Malygin undertook a voyage from Dolgy Island in the Barents Sea. The two ships in this early expedition were the \"Perviy\", under Malygin's command and the \"Vtoroy\" under Captain A. Skuratov. After entering the little-explored Kara Sea, they sailed to the mouth of the Ob River. Malygin took careful observations of these hitherto almost unknown areas of the Russian Arctic coastline. With this knowledge he was able to draw the first somewhat accurate map of the Arctic shores between the Pechora River and the Ob River.\n\nIn 1878, Finnish explorer Adolf Erik Nordenskiöld on ship \"Vega\" sailed across the Kara Sea from Gothenburg, along the coast of Siberia, and despite the ice packs, got to 180° longitude by early September. Frozen in for the winter in the Chukchi Sea, Nordenskiöld waited and bartered with the local Chukchi people. The following July, the Vega was freed from the ice, and continued to Yokohama, Japan. He became the first to force the Northeast Passage. The largest group of islands in the Kara Sea, the Nordenskiöld Archipelago, has been named in his honour. The year 1912 was a tragic one for Russian explorers in the Kara Sea. In that fateful year unbroken consolidated ice blocked the way for the Northern Sea Route and three expeditions that had to cross the Kara Sea became trapped and failed: Sedov's on vessel \"St. Foka\", Brusilov's on the \"St. Anna\", and Rusanov's on the \"Gercules\". Georgy Sedov intended to reach Franz Josef Land on ship, leave a depot over there, and sledge to the pole. Due to the heavy ice the vessel could only reach Novaya Zemlya the first summer and wintered in Franz Josef Land. In February 1914 Sedov headed to the North Pole with two sailors and three sledges, but he fell ill and died on Rudolf Island. Georgy Brusilov attempted to navigate the Northeast Passage, was trapped in the Kara Sea, and drifted northward for more than two years reaching latitude 83° 17' N. Thirteen men, headed by Valerian Albanov, left the vessel and started across the ice to Franz Josef Land, but only Albanov and one sailor (Alexander Konrad) survived after a gruesome three-month ordeal. The survivors brought the ship log of \"St. Anna\", the map of her drift, and daily meteorological records, but the destiny of those who stayed on board remains unknown. In the same year the expedition of Vladimir Rusanov was lost in the Kara Sea. The prolonged absence of those three expeditions stirred public attention, and a few small rescue expeditions were launched, including Jan Nagórski's five air flights over the sea and ice from the NW coast of Novaya Zemlya.\n\nAfter the Russian Revolution in 1917, the scale and scope of exploration of the Kara Sea increased greatly as part of the work of developing the Northern Sea Route. Polar stations, of which five already existed in 1917, increased in number, providing meteorologic, ice reconnaissance, and radio facilities. By 1932 there were 24 stations, by 1948 about 80, and by the 1970s more than 100. The use of icebreakers and, later, aircraft as platforms for scientific work were developed. In 1929 and 1930 the Icebreaker Sedov carried groups of scientists to Severnaya Zemlya, the last major piece of unsurveyed territory in the Soviet Arctic; the archipelago was completely mapped under Georgy Ushakov between 1930 and 1932.\n\nParticularly worth noting are three cruises of the Icebreaker \"Sadko\", which went farther north than most; in 1935 and 1936 the last unexplored areas in the northern Kara Sea were examined and small and elusive Ushakov Island was discovered.\n\nIn the summer of 1942, German Kriegsmarine warships and submarines entered the Kara Sea to destroy as many Russian vessels as possible. This naval campaign was named \"Operation Wunderland\". Its success was limited by the presence of ice floes, as well as bad weather and fog. These effectively protected the Soviet ships, preventing the damage that could have been inflicted on the Soviet fleet under fair weather conditions.\n\nIn October 2010, the Russian government awarded a license to Russian oil company Rosneft for developing the East-Prinovozemelsky oil and gas structure in the Kara Sea.\n\nThere is concern about radioactive contamination from nuclear waste the former Soviet Union dumped in the sea and the effect this will have on the marine environment. According to an official \"White Paper\" report compiled and released by the Russian government in March 1993, the Soviet Union dumped six nuclear submarine reactors and ten nuclear reactors into the Kara Sea between 1965–1988. Solid high and low-level wastes unloaded from Northern Fleet nuclear submarines during reactor refuelings, were dumped in the Kara Sea, mainly in the shallow fjords of Novaya Zemlya, where the depths of the dumping sites range from 12 to 135 meters, and in the Novaya Zemlya Trough at depths of up to 380 meters. Liquid low-level wastes were released in the open Barents and Kara Seas. A subsequent appraisal by the International Atomic Energy Agency showed that releases are low and localized from the 16 naval reactors (reported by the IAEA as having come from seven submarines and the icebreaker \"Lenin\") which were dumped at five sites in the Kara Sea. Most of the dumped reactors had suffered an accident.\n\nThe Soviet submarine K-27 was scuttled in Stepovogo Bay with its two reactors filled with spent nuclear fuel. At a seminar in February 2012 it was revealed that the reactors on board the submarine could re-achieve criticality and explode (a buildup of heat leading to a steam explosion vs. nuclear). The catalogue of waste dumped at sea by the Soviets, according to documents seen by Bellona, includes some 17,000 containers of radioactive waste, 19 ships containing radioactive waste, 14 nuclear reactors, including five that still contain spent nuclear fuel; 735 other pieces of radioactively contaminated heavy machinery, and the K-27 nuclear submarine with its two reactors loaded with nuclear fuel.\n\nThe Great Arctic State Nature Reserve—the largest nature reserve of Russia—was founded on May 11, 1993 by Resolution No. 431 of the Government of the Russian Federation (RF). The Kara Sea Islands section (4,000 km²) of the Great Arctic Nature Reserve includes: the Sergei Kirov Archipelago, the Voronina Island, the Izvestiy TSIK Islands, the Arctic Institute Islands, the Svordrup Island, Uedineniya (Ensomheden) and a number of smaller islands. This section represents rather fully the natural and biological diversity of Arctic sea islands of the eastern part of the Kara Sea.\n\nNearby, the Franz Josef Land and Severny Island in northern Novaya Zemlya are also registered as a sanctuary, the Russian Arctic National Park.\n\nBULLET::::- Valerian Albanov\nBULLET::::- List of seas\nBULLET::::- Adolf Erik Nordenskiöld\nBULLET::::- Northern Sea Route\nBULLET::::- Boris Vilkitsky\n\nBULLET::::- International Atomic Energy Agency:Radiological Conditions of the Western Kara Sea\nBULLET::::- J. Zeeberg. \"Into the Ice Sea\".\nBULLET::::- Sea ice and polynias in the Kara Sea: &\nBULLET::::- Marine pollution in the Kara Sea:\nBULLET::::- \"Russians Describe Extensive Dumping of Nuclear Waste\", \"The New York Times\", 27 April 1993\n"}
{"id": "16899", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16899", "title": "Kareem Abdul-Jabbar", "text": "Kareem Abdul-Jabbar\n\nKareem Abdul-Jabbar (born Ferdinand Lewis Alcindor Jr.; April 16, 1947) is an American retired professional basketball player who played 20 seasons in the National Basketball Association (NBA) for the Milwaukee Bucks and the Los Angeles Lakers. During his career as a center, Abdul-Jabbar was a record six-time NBA Most Valuable Player (MVP), a record 19-time NBA All-Star, a 15-time All-NBA selection, and an 11-time NBA All-Defensive Team member. A member of six NBA championship teams as a player and two more as an assistant coach, Abdul-Jabbar twice was voted NBA Finals MVP. In 1996, he was honored as one of the 50 Greatest Players in NBA History. NBA coach Pat Riley and players Isiah Thomas and Julius Erving have called him the greatest basketball player of all time.\n\nAfter winning 71 consecutive basketball games on his high school team in New York City, Alcindor was recruited by Jerry Norman, the assistant coach of UCLA, where he played for coach John Wooden on three consecutive national championship teams and was a record three-time MVP of the NCAA Tournament. Drafted with the first overall pick by the one-season-old Bucks franchise in the 1969 NBA draft, Alcindor spent six seasons in Milwaukee. After leading the Bucks to its first NBA championship at age 24 in 1971, he took the Muslim name Kareem Abdul-Jabbar. Using his trademark \"skyhook\" shot, he established himself as one of the league's top scorers. In 1975, he was traded to the Lakers, with whom he played the final 14 seasons of his career and won five additional NBA championships. Abdul-Jabbar's contributions were a key component in the \"Showtime\" era of Lakers basketball. Over his 20-year NBA career, his teams succeeded in making the playoffs 18 times and got past the first round 14 times; his teams reached the NBA Finals on 10 occasions.\n\nAt the time of his retirement at age 42 in 1989, Abdul-Jabbar was the NBA's all-time leader in points scored (38,387), games played (1,560), minutes played (57,446), field goals made (15,837), field goal attempts (28,307), blocked shots (3,189), defensive rebounds (9,394), career wins (1,074), and personal fouls (4,657). He remains the all-time leader in points scored, field goals made, and career wins. He is ranked third all-time in both rebounds and blocked shots. In 2007, ESPN voted him the greatest center of all time, in 2008, they named him the \"greatest player in college basketball history\", and in 2016, they named him the second best player in NBA history (behind Michael Jordan). Abdul-Jabbar has also been an actor, a basketball coach, and a best-selling author. In 2012, he was selected by Secretary of State Hillary Clinton to be a U.S. global cultural ambassador. In 2016, President Barack Obama awarded him the Presidential Medal of Freedom.\n\nFerdinand Lewis Alcindor Jr. was born in New York City, the only child of Cora Lillian, a department store price checker, and Ferdinand Lewis Alcindor Sr., a transit police officer and jazz musician. He grew up in the Dyckman Street projects in the Inwood neighborhood of Upper Manhattan. Alcindor was unusually large and tall from a young age. At birth he weighed and was long, and by the age of nine he was already tall. By the eighth grade (age 13–14) he had grown to tall and could already slam dunk a basketball.\n\nAlcindor began his record-breaking basketball accomplishments when he was in high school, where he led coach Jack Donahue's Power Memorial Academy team to three straight New York City Catholic championships, a 71-game winning streak, and a 79–2 overall record. This earned him a nickname—\"\"The tower from Power\"\". His 2,067 total points were a New York City high school record. The team won the national high school boys basketball championship when Alcindor was in 10th and 11th grade and was runner-up his senior year. Alcindor had a strained relationship with his coach. In his 2017 book \"Coach Wooden and Me,\" Abdul-Jabbar relates an incident where Donahue called him a nigger.\n\nAlcindor played on the UCLA freshman team in 1966 only because the \"freshman rule\" was in effect, but his prowess was already well known. He received national coverage when he made his varsity debut in 1967: \"Sports Illustrated\" described him as \"The New Superstar.\" From 1967 to 1969, he played on the varsity under head coach John Wooden. He was the main contributor to the team's three-year record of 88 wins and only two losses: one to the University of Houston in which Alcindor had an eye injury, and the other to crosstown rival USC who played a \"stall game\" (i.e., there was no shot clock in those days, so a team could hold the ball as long as it wanted before attempting to score). In his first game, Alcindor scored 56 points, which set a UCLA single-game record.\nDuring his college career, Alcindor was twice named Player of the Year (1967, 1969); was a three-time First Team All-American (1967–1969); played on three NCAA basketball champion teams (1967, 1968 and 1969); was honored as the Most Outstanding Player in the NCAA Tournament three times and became the first-ever Naismith College Player of the Year in 1969.\n\nIn 1967 and 1968, he also won USBWA College Player of the Year, which later became the Oscar Robertson Trophy. Alcindor became the only player to win the Helms Foundation Player of the Year award three times. The 1965–66 UCLA Bruin team was the preseason #1. On November 27, 1965, the freshman team, led by Alcindor, defeated the varsity 75–60 in the first game in the new Pauley Pavilion. Alcindor scored 31 points and had 21 rebounds in what was a good indication of things to come. After the game, the UCLA varsity was #1 in the country but #2 on campus. If the \"freshman rule\" had not been in effect at that time, UCLA would have had a much better chance of winning the 1966 National Championship.\n\nAlcindor had considered transferring to Michigan because of unfulfilled recruiting promises. UCLA player Willie Naulls introduced Alcindor and teammate Lucius Allen to athletic booster Sam Gilbert, who convinced the pair to remain at UCLA.\n\nThe dunk was banned in college basketball after the 1967 season, primarily because of Alcindor's dominant use of the shot. The rule was not rescinded until the 1976–77 season, which was shortly after Wooden's retirement.\n\nDuring his junior year, Alcindor suffered a scratched left cornea on January 12, 1968, in a game against Cal when he was struck by Tom Henderson in a rebound battle. He would miss the next two games against Stanford and Portland. This happened right before the showdown game against Houston. His cornea would again be scratched during his pro career, which subsequently caused him to wear goggles for eye protection.\n\nDuring the summer of 1968, Alcindor took the \"shahada\" twice and converted to Sunni Islam, though he did not begin publicly using his Arabic name until 1971. He boycotted the 1968 Summer Olympics by deciding not to try out for the United States Men's Olympic Basketball team, who went on to easily win the gold medal. Alcindor's decision to stay home during the 1968 Games was in protest of the unequal treatment of African-Americans in the United States.\n\nAlcindor was one of only four players who started on three NCAA championship teams; the others all played for Wooden at UCLA: Henry Bibby, Curtis Rowe and Lynn Shackelford. At the time, the NBA did not allow college underclassmen to declare early for the draft. He completed his studies and earned a Bachelor of Arts with a major in history in 1969. In his free time, he practiced martial arts. He studied Jeet Kune Do under Bruce Lee.\n\nOn January 20, 1968, Alcindor and the UCLA Bruins faced coach Guy Lewis's Houston Cougars in the first-ever nationally televised regular-season college basketball game, with 52,693 in attendance at the Astrodome. Cougar forward Elvin Hayes scored 39 points and had 15 rebounds, while Alcindor, who suffered from a scratch on his left cornea, was held to just 15 points as Houston won 71–69. The Bruins' 47-game winning streak ended in what has been called the \"Game of the Century\". Hayes and Alcindor had a rematch in the semi-finals of the NCAA Tournament, where UCLA, with a healthy Alcindor, defeated Houston 101–69 en route to the national championship. UCLA limited Hayes, who was averaging 37.7 points per game, to only ten points. Wooden credited his assistant, Jerry Norman, for devising the diamond-and-one defense that contained Hayes. \"Sports Illustrated\" ran a cover story on the game and used the headline: \"Lew's Revenge: The Rout of Houston.\"\n\nAs of the 2011–12 season, he still holds or shares a number of individual records at UCLA:\nBULLET::::- Highest career scoring average: 26.4;\nBULLET::::- Most career field goals: 943 (tied with Don MacLean);\nBULLET::::- Most points in a season: 870 (1967);\nBULLET::::- Highest season scoring average: 29.0 (1967);\nBULLET::::- Most field goals in a season: 346 (1967);\nBULLET::::- Most free throw attempts in a season: 274 (1967);\nBULLET::::- Most points in a single game: 61;\nBULLET::::- Most field goals in a single game: 26 (vs. Washington State, February 25, 1967).\n\nThe Harlem Globetrotters offered Alcindor $1 million to play for them, but he declined and was picked first in the 1969 NBA draft by the Milwaukee Bucks, who were in only their second season of existence. The Bucks won a coin-toss with the Phoenix Suns for first pick. He was also chosen first overall in the 1969 American Basketball Association draft by the New York Nets. The Nets believed that they had the upper hand in securing Alcindor's services because he was from New York; however, when Alcindor told both the Bucks and the Nets that he would accept one offer only from each team, the Nets bid too low. Sam Gilbert negotiated the contract along with Los Angeles businessman Ralph Shapiro at no charge. After Alcindor chose the Milwaukee Bucks' offer of $1.4 million, the Nets offered a guaranteed $3.25 million. Alcindor declined the offer, saying, \"A bidding war degrades the people involved. It would make me feel like a flesh peddler, and I don't want to think like that.\"\n\nAlcindor's presence enabled the 1969–70 Bucks to claim second place in the NBA's Eastern Division with a 56–26 record (improved from 27–55 the previous year). Alcindor was an instant star, ranking second in the league in scoring (28.8 ppg) and third in rebounding (14.5 rpg), for which he was awarded the title of NBA Rookie of the Year. Until Jayson Tatum in 2018, Alcindor would be the only rookie to record 10 or more games of 20+ points scored during the playoffs.\n\nThe next season, the Bucks acquired All-Star guard Oscar Robertson. Milwaukee went on to record the best record in the league with 66 victories in the 1970–71 season, including a then-record 20 straight wins. Alcindor was awarded his first of six NBA Most Valuable Player Awards, along with his first scoring title (31.7 ppg). He also led the league in total points, with 2,596. In the playoffs, the Bucks went 12–2 (including a four-game sweep of the Baltimore Bullets in the NBA Finals), and won the championship, while Alcindor was named Finals MVP. On May 1, 1971, the day after the Bucks won the NBA championship, he adopted the Muslim name Kareem Abdul-Jabbar (, \"Karīm Abd al-Jabbār\"), its translation roughly \"noble one, servant of the Almighty [i.e., servant of Allah]\". He had converted to Islam while at UCLA.\nAbdul-Jabbar remained a dominant force for the Bucks. The following year, he repeated as scoring champion with (34.8 ppg and 2,822 total points) and was named NBA Most Valuable Player. He helped the Bucks to repeat as division leaders for four straight years. In 1974, Abdul-Jabbar won his third MVP Award in five years and was among the top five NBA players in scoring (27.0 ppg, third), rebounding (14.5 rpg, fourth), blocked shots (283, second), and field goal percentage (.539, second).\n\nAbdul-Jabbar remained relatively injury-free throughout his NBA career, but he twice broke one of his hands. The first incident occurred during a pre-season game in 1974, when he was bumped hard and got his eye scratched; this angered him enough to punch the basket support . He returned after missing the first 16 games of the season and started to wear protective goggles. In the second incident, he broke his hand during the opening game of the 1977–78 season. Two minutes into the game, Abdul-Jabbar punched Milwaukee's Kent Benson in retaliation for an overly aggressive elbow; the punch caused Benson's jaw to be broken. As a result of the injury to his hand, Abdul-Jabbar was out for two months, and it was unnecessary for the NBA to suspend him.\n\nAlthough Abdul-Jabbar always spoke well of Milwaukee and its fans, he said that being in the Midwest did not fit his cultural needs. In October 1974, he requested a trade to either the New York Knicks or Los Angeles.\n\nIn 1975, the Lakers acquired Abdul-Jabbar and reserve center Walt Wesley from the Bucks for center Elmore Smith, guard Brian Winters, and rookie \"blue chippers\" Dave Meyers and Junior Bridgeman. In the 1975–76 season, his first with the Lakers, he had a dominating season, averaging 27.7 points per game and leading the league in rebounding, blocked shots, and minutes played. His 1,111 defensive rebounds remains the NBA single-season record (defensive rebounds were not recorded prior to the 1973–74 season). He earned his fourth MVP award, but missed the post-season for the second straight year.\nOnce he joined the Lakers, Abdul-Jabbar began wearing his trademark goggles (he briefly ditched them in the 1979–80 season). Years of battling under NBA backboards, and being hit and scratched in the face in the process, had taken their toll on his eyes and he developed corneal erosion syndrome, where the eyes begin to dry out easily and cease to produce moisture. He missed one game in the 1986–87 season when his eyes dried out and swelled.\n\nIn the 1976–77 season, Abdul-Jabbar had another strong performance. He led the league in field goal percentage, finished second in rebounds and blocked shots, and third in points per game. He helped lead the Lakers to the best record in the NBA, and he won his record-tying fifth MVP award. In the playoffs, the Lakers beat the Golden State Warriors in the Western Conference semi-finals, setting up a confrontation with the Portland Trail Blazers. The result was a memorable matchup, pitting Abdul-Jabbar against a young, injury-free Bill Walton. Although Abdul-Jabbar dominated the series statistically, Walton and the Trail Blazers (who were experiencing their first-ever run in the playoffs) swept the Lakers, behind Walton's skillful passing and leadership.\n\nAbdul-Jabbar's play remained strong during the next two seasons, being named to the All-NBA Second Team twice, the All-Defense First Team once, and the All-Defense Second Team once. The Lakers, however, continued to be stymied in the playoffs, being eliminated by the Seattle SuperSonics in both 1978 and 1979.\n\nIn 1979, the Lakers acquired first overall draft pick Magic Johnson. The trade and draft paved the way for a Laker dynasty as they went on to become the most dominant team of the 1980s, appearing in the finals eight times and winning five NBA championships. Individually, while Abdul-Jabbar was not the dominant center he had been in the 1970s, he experienced a number of highlight moments. Among them were his record sixth MVP award in 1980, four more All-NBA First Team designations, two more All-Defense First Team designations, the 1985 Finals MVP, and on April 5, 1984 breaking Wilt Chamberlain's record for most career points. Later in his career, he bulked up to about , to be able to withstand the strain of playing the highly physical center position into his early 40s.\nWhile in Los Angeles, Abdul-Jabbar started doing yoga in 1976 to improve his flexibility, and was notable for his physical fitness regimen. He says, \"There is no way I could have played as long as I did without yoga.\"\n\nIn 1983, Abdul-Jabbar's house burned down. Many of his belongings, including his beloved jazz LP collection of about 3,000 albums, were destroyed. Many Lakers fans sent and brought him albums, which he found uplifting.\n\nOn June 28, 1989, Abdul-Jabbar was 42 years old when he announced that he would retire at the end of the season after twenty years in the NBA. On his \"retirement tour\" he received standing ovations at games, home and away and gifts ranging from a yacht that said \"Captain Skyhook\" to framed jerseys from his basketball career to an Afghan rug. In his biography \"My Life\", Magic Johnson recalls that many Lakers and Celtics legends participated in Abdul-Jabbar's farewell game. Every player wore Abdul-Jabbar's trademark goggles and had to try a skyhook at least once, which led to comic results. The Lakers made the NBA Finals in each of Abdul-Jabbar's final three seasons, defeating Boston in 1987, and Detroit in 1988. The Lakers lost to the Pistons in a four-game sweep in his final season.\n\nAt the time of his retirement, Abdul-Jabbar held the record for most games played by a single player in the NBA; this would later be broken by Robert Parish. He also was the all-time record holder for most points (38,387), most field goals made (15,837), and most minutes played (57,446).\n\nSince 2005, Abdul-Jabbar has served as a special assistant coach for the Lakers. He had been interested in coaching since his retirement, and given the influence that he exerted on the league during his playing days, he thought that the opportunity would present itself. However, during his playing years, Abdul-Jabbar had developed a reputation for being introverted and sullen. He did not speak to the press, which led to the impression that he disliked journalists. In his biography \"My Life\", Magic Johnson recalls instances when Abdul-Jabbar brushed him off when he was a ball boy and asked him for an autograph. Abdul-Jabbar also froze out reporters who gave him a too-enthusiastic handshake or even hugged him, and he refused to stop reading the newspaper while giving an interview.\n\nAbdul-Jabbar believes that his reticence, whether through disdain for the press or simply because of introversion, contributed to the dearth of coaching opportunities offered to him by the NBA. In his words, he said he had a mindset he could not overcome, and proceeded through his career oblivious to the effect his reticence may have had on his future coaching prospects. Abdul-Jabbar said: \"I didn't understand that I also had affected people that way and that's what it was all about. I always saw it like they were trying to pry. I was way too suspicious and I paid a price for it.\" Since he began lobbying for a coaching position in 1995, he has managed to obtain only low-level assistant and scouting jobs in the NBA, and a head coaching position only in a minor professional league.\n\nAbdul-Jabbar has worked as an assistant for the Los Angeles Clippers and the Seattle SuperSonics, helping mentor, among others, their young centers, Michael Olowokandi and Jerome James. Abdul-Jabbar was the head coach of the Oklahoma Storm of the United States Basketball League in 2002, leading the team to the league's championship that season, but he failed to land the head coaching position at Columbia University a year later. He then worked as a scout for the New York Knicks. Finally, on September 2, 2005, he returned to the Lakers as a special assistant to Phil Jackson to help the Lakers' centers, and in particular their young draftee Andrew Bynum. Abdul-Jabbar's influence has been credited with Bynum's emergence as a more talented NBA center. Abdul-Jabbar also served as a volunteer coach at Alchesay High School on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation in Whiteriver, Arizona in 1998.\n\nIn 2016, he performed a tribute to friend Muhammad Ali along with Chance the Rapper. He is also co-author of a comic book published by Titan Comics entitled \"Mycroft Holmes and the Apocalypse Handbook\".\n\nOn offense, Abdul-Jabbar was a dominant low-post threat. In contrast to other low-post specialists like Wilt Chamberlain, Artis Gilmore or Shaquille O'Neal, Abdul-Jabbar was a relatively slender player, standing tall but only weighing (though in his latter years the Lakers listed Abdul-Jabbar's weight as ). However, he made up for his relative lack of bulk by showing textbook finesse, strength and was famous for his ambidextrous skyhook shot, which was impossible for defenders to block. It contributed to his high .559 field goal accuracy, making him the eighth most accurate scorer of all time and a feared clutch shooter. Abdul-Jabbar was also quick enough to run the Showtime fast break led by Magic Johnson and was well-conditioned, standing on the hardwood an average 36.8 minutes. In contrast to other big men, Abdul-Jabbar also could reasonably hit his free throws, finishing with a career 72% average.\n\nAbdul-Jabbar maintained a dominant presence on defense. He was selected to the NBA All-Defensive Team eleven times. He frustrated opponents with his superior shot-blocking ability and denied an average of 2.6 shots a game. After the pounding he endured early in his career, his rebounding average fell to between six or eight a game in his latter years.\n\nAs a teammate, Abdul-Jabbar exuded natural leadership and was affectionately called \"Cap\" or \"Captain\" by his colleagues. He had an even temperament, which Riley said made him coachable. A strict fitness regime made him one of the most durable players of all time. In the NBA, his 20 seasons and 1,560 games are performances surpassed only by former Celtics' center Robert Parish.\n\nAbdul-Jabbar was well known for his trademark \"skyhook\", a hook shot in which he bent his entire body (rather than just the arm) like a straw in one fluid motion to raise the ball and then release it at the highest point of his arm's arching motion. Combined with his long arms and great height——the skyhook was difficult for a defender to block without committing a goaltending violation. It was a reliable and feared offensive weapon and contributed to his high lifetime field goal percentage of 0.559. He was adept at shooting the skyhook with either hand, which made him even more difficult to defend against, though as a right-handed player, he was stronger shooting the skyhook with his right hand than he was with his left. According to Abdul-Jabbar, he learned the move in fifth grade after practicing with the Mikan Drill and soon learned to value it, as it was \"the only shot I could use that didn't get smashed back in my face\".\n\nAbdul-Jabbar is the NBA's all-time leading scorer with 38,387 points, and he won a league-record six MVP awards. He earned six championship rings, two Finals MVP awards, fifteen NBA First or Second Teams, a record nineteen NBA All-Star call-ups and averaging 24.6 points, 11.2 rebounds, 3.6 assists and 2.6 blocks per game. He is ranked as the NBA's third leading all-time rebounder (17,440). He is also the third all-time in registered blocks (3,189), which is even more impressive because this stat had not been recorded until the fourth year of his career (1974).\n\nAbdul-Jabbar combined dominance during his career peak with the longevity and sustained excellence of his later years. He credited Bruce Lee with teaching him \"the discipline and spirituality of martial arts, which was greatly responsible for me being able to play competitively in the NBA for 20 years with very few injuries.\" After claiming his sixth and final MVP in 1980, Abdul-Jabbar continued to average above 20 points in the following six seasons, including 23 points per game in his 17th season at age 38. He made the NBA's 35th Anniversary Team, and was named one of its 50 greatest players of all time in 1996. Abdul-Jabbar is regarded as one of the best centers ever, and league experts and basketball legends frequently mentioned him when considering the greatest player of all time. Former Lakers coach Pat Riley once said, \"Why judge anymore? When a man has broken records, won championships, endured tremendous criticism and responsibility, why judge? Let's toast him as the greatest player ever.\" Isiah Thomas remarked, \"If they say the numbers don't lie, then Kareem is the greatest ever to play the game.\" Julius Erving in 2013 said, \"In terms of players all-time, Kareem is still the number one guy. He's the guy you gotta start your franchise with.\" In 2015, ESPN named Abdul-Jabbar the best center in NBA history, and ranked him No. 2 behind Michael Jordan among the greatest NBA players ever. While Jordan's shots were enthralling and considered unfathomable, Abdul-Jabbar's skyhook appeared automatic, and he himself called the shot \"unsexy\".\n\nstyle=\"background:#CFECEC; width:3em\"*\nLed league\nstyle=\"background:#afe6ba; width:3em;\"†\nDenotes seasons in which Abdul-Jabbar's team won an NBA championship\nstyle=\"background:#E0CEF2; width:1em\"\nNBA record\n\n style=\"text-align:left;\" \nbgcolor=\"EOCEF2\"  18  13  24.9  .493  .000  .820  8.3  2.8  .4  2.1  13.9\n style=\"text-align:left;\"1970\n\nBULLET::::- Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame (May 15, 1995)\nBULLET::::- College:\nBULLET::::- 2× Associated Press College Basketball Player of the Year (1967, 1969)\nBULLET::::- 2× Oscar Robertson Trophy winner (1967, 1968)\nBULLET::::- 2× UPI College Basketball Player of the Year (1967, 1969)\nBULLET::::- Three-time First Team All-American (1967–1969)\nBULLET::::- Three-time NCAA champion (1967–1969)\nBULLET::::- Most Outstanding Player in NCAA Tournament (1967–1969)\nBULLET::::- Naismith College Player of the Year (1969)\nBULLET::::- 3× First-team All-Pac-8 (1967–1969)\nBULLET::::- National Collegiate Basketball Hall of Fame (2007)\nBULLET::::- National Basketball Association:\nBULLET::::- Rookie of the Year (1970)\nBULLET::::- Six-time NBA champion (1971, 1980, 1982, 1985, 1987, 1988)\nBULLET::::- NBA MVP (1971, 1972, 1974, 1976, 1977, 1980)\nBULLET::::- Sporting News NBA MVP (1971, 1972, 1974, 1976, 1977, 1980)\nBULLET::::- Finals MVP (1971, 1985)\nBULLET::::- \"Sports Illustrated\" magazine's \"Sportsman of the Year\" (1985)\nBULLET::::- One of the 50 Greatest Players in NBA History (1996)\nBULLET::::- First player in NBA history to play 20 seasons\nBULLET::::- Ranked No.2 in \"ESPN\"'s 100 greatest NBA players of all time #NBArank\nBULLET::::- November 16, 2012 – A statue of Abdul-Jabbar was unveiled in front of Staples Center on Chick Hearn Court, in Los Angeles.\n\nPlaying in Los Angeles facilitated Abdul-Jabbar's trying his hand at acting.\nHe made his film debut in Bruce Lee's 1972 film \"Game of Death\", in which his character Hakim fights Billy Lo (played by Lee).\n\nIn 1980, he played co-pilot Roger Murdock in \"Airplane!\". Abdul-Jabbar has a scene in which a little boy looks at him and remarks that he is in fact Abdul-Jabbar—spoofing the appearance of football star Elroy \"Crazylegs\" Hirsch as an airplane pilot in the 1957 drama that served as the inspiration for \"Airplane!\", \"Zero Hour!\". Staying in character, Abdul-Jabbar states that he is merely Roger Murdock, an airline co-pilot, but the boy continues to insist that Abdul-Jabbar is \"the greatest\", but that, according to his father, he doesn't \"work hard on defense\" and \"never really tries, except during the playoffs\". This causes Abdul-Jabbar's character to snap, \"The hell I don't!\", then grab the boy and snarl he has \"[heard] that crap ever since ... UCLA\", he \"busts his buns every night\" and the boy should tell his \"old man to drag [Bill] Walton and [Bob] Lanier up and down the court for 48 minutes\". When Murdock loses consciousness later in the film, he collapses at the controls wearing Abdul-Jabbar's goggles and yellow Lakers' shorts.\nAbdul-Jabbar has had numerous other television and film appearances, often playing himself. He has had roles in movies such as \"Fletch\", \"Troop Beverly Hills\" and \"Forget Paris\", and television series such as \"Full House\", \"Living Single\", \"Amen\", \"Everybody Loves Raymond\", \"Martin\", \"Diff'rent Strokes\" (his height humorously contrasted with that of diminutive child star Gary Coleman), \"The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air\", \"Scrubs\", \"21 Jump Street\", \"Emergency!\", \"Man from Atlantis\", and \"New Girl\". Abdul-Jabbar played a genie in a lamp in a 1984 episode of \"Tales from the Darkside\". He also played himself on the February 10, 1994 episode of the sketch comedy television series \"In Living Color\".\n\nHe also appeared in the television version of Stephen King's \"The Stand\", played the Archangel of Basketball in \"Slam Dunk Ernest\", and had a brief non-speaking cameo appearance in \"BASEketball\". Abdul-Jabbar was also the co-executive producer of the 1994 TV film \"Road to Freedom: The Vernon Johns Story\". He has also made appearances on \"The Colbert Report\", in a 2006 skit called \"HipHopKetball II: The ReJazzebration Remix '06\" and in 2008 as a stage manager who is sent out on a mission to find Nazi gold. Abdul-Jabbar also voiced himself in a 2011 episode of \"The Simpsons\" titled \"Love Is a Many Strangled Thing\". He had a recurring role as himself on the NBC series \"Guys with Kids\", which aired from 2012 to 2013. On Al Jazeera English he expressed his desire to be remembered not just as a player, but somebody who had many talents and used them.\n\nAbdul-Jabbar was selected to appear in the 2013 ABC reality series \"Splash\", a celebrity diving competition.\n\nAbdul-Jabbar has also created the 2011 documentary \"On the Shoulders of Giants\", based on the all-black basketball team New York Renaissance.\n\nAbdul-Jabbar has also appeared with Robert Hays (Ted Striker) in a 2014 \"Airplane!\" parody commercial promoting Wisconsin tourism. In 2015, he appeared in an HBO documentary on his life, \"Kareem: Minority of One\".\n\nIn April 2018, Abdul-Jabbar was announced as one of the celebrities who competed on season 26 of \"Dancing with the Stars\". He was partnered with professional dancer Lindsay Arnold.\n\nIn February 2019, he appeared in season 12 episode 16 of \"The Big Bang Theory\", \"The D&D Vortex\".\n\nIn September 2018, Abdul-Jabbar was announced as one of the writers for the July 2019 revival of \"Veronica Mars\".\n\nAbdul-Jabbar is also a best-selling author and cultural critic. His first book, his autobiography \"Giant Steps\", was written in 1983 with co-author Peter Knobler. (The book's title is an homage to jazz great John Coltrane, referring to his album \"Giant Steps\".) Others include \"On the Shoulders of Giants: My Journey Through the Harlem Renaissance\", co-written with Raymond Obstfeld, and \"Brothers in Arms: The Epic Story of the 761st Tank Battalion, World War II's Forgotten Heroes\", co-written with Anthony Walton, which is a history of an all-black armored unit that served with distinction in Europe.\n\nAbdul-Jabbar has also been a regular contributor to discussions about issues of race and religion, among other topics, in national magazines and on television. He has written a regular column for \"Time\", for example, and he appeared on \"Meet the Press\" on Sunday, January 25, 2015, to talk about a recent column, which pointed out that Islam should not be blamed for the actions of violent extremists, just as Christianity has not been blamed for the actions of violent extremists who profess Christianity. When asked about being Muslim, he said: \"I don't have any misgiving about my faith. I'm very concerned about the people who claim to be Muslims that are murdering people and creating all this mayhem in the world. That is not what Islam is about, and that should not be what people think of when they think about Muslims. But it's up to all of us to do something about all of it.\"\n\nIn November 2014, Abdul-Jabbar published an essay in \"Jacobin\" magazine calling for just compensation for college athletes, writing, \"in the name of fairness, we must bring an end to the indentured servitude of college athletes and start paying them what they are worth.\"\n\nIn 2007, Abdul-Jabbar participated in the national UCLA alumni commercial entitled \"My Big UCLA Moment\". The UCLA commercial is featured on YouTube.\n\nOn February 10, 2011, Abdul-Jabbar debuted his film \"On the Shoulders of Giants\", documenting the tumultuous journey of the famed yet often-overlooked Harlem Renaissance professional basketball team, at Science Park High School in Newark, New Jersey. The event was simulcast live throughout the school, city, and state.\n\nCommenting on Donald Trump's 2017 travel ban, he strongly condemned it, saying, \"The absence of reason and compassion is the very definition of pure evil because it is a rejection of our sacred values, distilled from millennia of struggle.\"\n\nIn January 2012, United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton announced that Abdul-Jabbar had accepted a position as a cultural ambassador for the United States. During the announcement press conference, Abdul-Jabbar commented on the historical legacy of African-Americans as representatives of U.S. culture: \"I remember when Louis Armstrong first did it back for President Kennedy, one of my heroes. So it's nice to be following in his footsteps.\" As part of this role, Abdul-Jabbar has traveled to Brazil to promote education for local youths.\n\nFormer President Barack Obama announced in his last days of office that he has appointed Abdul-Jabbar along with Gabrielle Douglas & Carli Lloyd to the President's Council on Fitness, Sports, and Nutrition.\n\nIn January 2017, Abdul-Jabbar was appointed to the Citizens Coinage Advisory Committee by United States Secretary of the Treasury Steven Mnuchin. According to the United States Mint, Abdul-Jabbar is a keen coin collector whose interest in the life of Alexander Hamilton had led him into the hobby. He resigned in 2018 due to what the Mint described as \"increasing personal obligations\".\n\nAbdul-Jabbar met Habiba Abdul-Jabbar (born Janice Brown) at a Lakers game during his senior year at UCLA. They eventually married and together had three children: daughters Habiba and Sultana and son Kareem Jr, who played basketball at Western Kentucky after attending Valparaiso. Abdul-Jabbar and Janice divorced in 1978. He has another son, Amir, with Cheryl Pistono. Another son, Adam, made an appearance on the TV sitcom \"Full House\" with him.\n\nAt age 24 in 1971, he converted to Islam and became Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, which means \"noble one, servant of the Almighty.\" He was named by Hamaas Abdul Khaalis. Abdul-Jabbar purchased and donated 7700 16th Street NW, a house in Washington, D.C., for Khaalis to use as the Hanafi Madh-Hab Center. Eventually, Kareem \"found that [he] disagreed with some of Hamaas' teachings about the Quran, and [they] parted ways.\"\n\nAbdul-Jabbar has spoken about the thinking that was behind his name change when he converted to Islam. He stated that he was \"latching on to something that was part of my heritage, because many of the slaves who were brought here were Muslims. My family was brought to America by a French planter named Alcindor, who came here from Trinidad in the 18th century. My people were Yoruba, and their culture survived slavery...  My father found out about that when I was a kid, and it gave me all I needed to know that, hey, I was somebody, even if nobody else knew about it. When I was a kid, no one would believe anything positive that you could say about black people. And that's a terrible burden on black people, because they don't have an accurate idea of their history, which has been either suppressed or distorted.\"\n\nIn 1998, Abdul-Jabbar reached a settlement after he sued Miami Dolphins running back Karim Abdul-Jabbar (now Abdul-Karim al-Jabbar, born Sharmon Shah) because he felt Karim was sponging off the name he made famous by having the Abdul-Jabbar moniker and number 33 on his Dolphins jersey. As a result, the younger Abdul-Jabbar had to change his jersey nameplate to simply \"Abdul\" while playing for the Dolphins. The football player had also been an athlete at UCLA.\n\nAbdul-Jabbar suffers from migraines, and his use of cannabis to reduce the symptoms has had legal ramifications.\n\nIn November 2009, Abdul-Jabbar announced that he was suffering from a form of leukemia, Philadelphia chromosome-positive chronic myeloid leukemia, a cancer of the blood and bone marrow. The disease was diagnosed in December 2008, but Abdul-Jabbar said his condition could be managed by taking oral medication daily, seeing his specialist every other month and having his blood analyzed regularly. He expressed in a 2009 press conference that he did not believe that the illness would stop him from leading a normal life. Abdul-Jabbar is now a spokesman for Novartis, the company that produces his cancer medication, Gleevec.\n\nIn February 2011, Abdul-Jabbar announced via Twitter that his leukemia was gone and he was \"100% cancer free\". A few days later, he clarified his misstatement. \"You're never really cancer-free and I should have known that\", Abdul-Jabbar said. \"My cancer right now is at an absolute minimum\".\n\nIn April 2015, Abdul-Jabbar was admitted to hospital when he was diagnosed with cardiovascular disease. Later that week, on his 68th birthday, he underwent quadruple coronary bypass surgery at the UCLA Medical Center.\n\nIn 2011, Abdul-Jabbar was awarded the Double Helix Medal for his work in raising awareness for cancer research. Also in 2011, Abdul-Jabbar received an honorary degree from New York Institute of Technology. In late 2016, Abdul-Jabbar was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by outgoing U.S. President Barack Obama.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Kareem\", with Mignon McCarthy (1990)\nBULLET::::- \"Selected from Giant Steps (Writers' Voices)\" (1999)\nBULLET::::- \"Black Profiles in Courage: A Legacy of African-American Achievement\", with Alan Steinberg (1996)\nBULLET::::- \"A Season on the Reservation: My Sojourn with the White Mountain Apaches\", with Stephen Singular (2000)\nBULLET::::- \"Brothers in Arms: The Epic Story of the 761st Tank Battalion, World War II's Forgotten Heroes\" with Anthony Walton (2004)\nBULLET::::- \"On the Shoulders of Giants: My Journey Through the Harlem Renaissance\" with Raymond Obstfeld (2007)\nBULLET::::- \"What Color Is My World? The Lost History of African American Inventors\" with Raymond Obstfeld (2012)\nBULLET::::- \"Streetball Crew Book One Sasquatch in the Paint\" with Raymond Obstfeld (2013)\nBULLET::::- \"Streetball Crew Book Two Stealing the Game\" with Raymond Obstfeld (2015)\nBULLET::::- \"Mycroft Holmes\" with Anna Waterhouse (September 2015)\nBULLET::::- \"Writings on the Wall: Searching for a New Equality Beyond Black and White\" with Raymond Obstfeld (2016)\nBULLET::::- \"Coach Wooden and Me: Our 50-Year Friendship On and Off the Court\" (2017)\nBULLET::::- \"Becoming Kareem: Growing Up On and Off the Court\" (2017)\nBULLET::::- \"Mycroft and Sherlock\" with Anna Waterhouse (October 9, 2018)\nBULLET::::- \"\" with Anna Waterhouse (September 24, 2019)\n\nBULLET::::- \"On the Shoulders of Giants: An Audio Journey Through the Harlem Renaissance\" 8-CD Set Vol. 1–4, with Avery Brooks, Jesse L. Martin, Maya Angelou, Herbie Hancock, Billy Crystal, Charles Barkley, James Worthy, Julius Erving, Jerry West, Clyde Drexler, Bill Russell, Coach John Wooden, Stanley Crouch, Quincy Jones and other chart-topping musicians, as well as legendary actors and performers such as Samuel L. Jackson. (2008)\n\n"}
{"id": "16900", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16900", "title": "Kung fu (term)", "text": "Kung fu (term)\n\nIn general, kung fu/kungfu or gung fu/gongfu ( or ; , Pinyin: \"gōngfu\") refers to the Chinese martial arts, also called wushu and quanfa. In China, it refers to any study, learning, or practice that requires patience, energy, and time to complete. In its original meaning, kung fu can refer to any discipline or skill achieved through hard work and practice, not necessarily martial arts. The Chinese literal equivalent of \"Chinese martial art\" would be \"\".\n\nThere are many forms of kung fu, namely Shaolin Kung Fu, Wing Chun, Tai chi, etc. and are practiced all over the world. Each form of kung fu has its own principles and techniques, but is best known for its trickery and quickness, which is where the word Kung Fu is derived. It is only in the late twentieth century, that this term was used in relation to Chinese martial arts by the Chinese community. The \"Oxford English Dictionary\" defines the term \"kung-fu\" as \"a primarily unarmed Chinese martial art resembling karate.\" This illustrates how the meaning of this term has been changed in English. The origin of this change can be attributed to the misunderstanding or mistranslation of the term through movie subtitles or dubbing.\n\nReferences to the concepts and use of Chinese martial arts can be found in popular culture. Historically, the influence of Chinese martial arts can be found in books and in the performance arts specific to Asia. Recently, those influences have extended to the movies and television that targets a much wider audience. As a result, Chinese martial arts have spread beyond its ethnic roots and have a global appeal.\n\nMartial arts play a prominent role in the literature genre known as wuxia (武俠小說). This type of fiction is based on Chinese concepts of chivalry, a separate martial arts society (武林; \"Wulin\") and a central theme involving martial arts. Wuxia stories can be traced as far back as 2nd and 3rd century BCE, becoming popular by the Tang Dynasty and evolving into novel form by the Ming Dynasty. This genre is still extremely popular in much of Asia and provides a major influence for the public perception of the martial arts.\n\nMartial arts influences can also be found in dance, theater and especially Chinese opera, of which Beijing opera is one of the best-known examples. This popular form of drama dates back to the Tang Dynasty and continues to be an example of Chinese culture. Some martial arts movements can be found in Chinese opera and some martial artists can be found as performers in Chinese operas.\n\nIn modern times, Chinese martial arts have spawned the genre of cinema known as the Kung fu film. The films of Bruce Lee were instrumental in the initial burst of Chinese martial arts' popularity in the West in the 1970s. Bruce Lee was the iconic international superstar that popularized Chinese martial arts in the West. The influence of Chinese martial art have been widely recognized and have a global appeal in Western cinemas starting off with Bruce Lee.\n\nMartial artists and actors such as Jet Li and Jackie Chan have continued the appeal of movies of this genre. Jackie Chan successfully brought in a sense of humour in his fighting style in his movies. Martial arts films from China are often referred to as \"kung fu movies\" (功夫片), or \"wire-fu\" if extensive wire work is performed for special effects, and are still best known as part of the tradition of kung fu theater. (see also: wuxia, Hong Kong action cinema). The talent of these individuals have broadened Hong Kong's cinematography production and rose to popularity overseas, influencing Western cinemas.\n\nIn the west, kung fu has become a regular action staple, and makes appearances in many films that would not generally be considered \"Martial Arts\" films. These films include but are not limited to \"The Matrix Trilogy\", \"Kill Bill\", and \"The Transporter\".\n\nMartial arts themes can also be found on television networks. A U.S. network TV western series of the early 1970s called \"Kung Fu\" also served in an attempt to mainstream the Chinese martial arts on television. With 60 episodes over a three-year span, it was one of the first North American TV shows that tried to convey the philosophy and practice in Chinese martial arts. The use of Chinese martial arts techniques can now be found in most TV action series, although the philosophy of Chinese martial arts is seldom portrayed in depth. In 2003, the Fuse (TV channel) began airing episodes of a half hour television show titled Kung Faux that married classic kung fu films with hip hop sensibilities and comic affects to gain resilient critical success.\n\nIn the 1970s, Bruce Lee was beginning to gain popularity in Hollywood for his martial arts movies. The fact that he was a non-white male who portrayed self-reliance and righteous self-discipline resonated with black audiences and made him an important figure in this community. With the release of \"Enter the Dragon\" in 1973, Kung Fu movies became a hit in America across all backgrounds; however, black audiences maintained the films’ popularity well after the general public lost interest. Urban youth in New York City were still going from every borough to Times Square every night to watch the latest movies. Amongst these individuals were those coming from the Bronx where, during this time, hip hop was beginning to take form. One of the pioneers responsible for the development of the foundational aspects of hip-hop was DJ Kool Herc, who began creating this new form of music by taking rhythmic breakdowns of songs and looping them. From the new music came a new form of dance known as b-boying or breakdancing, a style of street dance consisting of improvised acrobatic moves. The pioneers of this dance credit kung fu as one of its influences. Moves such as the crouching low leg sweep and “up rocking” (standing combat moves) are influenced by choreographed kung-fu fights. The dancers’ ability to improvise these moves led way to battles, which were dance competitions between two dancers or crews judged on their creativity, skills and musicality. In a documentary, Crazy Legs, a member of breakdancing group Rock Steady Crew, described the breakdancing battle being like an old kung fu movie, “where the one kung fu master says something along the lines of ‘hun your kung fu is good, but mine is better,’ then a fight erupts.”\n"}
{"id": "16903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16903", "title": "Kuomintang", "text": "Kuomintang\n\nThe Kuomintang of China (KMT), also often alternatively translated as the Chinese Nationalist Party (CNP), is a major political party in the Republic of China based in Taipei. Formed in 1919, the KMT was formerly the sole ruling party of the Republic of China from 1928 to 2000 and is currently an opposition political party in the Legislative Yuan.\n\nThe predecessor of the Kuomintang, the Revolutionary Alliance (Tongmenghui), was one of the major advocates of the overthrow of the Qing dynasty and the subsequent revolt in 1911 and proclamation of the Republic of China. The KMT was founded by Song Jiaoren and Sun Yat-sen shortly after the Xinhai Revolution of 1911. Sun was the provisional President, but he later ceded the presidency to Yuan Shikai. Later led by Chiang Kai-shek, the KMT formed the National Revolutionary Army and succeeded in its Northern Expedition to unify much of mainland China in 1928, ending the chaos of the Warlord Era. It was the ruling party in mainland China until 1949, when it lost the Chinese Civil War to the rival Communist Party of China. The KMT fled to Taiwan where it continued to govern as an authoritarian one-party state. This government retained China's United Nations seat (with considerable Western support) until 1971.\n\nTaiwan ceased to be a single-party state in 1986 and political reforms beginning in the 1990s loosened the KMT's grip on power. Nevertheless, the KMT remains one of Taiwan's main political parties, with Ma Ying-jeou, elected in 2008 and re-elected in 2012, being the seventh KMT member to hold the office of the presidency. In the 2016 general and presidential election, the KMT was defeated in both elections and the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) gained control of both the Legislative Yuan and the presidency, Tsai Ing-wen being elected President.\n\nThe party's guiding ideology is the Three Principles of the People, advocated by Sun Yat-sen. The KMT is a member of the International Democrat Union. Together with the People First Party and New Party, the KMT forms what is known as the Taiwanese Pan-Blue Coalition which supports eventual unification with the mainland. However, the KMT has been forced to moderate its stance by advocating the political and legal \"status quo\" of modern Taiwan as political realities make the reunification of China unlikely. The KMT holds to the one-China policy in that it officially considers that there is only one China, but that the Republic of China rather than the People's Republic of China is its legitimate government under the 1992 Consensus. In order to ease tensions with the PRC, the KMT has since 2008 endorsed the Three Noes policy as defined by Ma Ying-jeou, namely no unification, no independence and no use of force.\n\nThe KMT traces its ideological and organizational roots to the work of Sun Yat-sen, a proponent of Chinese nationalism and democracy who founded Revive China Society at the capital of the Republic of Hawaii, Honolulu on 24 November 1894. In 1905, Sun joined forces with other anti-monarchist societies in Tokyo, Empire of Japan to form the Tongmenghui on 20 August 1905, a group committed to the overthrow of the Qing Dynasty and the establishment of a republic style government.\n\nThe group planned and supported the Xinhai Revolution of 1911 and the founding of the Republic of China on 1 January 1912. However, Sun did not have military power and ceded the provisional presidency of the republic to Yuan Shikai, who arranged for the abdication of Puyi, the last Emperor, on 12 February.\n\nOn 25 August 1912, the Nationalist Party was established at the Huguang Guild Hall in Peking, where Tongmenghui and five smaller pro-revolution parties merged to contest the first national elections. Sun was chosen as the party chairman with Huang Xing as his deputy.\n\nThe most influential member of the party was the third ranking Song Jiaoren, who mobilized mass support from gentry and merchants for the Nationalists to advocate a constitutional parliamentary democracy. The party opposed constitutional monarchists and sought to check the power of Yuan. The Nationalists won an overwhelming majority of the first National Assembly election in December 1912.\n\nHowever, Yuan soon began to ignore the parliament in making presidential decisions. Song Jiaoren was assassinated in Shanghai in 1913. Members of the Nationalists led by Sun Yat-sen suspected that Yuan was behind the plot and thus staged the Second Revolution in July 1913, a poorly planned and ill-supported armed rising to overthrow Yuan, and failed. Yuan, claiming subversiveness and betrayal, expelled adherents of the KMT from the parliament. Yuan dissolved the Nationalists in November (whose members had largely fled into exile in Japan) and dismissed the parliament early in 1914.\n\nYuan Shikai proclaimed himself emperor in December 1915. While exiled in Japan in 1914, Sun established the Chinese Revolutionary Party on 8 July 1914, but many of his old revolutionary comrades, including Huang Xing, Wang Jingwei, Hu Hanmin and Chen Jiongming, refused to join him or support his efforts in inciting armed uprising against Yuan. In order to join the Revolutionary Party, members had to take an oath of personal loyalty to Sun, which many old revolutionaries regarded as undemocratic and contrary to the spirit of the revolution. As a result, he became largely sidelined within the Republican movement during this period.\n\nSun returned to China in 1917 to establish a military junta at Canton in order to oppose the Beiyang government, but was soon forced out of office and exiled to Shanghai. There, with renewed support, he resurrected the KMT on 10 October 1919, under the name Kuomintang of China () and established its headquarters in Canton in 1920.\n\nIn 1923, the KMT and its Canton government accepted aid from the Soviet Union after being denied recognition by the western powers. Soviet advisers—the most prominent of whom was Mikhail Borodin, an agent of the Comintern—arrived in China in 1923 to aid in the reorganization and consolidation of the KMT along the lines of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, establishing a Leninist party structure that lasted into the 1990s. The Communist Party of China (CPC) was under Comintern instructions to cooperate with the KMT, and its members were encouraged to join while maintaining their separate party identities, forming the First United Front between the two parties. Mao Zedong and early members of the CPC also joined the KMT in 1923.\nSoviet advisers also helped the KMT to set up a political institute to train propagandists in mass mobilization techniques, and in 1923 Chiang Kai-shek, one of Sun's lieutenants from the Tongmenghui days, was sent to Moscow for several months' military and political study. At the first party congress in 1924 in Kwangchow, Kwangtung, (Guanzhou, Guangdong) which included non-KMT delegates such as members of the CPC, they adopted Sun's political theory, which included the Three Principles of the People - nationalism, democracy and people's livelihood.\n\nWhen Sun Yat-sen died in 1925, the political leadership of the KMT fell to Wang Jingwei and Hu Hanmin, respectively the left-wing and right-wing leaders of the party. However, the real power was in the hands of Chiang Kai-shek, who was in near complete control of the military as the superintendent of the Whampoa Military Academy. With their military superiority, KMT confirmed their rule on Canton, the provincial capital of Kwangtung. The Guangxi warlords pledged loyalty to the KMT. The KMT now became a rival government in opposition to the warlord Beiyang government based in Peking.\n\nChiang assumed leadership of the KMT on 6 July 1926. Unlike Sun Yat-sen, whom he admired greatly and who forged all his political, economic, and revolutionary ideas primarily from what he had learned in Hawaii and indirectly through British Hong Kong and Empire of Japan under Meiji Restoration, Chiang knew relatively little about the West. He also studied in Japan, but he was firmly rooted in his ancient Han Chinese identity and was steeped in Chinese culture. As his life progressed, he became increasingly attached to ancient Chinese culture and traditions. His few trips to the West confirmed his pro-ancient Chinese outlook and he studied the ancient Chinese classics and ancient Chinese history assiduously. In 1923, Sun Yat-sen sent Chiang to spend three months in Moscow studying the political and military system of the Soviet Union. Chiang met Leon Trotsky and other Soviet leaders, but quickly came to the conclusion that the Soviet communist, Marxist and socialist model of government was not suitable for China. This laid the beginning of his lifelong antagonism against communism.\n\nChiang was also particularly committed to Sun's idea of \"political tutelage\". Sun believed that the only hope for a unified and better China lies in a military conquest, followed by a period of political tutelage that would culminate in the transition to democracy. Using this ideology, Chiang built himself into the dictator of the Republic of China, both in the Chinese mainland and when the national government was relocated to Taiwan.\n\nFollowing the death of Sun Yat-sen, Chiang Kai-shek emerged as the KMT leader and launched the Northern Expedition to defeat the northern warlords and unite China under the party. With its power confirmed in the southeast, the Nationalist Government appointed Chiang Kai-shek commander-in-chief of the National Revolutionary Army (NRA), and the Northern Expedition to suppress the warlords began. Chiang had to defeat three separate warlords and two independent armies. Chiang, with Soviet supplies, conquered the southern half of China in nine months.\n\nA split erupted between the Chinese Communist Party and the KMT, which threatened the Northern Expedition. Wang Jing Wei, who led the KMT leftist allies, took the city of Wuhan in January 1927. With the support of the Soviet agent Mikhail Borodin, Wang declared the National Government as having moved to Wuhan. Having taken Nanking in March, Chiang halted his campaign and prepared a violent break with Wang and his communist allies. Chiang's expulsion of the CPC and their Soviet advisers, marked by the Shanghai massacre on April 12, led to the beginning of the Chinese Civil War. Wang finally surrendered his power to Chiang. Joseph Stalin ordered the Chinese Communist Party to obey the KMT leadership. Once this split had been healed, Chiang resumed his Northern Expedition and managed to take Shanghai.\nDuring the Nanking Incident in March 1927, the NRA stormed the consulates of the United States, United Kingdom (UK) and Empire of Japan, looted foreign properties and almost assassinated the Japanese consul. An American, two British, one French, an Italian and a Japanese were killed. These looters also stormed and seized millions of dollars worth of British concessions in Hankou, refusing to hand them back to the UK. Both Nationalists and Communist soldiers within the army participated in the rioting and looting of foreign residents in Nanking.\n\nNRA took Peking in 1928. The city was the internationally recognized capital, even when it was previously controlled by warlords. This event allowed the KMT to receive widespread diplomatic recognition in the same year. The capital was moved from Peking to Nanking, the original capital of the Ming Dynasty, and thus a symbolic purge of the final Qing elements. This period of KMT rule in China between 1927 and 1937 was relatively stable and prosperous and is still known as the Nanjing decade.\n\nAfter the Northern Expedition in 1928, the Nationalist government under the KMT declared that China had been exploited for decades under the unequal treaties signed between the foreign powers and the Qing Dynasty. The KMT government demanded that the foreign powers renegotiate the treaties on equal terms.\n\nBefore the Northern Expedition, the KMT began as a heterogeneous group advocating American-inspired federalism and provincial autonomy. However, the KMT under Chiang's leadership aimed at establishing a centralized one-party state with one ideology. This was even more evident following Sun's elevation into a cult figure after his death. The control by one single party began the period of \"political tutelage\", whereby the party was to lead the government while instructing the people on how to participate in a democratic system. The topic of reorganizing the army, brought up at a military conference in 1929, sparked the Central Plains War. The cliques, some of them former warlords, demanded to retain their army and political power within their own territories. Although Chiang finally won the war, the conflicts among the cliques would have a devastating effect on the survival of the KMT. Muslim Generals in Kansu waged war against the Guominjun in favor of the KMT during the conflict in Gansu in 1927-1930.\n\nAlthough the Second Sino-Japanese War officially broke out in 1937, Japanese aggression started in 1931 when they staged the Mukden Incident and occupied Manchuria. At the same time, the CPC had been secretly recruiting new members within the KMT government and military. Chiang was alarmed by the expansion of the communist influence. He believed that in order to fight against foreign aggression, the KMT must solve its internal conflicts first, so he started his second attempt to exterminate CPC members in 1934. With the advice from German military advisors, the KMT forced the Communists to withdraw from their bases in southern and central China into the mountains in a massive military retreat known as the Long March. Less than 10% of the communist army survived the long retreat to Shaanxi province, but they re-established their military base quickly with aid from the Soviet Union.\n\nThe KMT was also known to have used terror tactics against suspected communists, through the utilization of a secret police force, who were employed to maintain surveillance on suspected communists and political opponents. In \"The Birth of Communist China\", C.P. Fitzgerald describes China under the rule of the KMT thus: \"the Chinese people groaned under a regime Fascist in every quality except efficiency.\"\n\nZhang Xueliang, who believed that the Japanese invasion was a greater threat, was persuaded by the CPC to take Chiang hostage during the Xi'an Incident in 1937 and forced Chiang to agree to an alliance with them in the total war against the Japanese. However, in many situations the alliance was in name only; after a brief period of cooperation, the armies began to fight the Japanese separately, rather than as coordinated allies. Conflicts between KMT and CPC were still common during the war, and documented claims abound of CPC attacks upon the KMT forces and vice versa.\n\nWhile the KMT army received heavy casualties fighting the Japanese, the CPC expanded its territory by guerrilla tactics within Japanese occupied regions, leading some claims that the CPC often refused to support the KMT troops, choosing to withdraw and let the KMT troops take the brunt of Japanese attacks.\nAfter Japan surrendered in 1945, Taiwan was returned to the Republic of China on 25 October 1945. The brief period of celebration was soon shadowed by the possibility of a civil war between the KMT and CPC. The Soviet Union declared war on Japan just before it surrendered and occupied Manchuria, the north eastern part of China. The Soviet Union denied the KMT army the right to enter the region and allowed the CPC to take control of the Japanese factories and their supplies.\n\nFull-scale civil war between the Communists and the Nationalists erupted in 1946. The Communist Chinese armies, the People's Liberation Army (PLA), previously a minor faction, grew rapidly in influence and power due to several errors on the KMT's part. First, the KMT reduced troop levels precipitously after the Japanese surrender, leaving large numbers of able-bodied, trained fighting men who became unemployed and disgruntled with the KMT as prime recruits for the PLA. Second, the KMT government proved thoroughly unable to manage the economy, allowing hyperinflation to result. Among the most despised and ineffective efforts it undertook to contain inflation was the conversion to the gold standard for the national treasury and the Gold Standard Scrip in August 1948, outlawing private ownership of gold, silver and foreign exchange, collecting all such precious metals and foreign exchange from the people and issuing the Gold Standard Scrip in exchange. As most farmland in the north were under CPC's control, the cities governed by the KMT lacked food supply and this added to the hyperinflation. The new scrip became worthless in only ten months and greatly reinforced the nationwide perception of the KMT as a corrupt or at best inept entity. Third, Chiang Kai-shek ordered his forces to defend the urbanized cities. This decision gave CPC a chance to move freely through the countryside. At first, the KMT had the edge with the aid of weapons and ammunition from the United States (US). However, with the country suffering from hyperinflation, widespread corruption and other economic ills, the KMT continued to lose popular support. Some leading officials and military leaders of the KMT hoarded material, armament and military-aid funding provided by the US. This became an issue which proved to be a hindrance of its relationship with US government. US President Harry S. Truman wrote that \"the Chiangs, the Kungs and the Soongs (were) all thieves\", having taken $750 million in US aid.\n\nAt the same time, the suspension of American aid and tens of thousands of deserted or decommissioned soldiers being recruited to the PLA cause tipped the balance of power quickly to the CPC side, and the overwhelming popular support for the CPC in most of the country made it all but impossible for the KMT forces to carry out successful assaults against the Communists.\n\nBy the end of 1949, the CPC controlled almost all of mainland China, as the KMT retreated to Taiwan with a significant amount of China's national treasures and 2 million people, including military forces and refugees. Some party members stayed in the mainland and broke away from the main KMT to found the Revolutionary Committee of the Kuomintang, which still currently exists as one of the eight minor registered parties of the People's Republic of China.\n\nIn 1895, Formosa (now called Taiwan), including the Penghu islands, became a Japanese colony via the Treaty of Shimonoseki following the First Sino-Japanese War.\n\nAfter Japan's defeat at the end of World War II in 1945, General Order No. 1 instructed Japan to surrender its troops in Taiwan to Chiang Kai-shek. On 25 October 1945, KMT general Chen Yi acted on behalf of the Allied Powers to accept Japan's surrender and proclaimed that day as Taiwan Retrocession Day.\n\nTensions between the local Taiwanese and mainlanders from Mainland China increased in the intervening years, culminating in a flashpoint on 27 February 1947 in Taipei when a dispute between a female cigarette vendor and an anti-smuggling officer in front of Tianma Tea House triggered civil disorder and protests that would last for days. The uprising turned bloody and was shortly put down by the ROC Army in the February 28 Incident. As a result of the February 28 Incident in 1947, Taiwanese people endured what is called the \"White Terror\", a KMT-led political repression that resulted in the death or disappearance of over 30,000 Taiwanese intellectuals, activists, and people suspected of opposition to the KMT.\n\nFollowing the establishment of the People's Republic of China (PRC) on 1 October 1949, the commanders of the People's Liberation Army (PLA) believed that Kinmen and Matsu had to be taken before a final assault on Taiwan. The KMT fought the Battle of Guningtou on 25–27 October 1949 and stopped the PLA invasion. The KMT headquarter was set up on 10 December 1949 at No. 11 Zhongshan South Road. In 1950, Chiang took office in Taipei under the Temporary Provisions Effective During the Period of Communist Rebellion. The provision declared martial law in Taiwan and halted some democratic processes, including presidential and parliamentary elections, until the mainland could be recovered from the CPC. The KMT estimated it would take 3 years to defeat the Communists. The slogan was \"prepare in the first year, start fighting in the second, and conquer in the third year.\" Chiang also initiated the Project National Glory to retake back the mainland in 1965, but was eventually dropped in July 1972 after many unsuccessful attempts.\n\nHowever, various factors, including international pressure, are believed to have prevented the KMT from militarily engaging the CPC full-scale. The KMT backed Muslim insurgents formerly belonging to the National Revolutionary Army during the KMT Islamic insurgency in 1950–1958 in Mainland China. A cold war with a couple of minor military conflicts was resulted in the early years. The various government bodies previously in Nanjing, that were re-established in Taipei as the KMT-controlled government, actively claimed sovereignty over all China. The Republic of China in Taiwan retained China's seat in the United Nations until 1971.\n\nUntil the 1970s, the KMT successfully pushed ahead with land reforms, developed the economy, implemented a democratic system in a lower level of the government, improved relations between Taiwan and the mainland and created the Taiwan economic miracle. However, the KMT controlled the government under a one-party authoritarian state until reforms in the late 1970s through the 1990s. The ROC in Taiwan was once referred to synonymously with the KMT and known simply as Nationalist China after its ruling party. In the 1970s, the KMT began to allow for \"supplemental elections\" in Taiwan to fill the seats of the aging representatives in the National Assembly.\n\nAlthough opposition parties were not permitted, Tangwai (\"outside the KMT\") representatives were tolerated. In the 1980s, the KMT focused on transforming the government from a single-party system to a multi-party democratic one and embracing \"Taiwanization\". With the founding of the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) on 28 September 1986, the KMT started competing against the DPP in Parliamentary elections.\n\nIn 1991, martial law ceased when President Lee Teng-hui terminated the Temporary Provisions Effective During the Period of Communist Rebellion. All parties started to be allowed to compete at all levels of elections, including the presidential election. Lee Teng-hui, the ROC's first democratically elected President and the leader of the KMT during the 1990s, announced his advocacy of \"special state-to-state relations\" with the PRC. The PRC associated this idea with Taiwan independence.\n\nThe KMT faced a split in 1993 that led to the formation of the New Party in August 1993, alleged to be a result of Lee's \"corruptive ruling style\". The New Party has, since the purging of Lee, largely reintegrated into the KMT. A much more serious split in the party occurred as a result of the 2000 Presidential election. Upset at the choice of Lien Chan as the party's presidential nominee, former party Secretary-General James Soong launched an independent bid, which resulted in the expulsion of Soong and his supporters and the formation of the People First Party (PFP) on 31 March 2000. The KMT candidate placed third behind Soong in the elections. After the election, Lee's strong relationship with the opponent became apparent. In order to prevent defections to the PFP, Lien moved the party away from Lee's pro-independence policies and became more favorable toward Chinese reunification. This shift led to Lee's expulsion from the party and the formation of the Taiwan Solidarity Union (TSU) by Lee supporters on 24 July 2001.\nPrior to this, the party's voters had defected to both the PFP and TSU, and the KMT did poorly in the December 2001 legislative elections and lost its position as the largest party in the Legislative Yuan. However, the party did well in the 2002 local government mayoral and council election with Ma Ying-jeou, its candidate for Taipei mayor, winning reelection by a landslide and its candidate for Kaohsiung mayor narrowly losing but doing surprisingly well. Since 2002, the KMT and PFP have coordinated electoral strategies. In 2004, the KMT and PFP ran a joint presidential ticket, with Lien running for president and Soong running for vice-president.\n\nThe loss of the presidential election of 2004 to DPP President Chen Shui-bian by merely over 30,000 votes was a bitter disappointment to party members, leading to large scale rallies for several weeks protesting alleged electoral fraud and the \"odd circumstances\" of the shooting of President Chen. However, the fortunes of the party were greatly improved when the KMT did well in the legislative elections held in December 2004 by maintaining its support in southern Taiwan achieving a majority for the Pan-Blue Coalition.\n\nSoon after the election, there appeared to be a falling out with the KMT's junior partner, the People First Party and talk of a merger seemed to have ended. This split appeared to widen in early 2005, as the leader of the PFP, James Soong appeared to be reconciling with President Chen Shui-Bian and the Democratic Progressive Party. Many PFP members including legislators and municipal leaders have defected to the KMT, and the PFP is seen as a fading party.\n\nIn 2005, Ma Ying-jeou became KMT chairman defeating speaker Wang Jin-pyng in the first public election for KMT chairmanship. The KMT won a decisive victory in the 3-in-1 local elections of December 2005, replacing the DPP as the largest party at the local level. This was seen as a major victory for the party ahead of legislative elections in 2007. There were elections for the two municipalities of the ROC, Taipei and Kaohsiung on December 2006. The KMT won a clear victory in Taipei, but lost to the DPP in the southern city of Kaohsiung by the slim margin of 1,100 votes.\n\nOn 13 February 2007, Ma was indicted by the Taiwan High Prosecutors Office on charges of allegedly embezzling approximately NT$11 million (US$339,000), regarding the issue of \"special expenses\" while he was mayor of Taipei. Shortly after the indictment, he submitted his resignation as KMT chairman at the same press conference at which he formally announced his candidacy for ROC President. Ma argued that it was customary for officials to use the special expense fund for personal expenses undertaken in the course of their official duties. In December 2007, Ma was acquitted of all charges and immediately filed suit against the prosecutors. In 2008, the KMT won a landslide victory in the Republic of China Presidential Election on 22 March 2008. The KMT fielded former Taipei mayor and former KMT chairman Ma Ying-jeou to run against the DPP's Frank Hsieh. Ma won by a butt of 17% against Hsieh. Ma took office on 20 May 2008, with Vice-Presidential candidate Vincent Siew, and ended 8 years of the DPP presidency. The KMT also won a landslide victory in the 2008 legislative elections, winning 81 of 113 seats, or 71.7% of seats in the Legislative Yuan. These two elections gave the KMT firm control of both the executive and legislative yuans.\n\nOn 25 June 2009, President Ma launched his bid to regain KMT's leadership and registered as the sole candidate for the election of the KMT chairmanship. On July 26, Ma won 93.87% of the vote, becoming the new chairman of the KMT, taking office on 17 October 2009. This officially allows Ma to be able to meet with Xi Jinping, the General Secretary of the Communist Party of China and other PRC delegates, as he is able to represent the KMT as leader of a Chinese political party, rather than as head-of-state of a political entity unrecognized by the PRC.\n\nOn 29 November 2014, the KMT suffered a heavy loss in the local election to the DPP, winning only 6 municipalities and counties, down from 14 in the previous election in 2009 and 2010. Ma Ying-jeou subsequently resigned from the party chairmanship on 3 December and replaced by acting Chairman Wu Den-yih. Chairmanship election was held on 17 January 2015 and Eric Chu was elected to become the new chairman. He was inaugurated on 19 February.\n\nAs the ruling party on Taiwan, the KMT amassed a vast business empire of banks, investment companies, petrochemical firms, and television and radio stations, thought to have made it the world's richest political party, with assets once estimated to be around US$2–10 billion. Although this war chest appeared to help the KMT until the mid-1990s, it later led to accusations of corruption (often referred to as \"black gold\").\n\nAfter 2000, the KMT's financial holdings appeared to be more of a liability than a benefit, and the KMT started to divest itself of its assets. However, the transactions were not disclosed and the whereabouts of the money earned from selling assets (if it has gone anywhere) is unknown. There were accusations in the 2004 presidential election that the KMT retained assets that were illegally acquired. During the 2000-2008 DPP presidency, a law was proposed by the DPP in the Legislative Yuan to recover illegally acquired party assets and return them to the government. However, due to the DPP's lack of control of the legislative chamber at the time, it never materialised.\n\nThe KMT also acknowledged that part of its assets were acquired through extra-legal means and thus promised to \"retro-endow\" them to the government. However, the quantity of the assets which should be classified as illegal are still under heated debate. DPP, in its capacity as ruling party from 2000–2008, claimed that there is much more that the KMT has yet to acknowledge. Also, the KMT actively sold assets under its title in order to quench its recent financial difficulties, which the DPP argues is illegal. Former KMT Chairman Ma Ying-Jeou's position is that the KMT will sell some of its properties at below market rates rather than return them to the government and that the details of these transactions will not be publicly disclosed.\nIn 2006, the KMT sold its headquarters at 11 Zhongshan South Road in Taipei to Evergreen Group for NT$2.3 billion (US$96 million). The KMT moved into a smaller building on Bade Road in the eastern part of the city.\n\nIn July 2014, the KMT reported total assets of NT$26.8 billion (US$892.4 million) and interest earnings of NT$981.52 million for the year of 2013, making it one of the richest political parties in the world.\n\nIn August 2016, the Ill-gotten Party Assets Settlement Committee is set up by the ruling DPP government to investigate KMT party assets acquired during the martial law period and recover those that were determined to be illegally acquired.\n\nIn December 2003, then-KMT chairman (present chairman emeritus) and presidential candidate Lien Chan initiated what appeared to some to be a major shift in the party's position on the linked questions of Chinese reunification and Taiwan independence. Speaking to foreign journalists, Lien said that while the KMT was opposed to \"immediate independence\", it did not wish to be classed as \"pro-reunificationist\" either.\n\nAt the same time, Wang Jin-pyng, speaker of the Legislative Yuan and the Pan-Blue Coalition's campaign manager in the 2004 presidential election, said that the party no longer opposed Taiwan's \"eventual independence\". This statement was later clarified as meaning that the KMT opposes any immediate decision on unification and independence and would like to have this issue resolved by future generations. The KMT's position on the cross-strait relations was redefined as hoping to remain in the current neither-independent-nor-united situation.\n\nHowever, there had been a warming of relations between the Pan-Blue Coalition and the PRC, with prominent members of both the KMT and PFP in active discussions with officials on the mainland. In February 2004, it appeared that KMT had opened a campaign office for the Lien-Soong ticket in Shanghai targeting Taiwanese businessmen. However, after an adverse reaction in Taiwan, the KMT quickly declared that the office was opened without official knowledge or authorization. In addition, the PRC issued a statement forbidding open campaigning in the mainland and formally stated that it had no preference as to which candidate won and cared only about the positions of the winning candidate.\n\nIn 2005, then-party chairman Lien Chan announced that he was to leave his office. The two leading contenders for the position included Ma Ying-jeou and Wang Jin-pyng. On 5 April 2005, Taipei Mayor Ma Ying-jeou said he wished to lead the opposition KMT with Wang Jin-pyng. On 16 July 2005, Ma was elected as KMT Chairman in the first contested leadership in KMT's 93-year history. Some 54% of the party's 1.04 million members cast their ballots. Ma garnered 72.4% of vote share, or 375,056 votes, against Wang's 27.6%, or 143,268 votes. After failing to convince Wang to stay on as a vice chairman, Ma named holdovers Wu Po-hsiung, Chiang Pin-kung and Lin Cheng-chi (), as well as long-time party administrator and strategist John Kuan as vice-chairmen. All appointments were approved by a hand count of party delegates.\nOn 28 March 2005, thirty members of the KMT, led by Vice Chairman Chiang Pin-kung, arrived in mainland China. This marked the first official visit by the KMT to the mainland since it was defeated by communist forces in 1949 (although KMT members including Chiang had made individual visits in the past). The delegates began their itinerary by paying homage to the revolutionary martyrs of the Tenth Uprising at Huanghuagang. They subsequently flew to the former ROC capital of Nanjing to commemorate Sun Yat-sen. During the trip, the KMT signed a 10-points agreement with the CPC. The opponents regarded this visit as the prelude of the third KMT-CPC cooperation, after the First and Second United Front. Weeks afterwards, in May 2005, Chairman Lien Chan visited the mainland and met with Hu Jintao, General Secretary of the Communist Party of China. This marked the first meeting between leaders of the KMT and CPC after the end of Chinese Civil War in 1949. No agreements were signed because incumbent Chen Shui-bian's government threatened to prosecute the KMT delegation for treason and violation of ROC laws prohibiting citizens from collaborating with CPC.\n\nSupport for the KMT in Taiwan encompasses a wide range of groups. KMT support tends to be higher in northern Taiwan and in urban areas, where it draws its backing from big businesses due to its policy of maintaining commercial links with mainland China.\n\nThe KMT also has strong support in the labor sector because of the many labor benefits and insurance implemented while the KMT was in power. The KMT traditionally has strong cooperation with military officers, teachers, and government workers. Among the ethnic groups in Taiwan, the KMT has solid support among mainlanders and their descendants, for ideological reasons, and among Taiwanese aboriginals.\n\nThe deep-rooted hostility between Aboriginals and (Taiwanese) Hoklo, and the Aboriginal communities effective KMT networks, contribute to Aboriginal skepticism towards the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) and the Aboriginals' tendency to vote for the KMT. Aboriginals have criticized politicians for abusing the \"indigenization\" movement for political gains, such as aboriginal opposition to the DPP's \"rectification\" by recognizing the Taroko for political reasons, with the majority of mountain townships voting for Ma Ying-jeou. In 2005 the Kuomintang displayed a massive photo of the anti-Japanese Aboriginal leader Mona Rudao at its headquarters in honor of the 60th anniversary of Taiwan's retrocession from Japan to the Republic of China.\n\nTraditional opponents of the KMT included strong supporters of Taiwan independence and rural residents, particularly in southern Taiwan.\n\nFor social issues, the KMT does a strong opposition on same-sex marriage in Taiwan, including most members of legislative committees, mayor of cities, and the current presidential candidate－Han Kuo-yu. Though opposition to same-sex marriage comes mostly from Christian groups, who wield significant political influence especially within the KMT.\n\nThe Kuomintang's constitution designated Sun Yat-sen as party president. After his death, the Kuomintang opted to keep that language in its constitution to honor his memory forever. The party has since been headed by a director-general (1927–1975) and a chairman (since 1975), positions which officially discharge the functions of the president.\n\nBULLET::::- Chairman\nBULLET::::- Current Chairman: Wu Den-yih (since 20 August 2017)\nBULLET::::- Vice Chairpersons\nBULLET::::- Current Vice Chairpersons: Hau Lung-pin, Tseng Yung-chuan (since 20 August 2017)\n\nBULLET::::- Secretary-General\nBULLET::::- Current Secretary-General: Tseng Yung-chuan (since 20 August 2017)\nBULLET::::- Vice Secretaries-General\nBULLET::::- Current Vice Secretaries-General: Tu Chien-te (),\n\nBULLET::::- (1 February 1999 – 1 February 2004)\nBULLET::::- Tseng Yung-chuan (1 February 2004 – 1 December 2008)\nBULLET::::- Lin Yi-shih (1 December 2008 – 1 February 2012)\nBULLET::::- Lin Hung-chih (1 February 2012 – 31 July 2014)\nBULLET::::- (31 July 2014 – 7 February 2015)\nBULLET::::- Lai Shyh-bao (7 February 2015 – 7 July 2016)\nBULLET::::- Liao Kuo-tung (7 July 2016 – 29 June 2017)\nBULLET::::- (29 June 2017 – 14 June 2018)\nBULLET::::- Johnny Chiang (since 14 June 2018)\n\nThe KMT is organised as such:\nBULLET::::- National Congress\nBULLET::::- Party Chairman\nBULLET::::- Vice-Chairmen\nBULLET::::- Central Committee\nBULLET::::- Central Steering Committee for Women\nBULLET::::- Central Standing Committee\nBULLET::::- Secretary-General\nBULLET::::- Deputy Secretaries-General\nBULLET::::- Executive Director\nBULLET::::- Policy Committee\nBULLET::::- Policy Coordination Department\nBULLET::::- Policy Research Department\nBULLET::::- Mainland Affairs Department\nBULLET::::- National Development Institute\nBULLET::::- Administrative Division\nBULLET::::- Research Division\nBULLET::::- Education and Counselling Division\nBULLET::::- Party Disciplinary Committee\nBULLET::::- Evaluation and Control Office\nBULLET::::- Audit Office\nBULLET::::- Culture and Communications Committee\nBULLET::::- Cultural Department\nBULLET::::- Communications Department\nBULLET::::- KMT Party History Institute\nBULLET::::- Administration Committee\nBULLET::::- Personnel Office\nBULLET::::- General Office\nBULLET::::- Finance Office\nBULLET::::- Accounting Office\nBULLET::::- Information Center\nBULLET::::- Organizational Development Committee\nBULLET::::- Organization and Operations Department\nBULLET::::- Elections Mobilization Department\nBULLET::::- Community Volunteers Department\nBULLET::::- Overseas Department\nBULLET::::- Youth Department\nBULLET::::- Women's Department\n\nThe KMT was a nationalist revolutionary party which had been supported by the Soviet Union. It was organized on the Leninist principle of organisation, democratic centralism.\n\nThe KMT had several influences upon its ideology by revolutionary thinking. The KMT and Chiang Kai-shek used the words feudal and counterrevolutionary as synonyms for evil and backwardness, and they proudly proclaimed themselves to be revolutionaries. Chiang called the warlords feudalists, and he also called for feudalism and counterrevolutionaries to be stamped out by the KMT. Chiang showed extreme rage when he was called a warlord, because of the words negative and feudal connotations. Ma Bufang was forced to defend himself against the accusations, and stated to the news media that his army was a part of \"National army, people's power\".\n\nChiang Kai-shek, the head of the KMT, warned the Soviet Union and other foreign countries about interfering in Chinese affairs. He was personally angry at the way China was treated by foreigners, mainly by the Soviet Union, Britain, and the United States. He and his New Life Movement called for the crushing of Soviet, Western, American and other foreign influences in China. Chen Lifu, a CC Clique member in the KMT, said \"Communism originated from Soviet imperialism, which has encroached on our country.\" It was also noted that \"the white bear of the North Pole is known for its viciousness and cruelty\".\n\nThe Blue Shirts Society, a fascist paramilitary organization within the KMT that modeled itself after Mussolini's blackshirts, was anti-foreign and anti-communist, and it stated that its agenda was to expel foreign (Japanese and Western) imperialists from China, crush Communism, and eliminate feudalism. In addition to being anticommunist, some KMT members, like Chiang Kai-shek's right-hand man Dai Li were anti-American, and wanted to expel American influence.\n\nKMT leaders across China adopted nationalist rhetoric. The Chinese Muslim general Ma Bufang of Qinghai presented himself as a Chinese nationalist to the people of China, fighting against British imperialism, to deflect criticism by opponents that his government was feudal and oppressed minorities like Tibetans and Buddhist Mongols. He used his Chinese nationalist credentials to his advantage to keep himself in power.\n\nThe KMT pursued a sinicization policy, it was stated that \"the time had come to set about the business of making all natives either turn Chinese or get out\" by foreign observers of KMT policy. It was noted that \"Chinese colonization\" of \"Mongolia and Manchuria\" led \"to a conviction that the day of the barbarian was finally over\".\n\nKMT branch in Guangxi province, led by the New Guangxi Clique of Bai Chongxi and Li Zongren, implemented anti-imperialist, anti-religious, and anti-foreign policies. During the Northern Expedition, in 1926 in Guangxi, Muslim General Bai Chongxi led his troops in destroying most of the Buddhist temples and smashing idols, turning the temples into schools and KMT headquarters. Bai led an anti-foreign wave in Guangxi, attacking American, European, and other foreigners and missionaries, and generally making the province unsafe for non-natives. Westerners fled from the province, and some Chinese Christians were also attacked as imperialist agents.\n\nThe leaders clashed with Chiang Kai-shek, which led to the Central Plains War where Chiang defeated the clique.\n\nKMT had a left wing and a right wing, the left being more radical in its pro-Soviet policies, but both wings equally persecuted merchants, accusing them of being counterrevolutionaries and reactionaries. The right wing under Chiang Kai-shek prevailed, and continued radical policies against private merchants and industrialists, even as they denounced communism.\n\nOne of the Three Principles of the People of KMT, Mínshēng, was defined as socialism by Dr. Sun Yat-sen. He defined this principle of saying in his last days \"its socialism and its communism\". The concept may be understood as social welfare as well. Sun understood it as an industrial economy and equality of land holdings for the Chinese peasant farmers. Here he was influenced by the American thinker Henry George (see Georgism) and German thinker Karl Marx; the land value tax in Taiwan is a legacy thereof. He divided livelihood into four areas: food, clothing, housing, and transportation; and planned out how an ideal (Chinese) government can take care of these for its people.\n\nKMT was referred to having a socialist ideology. \"Equalization of land rights\" was a clause included by Dr. Sun in the original Tongmenhui. KMT's revolutionary ideology in the 1920s incorporated unique Chinese Socialism as part of its ideology.\n\nThe Soviet Union trained KMT revolutionaries in the Moscow Sun Yat-sen University. In the West and in the Soviet Union, Chiang was known as the \"Red General\". Movie theaters in the Soviet Union showed newsreels and clips of Chiang, at Moscow Sun Yat-sen University Portraits of Chiang were hung on the walls, and in the Soviet May Day Parades that year, Chiang's portrait was to be carried along with the portraits of Karl Marx, Lenin, Stalin, and other socialist leaders.\n\nKMT attempted to levy taxes upon merchants in Canton, and the merchants resisted by raising an army, the Merchant's volunteer corps. Dr. Sun initiated this anti-merchant policy, and Chiang Kai-shek enforced it, Chiang led his army of Whampoa Military Academy graduates to defeat the merchant's army. Chiang was assisted by Soviet advisors, who supplied him with weapons, while the merchants were supplied with weapons from the Western countries.\n\nKMT were accused of leading a \"Red Revolution\" in Canton. The merchants were conservative and reactionary, and their Volunteer Corp leader Chen Lianbao was a prominent comprador trader.\n\nThe merchants were supported by the foreign, western Imperialists such as the British, who led an international flotilla to support them against Dr. Sun. Chiang seized the western supplied weapons from the merchants, and battled against them. A KMT General executed several merchants, and KMT formed a Soviet inspired Revolutionary Committee. The British Communist party congratulated Dr. Sun for his war against foreign imperialists and capitalists.\n\nIn 1948, KMT again attacked the merchants of Shanghai, Chiang Kai-shek sent his son Chiang Ching-kuo to restore economic order. Ching-kuo copied Soviet methods, which he learned during his stay there, to start a social revolution by attacking middle-class merchants. He also enforced low prices on all goods to raise support from the proletariat.\n\nAs riots broke out and savings were ruined, bankrupting shop owners, Ching-kuo began to attack the wealthy, seizing assets and placing them under arrest. The son of the gangster Du Yuesheng was arrested by him. Ching-kuo ordered KMT agents to raid the Yangtze Development Corporation's warehouses, which was privately owned by H.H. Kung and his family. H.H. Kung's wife was Soong Ai-ling, the sister of Soong Mei-ling who was Ching-kuo's stepmother. H.H. Kung's son David was arrested, the Kung's responded by blackmailing the Chiang's, threatening to release information about them, eventually he was freed after negotiations, and Ching-kuo resigned, ending the terror on the Shanghainese merchants.\n\nKMT also promotes government-owned corporations. KMT founder Sun Yat-sen, was heavily influenced by the economic ideas of Henry George, who believed that the rents extracted from natural monopolies or the usage of land belonged to the public. Dr. Sun argued for Georgism and emphasized the importance of a mixed economy, which he termed \"The Principle of Minsheng\" in his Three Principles of the People.\n\n\"The railroads, public utilities, canals, and forests should be nationalized, and all income from the land and mines should be in the hands of the State. With this money in hand, the State can therefore finance the social welfare programs.\"\n\nKMT Muslim Governor of Ningxia, Ma Hongkui promoted state-owned monopolies. His government had a company, Fu Ning Company, which had a monopoly over commerce and industry in Ningxia.\n\nCorporations such as CSBC Corporation, Taiwan, CPC Corporation, Taiwan and Aerospace Industrial Development Corporation are owned by the state in the Republic of China.\n\nMarxists also existed in KMT. They viewed the Chinese revolution in different terms than the CPC, claiming that China already went past its feudal stage and in a stagnation period rather than in another mode of production. These Marxists in KMT opposed the CPC ideology.\n\nKMT used traditional Chinese religious ceremonies, the souls of Party martyrs who died fighting for KMT and the revolution and the party founder Dr. Sun Yat-sen were sent to heaven according to KMT. Chiang Kai-shek believed that these martyrs witnessed events on earth from heaven.\n\nThe KMT backed the New Life Movement, which promoted Confucianism, and it was also against westernization. KMT leaders also opposed the May Fourth Movement. Chiang Kai-shek, as a nationalist, and Confucianist, was against the iconoclasm of the May Fourth Movement. He viewed some western ideas as foreign, as a Chinese nationalist, and that the introduction of western ideas and literature that the May Fourth Movement wanted was not welcome. He and Dr. Sun Yat-sen criticized these May Fourth intellectuals for corrupting morals of youth.\n\nKMT also incorporated Confucianism in its jurisprudence. It pardoned Shi Jianqiao for murdering Sun Chuanfang, because she did it in revenge since Sun executed her father Shi Congbin, which was an example of Filial piety to one's parents in Confucianism. KMT encouraged filial revenge killings and extended pardons to those who performed them.\n\nKMT purged China's education system of Western ideas, introducing Confucianism into the curriculum. Education came under the total control of state, which meant, in effect, the KMT, via the Ministry of Education. Military and political classes on KMT's \"Three Principles of the People\" were added. Textbooks, exams, degrees and educational instructors were all controlled by the state, as were all universities.\n\nChiang Ching-kuo, appointed as KMT director of Secret Police in 1950, was educated in the Soviet Union, and initiated Soviet style military organization in the Republic of China Armed Forces, reorganizing and Sovietizing the political officer corps, surveillance, and KMT activities were propagated throughout the whole of the armed forces. Opposed to this was Sun Li-jen, who was educated at the American Virginia Military Institute. Chiang Ching-kuo then arrested Sun Li-jen, charging him of conspiring with the American CIA of plotting to overthrow Chiang Kai-shek and KMT, Sun was placed under house arrest in 1955.\n\nThe Malaysian Chinese Association (MCA) was initially pro-ROC and mainly consisted of KMT members who joined as an alternative and were also in opposition to the Malayan Communist Party, supporting the KMT in China by funding them with the intention of reclaiming the Chinese mainland from the communists.\n\nThe Tibet Improvement Party was founded by Pandatsang Rapga, a pro-ROC and pro-KMT Khampa revolutionary, who worked against the 14th Dalai Lama's Tibetan Government in Lhasa. Rapga borrowed Sun Yat-sen's Three Principles of the People doctrine and translated his political theories into the Tibetan language, hailing it as the best hope for Asian peoples against imperialism. Rapga stated that \"the Sanmin Zhuyi was intended for all peoples under the domination of foreigners, for all those who had been deprived of the rights of man. But it was conceived especially for the Asians. It is for this reason that I translated it. At that time, a lot of new ideas were spreading in Tibet,\" during an interview in 1975 by Dr. Heather Stoddard. He wanted to destroy the feudal government in Lhasa, in addition to modernizing and secularizing Tibetan society. The ultimate goal of the party was the overthrow of the Dalai Lama's regime, and the creation of a Tibetan Republic which would be an autonomous Republic within the ROC. Chiang Kai-shek and the KMT funded the party and their efforts to build an army to battle the Dalai Lama's government. KMT was extensively involved in the Kham region, recruiting the Khampa people to both oppose the Dalai Lama's Tibetan government, fight the Communist Red Army, and crush the influence of local Chinese warlords who did not obey the central government.\n\nThe KMT assisted the Viet Nam Quoc Dan Dang party which translates literally into Chinese (; ) as the Vietnamese Nationalist Party. When it was established, it was based on the Chinese KMT and was pro Chinese. The Chinese KMT helped the party, known as the VNQDD, set up headquarters in Canton and Yunnan, to aid their anti imperialist struggle against the French occupiers of Indo China and against the Vietnamese Communist Party. It was the first revolutionary nationalist party to be established in Vietnam, before the communist party. The KMT assisted VNQDD with funds and military training.\n\nThe VNQDD was founded with KMT aid in 1925, they were against Ho Chi Minh's Viet Nam Revolutionary Youth League. When the VNQDD fled to China after the failed uprising against the French, they settled in Yunnan and Canton, in two different branches. The VNQDD existed as a party in exile in China for 15 years, receiving help, militarily and financially, and organizationally from the Chinese KMT. The two VNQDD parties merged into a single organization, the Canton branch removed the word \"revolutionary\" from the party name. Lu Han, a KMT official in Nanjing, who was originally from Yunnan, was contacted by the VNQDD, and the KMT Central Executive Committee and Military made direct contact with VNQDD for the first time, the party was reestablished in Nanjing with KMT help.\n\nThe Chinese KMT used the VNQDD for its own interests in south China and Indo China. General Zhang Fakui (Chang Fa-kuei), who based himself in Guangxi, established the Viet Nam Cach Menh Dong Minh Hoi meaning \"Viet Nam Revolutionary League\" in 1942, which was assisted by the VNQDD to serve the KMT's aims. The Chinese Yunnan provincial army, under the KMT, occupied northern Vietnam after the Japanese surrender in 1945, the VNQDD tagging alone, opposing Ho Chi Minh's communist party. The Viet Nam Revolutionary League was a union of various Vietnamese nationalist groups, run by the pro Chinese VNQDD. Its stated goal was for unity with China under the Three Principles of the People, created by KMT founder Dr. Sun and opposition to Japanese and French Imperialists. The Revolutionary League was controlled by Nguyen Hai Than, who was born in China and could not speak Vietnamese. General Zhang shrewdly blocked the Communists of Vietnam, and Ho Chi Minh from entering the league, as his main goal was Chinese influence in Indo China. The KMT utilized these Vietnamese nationalists during World War II against Japanese forces.\n\nA KMT left-winger, General Chang Fa-kuei worked with Nguyen Hai Than, a VNQDD member, against French Imperialists and Communists in Indo China. General Chang Fa-kuei planned to lead a Chinese army invasion of Tonkin in Indochina to free Vietnam from French control, and to get Chiang Kai-shek's support. The VNQDD opposed the government of Ngo Dinh Diem during the Vietnam War.\n\nAfter the Fall of Saigon in 1977 the party dissolved and was refounded in 1991 as People's Action Party of Vietnam.\n\nOn 30 November 1958, the establishment of the Ryukyu Guomindang took place. Tsugumasa Kiyuna headed its predecessor party, the Ryukyuan separatist Ryukyu Revolutionary Party which was backed by the Kuomintang in Taiwan.\n\nThe Pro-Kuomintang camp is a political alignment in Hong Kong. It generally pledges allegiance to the Kuomintang.\n\nOne of these members, the 123 Democratic Alliance, dissolved in 2000 due to the lack of financial support from the Taiwan government, after the Presidential election.\n\nMa Fuxiang founded Islamic organizations sponsored by KMT, including the China Islamic Association ().\n\nKMT Muslim General Bai Chongxi was Chairman of the Chinese Islamic National Salvation Federation. The Muslim Chengda school and Yuehua publication were supported by the Nationalist Government, and they supported KMT.\n\nThe Chinese Muslim Association was also sponsored by KMT, and it evacuated from the mainland to Taiwan with the party. The Chinese Muslim Association owns the Taipei Grand Mosque which was built with funds from KMT.\n\nThe Yihewani (Ikhwan al Muslimun a.k.a. Muslim brotherhood) was the predominant Muslim sect backed by KMT. Other Muslim sects, like the Xidaotang were also supported by the KMT. The Chinese Muslim brotherhood became a Chinese nationalist organization and supported KMT rule. Brotherhood Imams like Hu Songshan ordered Muslims to pray for the Nationalist Government, salute KMT flags during prayer, and listen to nationalist sermons.\n\nKMT considers all minorities to be members of the Chinese nation. Former KMT leader Chiang Kai-shek considered all the minority peoples of China, including the Hui, as descendants of Yellow Emperor, the Yellow Emperor and semi mythical founder of the Chinese nation. Chiang considered all the minorities to belong to the Chinese Nation Zhonghua Minzu and he introduced this into KMT ideology, which was propagated into the educational system of the Republic of China, and the Constitution of the ROC considered Chiang's ideology to be true. In Taiwan, the President performs a ritual honoring the Yellow Emperor, while facing west, in the direction of the Chinese mainland.\n\nKMT kept the Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission for dealing with Mongolian And Tibetan affairs. A Muslim, Ma Fuxiang, was appointed as its Chairman.\n\nKMT was known for sponsoring Muslim students to study abroad at Muslim universities like Al Azhar and it established schools especially for Muslims, Muslim KMT warlords like Ma Fuxiang promoted education for Muslims. KMT Muslim Warlord Ma Bufang built a girls' school for Muslim girls in Linxia City which taught modern secular education.\n\nTibetans and Mongols refused to allow other ethnic groups like Kazakhs to participate in the Kokonur ceremony in Qinghai, but the KMT Muslim General Ma Bufang allowed them to participate.\n\nChinese Muslims were among the most hardline KMT members. Ma Chengxiang was a Muslim and a KMT member, and refused to surrender to the Communists.\n\nKMT incited anti Yan Xishan and Feng Yuxiang sentiments among Chinese Muslims and Mongols, encouraging for them to topple their rule during the Central Plains War.\n\nMasud Sabri, a Uyghur was appointed as Governor of Xinjiang by KMT, as was the Tatar Burhan Shahidi and the Uyghur Yulbars Khan.\n\nThe Muslim General Ma Bufang also put KMT symbols on his mansion, the Ma Bufang Mansion along with a portrait of party founder Dr. Sun Yatsen arranged with KMT flag and the Republic of China flag.\n\nGeneral Ma Bufang and other high ranking Muslim Generals attended the Kokonuur Lake Ceremony where the God of the Lake was worshipped, and during the ritual, the Chinese national anthem was sung, all participants bowed to a Portrait of KMT founder Dr. Sun Yat-sen, and the God of the Lake was also bowed to, and offerings were given to him by the participants, which included the Muslims. This cult of personality around KMT leader and KMT was standard in all meetings. Sun Yat-sen's portrait was bowed to three times by KMT party members. Dr. Sun's portrait was arranged with two flags crossed under, the KMT flag and the flag of the Republic of China.\n\nKMT also hosted conferences of important Muslims like Bai Chongxi, Ma Fuxiang, and Ma Liang. Ma Bufang stressed \"racial harmony\" as a goal when he was Governor of Qinghai.\n\nIn 1939, Isa Yusuf Alptekin and Ma Fuliang were sent on a mission by KMT to the Middle Eastern countries such as Egypt, Turkey and Syria to gain support for the Chinese War against Japan, they also visited Afghanistan in 1940 and contacted Muhammad Amin Bughra, they asked him to come to Chongqing, the capital of the Nationalist Government. Bughra was arrested by the British in 1942 for spying, and KMT arranged for Bughra's release. He and Isa Yusuf worked as editors of KMT Muslim publications. Ma Tianying () (1900–1982) led the 1939 mission which had 5 other people including Isa and Fuliang.\n\nKMT is anti-separatist. During its rule on mainland China, it crushed Uyghur and Tibetan separatist uprisings. KMT claims sovereignty over Mongolia and Tuva as well as the territories of the modern People's Republic and Republic of China.\n\nKMT Muslim General Ma Bufang waged war on the invading Tibetans during the Sino-Tibetan War with his Muslim army, and he repeatedly crushed Tibetan revolts during bloody battles in Qinghai provinces. Ma Bufang was fully supported by President Chiang Kai-shek, who ordered him to prepare his Muslim army to invade Tibet several times and threatened aerial bombardment on the Tibetans. With support from KMT, Ma Bufang repeatedly attacked the Tibetan area of Golog seven times during the KMT Pacification of Qinghai, eliminating thousands of Tibetans.\n\nGeneral Ma Fuxiang, the chairman of the Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission stated that Mongolia and Tibet were an integral part of the Republic of China, arguing:\nOur Party [the Guomindang] takes the development of the weak and small and resistance to the strong and violent as our sole and most urgent task. This is even more true for those groups which are not of our kind [Ch. fei wo zulei zhe]. Now the people of Mongolia and Tibet are closely related to us, and we have great affection for one another: our common existence and common honor already have a history of over a thousand years. [...] Mongolia and Tibet's life and death are China's life and death. China absolutely cannot cause Mongolia and Tibet to break away from China's territory, and Mongolia and Tibet cannot reject China to become independent. At this time, there is not a single nation on earth except China that will sincerely develop Mongolia and Tibet.\n\nUnder orders from Nationalist Government of Chiang Kai-shek, the Hui General Ma Bufang, Governor of Qinghai (1937–1949), repaired Yushu airport to prevent Tibetan separatists from seeking independence. Ma Bufang also crushed Mongol separatist movements, abducting the Genghis Khan Shrine and attacking Tibetan Buddhist Temples like Labrang, and keeping a tight control over them through the Kokonur God ceremony.\n\nDuring the Kumul Rebellion, KMT 36th Division (National Revolutionary Army) crushed a separatist Uyghur First East Turkestan Republic, delivering it a fatal blow at the Battle of Kashgar (1934). The Muslim General Ma Hushan pledged allegiance to KMT and crushed another Uyghur revolt at Charkhlik Revolt.\n\nDuring the Ili Rebellion, KMT fought against Uyghur separatists and the Soviet Union, and against Mongolia.\n\n!Election\n!Candidate\n!Running mate\n!Total votes\n!Share of votes\n!Outcome\n!1996\nLee Teng-hui\nLien Chan\n5,813,699\n54.0%\nElected \n!2000\nLien Chan\nVincent Siew\n2,925,513\n23.1%\nDefeated \n!2004\nLien Chan\nJames Soong ( )\n6,423,906\n49.8%\nDefeated \n!2008\nMa Ying-jeou\nVincent Siew\n7,658,724\n58.4%\nElected \n!2012\nMa Ying-jeou\nWu Den-yih\n6,891,139\n51.6%\nElected \n!2016\nEric Chu\nWang Ju-hsuan ( )\n3,813,365\n31.0%\nDefeated \n\n!Election\n!Total seats won\n!Total votes\n!Share of votes\n!Changes\n!Election leader\n!Status\n!President\n!1992\n5,030,725\n53.0%\nLee Teng-hui\nrowspan=\"3\"Lee Teng-hui \n!1995\n4,349,089\n46.1%\nLee Teng-hui\n\n!rowspan=\"2\"1998\nrowspan=\"2\"\nrowspan=\"2\"4,659,679\nrowspan=\"2\"46.4%\nrowspan=\"2\" 7 seats\nrowspan=\"2\"Lee Teng-hui\n\nrowspan=\"4\"Chen Shui-bian \n!2001\n2,949,371\n31.3%\nLien Chan\n\n!2004\n3,190,081\n34.9%\nLien Chan\n\n!rowspan=\"2\"2008\nrowspan=\"2\"\nrowspan=\"2\"5,291,512\nrowspan=\"2\"53.5%\nrowspan=\"2\" 41 seats\nrowspan=\"2\"Wu Po-hsiung\n\nrowspan=\"2\"Ma Ying-jeou \n!2012\n5,863,379\n44.5%\nMa Ying-jeou\n\n!2016\n3,280,949\n26.9%\nEric Chu\nTsai Ing-wen \n\n!Election\n!MayorsMagistrates\n!Councils\n!Third-levelMunicipal heads\n!Third-levelMunicipal councils\n!Fourth-levelVillage heads\n!Election Leader\n!1994\n\nLee Teng-hui\n!1997\n\nLee Teng-hui\n!1998\n\nLee Teng-hui\n!2001\n\nLien Chan\n!2002\n\nLien Chan\n!2005\n\nMa Ying-jeou\n!2006\n\nMa Ying-jeou\n!2009\n\nMa Ying-jeou\n!2010\n\nMa Ying-jeou\n!2014\n\nMa Ying-jeou\n!2018\n\nWu Den-yih\n\n!Election\n!Total seats won\n!Total votes\n!Share of votes\n!Changes\n!Election leader\n!Status\n!President\n!1991\n6,053,366\n69.1%\nLee Teng-hui\nrowspan=\"2\"Lee Teng-hui \n!1996\n5,180,829\n49.7%\nLee Teng-hui\n\n!2005\n1,508,384\n38.92%\nLien Chan\nChen Shui-bian \n\nBULLET::::- Administrative divisions of the Republic of China\nBULLET::::- February 28 Incident\nBULLET::::- Campaign at the China–Burma border\nBULLET::::- Chinese nationalism\nBULLET::::- Conservatism in Taiwan\nBULLET::::- Elections in Taiwan\nBULLET::::- Index of Taiwan-related articles\nBULLET::::- History of the Kuomintang cultural policy\nBULLET::::- History of the Republic of China\nBULLET::::- Joseph Stilwell\nBULLET::::- KMT retreat to Taiwan in 1949\nBULLET::::- Kuomintang Islamic insurgency in China (1950–58)\nBULLET::::- Military of the Republic of China\nBULLET::::- National Revolutionary Army\nBULLET::::- Nationalist government\nBULLET::::- New Kuomintang Alliance\nBULLET::::- Political status of Taiwan\nBULLET::::- Politics of the Republic of China\nBULLET::::- Revolutionary Committee of the Chinese Kuomintang\nBULLET::::- Outline of Taiwan\nBULLET::::- Whampoa Military Academy\nBULLET::::- White Terror (Taiwan)\n\n\nBULLET::::- John F. Copper. \"The KMT Returns to Power: Elections in Taiwan, 2008 to 2012\" (Lexington Books; 2013) 251 pages; A study of how Taiwan's Nationalist Party regained power after losing in 2000.\nBULLET::::- Chris Taylor, \"Taiwan's Seismic shift,\" \"Asian Wall Street Journal\", 4 February 2004 (not available online).\n\nBULLET::::- Kuomintang Official Website\nBULLET::::- Kuomintang News Network\nBULLET::::- The History of Kuomintang (Archived 31 October 2009)\n"}
{"id": "16904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16904", "title": "KMT (disambiguation)", "text": "KMT (disambiguation)\n\nKMT often refers to Kuomintang, a political party in Taiwan (Republic of China).\n\nKMT or kmt may also refer to:\nBULLET::::- \"KMT\" (song), a 2017 song by Drake\nBULLET::::- \"Kmt\" (magazine), a magazine on ancient Egypt\nBULLET::::- kilometre-tonne or kmt, a unit of payload-distance\nBULLET::::- King in Council (Sweden) or K.M:t, a term of constitutional importance that was used in Sweden before 1975 when the 1974 Instrument of Government came into force\nBULLET::::- km.t, a name for ancient Egypt using the hieroglyph Km\n"}
{"id": "16905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16905", "title": "Kabbalah", "text": "Kabbalah\n\nKabbalah (, literally \"reception, tradition\" or \"correspondence\") is an esoteric method, discipline, and school of thought in Jewish mysticism. A traditional Kabbalist in Judaism is called a \"Mequbbāl\" (). The definition of Kabbalah varies according to the tradition and aims of those following it, from its religious origin as an integral part of Judaism, to its later adaptations in Western esotericism (Christian Kabbalah and Hermetic Qabalah). Jewish Kabbalah is a set of esoteric teachings meant to explain the relationship between God, the unchanging, eternal, and mysterious \"Ein Sof\" (, \"The Infinite\"), and the mortal and finite universe (God's creation). It forms the foundation of mystical religious interpretations within Judaism.\n\nJewish Kabbalists originally developed their own transmission of sacred texts within the realm of Jewish tradition, and often use classical Jewish scriptures to explain and demonstrate its mystical teachings. These teachings are held by followers in Judaism to define the inner meaning of both the Hebrew Bible and traditional rabbinic literature and their formerly concealed transmitted dimension, as well as to explain the significance of Jewish religious observances. One of the fundamental kabbalistic texts, the \"Zohar\", was first published in the 13th century, and the almost universal form adhered to in modern Judaism is Lurianic Kabbalah.\n\nTraditional practitioners believe its earliest origins pre-date world religions, forming the primordial blueprint for Creation's philosophies, religions, sciences, arts, and political systems. Historically, Kabbalah emerged after earlier forms of Jewish mysticism, in 12th- to 13th-century Spain and Southern France, and was reinterpreted during the Jewish mystical renaissance of 16th-century Ottoman Palestine. Isaac Luria is considered the father of contemporary Kabbalah; Lurianic Kabbalah was popularised in the form of Hasidic Judaism from the 18th century onwards. During the 20th-century, academic interest in Kabbalistic texts led primarily by the Jewish historian Gershom Scholem has inspired the development of historical research on Kabbalah in the field of Judaic studies.\n\nAccording to the \"Zohar\", a foundational text for kabbalistic thought, Torah study can proceed along four levels of interpretation (exegesis). These four levels are called \"pardes\" from their initial letters (PRDS , orchard).\nBULLET::::- \"Peshat\" ( lit. \"simple\"): the direct interpretations of meaning.\nBULLET::::- \"Remez\" ( lit. \"hint[s]\"): the allegoric meanings (through allusion).\nBULLET::::- \"Derash\" ( from Heb. \"darash\": \"inquire\" or \"seek\"): midrashic (rabbinic) meanings, often with imaginative comparisons with similar words or verses.\nBULLET::::- \"Sod\" ( lit. \"secret\" or \"mystery\"): the inner, esoteric (metaphysical) meanings, expressed in kabbalah.\n\nKabbalah is considered by its followers as a necessary part of the study of Torah – the study of Torah (the \"Tanakh\" and rabbinic literature) being an inherent duty of observant Jews.\n\nModern academic-historical study of Jewish mysticism reserves the term \"kabbalah\" to designate the particular, distinctive doctrines that textually emerged fully expressed in the Middle Ages, as distinct from the earlier Merkabah mystical concepts and methods. According to this descriptive categorisation, both versions of Kabbalistic theory, the medieval-Zoharic and the early-modern Lurianic Kabbalah together comprise the theosophical tradition in Kabbalah, while the meditative-ecstatic Kabbalah incorporates a parallel inter-related Medieval tradition. A third tradition, related but more shunned, involves the magical aims of Practical Kabbalah. Moshe Idel, for example, writes that these 3 basic models can be discerned operating and competing throughout the whole history of Jewish mysticism, beyond the particular Kabbalistic background of the Middle Ages. They can be readily distinguished by their basic intent with respect to God:\nBULLET::::- The theosophical tradition of \"Theoretical Kabbalah\" (the main focus of the Zohar and Luria) seeks to understand and describe the divine realm. As an alternative to rationalist Jewish philosophy, particularly Maimonides' Aristotelianism, this speculation became the central component of Kabbalah\nBULLET::::- The Ecstatic tradition of \"Meditative Kabbalah\" (exemplified by Abraham Abulafia and Isaac of Acre) strives to achieve a mystical union with God. Abraham Abulafia's \"Prophetic Kabbalah\" was the supreme example of this, though marginal in Kabbalistic development, and his alternative to the program of theosophical Kabbalah\nBULLET::::- The Magico-theurgical tradition of \"Practical Kabbalah\" (in often unpublished manuscripts) endeavours to alter both the Divine realms and the World. While some interpretations of prayer see its role as manipulating heavenly forces, Practical Kabbalah properly involved white-magical acts, and was censored by kabbalists for only those completely pure of intent. Consequently, it formed a separate minor tradition shunned from Kabbalah. Practical Kabbalah was prohibited by the Arizal until the Temple in Jerusalem is rebuilt and the required state of ritual purity is attainable.\n\nAccording to traditional belief, early kabbalistic knowledge was transmitted orally by the Patriarchs, prophets, and sages (\"hakhamim\" in Hebrew), eventually to be \"interwoven\" into Jewish religious writings and culture. According to this view, early kabbalah was, in around the 10th century BCE, an open knowledge practiced by over a million people in ancient Israel. Foreign conquests drove the Jewish spiritual leadership of the time (the Sanhedrin) to hide the knowledge and make it secret, fearing that it might be misused if it fell into the wrong hands.\n\nIt is hard to clarify with any degree of certainty the exact concepts within kabbalah. There are several different schools of thought with very different outlooks; however, all are accepted as correct. Modern halakhic authorities have tried to narrow the scope and diversity within kabbalah, by restricting study to certain texts, notably Zohar and the teachings of Isaac Luria as passed down through Hayyim ben Joseph Vital. However, even this qualification does little to limit the scope of understanding and expression, as included in those works are commentaries on Abulafian writings, \"Sefer Yetzirah\", Albotonian writings, and the \"Berit Menuhah\", which is known to the kabbalistic elect and which, as described more recently by Gershom Scholem, combined ecstatic with theosophical mysticism. It is therefore important to bear in mind when discussing things such as the \"sephirot\" and their interactions that one is dealing with highly abstract concepts that at best can only be understood intuitively.\n\nFrom the Renaissance onwards Jewish Kabbalah texts entered non-Jewish culture, where they were studied and translated by Christian Hebraists and Hermetic occultists. The syncretic traditions of Christian Kabbalah and Hermetic Qabalah developed independently of Jewish Kabbalah, reading the Jewish texts as universal ancient wisdom. Both adapted the Jewish concepts freely from their Judaic understanding, to merge with other theologies, religious traditions and magical associations. With the decline of Christian Cabala in the Age of Reason, Hermetic Qabalah continued as a central underground tradition in Western esotericism. Through these non-Jewish associations with magic, alchemy and divination, Kabbalah acquired some popular occult connotations forbidden within Judaism, where Jewish theurgic Practical Kabbalah was a minor, permitted tradition restricted for a few elite. Today, many publications on Kabbalah belong to the non-Jewish New Age and occult traditions of Cabala, rather than giving an accurate picture of Judaic Kabbalah. Instead, academic and traditional publications now translate and study Judaic Kabbalah for wide readership.\n\nAccording to the traditional understanding, Kabbalah dates from Eden. It came down from a remote past as a revelation to elect Tzadikim (righteous people), and, for the most part, was preserved only by a privileged few. Talmudic Judaism records its view of the proper protocol for teaching this wisdom, as well as many of its concepts, in the \"Talmud\", Tractate \"Hagigah\", 11b-13a, \"One should not teach ... the Act of Creation in pairs, nor the Act of the Chariot to an individual, unless he is wise and can understand the implications himself etc.\"\n\nContemporary scholarship suggests that various schools of Jewish esotericism arose at different periods of Jewish history, each reflecting not only prior forms of mysticism, but also the intellectual and cultural milieu of that historical period. Answers to questions of transmission, lineage, influence, and innovation vary greatly and cannot be easily summarised.\n\nOriginally, Kabbalistic knowledge was believed to be an integral part of the Oral Torah, given by God to Moses on Mount Sinai around the 13th century BCE according to its followers; although some believe that Kabbalah began with Adam.\n\nFor a few centuries the esoteric knowledge was referred to by its aspect practice—meditation Hitbonenut (), Rebbe Nachman of Breslov's Hitbodedut (), translated as \"being alone\" or \"isolating oneself\", or by a different term describing the actual, desired goal of the practice—prophecy (\"\"NeVu'a\"\" ).\n\nDuring the 5th century BCE, when the works of the Tanakh were edited and canonised and the secret knowledge encrypted within the various writings and scrolls (\"Megilot\"), the knowledge was referred to as \"Ma'aseh Merkavah\" () and \"Ma'aseh B'reshit\" (), respectively \"the act of the Chariot\" and \"the act of Creation\". Merkabah mysticism alluded to the encrypted knowledge within the book of the prophet Ezekiel describing his vision of the \"Divine Chariot\". B'reshit mysticism referred to the first chapter of Genesis () in the Torah that is believed to contain secrets of the creation of the universe and forces of nature. These terms are also mentioned in the second chapter of the Talmudic tractate \"Hagigah\".\n\nWhen read by later generations of Kabbalists, the Torah's description of the creation in the Book of Genesis reveals mysteries about God himself, the true nature of Adam and Eve, the Garden of Eden (), the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil (), and the Tree of Life (), as well as the interaction of these supernatural entities with the Serpent (), which leads to disaster when they eat the forbidden fruit (), as recorded in Genesis 3.\n\nThe Bible provides ample additional material for mythic and mystical speculation. The prophet Ezekiel's visions in particular attracted much mystical speculation, as did Isaiah's Temple vision—\"Isaiah\", Ch.6. Jacob's vision of the ladder to heaven provided another example of esoteric experience. Moses' encounters with the Burning bush and God on Mount Sinai are evidence of mystical events in the Torah that form the origin of Jewish mystical beliefs.\n\nThe 72 letter name of God which is used in Jewish mysticism for meditation purposes is derived from the Hebrew verbal utterance Moses spoke in the presence of an angel, while the Sea of Reeds parted, allowing the Hebrews to escape their approaching attackers. The miracle of the Exodus, which led to Moses receiving the Ten Commandments and the Jewish Orthodox view of the acceptance of the Torah at Mount Sinai, preceded the creation of the first Jewish nation approximately three hundred years before King Saul.\n\nIn early Rabbinic Judaism (the early centuries of the 1st millennium CE), the terms \"Ma'aseh Bereshit\" (\"Works of Creation\") and \"Ma'aseh Merkabah\" (\"Works of the Divine Throne/Chariot\") clearly indicate the Midrashic nature of these speculations; they are really based upon Genesis 1 and Ezekiel 1:4–28, while the names \"Sitrei Torah\" (Hidden aspects of the Torah) (Talmud \"Hag.\" 13a) and \"Razei Torah\" (Torah secrets) (\"Ab.\" vi. 1) indicate their character as secret lore. An additional term also expanded Jewish esoteric knowledge, namely \"Chochmah Nistara\" (Hidden wisdom).\n\nTalmudic doctrine forbade the public teaching of esoteric doctrines and warned of their dangers. In the Mishnah (Hagigah 2:1), rabbis were warned to teach the mystical creation doctrines only to one student at a time. To highlight the danger, in one Jewish aggadic (\"legendary\") anecdote, four prominent rabbis of the Mishnaic period (1st century CE) are said to have visited the Orchard (that is, Paradise, \"pardes\", Hebrew: lit., \"orchard\"):\nIn notable readings of this legend, only Rabbi Akiba was fit to handle the study of mystical doctrines. The \"Tosafot\", medieval commentaries on the Talmud, say that the four sages \"did not go up literally, but it appeared to them as if they went up\". On the other hand, Louis Ginzberg, writes in the \"Jewish Encyclopedia\" (1901–1906) that the journey to paradise \"is to be taken literally and not allegorically\".\n\nMaimonides interprets \"pardes\" as physics and not mysticism.\n\nThe mystical methods and doctrines of Hekhalot (Heavenly \"Chambers\") and Merkabah (Divine \"Chariot\") texts, named by modern scholars from these repeated motifs, lasted from the 1st century BCE through to the 10th century CE, before giving way to the documented manuscript emergence of Kabbalah. Initiates were said to \"descend the chariot\", possibly a reference to internal introspection on the Heavenly journey through the spiritual realms. The ultimate aim was to arrive before the transcendent awe, rather than nearness, of the Divine. From the 8th to 11th centuries, the Hekhalot texts, and the proto-Kabbalistic early \"Sefer Yetzirah\" (\"Book of Creation\") made their way into European Jewish circles.\n\nAnother, separate influential mystical movement, shortly before the arrival there of Kabbalistic theory, was the \"Chassidei Ashkenaz\" (חסידי אשכנז) or Medieval German Pietists from 1150 to 1250. This ethical-ascetic movement arose mostly among a single scholarly family, the Kalonymus family of the French and German Rhineland.\n\nModern scholars have identified several mystical brotherhoods that functioned in Europe starting in the 12th century. Some, such as the \"Iyyun Circle\" and the \"Unique Cherub Circle\", were truly esoteric, remaining largely anonymous.\n\nThere were certain Rishonim (\"Elder Sages\") of exoteric Judaism who are known to have been experts in Kabbalah. One of the best known is Nahmanides (the \"Ramban\") (1194–1270) whose commentary on the Torah is considered to be based on Kabbalistic knowledge. Bahya ben Asher (the \"Rabbeinu Behaye\") (died 1340) also combined Torah commentary and Kabbalah. Another was Isaac the Blind (1160–1235), the teacher of Nahmanides, who is widely argued to have written the first work of classic Kabbalah, the \"Bahir\" (Book of \"Brightness\").\n\nMany Orthodox Jews reject the idea that Kabbalah underwent significant historical development or change such as has been proposed above. After the composition known as the Zohar was presented to the public in the 13th century, the term \"Kabbalah\" began to refer more specifically to teachings derived from, or related to, the \"Zohar\". At an even later time, the term began to generally be applied to Zoharic teachings as elaborated upon by Isaac Luria Arizal. Historians generally date the start of Kabbalah as a major influence in Jewish thought and practice with the publication of the Zohar and climaxing with the spread of the Arizal's teachings. The majority of Haredi Jews accept the Zohar as the representative of the \"Ma'aseh Merkavah\" and \"Ma'aseh B'reshit\" that are referred to in Talmudic texts.\n\nFollowing the upheavals and dislocations in the Jewish world as a result of anti-Judaism during the Middle Ages, and the national trauma of the expulsion from Spain in 1492, closing the Spanish Jewish flowering, Jews began to search for signs of when the long-awaited Jewish Messiah would come to comfort them in their painful exiles. In the 16th century, the community of Safed in the Galilee became the centre of Jewish mystical, exegetical, legal and liturgical developments. The Safed mystics responded to the Spanish expulsion by turning Kabbalistic doctrine and practice towards a messianic focus. Moses Cordovero and his school popularized the teachings of the Zohar which had until then been only a restricted work. Cordovero's comprehensive works achieved the systemisation of preceding Kabbalah. The author of the \"Shulkhan Arukh\" (the normative Jewish \"Code of Law\"), Yosef Karo (1488–1575), was also a scholar of Kabbalah who kept a personal mystical diary. Moshe Alshich wrote a mystical commentary on the Torah, and Shlomo Alkabetz wrote Kabbalistic commentaries and poems.\n\nThe messianism of the Safed mystics culminated in Kabbalah receiving its biggest transformation in the Jewish world with the explication of its new interpretation from Isaac Luria (1534–1572), by his disciples Hayim Vital and Israel Sarug. Both transcribed Luria's teachings (in variant forms) gaining them widespread popularity, Sarug taking Lurianic Kabbalah to Europe, Vital authoring the latterly canonical version. Luria's teachings came to rival the influence of the Zohar and Luria stands, alongside Moses de Leon, as the most influential mystic in Jewish history.\n\nThe ban on studying Kabbalah was lifted by the efforts of the 16th-century kabbalist Avraham Azulai (1570–1643).\nThe question, however, is whether the ban ever existed in the first place. Concerning the above quote by Avraham Azulai, it has found many versions in English, another is this\nThe lines concerning the year 1490 are also missing from the Hebrew edition of \"Hesed L'Avraham\", the source work that both of these quote from. Furthermore, by Azulai's view the ban was lifted thirty years before his birth, a time that would have corresponded with Haim Vital's publication of the teaching of Isaac Luria. Moshe Isserles understood there to be only a minor restriction, in his words, \"One's belly must be full of meat and wine, discerning between the prohibited and the permitted.\" He is supported by the Bier Hetiv, the Pithei Teshuva as well as the Vilna Gaon. The Vilna Gaon says, \"There was never any ban or enactment restricting the study of the wisdom of Kabbalah. Any who says there is has never studied Kabbalah, has never seen PaRDeS, and speaks as an ignoramus.\"\n\nThe Kabbalah of the Sefardi (Iberian Peninsula) and Mizrahi (Middle East, North Africa, and the Caucasus) Torah scholars has a long history. Kabbalah in various forms was widely studied, commented upon, and expanded by North African, Turkish, Yemenite, and Asian scholars from the 16th century onward. It flourished among Sefardic Jews in Tzfat (Safed), Israel even before the arrival of Isaac Luria. Yosef Karo, author of the \"Shulchan Arukh\" was part of the Tzfat school of Kabbalah. Shlomo Alkabetz, author of the hymn \"Lekhah Dodi\", taught there.\n\nHis disciple Moses ben Jacob Cordovero (or Cordoeiro) authored \"Pardes Rimonim\", an organised, exhaustive compilation of kabbalistic teachings on a variety of subjects up to that point. Cordovero headed the academy of Tzfat until his death, when Isaac Luria rose to prominence. Rabbi Moshe's disciple Eliyahu De Vidas authored the classic work, \"Reishit Chochma\", combining kabbalistic and \"mussar\" (moral) teachings. Chaim Vital also studied under Cordovero, but with the arrival of Luria became his main disciple. Vital claimed to be the only one authorised to transmit the Ari's teachings, though other disciples also published books presenting Luria's teachings.\n\nThe Oriental Kabbalist tradition continues until today among Sephardi and Mizrachi Hakham sages and study circles. Among leading figures were the Yemenite Shalom Sharabi (1720–1777) of the Beit El Synagogue, the Jerusalemite Hida (1724–1806), the Baghdad leader Ben Ish Chai (1832–1909), and the Abuhatzeira dynasty.\n\nOne of the most innovative theologians in early-modern Judaism was Judah Loew ben Bezalel (1525–1609) known as the \"Maharal of Prague\". Many of his written works survive and are studied for their unusual combination of the mystical and philosophical approaches in Judaism. While conversant in Kabbalistic learning, he expresses Jewish mystical thought in his own individual approach without reference to Kabbalistic terms. The Maharal is most well known in popular culture for the legend of the golem of Prague, associated with him in folklore. However, his thought influenced Hasidism, for example being studied in the introspective Przysucha school. During the 20th century, Isaac Hutner (1906–1980) continued to spread the Maharal's works indirectly through his own teachings and publications within the non-Hasidic yeshiva world.\n\nThe spiritual and mystical yearnings of many Jews remained frustrated after the death of Isaac Luria and his disciples and colleagues. No hope was in sight for many following the devastation and mass killings of the pogroms that followed in the wake of the Chmielnicki Uprising (1648–1654), the largest single massacre of Jews until the Holocaust, and it was at this time that a controversial scholar by the name of Sabbatai Zevi (1626–1676) captured the hearts and minds of the Jewish masses of that time with the promise of a newly minted messianic Millennialism in the form of his own personage.\n\nHis charisma, mystical teachings that included repeated pronunciations of the holy Tetragrammaton in public, tied to an unstable personality, and with the help of his greatest enthusiast, Nathan of Gaza, convinced the Jewish masses that the Jewish Messiah had finally come. It seemed that the esoteric teachings of Kabbalah had found their \"champion\" and had triumphed, but this era of Jewish history unravelled when Zevi became an apostate to Judaism by converting to Islam after he was arrested by the Ottoman Sultan and threatened with execution for attempting a plan to conquer the world and rebuild the Temple in Jerusalem. Unwilling to give up their messianic expectations, a minority of Zevi's Jewish followers converted to Islam along with him.\n\nMany of his followers, known as Sabbatians, continued to worship him in secret, explaining his conversion not as an effort to save his life but to recover the sparks of the holy in each religion, and most leading rabbis were always on guard to root them out. The Dönmeh movement in modern Turkey is a surviving remnant of the Sabbatian schism.\n\nDue to the chaos caused in the Jewish world, the rabbinic prohibition against studying Kabbalah established itself firmly within the Jewish religion. One of the conditions allowing a man to study and engage himself in the Kabbalah was to be at least forty years old. This age requirement came about during this period and is not Talmudic in origin but rabbinic. Many Jews are familiar with this ruling, but are not aware of its origins. Moreover, the prohibition is not halakhic in nature. According to Moses Cordovero, halakhically, one must be of age twenty to engage in the Kabbalah. Many famous kabbalists, including the ARI, Rabbi Nachman of Breslov, Yehuda Ashlag, were younger than twenty when they began.\n\nThe Sabbatian movement was followed by that of the Frankists who were disciples of Jacob Frank (1726–1791) who eventually became an apostate to Judaism by apparently converting to Catholicism. This era of disappointment did not stem the Jewish masses' yearnings for \"mystical\" leadership.\n\nMoshe Chaim Luzzatto (1707–1746), based in Italy, was a precocious Talmudic scholar who deduced a need for the public teaching and study of Kabbalah. He established a yeshiva for Kabbalah study and actively recruited students. He wrote copious manuscripts in an appealing clear Hebrew style, all of which gained the attention of both admirers and rabbinical critics, who feared another \"Shabbetai Zevi\" (false messiah) in the making. His rabbinical opponents forced him to close his school, hand over and destroy many of his most precious unpublished kabbalistic writings, and go into exile in the Netherlands. He eventually moved to the Land of Israel. Some of his most important works, such as \"Derekh Hashem\", survive and serve as a gateway to the world of Jewish mysticism.\n\nElijah of Vilna (Vilna Gaon) (1720–1797), based in Lithuania, had his teachings encoded and publicised by his disciples, such as Chaim Volozhin's posthumously published the mystical-ethical work \"Nefesh HaChaim\". He staunchly opposed the new Hasidic movement and warned against their public displays of religious fervour inspired by the mystical teachings of their rabbis. Although the Vilna Gaon did not look with favor on the Hasidic movement, he did not prohibit the study and engagement in the Kabbalah. This is evident from his writings in the \"Even Shlema\". \"He that is able to understand secrets of the Torah and does not try to understand them will be judged harshly, may God have mercy\". (The Vilna Gaon, \"Even Shlema\", 8:24). \"The Redemption will only come about through learning Torah, and the essence of the Redemption depends upon learning Kabbalah\" (The Vilna Gaon, \"Even Shlema\", 11:3).\n\nIn the Oriental tradition of Kabbalah, Shalom Sharabi (1720–1777) from Yemen was a major esoteric clarifier of the works of the Ari. The Beit El Synagogue, \"yeshivah of the kabbalists\", which he came to head, was one of the few communities to bring Lurianic meditation into communal prayer.\n\nIn the 20th century, Yehuda Ashlag (1885—1954) in Mandate Palestine became a leading esoteric kabbalist in the traditional mode, who translated the Zohar into Hebrew with a new approach in Lurianic Kabbalah.\n\nIsrael ben Eliezer Baal Shem Tov (1698–1760), founder of Hasidism in the area of the Ukraine, spread teachings based on Lurianic Kabbalah, but adapted to a different aim of immediate psychological perception of Divine Omnipresence amidst the mundane. The emotional, ecstatic fervour of early Hasidism developed from previous Nistarim circles of mystical activity, but instead sought communal revival of the common folk by reframing Judaism around the central principle of devekut (mystical cleaving to God) for all. This new approach turned formerly esoteric elite kabbalistic theory into a popular social mysticism movement for the first time, with its own doctrines, classic texts, teachings and customs. From the Baal Shem Tov sprang the wide ongoing schools of Hasidic Judaism, each with different approaches and thought. Hasidism instituted a new concept of Tzadik leadership in Jewish mysticism, where the elite scholars of mystical texts now took on a social role as embodiments and intercessors of Divinity for the masses. With the 19th-century consolidation of the movement, leadership became dynastic.\n\nAmong later Hasidic schools:\nRebbe Nachman of Breslov (1772–1810), the great-grandson of the Baal Shem Tov, revitalised and further expanded the latter's teachings, amassing a following of thousands in Ukraine, Belarus, Lithuania and Poland. In a unique amalgam of Hasidic and \"Mitnaged\" approaches, Rebbe Nachman emphasised study of both Kabbalah and serious Torah scholarship to his disciples. His teachings also differed from the way other Hasidic groups were developing, as he rejected the idea of hereditary Hasidic dynasties and taught that each Hasid must \"search for the \"tzaddik\" ('saintly/righteous person')\" for himself and within himself.\n\nThe Habad-Lubavitch intellectual school of Hasidism broke away from General-Hasidism's emotional faith orientation, by making the mind central as the route to the internal heart. Its texts combine what they view as rational investigation with explanation of Kabbalah through articulating unity in a common Divine essence. In recent times, the messianic element latent in Hasidism has come to the fore in Habad.\n\nJewish mysticism has influenced the thought of some major Jewish theologians in the 20th century, outside of Kabbalistic or Hasidic traditions. The first Chief Rabbi of Mandate Palestine, Abraham Isaac Kook was a mystical thinker who drew heavily on Kabbalistic notions through his own poetic terminology. His writings are concerned with fusing the false divisions between sacred and secular, rational and mystical, legal and imaginative. Students of Joseph B. Soloveitchik, figurehead of American Modern Orthodox Judaism have read the influence of Kabbalistic symbols in his philosophical works. Neo-Hasidism, rather than Kabbalah, shaped Martin Buber's philosophy of dialogue and Abraham Joshua Heschel's Conservative Judaism. Lurianic symbols of Tzimtzum and Shevirah have informed Holocaust theologians.\n\nThe nature of the divine prompted kabbalists to envision two aspects to God: (a) God in essence, absolutely transcendent, unknowable, limitless divine simplicity, and (b) God in manifestation, the revealed persona of God through which he creates and sustains and relates to mankind. Kabbalists speak of the first as \"Ein/Ayn Sof\" (אין סוף \"the infinite/endless\", literally \"there is no end\"). Of the impersonal \"Ein Sof\" nothing can be grasped. However the second aspect of divine emanations, are accessible to human perception, dynamically interacting throughout spiritual and physical existence, reveal the divine immanently, and are bound up in the life of man. Kabbalists believe that these two aspects are not contradictory but complement one another, emanations revealing the concealed mystery from within the Godhead.\n\nThe Zohar reads the first words of Genesis, \"BeReishit Bara Elohim – In the beginning God created\", as \"With the level of \"\"Reishit-Beginning\"\" the \"Ein Sof\" created \"Elohim\"-God's manifestation in creation:\nThe structure of emanations has been described in various ways: Sephirot (divine attributes) and Partzufim (divine \"faces\"), Ohr (spiritual light and flow), Names of God and the supernal Torah, Olamot (Spiritual Worlds), a Divine Tree and Archetypal Man, Angelic Chariot and Palaces, male and female, enclothed layers of reality, inwardly holy vitality and external Kelipot shells, 613 channels (\"limbs\" of the King) and the divine souls in man. These symbols are used to describe various parts and aspects of the model.\n\nThe \"Sephirot\" (also spelled \"sefirot\"; singular \"sefirah\") are the ten emanations and attributes of God with which he continually sustains the existence of the universe. The Zohar and other Kabbalistic texts elaborate on the emergence of the sephirot from a state of concealed potential in the \"Ein Sof\" until their manifestation in the mundane world. In particular,\nMoses ben Jacob Cordovero (known as \"the Ramak\"), describes how God emanated the myriad details of finite reality out of the absolute unity of Divine light via the ten sephirot, or vessels.\n\nComparison of the Ramak's counting with Luria's, describes dual rational and unconscious aspects of Kabbalah. Two metaphors are used to describe the \"sephirot\", their theocentric manifestation as the Trees of Life and Knowledge, and their anthropocentric correspondence in man, exemplified as Adam Kadmon. This dual-directional perspective embodies the cyclical, inclusive nature of the divine flow, where alternative divine and human perspectives have validity. The central metaphor of man allows human understanding of the sephirot, as they correspond to the psychological faculties of the soul, and incorporate masculine and feminine aspects after Genesis 1:27 (\"God created man in His own image, in the image of God He created him, male and female He created them\"). Corresponding to the last \"sefirah\" in Creation is the indwelling shekhinah (Feminine Divine Presence). Downward flow of divine Light in Creation forms the supernal Four Worlds; Atziluth, Beri'ah, Yetzirah and Assiah manifesting the dominance of successive sephirot towards action in this world. The acts of man unite or divide the Heavenly masculine and feminine aspects of the sephirot, their anthropomorphic harmony completing Creation. As the spiritual foundation of Creation, the sephirot correspond to the names of God in Judaism and the particular nature of any entity.\n\nAccording to Lurianic cosmology, the \"sephirot\" correspond to various levels of creation (ten \"sephirot\" in each of the Four Worlds, and four worlds within each of the larger four worlds, each containing ten \"sephirot\", which themselves contain ten \"sephirot\", to an infinite number of possibilities), and are emanated from the Creator for the purpose of creating the universe. The \"sephirot\" are considered revelations of the Creator's will (\"ratzon\"), and they should not be understood as ten different \"gods\" but as ten different ways the one God reveals his will through the Emanations. It is not God who changes but the ability to perceive God that changes.\n\nDivine creation by means of the Ten Sephirot is an ethical process. They represent the different aspects of Morality. Loving-Kindness is a possible moral justification found in Chessed, and Gevurah is the Moral Justification of Justice and both are mediated by Mercy which is Rachamim. However, these pillars of morality become immoral once they become extremes. When Loving-Kindness becomes extreme it can lead to sexual depravity and lack of Justice to the wicked. When Justice becomes extreme, it can lead to torture and the Murder of innocents and unfair punishment.\n\n\"Righteous\" humans (\"tzadikim\") ascend these ethical qualities of the ten \"sephirot\" by doing righteous actions. If there were no righteous humans, the blessings of God would become completely hidden, and creation would cease to exist. While real human actions are the \"Foundation\" (\"Yesod\") of this universe (\"Malchut\"), these actions must accompany the conscious intention of compassion. Compassionate actions are often impossible without faith (\"Emunah\"), meaning to trust that God always supports compassionate actions even when God seems hidden. Ultimately, it is necessary to show compassion toward oneself too in order to share compassion toward others. This \"selfish\" enjoyment of God's blessings but only in order to empower oneself to assist others is an important aspect of \"Restriction\", and is considered a kind of golden mean in kabbalah, corresponding to the \"sefirah\" of Adornment (Tiferet) being part of the \"Middle Column\".\n\nMoses ben Jacob Cordovero, wrote \"Tomer Devorah\" (\"Palm Tree of Deborah\"), in which he presents an ethical teaching of Judaism in the kabbalistic context of the ten \"sephirot\". \"Tomer Devorah\" has become also a foundational Musar text.\n\nMedieval Kabbalists believed that all things are linked to God through these emanations, making all levels in creation part of one great, gradually descending chain of being. Through this any lower creation reflects its particular characteristics in Supernal Divinity.\n\nHasidic thought extends the divine immanence of Kabbalah by holding that God is all that really exists, all else being completely undifferentiated from God's perspective. This view can be defined as monistic panentheism. According to this philosophy, God's existence is higher than anything that this world can express, yet he includes all things of this world within his Divine reality in perfect unity, so that the Creation effected no change in him at all. This paradox is dealt with at length in Chabad texts.\n\nAmong problems considered in the Hebrew Kabbalah is the theological issue of the nature and origin of evil. In the views of some Kabbalists this conceives \"evil\" as a \"quality of God\", asserting that negativity enters into the essence of the Absolute. In this view it is conceived that the Absolute needs evil to \"be what it is\", i.e., to exist. Foundational texts of Medieval Kabbalism conceived evil as a demonic parallel to the holy, called the \"Sitra Achra\" (the \"Other Side\"), and the \"Kelipot/Qliphoth\" (the \"Shells/Husks\") that cover and conceal the holy, are nurtured from it, and yet also protect it by limiting its revelation. Scholem termed this element of the Spanish Kabbalah a \"Jewish gnostic\" motif, in the sense of dual powers in the divine realm of manifestation. In a radical notion, the root of evil is found within the 10 holy Sephirot, through an imbalance of Gevurah, the power of \"Strength/Judgement/Severity\".\n\nGevurah is necessary for Creation to exist as it counterposes Chesed (\"loving-kindness\"), restricting the unlimited divine bounty within suitable vessels, so forming the Worlds. However, if man sins (actualising impure judgement within his soul), the supernal Judgement is reciprocally empowered over the Kindness, introducing disharmony among the Sephirot in the divine realm and exile from God throughout Creation. The demonic realm, though illusory in its holy origin, becomes the real apparent realm of impurity in lower Creation.\n\nKabbalistic doctrine gives man the central role in Creation, as his soul and body correspond to the supernal divine manifestations. In the Christian Kabbalah this scheme was universalised to describe \"harmonia mundi\", the harmony of Creation within man. In Judaism, it gave a profound spiritualisation of Jewish practice. While the kabbalistic scheme gave a radically innovative, though conceptually continuous, development of mainstream Midrashic and Talmudic rabbinic notions, kabbalistic thought underscored and invigorated conservative Jewish observance. The esoteric teachings of kabbalah gave the traditional mitzvot observances the central role in spiritual creation, whether the practitioner was learned in this knowledge or not. Accompanying normative Jewish observance and worship with elite mystical kavanot intentions gave them theurgic power, but sincere observance by common folk, especially in the Hasidic popularisation of kabbalah, could replace esoteric abilities. Many kabbalists were also leading legal figures in Judaism, such as Nachmanides and Joseph Karo.\n\nMedieval kabbalah elaborates particular reasons for each Biblical mitzvah, and their role in harmonising the supernal divine flow, uniting masculine and feminine forces on High. With this, the feminine Divine presence in this world is drawn from exile to the Holy One Above. The 613 mitzvot are embodied in the organs and soul of man. Lurianic Kabbalah incorporates this in the more inclusive scheme of Jewish messianic rectification of exiled divinity. Jewish mysticism, in contrast to Divine transcendence rationalist human-centred reasons for Jewish observance, gave Divine-immanent providential cosmic significance to the daily events in the worldly life of man in general, and the spiritual role of Jewish observance in particular.\n\nThe Kabbalah posits that the human soul has three elements, the \"nefesh\", \"ru'ach\", and \"neshamah\". The \"nefesh\" is found in all humans, and enters the physical body at birth. It is the source of one's physical and psychological nature. The next two parts of the soul are not implanted at birth, but can be developed over time; their development depends on the actions and beliefs of the individual. They are said to only fully exist in people awakened spiritually. A common way of explaining the three parts of the soul is as follows:\nBULLET::::- \"Nefesh\" (נפש): the lower part, or \"animal part\", of the soul. It is linked to instincts and bodily cravings. This part of the soul is provided at birth.\nBULLET::::- \"Ruach\" (רוח): the middle soul, the \"spirit\". It contains the moral virtues and the ability to distinguish between good and evil.\nBULLET::::- \"Neshamah\" (נשמה): the higher soul, or \"super-soul\". This separates man from all other life-forms. It is related to the intellect and allows man to enjoy and benefit from the afterlife. It allows one to have some awareness of the existence and presence of God.\n\nThe Raaya Meheimna, a section of related teachings spread throughout the Zohar, discusses fourth and fifth parts of the human soul, the \"chayyah\" and \"yehidah\" (first mentioned in the Midrash Rabbah). Gershom Scholem writes that these \"were considered to represent the sublimest levels of intuitive cognition, and to be within the grasp of only a few chosen individuals\". The Chayyah and the Yechidah do not enter into the body like the other three—thus they received less attention in other sections of the \"Zohar\".\n\nBULLET::::- \"Chayyah\" (חיה): The part of the soul that allows one to have an awareness of the divine life force itself.\nBULLET::::- \"Yehidah\" (יחידה): The highest plane of the soul, in which one can achieve as full a union with God as is possible.\n\nBoth rabbinic and kabbalistic works posit that there are a few additional, non-permanent states of the soul that people can develop on certain occasions. These extra souls, or extra states of the soul, play no part in any afterlife scheme, but are mentioned for completeness:\nBULLET::::- \"Ruach HaKodesh\" (רוח הקודש) (\"spirit of holiness\"): a state of the soul that makes prophecy possible. Since the age of classical prophecy passed, no one (outside of Israel) receives the soul of prophecy any longer.\nBULLET::::- \"Neshamah Yeseira\": The \"supplemental soul\" that a Jew can experience on Shabbat. It makes possible an enhanced spiritual enjoyment of the day. This exists only when one is observing Shabbat; it can be lost and gained depending on one's observance.\nBULLET::::- \"Neshamah Kedosha\": Provided to Jews at the age of maturity (13 for boys, 12 for girls) and is related to the study and fulfillment of the Torah commandments. It exists only when one studies and follows the Torah; it can be lost and gained depending on one's study and observance.\n\nReincarnation, the transmigration of the soul after death, was introduced into Judaism as a central esoteric tenet of Kabbalah from the Medieval period onwards, called Gilgul neshamot (\"cycles of the soul\"). The concept does not appear overtly in the Hebrew Bible or classic rabbinic literature, and was rejected by various Medieval Jewish philosophers. However, the Kabbalists explained a number of scriptural passages in reference to Gilgulim. The concept became central to the later Kabbalah of Isaac Luria, who systemised it as the personal parallel to the cosmic process of rectification. Through Lurianic Kabbalah and Hasidic Judaism, reincarnation entered popular Jewish culture as a literary motif.\n\n\"Tzimtzum\" (Constriction/Concentration) is the primordial cosmic act whereby God \"contracted\" His infinite light, leaving a \"void\" into which the light of existence was poured. This allowed the emergence of independent existence that would not become nullified by the pristine Infinite Light, reconciling the unity of the \"Ein Sof\" with the plurality of creation. This changed the first creative act into one of withdrawal/exile, the antithesis of the ultimate Divine Will. In contrast, a new emanation after the Tzimtzum shone into the vacuum to begin creation, but led to an initial instability called \"Tohu\" (Chaos), leading to a new crisis of \"Shevirah\" (Shattering) of the sephirot vessels. The shards of the broken vessels fell down into the lower realms, animated by remnants of their divine light, causing primordial exile within the Divine Persona before the creation of man. Exile and enclothement of higher divinity within lower realms throughout existence requires man to complete the \"Tikkun olam\" (Rectification) process. Rectification Above corresponds to the reorganization of the independent sephirot into relating \"Partzufim\" (Divine Personas), previously referred to obliquely in the Zohar. From the catastrophe stems the possibility of self-aware Creation, and also the \"Kelipot\" (Impure Shells) of previous Medieval kabbalah. The metaphorical anthropomorphism of the partzufim accentuates the sexual unifications of the redemption process, while Gilgul reincarnation emerges from the scheme. Uniquely, Lurianism gave formerly private mysticism the urgency of Messianic social involvement.\n\nAccording to interpretations of Luria, the catastrophe stemmed from the \"unwillingness\" of the residue imprint after the Tzimtzum to relate to the new vitality that began creation. The process was arranged to shed and harmonise the Divine Infinity with the latent potential of evil. The creation of Adam would have redeemed existence, but his sin caused new shevirah of Divine vitality, requiring the Giving of the Torah to begin Messianic rectification. Historical and individual history becomes the narrative of reclaiming exiled Divine sparks.\n\nKabbalistic thought extended Biblical and Midrashic notions that God enacted Creation through the Hebrew language and through the Torah into a full linguistic mysticism. In this, every Hebrew letter, word, number, even accent on words of the Hebrew Bible contain esoteric meanings, describing the spiritual dimensions within exoteric ideas, and it teaches the hermeneutic methods of interpretation for ascertaining these meanings. Names of God in Judaism have further prominence, though fluidity of meaning turns the whole Torah into a Divine name. As the Hebrew name of things is the channel of their lifeforce, parallel to the sephirot, so concepts such as \"holiness\" and \"mitzvot\" embody ontological Divine immanence, as God can be known in manifestation as well as transcendence. The infinite potential of meaning in the Torah, as in the \"Ein Sof\", is reflected in the symbol of the two trees of the Garden of Eden; the Torah of the Tree of Knowledge is the external, Halachic Torah, through which mystics can perceive the unlimited Torah of the Tree of Life. In Lurianic expression, each of the 600,000 souls of Israel find their own interpretation in Torah.\n\nAs early as the 1st century BCE Jews believed that the Torah and other canonical texts contained encoded messages and hidden meanings. Gematria is one method for discovering its hidden meanings. Each letter in Hebrew also represents a number; Hebrew, unlike many other languages, never developed a separate numerical alphabet. By converting letters to numbers, Kabbalists were able to find a hidden meaning in each word. This method of interpretation was used extensively by various schools.\n\nLike the rest of the rabbinic literature, the texts of kabbalah were once part of an ongoing oral tradition, though, over the centuries, much of the oral tradition has been written down.\n\nJewish forms of esotericism existed over 2,000 years ago. Ben Sira (born c. 170 BCE) warns against it, saying: \"You shall have no business with secret things\". Nonetheless, mystical studies were undertaken and resulted in mystical literature, the first being the Apocalyptic literature of the second and first pre-Christian centuries and which contained elements that carried over to later kabbalah.\n\nThroughout the centuries since, many texts have been produced, among them the ancient descriptions of \"Sefer Yetzirah\", the \"Heichalot\" mystical ascent literature, the \"Bahir\", \"Sefer Raziel HaMalakh\" and the \"Zohar\", the main text of Kabbalistic exegesis. Classic mystical Bible commentaries are included in fuller versions of the \"Mikraot Gedolot\" (Main Commentators). Cordoveran systemisation is presented in \"Pardes Rimonim\", philosophical articulation in the works of the Maharal, and Lurianic rectification in \"Etz Chayim\". Subsequent interpretation of Lurianic Kabbalah was made in the writings of Shalom Sharabi, in \"Nefesh HaChaim\" and the 20th-century \"Sulam\". Hasidism interpreted kabbalistic structures to their correspondence in inward perception. The Hasidic development of kabbalah incorporates a successive stage of Jewish mysticism from historical kabbalistic metaphysics.\n\nThe first modern-academic historians of Judaism, the \"Wissenschaft des Judentums\" school of the 19th century, framed Judaism in solely rational terms in the emancipatory Haskalah spirit of their age. They opposed kabbalah and restricted its significance from Jewish historiography. In the mid-20th century, it was left to Gershom Scholem to overturn their stance, establishing the flourishing present-day academic investigation of Jewish mysticism, and making Heichalot, Kabbalistic and Hasidic texts the objects of scholarly critical-historical study. In Scholem's opinion, the mythical and mystical components of Judaism were at least as important as the rational ones, and he thought that they, rather than the exoteric Halakha, were the living current in historical Jewish development.\n\nThe Hebrew University of Jerusalem has been a centre of this research, including Scholem and Isaiah Tishby, and more recently Joseph Dan, Yehuda Liebes, Rachel Elior, and Moshe Idel. Scholars across the eras of Jewish mysticism in America and Britain have included Arthur Green, Lawrence Fine, Elliot Wolfson, Daniel Matt and Ada Rapoport-Albert.\n\nMoshe Idel has opened up research on the Ecstatic Kabbalah alongside the theosophical, and has called for new multi-disciplinary approaches, beyond the philological and historical that have dominated until now, to include phenomenology, psychology, anthropology and comparative studies.\n\nHistorians have noted that most claims for the authority of kabbalah involve an argument of the antiquity of authority (see, e.g., Joseph Dan's discussion in his \"Circle of the Unique Cherub\"). As a result, virtually all early foundational works pseudepigraphically claim, or are ascribed, ancient authorship. For example, \"Sefer Raziel HaMalach\", an astro-magical text partly based on a magical manual of late antiquity, \"Sefer ha-Razim\", was, according to the kabbalists, transmitted by the angel Raziel to Adam after he was evicted from Eden.\n\nAnother famous work, the early \"Sefer Yetzirah\", is dated back to the patriarch Abraham. This tendency toward pseudepigraphy has its roots in apocalyptic literature, which claims that esoteric knowledge such as magic, divination and astrology was transmitted to humans in the mythic past by the two angels, Aza and Azaz'el (in other places, Azaz'el and Uzaz'el) who fell from heaven (see Genesis 6:4).\n\nAlthough Kabbalah propounds the Unity of God, one of the most serious and sustained criticisms is that it may lead away from monotheism, and instead promote dualism, the belief that there is a supernatural counterpart to God. The dualistic system holds that there is a good power versus an evil power. There are two primary models of Gnostic-dualistic cosmology: the first, which goes back to Zoroastrianism, believes creation is ontologically divided between good and evil forces; the second, found largely in Greco-Roman metaphysics like Neo-Platonism, argues that the universe knew a primordial harmony, but that a cosmic disruption yielded a second, evil dimension to reality. This second model influenced the cosmology of the Kabbalah.\n\nAccording to Kabbalistic cosmology, the Ten Sephirot correspond to ten levels of creation. These levels of creation must not be understood as ten different \"gods\" but as ten different ways of revealing God, one per level. It is not God who changes but the ability to perceive God that changes.\n\nWhile God may seem to exhibit dual natures (masculine-feminine, compassionate-judgmental, creator-creation), all adherents of Kabbalah have consistently stressed the ultimate unity of God. For example, in all discussions of Male and Female, the hidden nature of God exists above it all without limit, being called the Infinite or the \"No End\" (\"Ein Sof\")—neither one nor the other, transcending any definition. The ability of God to become hidden from perception is called \"Restriction\" (Tzimtzum). Hiddenness makes creation possible because God can become \"revealed\" in a diversity of limited ways, which then form the building blocks of creation.\n\nKabbalistic texts, including the \"Zohar\", appear to affirm dualism, as they ascribe all evil to the separation from holiness known as the Sitra Achra (\"the other side\") which is opposed to \"Sitra D'Kedushah\", or the Side of Holiness. The \"left side\" of divine emanation is a negative mirror image of the \"side of holiness\" with which it was locked in combat. [\"Encyclopaedia Judaica\", Volume 6, \"Dualism\", p. 244]. While this evil aspect exists within the divine structure of the Sephirot, the \"Zohar\" indicates that the Sitra Ahra has no power over \"Ein Sof\", and only exists as a necessary aspect of the creation of God to give man free choice, and that evil is the consequence of this choice. It is not a supernatural force opposed to God, but a reflection of the inner moral combat within mankind between the dictates of morality and the surrender to one's basic instincts.\n\nDavid Gottlieb notes that many Kabbalists hold that the concepts of, e.g., a Heavenly Court or the Sitra Ahra are only given to humanity by God as a working model to understand His ways within our own epistemological limits. They reject the notion that a satan or angels actually exist. Others hold that non-divine spiritual entities were indeed created by God as a means for exacting his will.\n\nAccording to Kabbalists, humans cannot yet understand the infinity of God. Rather, there is God as revealed to humans (corresponding to Zeir Anpin), and the rest of the infinity of God as remaining hidden from human experience (corresponding to Arich Anpin). One reading of this theology is monotheistic, similar to panentheism; another reading of the same theology is that it is dualistic. Gershom Scholem writes:\nAccording to Isaac Luria (1534–72) and other commentators on the Zohar, righteous Gentiles do not have this demonic aspect and are in many ways similar to Jewish souls. A number of prominent Kabbalists, e.g., Pinchas Eliyahu of Vilna, the author of \"Sefer ha-Brit\", held that only some marginal elements in the humanity represent these demonic forces. On the other hand, the souls of Jewish heretics have much more satanic energy than the worst of idol worshippers; this view is popular in some Hasidic circles, especially Satmar Hasidim.\n\nOn the other hand, many prominent Kabbalists rejected this idea and believed in essential equality of all human souls. Menahem Azariah da Fano (1548–1620), in his book \"Reincarnations of souls\", provides many examples of non-Jewish Biblical figures being reincarnated into Jews and vice versa; the contemporary Habad rabbi and mystic Dov Ber Pinson teaches that distinctions between Jews and non-Jews in works such as the Tanya are not to be understood as literally referring to the external properties of a person (what religious community they are born into), but rather as referring to the properties of souls as they can be re-incarnated in any religious community.\n\nBut one point of view is represented by the Hasidic work \"Tanya\" (1797), in order to argue that Jews have a different character of soul: while a non-Jew, according to the author Shneur Zalman of Liadi (born 1745), can achieve a high level of spirituality, similar to an angel, his soul is still fundamentally different in character, but not value, from a Jewish one. A similar view is found in \"Kuzari\", an early medieval philosophical book by Yehuda Halevi (1075–1141 AD)\n\nAnother prominent Habad rabbi, Abraham Yehudah Khein (born 1878), believed that spiritually elevated Gentiles have essentially Jewish souls, \"who just lack the formal conversion to Judaism\", and that unspiritual Jews are \"Jewish merely by their birth documents\". The great 20th-century Kabbalist Yehuda Ashlag viewed the terms \"Jews\" and \"Gentile\" as different levels of perception, available to every human soul.\n\nDavid Halperin argues that the collapse of Kabbalah's influence among Western European Jews over the course of the 17th and 18th century was a result of the cognitive dissonance they experienced between the negative perception of Gentiles found in some exponents of Kabbalah, and their own positive dealings with non-Jews, which were rapidly expanding and improving during this period due to the influence of the Enlightenment.\n\nHowever, a number of renowned Kabbalists claimed the exact opposite, stressing universality of all human souls and providing universal interpretations of the Kabbalistic tradition, including its Lurianic version. In their view, Kabbalah transcends the borders of Judaism and can serve as a basis of inter-religious theosophy and a universal religion. Pinchas Elijah Hurwitz, a prominent Lithuanian-Galician Kabbalist of the 18th century and a moderate proponent of the Haskalah, called for brotherly love and solidarity between all nations, and believed that Kabbalah can empower everyone, Jews and Gentiles alike, with prophetic abilities.\n\nThe works of Abraham Cohen de Herrera (1570–1635) are full of references to Gentile mystical philosophers. Such approach was particularly common among the Renaissance and post-Renaissance Italian Jews. Late medieval and Renaissance Italian Kabbalists, such as Yohanan Alemanno, David Messer Leon and Abraham Yagel, adhered to humanistic ideals and incorporated teachings of various Christian and pagan mystics.\n\nA prime representative of this humanist stream in Kabbalah was Elijah Benamozegh, who explicitly praised Christianity, Islam, Zoroastrianism, Hinduism, as well as a whole range of ancient pagan mystical systems. He believed that Kabbalah can reconcile the differences between the world religions, which represent different facets and stages of the universal human spirituality. In his writings, Benamozegh interprets the New Testament, Hadith, Vedas, Avesta and pagan mysteries according to the Kabbalistic theosophy.\n\nFor a different perspective, see Wolfson. He provides numerous examples from the 17th to the 20th centuries, which would challenge the view of Halperin cited above as well as the notion that \"modern Judaism\" has rejected or dismissed this \"outdated aspect\" of the religion and, he argues, there are still Kabbalists today who harbor this view. He argues that, while it is accurate to say that many Jews do and would find this distinction offensive, it is inaccurate to say that the idea has been totally rejected in all circles. As Wolfson has argued, it is an ethical demand on the part of scholars to continue to be vigilant with regard to this matter and in this way the tradition can be refined from within.\n\nHowever, as explained above, many well known Kabbalists rejected the literal interpretation of these seemingly discriminatory views. They argued that the term \"Jew\" was to be interpreted metaphorically, as referring to the spiritual development of the soul, rather than the superficial denomination of the individual, and they added a chain of intermediary states between \"Jews\" and idol worshippers, or spiritualised the very definition of \"Jews\" and \"non-Jews\" and argued that a soul can be re-incarnated in different communities (whether Jewish or not) as much as within a single one.\n\nThe idea that there are ten divine \"sephirot\" could evolve over time into the idea that \"God is One being, yet in that One being there are Ten\" which opens up a debate about what the \"correct beliefs\" in God should be, according to Judaism. Saadia Gaon teaches in his book Emunot v'Deot that Jews who believe in reincarnation have adopted a non-Jewish belief.\n\nMaimonides (12th century) rejected many of the texts of the Hekalot, particularly \"Shi'ur Qomah\" whose starkly anthropomorphic vision of God he considered heretical.\n\nNachmanides (13th century) provides background to many kabbalistic ideas. His works offer in-depth of various concepts. In fact, an entire book, entitled \"Gevuras Aryeh\", was authored by Yaakov Yehuda Aryeh Leib Frenkel and originally published in 1915, specifically to explain and elaborate on the kabbalistic concepts addressed by Nachmanides in his commentary to the Five books of Moses.\n\nAbraham ben Moses ben Maimon, in the spirit of his father Maimonides, Saadiah Gaon, and other predecessors, explains at length in his \"Milḥamot HaShem\" that God is in no way literally within time or space nor physically outside time or space, since time and space simply do not apply to his being whatsoever. This is in contrast to certain popular understandings of modern Kabbalah which teach a form of panentheism, that his 'essence' is within everything.\n\nAround the 1230s, Rabbi Meir ben Simon of Narbonne wrote an epistle (included in his \"Milḥemet Mitzvah\") against his contemporaries, the early Kabbalists, characterizing them as blasphemers who even approach heresy. He particularly singled out the Sefer Bahir, rejecting the attribution of its authorship to the \"tanna\" R. Neḥunya ben ha-Kanah and describing some of its content as truly heretical.\n\nLeone di Modena, a 17th-century Venetian critic of Kabbalah, wrote that if we were to accept the Kabbalah, then the Christian trinity would indeed be compatible with Judaism, as the Trinity closely resembles the kabbalistic doctrine of the \"sephirot\". This critique was in response to the knowledge that some European Jews of the period addressed individual \"sephirot\" in some of their prayers, although the practice was apparently uncommon. Apologists explain that Jews may have been praying \"for\" and not necessarily \"to\" the aspects of Godliness represented by the \"sephirot\".\n\nYaakov Emden, 1697–1776, wrote the \"Mitpaḥath Sfarim\" (\"Veil of the Books\"), a detailed critique of the Zohar in which he concludes that certain parts of the Zohar contain heretical teaching and therefore could not have been written by Shimon bar Yochai.\n\nYiḥyeh Qafeḥ, a 20th-century Yemenite Jewish leader and Chief Rabbi of Yemen, spearheaded the Dor De'ah (\"generation of knowledge\") movement to counteract the influence of the Zohar and modern Kabbalah. He authored critiques of mysticism in general and Lurianic Kabbalah in particular; his magnum opus was Milḥamoth ha-Shem (\"Wars of Hashem\") against what he perceived as neo-platonic and gnostic influences on Judaism with the publication and distribution of the Zohar since the 13th Century. Rabbi Yiḥyah founded yeshivot, rabbinical schools, and synagogues that featured a rationalist approach to Judaism based on the Talmud and works of Saadia Gaon and Maimonides (Rambam).\n\nYeshayahu Leibowitz (1903–1994), an ultra-rationalist Modern Orthodox philosopher and brother of Nechama Leibowitz, publicly shared views expressed in Yiḥyeh Qafeḥ's book \"Milḥamoth HaShem\" against mysticism. For example, Leibowitz called Kabbalah \"a collection of \"pagan superstitions\" and \"idol worship\" in remarks given after receiving the Yakir Yerushalayim Award (English: worthy citizen of Jerusalem) in 1990. In modern times, rationalists holding similar views as those of the Dor De'ah movement have described themselves as \"talmide ha-Rambam\" (disciples of Maimonides) rather than as being aligned with Dor De'ah, and are more theologically aligned with the rationalism of Modern Orthodox Judaism than with Orthodox Ḥasidic or Ḥaredi communities.\n\nThere is dispute among modern Haredim as to the status of Isaac Luria's (the Arizal) Kabbalistic teachings. While a portion of Modern Orthodox rabbis, followers of the Dor De'ah movement, and many students of the Rambam completely reject Arizal's Kabbalistic teachings, as well as deny that the \"Zohar\" is authoritative or from Shimon bar Yohai, all three of these groups completely accept the existence and validity of \"Ma'aseh Merkavah\" and \"Ma'aseh B'resheet\" mysticism. Their only disagreement concerns whether the Kabbalistic teachings promulgated today are accurate representations of those esoteric teachings to which the Talmud refers. Within the Haredi Jewish community one can find both rabbis who sympathize with such a view, while not necessarily agreeing with it, as well as rabbis who consider such a view absolute heresy. Eliyahu Dessler and Gedaliah Nadel maintained that it is acceptable to believe that the Zohar was not written by Shimon bar Yochai and that it had a late authorship. Yechiel Yaakov Weinberg mentioned the possibility of Christian influence in the Kabbalah with the \"Kabbalistic vision of the Messiah as the redeemer of all mankind\" being \"the Jewish counterpart to Christ.\"\n\nKabbalah tended to be rejected by most Jews in the Conservative and Reform movements, though its influences were not completely eliminated. While it was generally not studied as a discipline, the Kabbalistic \"Kabbalat Shabbat\" service remained part of liberal liturgy, as did the \"Yedid Nefesh\" prayer. Nevertheless, in the 1960s, Saul Lieberman of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America is reputed to have introduced a lecture by Scholem on Kabbalah with a statement that Kabbalah itself was \"nonsense\", but the academic study of Kabbalah was \"scholarship\". This view became popular among many Jews, who viewed the subject as worthy of study, but who did not accept Kabbalah as teaching literal truths.\n\nAccording to Bradley Shavit Artson (Dean of the Conservative Ziegler School of Rabbinic Studies in the American Jewish University) \n\nHowever, in the late 20th century and early 21st century there has been a revival in interest in Kabbalah in all branches of liberal Judaism. The Kabbalistic 12th-century prayer \"Anim Zemirot\" was restored to the new Conservative \"Sim Shalom\" \"siddur\", as was the \"B'rikh Shmeh\" passage from the Zohar, and the mystical \"Ushpizin\" service welcoming to the \"Sukkah\" the spirits of Jewish forbearers. \"Anim Zemirot\" and the 16th-century mystical poem \"Lekhah Dodi\" reappeared in the Reform Siddur \"Gates of Prayer\" in 1975. All rabbinical seminaries now teach several courses in Kabbalah—in Conservative Judaism, both the Jewish Theological Seminary of America and the Ziegler School of Rabbinic Studies of the American Jewish University in Los Angeles have full-time instructors in Kabbalah and \"Hasidut\", Eitan Fishbane and Pinchas Giller, respectively. In Reform Judaism, Sharon Koren teaches at the Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion. Reform rabbis like Herbert Weiner and Lawrence Kushner have renewed interest in Kabbalah among Reform Jews. At the Reconstructionist Rabbinical College, the only accredited seminary that has curricular requirements in Kabbalah, Joel Hecker is the full-time instructor teaching courses in Kabbalah and Hasidut.\n\nAccording to Artson: \n\nThe Reconstructionist movement, under the leadership of Arthur Green in the 1980s and 1990s, and with the influence of Zalman Schachter Shalomi, brought a strong openness to Kabbalah and hasidic elements that then came to play prominent roles in the Kol ha-Neshamah siddur series.\n\nTeaching of classic esoteric kabbalah texts and practice remained traditional until recent times, passed on in Judaism from master to disciple, or studied by leading rabbinic scholars. This changed in the 20th century, through conscious reform and the secular openness of knowledge. In contemporary times kabbalah is studied in four very different, though sometimes overlapping, ways:\nBULLET::::- The traditional method, employed among Jews since the 16th century, continues in learned study circles. Its prerequisite is to either be born Jewish or be a convert and to join a group of kabbalists under the tutelage of a rabbi, since the 18th century more likely a Hasidic one, though others exist among Sephardi-Mizrachi, and Lithuanian rabbinic scholars. Beyond elite, historical esoteric kabbalah, the public-communally studied texts of Hasidic thought explain kabbalistic concepts for wide spiritual application, through their own concern with popular psychological perception of Divine Panentheism.\nBULLET::::- A second, new universalist form, is the method of modern-style Jewish organisations and writers, who seek to disseminate kabbalah to every man, woman and child regardless of race or class, especially since the Western interest in mysticism from the 1960s. These derive from various cross-denominational Jewish interests in kabbalah, and range from considered theology to popularised forms that often adopt New Age terminology and beliefs for wider communication. These groups highlight or interpret kabbalah through non-particularist, universalist aspects.\nBULLET::::- A third way are non-Jewish organisations, mystery schools, initiation bodies, fraternities and secret societies, the most popular of which are Freemasonry, Rosicrucianism and the Golden Dawn, although hundreds of similar societies claim a kabbalistic lineage. These derive from syncretic combinations of Jewish kabbalah with Christian, occultist or contemporary New Age spirituality. As a separate spiritual tradition in Western esotericism since the Renaissance, with different aims from its Jewish origin, the non-Jewish traditions differ significantly and do not give an accurate representation of the Jewish spiritual understanding (or vice versa).\nBULLET::::- Fourthly, since the mid-20th century, historical-critical scholarly investigation of all eras of Jewish mysticism has flourished into an established department of university Jewish studies. Where the first academic historians of Judaism in the 19th century opposed and marginalised kabbalah, Gershom Scholem and his successors repositioned the historiography of Jewish mysticism as a central, vital component of Judaic renewal through history. Cross-disciplinary academic revisions of Scholem's and others' theories are regularly published for wide readership.\n\nThe two, unrelated organisations that translate the mid-20th-century teachings of Yehuda Ashlag into a contemporary universalist message, have given kabbalah a public cross-religious profile:\nBULLET::::- \"Bnei Baruch\" is a group of Kabbalah students, based in Israel. Study materials are available in over 25 languages for free online or at printing cost. Michael Laitman established Bnei Baruch in 1991, following the passing of his teacher, Ashlag's son Rav Baruch Ashlag. Laitman named his group Bnei Baruch (sons of Baruch) to commemorate the memory of his mentor. The teaching strongly suggests restricting one's studies to 'authentic sources', kabbalists of the direct lineage of master to disciple.\nBULLET::::- \"The Kabbalah Centre\" was founded in the United States in 1965 as The National Research Institute of Kabbalah by Philip Berg and Rav Yehuda Tzvi Brandwein, disciple of Yehuda Ashlag's. Later Philip Berg and his wife re-established the organisation as the worldwide Kabbalah Centre. In recent times its outreach teaching in New Age style has been \"derided by critics as Hollywood's new \"non-religion\" and even \"the McDonald's of spirituality\"\" after having attracted a cross-religious celebrity following (see Madonna) and media profile, though the organisation is led by Orthodox Jewish teachers.\n\nOther prominent Jewish universalist organisations:\nBULLET::::- \"The Kabbalah Society\", run by Warren Kenton, an organisation based instead on pre-Lurianic Medieval Kabbalah presented in universalist New Age syncretic style. In contrast, traditional kabbalists read earlier kabbalah through later Lurianism and the systemisations of 16th-century Safed.\nBULLET::::- \"The New Kabbalah\", website and books by Sanford L. Drob, is a scholarly intellectual investigation of the Lurianic symbolism in the perspective of modern and postmodern intellectual thought. It seeks a \"new kabbalah\" rooted in the historical tradition through its academic study, but universalised through dialogue with modern philosophy and psychology. This approach seeks to enrich the secular disciplines, while uncovering intellectual insights formerly implicit in kabbalah's essential myth:\n\nFrom the early 20th century, Neo-Hasidism expressed a non-Orthodox Jewish interest in Jewish mysticism, becoming organisational among Conservative, Reform and Reconstructionalist Jewish denominations from the 1960s, through Jewish Renewal and the Chavurah movement. The writings and teachings of Zalman Schachter-Shalomi, Arthur Green, Lawrence Kushner, Herbert Weiner and others, has sought a Kabbalistic and Hasidic study and spirituality among modernist Jews. Arthur Green's translations from the religious writings of Hillel Zeitlin conceive the latter to be a precursor of contemporary neo-Hasidism.\n\nSince the 18th century, Jewish mystical development has continued in Hasidic Judaism, turning kabbalah into a social revival with texts that internalise mystical thought. Among different schools, Chabad-Lubavitch and Breslav with related organisations, give outward looking spiritual resources and textual learning for secular Jews. The Intellectual Hasidism of Chabad most emphasises the spread and understanding of kabbalah through its explanation in Hasidic thought, articulating the Divine meaning within kabbalah through human rational analogies, uniting the spiritual and material, esoteric and exoteric in their Divine source:\nThe writings of Abraham Isaac Kook (1864–1935), first chief rabbi of Mandate Palestine and visionary, incorporate kabbalistic themes through his own poetic language and concern with human and divine unity. His influence is in the Religious-Zionist community, who follow his aim that the legal and imaginative aspects of Judaism should interfuse:\n\nBULLET::::- Aggadah\nBULLET::::- Ayin and Yesh\nBULLET::::- Ka-Bala board game\nBULLET::::- List of Jewish Kabbalists\nBULLET::::- Musar literature\nBULLET::::- Notarikon\nBULLET::::- Temurah (Kabbalah)\nBULLET::::- The Four Who Entered Paradise\n\nBULLET::::- Bodoff, Lippman; \"Jewish Mysticism: Medieval Roots, Contemporary Dangers and Prospective Challenges\"; \"The Edah Journal\" 2003 3.1\nBULLET::::- Dan, Joseph; \"The Early Jewish Mysticism\", Tel Aviv: MOD Books, 1993.\nBULLET::::- Dan, Joseph; \"The Heart and the Fountain: An Anthology of Jewish Mystical Experiences\", New York: Oxford University Press, 2002.\nBULLET::::- Dan, Joseph; \"Samael, Lilith, and the Concept of Evil in Early Kabbalah\", \"AJS Review\", vol. 5, 1980.\nBULLET::::- Dan, Joseph; \"The 'Unique Cherub' Circle\", Tübingen: J.C.B. Mohr, 1999.\nBULLET::::- Dan, J. and Kiener, R.; \"The Early Kabbalah\", Mahwah, N.J.: Paulist Press, 1986.\nBULLET::::- Dennis, G.; \"The Encyclopedia of Jewish Myth, Magic, and Mysticism\", St. Paul: Llewellyn Worldwide, 2007.\nBULLET::::- Fine, Lawrence, ed. \"Essential Papers in Kabbalah\", New York: NYU Press, 1995.\nBULLET::::- Fine, Lawrence; \"Physician of the Soul, Healer of the Cosmos: Isaac Luria and his Kabbalistic Fellowship\", Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2003.\nBULLET::::- Fine, Lawrence; \"Safed Spirituality\", Mahwah, N.J.: Paulist Press, 1989.\nBULLET::::- Fine, Lawrence, ed., \"Judaism in Practice\", Princeton N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2001.\nBULLET::::- Green, Arthur; \"EHYEH: A Kabbalah for Tomorrow.\" Woodstock: Jewish Lights Publishing, 2003.\nBULLET::::- Grözinger, Karl E., \"Jüdisches Denken Band 2: Von der mittelalterlichen Kabbala zum Hasidismus\", (Campus) Frankfurt /New York, 2005\nBULLET::::- Hecker, Joel; \"Mystical Bodies, Mystical Meals: Eating and Embodiment in Medieval Kabbalah.\" Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 2005.\nBULLET::::- Levy, Patrick, \"HaKabbalist\", \"edi. Yael, Tel Aviv\" 2010.Author's website.\nBULLET::::- Idel, Moshe; \"Kabbalah: New Perspectives.\" New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1988.\nBULLET::::- Idel, Moshe; \"The Golem: Jewish Magical and Mystical Traditions on the Artificial Anthropoid\", New York: SUNY Press, 1990.\nBULLET::::- Idel, Moshe; \"Hasidism: Between Ecstasy and Magic\", New York: SUNY Press, 1995.\nBULLET::::- Idel, Moshe; \"Kabbalistic Prayer and Color, Approaches to Judaism in Medieval Times\", D. Blumenthal, ed., Chicago: Scholar's Press, 1985.\nBULLET::::- Idel, Moshe; \"The Mystica Experience in Abraham Abulafia\", New York, SUNY Press, 1988.\nBULLET::::- Idel, Moshe; \"Kabbalah: New Perspectives, New Haven\", Yale University Press, 1988.\nBULLET::::- Idel, Moshe; \"Magic and Kabbalah in the 'Book of the Responding Entity\"'; The Solomon Goldman Lectures VI, Chicago: Spertus College of Judaica Press, 1993.\nBULLET::::- Idel, Moshe; \"The Story of Rabbi Joseph della Reina\"; Behayahu, M. \"Studies and Texts on the History of the Jewish Community in Safed\".\nBULLET::::- Kaplan, Aryeh; \"Inner Space: Introduction to Kabbalah, Meditation and Prophecy\". Moznaim Publishing Corp 1990.\nBULLET::::- McGiney, John W.; \"'The Written' as the Vocation of Conceiving Jewishly\"\nBULLET::::- Samuel, Gabriella; \"The Kabbalah Handbook: A Concise Encyclopedia of Terms and Concepts in Jewish Mysticism\". Penguin Books 2007.\nBULLET::::- Scholem, Gershom; \"Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism\", 1941.\nBULLET::::- Scholem, Gershom; \"Jewish Gnosticism, Merkabah Mysticism, and the Talmudic Tradition\", 1960.\nBULLET::::- Scholem, Gershom; \"Sabbatai Zevi, the Mystical Messiah\", 1973.\nBULLET::::- Scholem, Gershom; \"Kabbalah\", Jewish Publication Society, 1974.\nBULLET::::- Wineberg, Yosef; \"Lessons in Tanya: The Tanya of R. Shneur Zalman of Liadi\" (5 volume set). Merkos L'Inyonei Chinuch, 1998.\nBULLET::::- Wirszubski, Chaim; \"Pico della Mirandola's Encounter with Jewish Mysticism\", Harvard University Press, 1989.\nBULLET::::- Wolfson, Elliot; \"Through a Speculum That Shines: Vision and Imagination in Medieval Jewish Mysticism\", Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994.\nBULLET::::- Wolfson, Elliot; \"Language, Eros Being: Kabbalistic Hermeneutics and Poetic Imagination\", New York: Fordham University Press, 2005.\nBULLET::::- Wolfson, Elliot; \"Venturing Beyond: Law and Morality in Kabbalistic Mysticism\", Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.\nBULLET::::- Wolfson, Elliot; \"Alef, Mem, Tau: Kabbalistic Musings on Time, Truth, and Death\", Berkeley: University of California Press, 2006.\nBULLET::::- Wolfson, Elliot; \"Luminal Darkness: Imaginal Gleanings From Zoharic Literature\", London: Onworld Publications, 2007.\nBULLET::::- \"The Wisdom of The Zohar: An Anthology of Texts\", 3 volume set, Ed. Isaiah Tishby, translated from the Hebrew by David Goldstein, The Littman Library.\n\nBULLET::::- Jewish Encyclopedia: Cabala\nBULLET::::- Hermetic Kabbalah\nBULLET::::- Judaism 101: Kabbalah and Jewish Mysticism\nBULLET::::- The Kabbalah Centre\nBULLET::::- Learn Kabbalah: Lurianic Kabbalah\nBULLET::::- Chabad.org's \"What is Kabbalah?\"\n"}
{"id": "16908", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16908", "title": "Kadiogo Province", "text": "Kadiogo Province\n\nKadiogo is a province of Burkina Faso, located in its Centre Region. Its area is of 2,805 km², containing six departments and a population of 1,523,980 (2006). Its capital is also the State capital, Ouagadougou. It features the central plateau of the country. It is highly urbanized and is the most densely populated province.\n\nKadiogo is divided into 7 departments:\n+ The Departments of Kadiogo\n! Department\n! Capital city\n! Population (Census 2006)\n\nBULLET::::- Regions of Burkina Faso\nBULLET::::- Provinces of Burkina Faso\nBULLET::::- Departments of Burkina Faso\n"}
{"id": "16910", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16910", "title": "Kagoshima", "text": "Kagoshima\n\nKagoshima Prefecture (also known as the Satsuma Domain) was the center of the territory of the Shimazu clan for many centuries. It was a busy political and commercial port city throughout the medieval period and into the Edo period (1603–1868) when it formally became the capital of the Shimazu's fief, the Satsuma Domain. The official emblem is a modification of the Shimazu's kamon designed to resemble the character 市 (\"shi\", \"city\"). Satsuma remained one of the most powerful and wealthiest domains in the country throughout the period, and though international trade was banned for much of this period, the city remained quite active and prosperous. It served not only as the political center for Satsuma, but also for the semi-independent vassal kingdom of Ryūkyū; Ryūkyūan traders and emissaries frequented the city, and a special Ryukyuan embassy building was established to help administer relations between the two polities and to house visitors and emissaries. Kagoshima was also a significant center of Christian activity in Japan prior to the imposition of bans against that religion in the late 16th and early 17th centuries.\n\nKagoshima was bombarded by the British Royal Navy in 1863 to punish the \"daimyō\" of Satsuma for the murder of Charles Lennox Richardson on the Tōkaidō highway the previous year and its refusal to pay an indemnity in compensation.\n\nKagoshima was the birthplace and scene of the last stand of Saigō Takamori, a legendary figure in Meiji Era Japan in 1877 at the end of the Satsuma Rebellion.\n\nJapan's industrial revolution is said to have started here, stimulated by the young students' train station. Seventeen young men of Satsuma broke the Tokugawa ban on foreign travel, traveling first to England and then the United States before returning to share the benefits of the best of Western science and technology. A statue was erected outside the train station as a tribute to them.\n\nKagoshima was also the birthplace of Tōgō Heihachirō. After naval studies in England between 1871 and 1878, Togo's role as Chief Admiral of the Grand Fleet of the Imperial Japanese Navy in the Russo-Japanese War made him a legend in Japanese military history, and earned him the nickname 'Nelson of the Orient' in Britain. He led the Grand Fleet to two startling victories in 1904 and 1905, completely destroying Russia as a naval power in the East, and thereby contributing to the failed revolution in Russia in 1905.\n\nThe Japanese diplomat Sadomitsu Sakoguchi revolutionized Kagoshima's environmental economic plan with his dissertation on water pollution and orange harvesting.\n\nThe 1914 eruption of the volcano across the bay from the city spread ash throughout the municipality, but relatively little disruption ensued.\n\nOn the night of June 17, 1945 the 314th bombardment wing of the Army Air Corps (120 B-29s) dropped 809.6 tons of incendiary and cluster bombs destroying of Kagoshima (44.1 percent of the built-up area). Kagoshima was targeted because of its largely expanded naval port as well as its position as a railway terminus. A single B-29 was lost to unknown circumstances. Area bombing was chosen over precision bombing because of the cloudy weather over Japan during the middle of June. The planes were forced to navigate and bomb entirely by radar.\n\nJapanese intelligence predicted that the Allied Forces would assault Kagoshima and the Ariake Bay areas of southern Kyushu to gain naval and air-bases to strike Tokyo.\n\nKagoshima City is approximately 40 minutes from Kagoshima Airport, and features shopping districts and malls located wide across the city. Transportation options in the city include the \"Shinkansen\" (bullet train), local train, city trams, buses, and ferries to-and-from Sakurajima. The large and modern Kagoshima City Aquarium, situated near a shopping district known as \"Dolphin Port\" and the Sakurajima Ferry Terminal, was established in 1997 along the docks and offers a direct view of Sakurajima. One of the best places to view the city (and Sakurajima) is from the Amuran Ferris wheel atop of Amu Plaza Kagoshima, and the shopping center attached to the central Kagoshima-Chūō Station. Just outside the city is the early-Edo Period Sengan-en Japanese Garden. The garden was originally a villa belonging to the Shimazu clan and is still maintained by descendants today. Outside the garden grounds is a Satsuma \"kiriko\" cut-glass factory where visitors are welcome to view the glass blowing and cutting processes, and the Shoko Shūseikan Museum, which was built in 1865 and registered as a National Historic Site in 1959. The former Shuseikan industrial complex and the former machine factory were submitted to the UNESCO World Heritage as part of a group list titled \"Modern Industrial Heritage Sites in Kyushu and Yamaguchi Prefecture\".\n\nBULLET::::- On August 1, 1934 – the Villages of Yoshino, Nakagōriu and Nishitakeda, all from Kagoshima District, were merged into Kagoshima.\nBULLET::::- On October 1, 1950 – the Villages of Ishiki and Higashisakurajima (both from Kagoshima District) were merged into Kagoshima.\nBULLET::::- On April 29, 1967 – the Cities of Kagoshima and Taniyama were merged and became city of new Kagoshima.\nBULLET::::- On November 1, 2004 – the Towns of Yoshida and Sakurajima (both from Kagoshima District); the Towns of Matsumoto and Koriyama (both from Hioki District); and the town of Kiire (from Ibusuki District) were merged into Kagoshima.\nBULLET::::- Cities: Aira, Hioki, Ibusuki, Minamikyūshū, Minamisatsuma, Satsumasendai, Tarumizu\n\nKagoshima has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification \"Cfa\"), possessing the highest year average temperature and winter average temperature in mainland Japan. It is marked by mild, relatively dry winters, warm, wet springs, hot, wet summers and mild, and relatively dry falls.\nAs of 1 June 2019, Kagoshima City has an estimated population of 595,692 and a population density of 1,088 persons per km². The total area is . According to the April 2014 issue of the Kagoshima Prefectural Summary by the Kagoshima Prefecture Department of Planning and Promotion, the population of the prefecture at large was 1,680,319. The city's total area nearly doubled between 2003 and 2005 as a result of five towns: the towns of Kōriyama and Matsumoto (both from Hioki District) the town of Kiire (from Ibusuki District) and the towns of Sakurajima and Yoshida (both from Kagoshima District). All areas were merged into Kagoshima City on 1 November 2004.\n\nKagoshima Prefecture has a distinct and rich food culture. The warm weather and diverse environments allow for the agriculture and aquaculture of Kagoshima to thrive and gain nationwide and worldwide recognition for unique and quality products. Numerous restaurants around Kagoshima feature Satsuma Province local cuisine. Popular cuisine incorporating local agriculture include \"kibinago　sashimi\" (silver-striped herring), \"buri\" Amberjack, \"kampachi\" yellowtail, \"Black Label Products\" such as \"kuro-ushi\" Wagyu beef, \"kuro-buta\" Berkshire pork dishes, and \"kuro-Satsuma jidori\" chicken (sometimes served as raw, chicken \"sashimi\"); smoked eel, keihan, and \"miki\" (fermented rice milk consumed among residents of the Amami Islands).\n\nSatsuma age, or deep-fried fish cake, comes in great variety in Kagoshima. Though the deep-fried fishcake can be found throughout the country, the Satsuma Domain (modern-day Kagoshima Prefecture) is commonly believed to be the birthplace of the snack. It is said, though, the concept was introduced from the Ryūkyū Kingdom (modern-day Okinawa Prefecture) by Satsuma Lord, Nariakira Shimazu.\n\nThere are many types of sweets produced in Kagoshima Prefecture. has produced some of Japan's most popular and timeless sweets such as , , and green tea-flavored Hyōroku mochi, Minami \"shirokuma\" shaved ice desserts, etc. Traditional treats outside of Seika Food Co., Ltd. products include \"karukan\" (sweet cakes made from steamed yams and rice flour), \"jambo-mochi\", \"kokutō\" brown sugar from the Amami Islands, \"getanha\" brown sugar cake, etc.\n\nIn 1559, at in a carpenter wrote atop a wooden board \"the Shintō Priest of this shrine is too stingy to offer me showing an early love for the spirits. Kagoshima Prefecture is officially recognized (by the World Trade Organization) as the home to one of the most traditional beverages of Japan, \"shōchū\". In Kagoshima there are 113+ distilleries, producing about 1,500 highly acclaimed brands, placing Kagoshima in the top for production quantity and shipment. While visiting Kagoshima, one may notice labels reading . \"Honkaku-shōchū\" is a distilled beverage produced with traditional skills using ingredients such as natural spring water, sweet potatoes, locally-grown sugar cane, and grains. There is a variety of \"honkaku-shōchū\" including , \"shōchū\" distilled from sweet potatoes), , distilled from barley), , distilled from rice), etc. Another type of \"shōchū\" is , \"shōchū\" distilled with brown sugar). \"Shōchū\" has long gained international favor and has come to be comparable to Bordeaux for wine, Scotch for whiskey, and Cognac for brandy. Also, the Amami Islands of Kagoshima Prefecture are the only areas sanctioned to bear the label of \"kokutō-shōchū\".\n\nToday, Kagoshima is home to a distinctive dialect of Japanese known as or , differing from the usual Kyushu dialects with its pronunciations of the yotsugana.\n\nBULLET::::- Ishibashi Park\nBULLET::::- Kagoshima Aquarium\nBULLET::::- Kagoshima Botanical Garden\nBULLET::::- Museum of the Meiji Restoration\nBULLET::::- Sengan-en Garden\nBULLET::::- Tenmonkan shopping arcade\n\nBULLET::::- Ibusuki Nanohana Marathon (いぶすき菜の花マラソン, January)\nBULLET::::- Senganen Garden Classical Poetry Party (仙巌園の「曲水の宴」, June)\nBULLET::::- Fukiage Sand Festival (\"Fukiagehama suna-no-saiten text\"吹上浜砂の祭典, May)\nBULLET::::- Spider Fighting (\"Kumo Gassen\" くも合戦大会, June)\nBULLET::::- Kinko Bay Summer Nite Fireworks Show (July)\nBULLET::::- \"Ogionsaa\" Festival (おぎおんさぁ, July)\nBULLET::::- \"Rokugatsudō\" Festival (六月灯, July)\nBULLET::::- \"Sōgadon-no-kasayaki\" Umbrella Burning Festival (曽我どんの傘焼き, July)\nBULLET::::- Sendai City Great Tug-of-War (\"Sendai Ō-tsunahiki\" 川内大綱引, September)\nBULLET::::- Kagoshima \"Ōhara\" Festival (November)\nBULLET::::- 2015 National Cultural Festival (October–November Official Website: http://kagoshima-kokubunsai.jp/)\n\nBULLET::::- Japanese La Salle Academy\n\nAll lines are operated by Kyushu Railway Company (JR Kyushu)\nBULLET::::- Kyushu Shinkansen\nBULLET::::- Kagoshima-Chūō Station\nBULLET::::- Kagoshima Main Line\nBULLET::::- Satsuma-Matsumoto Station – Kami-Ijuin Station – Hiroki Station – Kagoshima-Chuo Station – Kagoshima Station\nBULLET::::- Nippo Main Line\nBULLET::::- Ryugamizu Station – Kagoshima Station\nBULLET::::- Ibusuki Makurazaki Line\nBULLET::::- Kagoshima-Chuo Station – Korimoto Station – Minami-Kagoshima Station – Usuki Station – Taniyama Station – Jigenji Station – Sakanoue Station – Goino Station – Hirakawa Station – Sesekushi Station – Nakamyo Station – Kiire Station – Maenohama Station – Nukumi Station\n\nBULLET::::- Kagoshima City Transportation Bureau Taniyama Line\nBULLET::::- Kagoshima City Transportation Bureau Korimoto Line\n\nBULLET::::- National Route 3\nBULLET::::- National Route 10\nBULLET::::- National Route 58\nBULLET::::- National Route 224\nBULLET::::- National Route 225\nBULLET::::- National Route 226\nBULLET::::- National Route 328\nBULLET::::- Kyushu Expressway\nBULLET::::- Minami-Kyushu Expressway\nBULLET::::- Ibusuki Skyline\n\nBULLET::::- Kagoshima City Bus\nBULLET::::- Kagoshima Kotsu\nBULLET::::- Iwasaki Bus Network\nBULLET::::- Nangoku Kotsu\nBULLET::::- JR Kyushu bus\nBULLET::::- MTA Bus\n\nBULLET::::- Sakurajima Ferry\nBULLET::::- A Line (to southern islands)\nBULLET::::- Marix Line (to southern islands)\nBULLET::::- RKK Line (to Okinawa, cargo only)\nBULLET::::- Toppy (to Tanegashima and Yakushima)\nBULLET::::- Seahawk (to Koshikijima Islands)\n\nKagoshima Airport in Kirishima ( NE of Kagoshima)\n\nKagoshima was one of the host cities of the official 1998 Women's Volleyball World Championship. Kagoshima is home to Kagoshima United. They play their home games at Kagoshima Kamoike Stadium.\n\nKagoshima is twinned with:\n\nBULLET::::- Hagi, Yamaguchi\nBULLET::::- Matsumoto, Nagano\nBULLET::::- Ōgaki, Gifu\nBULLET::::- Sapporo, Hokkaido\nBULLET::::- Tsuruoka, Yamagata\n\nBULLET::::- Changsha, China (friendship relationship, since 30 October 1982)\nBULLET::::- Miami, United States (since 1 November 1990)\nBULLET::::- Naples, Italy (since 3 May 1960)\nBULLET::::- Perth, Australia (since 23 April 1974)\n\n1st Family Head- Shimazu Tadahisa – Japanese daimyō, founder of the Shimazu clan, a son of Minamoto no Yoritomo.\n\nBULLET::::- Akira Yanagawa - Japanese motorcycle racer\nBULLET::::- Akitsune Imamura (Kagoshima City, Kagoshima) – Japanese seismologist\nBULLET::::- Bernardo the Japanese – Japanese Christian convert, disciple of Saint Francis Xavier, and the first Japanese to set foot in Europe\nBULLET::::- Chitose Hajime (Amami Islands, Kagoshima) – Japanese singer\nBULLET::::- Emi Hashino (Kagoshima City, Kagoshima) – Japanese comedian\nBULLET::::- Hiroko Ōta (Kagoshima City, Kagoshima) – Japanese politician, economic researcher\nBULLET::::- Hiroshi Kawauchi (Kagoshima City, Kagoshima) – Japanese politician\nBULLET::::- Ichinoya Mitsuru (Tokunoshima Island, Kagoshima) – Sumo wrestler\nBULLET::::- Ikki Sawamura (Kagoshima City, Kagoshima) – Japanese model, actor, TV presenter\nBULLET::::- Ikue Asazaki (Amami Islands, Kagoshima) – Japanese singer\nBULLET::::- Izumi Inamori (Kagoshima City, Kagoshima) – Japanese actress\nBULLET::::- Junichi Miyashita (Kagoshima City, Kagoshima) – Japanese swimmer\nBULLET::::- Kaneta Kimotsuki (Kagoshima City, Kagoshima) – Japanese voice actor\nBULLET::::- Kazuo Inamori (Kagoshima City, Kagoshima) – Japanese philanthropist, entrepreneur, founder of Kyocera Corporation and KDDI Corporation, and current chairman of Japan Airlines\nBULLET::::- Kawasaki Shōzō - Industrialist, founder of the Kawasaki Heavy Industries and K Line groups.\nBULLET::::- Kenji Midori (Amami Islands, Kagoshima) – 5th Kyokushin Karate World Champion\nBULLET::::- Koji Maeda (Kagoshima City, Kagoshima) – Japanese football player\nBULLET::::- Kiyotaka Kuroda (Satsuma Domain) – Japanese politician, 2nd Prime Minister of Japan\nBULLET::::- Kota Ibushi (Aira, Kagoshima) – Japanese Professional Wrestler\nBULLET::::- Kousuke Atari (Amami Islands, Kagoshima) – Japanese singer\nBULLET::::- Kyokunankai Hiromitsu (Tokunoshima Island, Kagoshima) – Sumo wrestler\nBULLET::::- Mika Kohirata (Kagoshima City, Kagoshima) – Kagoshima cat lady\nBULLET::::- Mika Nakashima (Hioki, Kagoshima) – Japanese singer and actress\nBULLET::::- Mone Kamishiraishi (Kagoshima City, Kagoshima) - Japanese singer and actress\nBULLET::::- Morihiko Nakahara (Kagoshima City, Kagoshima) – Japanese conductor\nBULLET::::- Norihiro Nakajima (Kagoshima City, Kagoshima) – Japanese manga artist of Astro Team, etc.\nBULLET::::- Rena Takeshita (Amami Islands, Kagoshima) – Japanese model\nBULLET::::- Ryuji Fujiyama (Sakurajima, Kagoshima) – Japanese football player\nBULLET::::- Saigō Takamori (Satsuma Domain) – Japanese politician, samurai\nBULLET::::- Saori Sakoda (Kagoshima City, Kagoshima) – Japanese volleyball player\nBULLET::::- Seiki Kuroda (Kagoshima City, Kagoshima) – Japanese artist\nBULLET::::- Shinobu Kaitani – Japanese manga artist\nBULLET::::- Taisei Okazaki — Japanese DJ, and music producer\nBULLET::::- Takehiko Inoue (Okuchi, Kagoshima) – Japanese manga artist of Slam Dunk, Vagabond, Real\nBULLET::::- Takuya Shiihara (Kagoshima City, Kagoshima) – Japanese football player\nBULLET::::- Toru Kamikawa (Kagoshima City, Kagoshima) – Japanese football referee\nBULLET::::- Toshimichi Ōkubo (Kagoshima City, Kagoshima) – Japanese statesman, samurai, and one of the Three Great Nobles who led to the Meiji Restoration\nBULLET::::- Yasuhito Endō (Kagoshima City, Kagoshima) – Japanese football player\nBULLET::::- Yoshito Kajiya (Kagoshima City, Kagoshima) – Japanese politician\nBULLET::::- Yuki Kashiwagi – (Kagoshima City, Kagoshima) – Japanese idol singer\nBULLET::::- Sakura Miyawaki – Japanese idol singer and actress, member of HKT48 and Iz*One\nBULLET::::- Yuya Hikichi (Kagoshima City, Kagoshima) – Japanese football player\nBULLET::::- Sachie Matsushita, piano player and composer\n\nBULLET::::- 1993 Kagoshima Heavy Rain\nBULLET::::- Kagoshima ramen\nBULLET::::- Sakurajima daikon\nBULLET::::- Godzilla vs. Spacegodzilla\n\nBULLET::::- Amu Plaza Visitors Guide (2006) available in Amu Plaza, Chūō Station, Kagoshima, Japan\n\nBULLET::::- Kagoshima City official website\nBULLET::::- Kagoshima Prefectural Visitors Bureau official website\nBULLET::::- Kagoshima Visitor's Guide from the Kagoshima Internationalization Council\n"}
{"id": "16911", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16911", "title": "Kajang", "text": "Kajang\n\nKajang (Jawi: كاجڠ; ; Tamil: காஜாங்) is a town in southeastern Selangor, Malaysia. It is located 20 km southeast of downtown Kuala Lumpur, in the coterminous mukim (commune) of Kajang in the Hulu Langat District.\n\nKajang is about half an hour's drive from Kuala Lumpur's central business district, primarily through Jalan Cheras and the Grand Saga Expressway; both routes are part of the national highway 1 system.\n\nKajang town is located on the eastern banks of the Langat River. It is surrounded by Cheras, Semenyih, Bangi, Putrajaya and Serdang (clockwise).\n\nIn recent years, a few townships were developed in Kajang, such as Taman Prima Saujana, Sungai Chua and Taman Kajang Perdana (Kajang Highlands). High-end developments in Kajang include Twin Palms, Sri Banyan, Country Heights, Jade Hills, TTDI Groove, Tropicana Heights and Prima Paramount.\n\nAreas surrounding these townships are accessible via the SILK Expressway. \n\nKajang, along with much of Hulu Langat District, is governed by the Kajang Municipal Council.\n\nThe name of Kajang has multiple possible origins:\n\nThe area is believed to have been explored by the Temuan people since 1580. This tribe named Kajang based on an abundant type of screw pine that is used to make roofs.\n\nA member of Ujong River named Batin Berenggai Besi, built huts on the river bank in the area by using a type of screw pine for building the cascading (Kajang) nailed roof. This convinced him that the place is suitable for settlement.\n\nThe meaning of the word 'Kajang' in Mendailingese is 'housed/sheltered'. Meanwhile, in Buginese, it is 'battle or quarrel'. These factions once clashed in one of the hilly areas facing the current railway station, because of the misunderstanding of the word 'Kajang'. The incident occurred when both groups fled to the Langat River from the civil war in Klang, between 1867 and 1873. After the incident, the place was named Kajang.\n\nIn another source, Kajang was opened by Toh Lili, who came from Riau in 1776. He was the follower of Sultan Mohamed Shah Ibni Al-Marhum Sultan Ibrahim Shah from Riau. With the Sultan's permission, he and six friends opened the land for paddy cultivation at Bukit Sungai Merbau and opened the Merbau River mine, now known as Kajang.\n\nRaja Alang from the Mandailing tribe migrated to Malaya in the early 1800s with a group of followers. The group sailed into Malaya through Kuala Sungai Langat. After days of sailing, they sheltered or 'berkajang' in an area now called Mandailing Road. Some of the followers of Raja Alang explored the area of Kampung Batu 14. Their place was then named by Alang.\n\nThe first settlement in Kajang came in 1709. In 1807, Kajang was founded after the Klang War. Because of its central location, it was made the district capital of Hulu Langat.\n\nKajang as a modern town owes its rise in particular to the coffee estates which were opened up around it in the 1890s. One of the famous coffee estates were Inch Kenneth Estate managed by the Kindersley brothers, who were among the first to plant rubber in the country on a commercial basis. Another was Perang Besar (Great War) Estate, opened by some British ex-servicemen led by Colonel Henry Gough, who was the pioneer of bud-grafting of rubber trees in the country.\n\nKajang's population of 342,657 is 60.4% Malay, 19.3% Chinese, 9.7% Indians, and 10.6% other ethnic groups.\n\nKajang's main population centres are Sg. Sikamat, Taman Saujana Impian, Sg. Kantan, Sg. Jelok, Sg. Ramal, Sungai Chua, Jalan Reko, Jalan Bukit, Taman Jenaris, Taman Prima Saujana, Taman Kantan Permai, Taman Kajang Perdana, Taman Sri Ramal, Taman Kajang Prima, Bandar Teknologi Kajang, Hillpark and Bandar Baru Bangi. \n\nSungai Sikamat area is celebrating its 100 years foundation in 2019.\n\nThe centre of Kajang is Old Town. Most of the colonial-era buildings were constructed around the 1920s to 1930s. The architecture of these shophouses is a combination of traditional Chinese and European designs. The ground floor was used mostly for commercial activities and the upper floor as the family living quarters.\n\nOne of Kajang's landmarks is Kajang Stadium which is situated in the heart of the town. The stadium can accommodate up to 5,000 people and is used throughout the year for the community soccer competitions.\n\nAnother landmark is the Kajang Jamek Mosque, which is recognisable by its bright yellow facade.\n\nKajang is served by a network of tolled expressways and federal highways.\n\nHighway 1, the premier north–south federal highway of Peninsular Malaysia, runs through downtown Kajang and then southwards until Johor Bahru. A stretch of highway 1 is concurrent with the Cheras–Kajang Expressway E7 between Cheras Sentral Mall and Taman Koperasi CUEPACS. The Kajang Dispersal Link Expressway E18 starts in Seri Kembangan, which then runs through Balakong and then forms a beltway around downtown Kajang before ending near Bangi. It is the main ring road for Kajang. PLUS Expressway E2 exit 210 serves the vicinity of Kajang and Bangi. From Ampang Jaya, one can reach Kajang with state routes B62 and B52.\n\n Kajang KTM/MRT is the principal rail station. It is an interchange station between the MRT SBK Line and the KTM network. Komuter's Seremban Line and ETS services are available. This station is the southern terminal of the MRT SBKline.\n\nKajang station, though so named, does not directly serve downtown Kajang; Stadium Kajang MRT is located in the actual downtown area, along with Sungai Jernih MRT.\n\nKajang is famous for its \"sate\", a form of skewered barbecued meat. Informally, Kajang is known as the \"Sate Town.\"\n\nThe Malaysia Prison Complex (\"Kompleks Penjara Kajang\"), headquarters of the Prison Department of Malaysia is in Kajang.\n\nKajang has multiple shopping complexes. The Billion Shopping Center in Kajang town is located in Bandar Teknologi Kajang. Other shopping centres located are Metro Plaza Kajang, Metro Point and Kompleks Kota Kajang. Metro Avenue is a new shopping district located opposite SMJK Yu Hua Kajang and Kajang High School.\n\nPublic hospitals are free and found within and around Kajang town, including Hospital Kajang, Hospital Serdang and Hospital Putrajaya. Private medical centres function 24 hours and include facilities such as Poliklinik MUC @Metro Point, Klinik Mediviron Prima Saujana, Kajang Plaza Medical Centre (KPMC) and KPJ Kajang Specialist Hospital.\n\nThe Hulu Langat District Police Headquarters are located in the town centre. Other services include a post office, government clinics, a stadium, food court and a wet market. Federal government agencies with their branch in Kajang include the National Registration Department, Immigration Department, Transportation Department, and Hulu Langat Education Office\n\nKajang is the starting point for MRT Sungai Buloh - Kajang with 4 stations within this town. The stations are Stesen Kajang, Stadium Kajang, Sungai Jernih and Simpang Balak.\n\nBULLET::::- Al-Amin Sungai Tangkas\nBULLET::::- Rafflesia International School Kajang 2\nBULLET::::- SK Jalan Bukit 1\nBULLET::::- SK Jalan Bukit 2\nBULLET::::- SK Jalan Semenyih 1\nBULLET::::- SK Jalan Semenyih 2\nBULLET::::- SK Kajang\nBULLET::::- SK Kajang Utama\nBULLET::::- SK Kantan Permai\nBULLET::::- SK Leftenan Adnan\nBULLET::::- SK Saujana Impian\nBULLET::::- SK Saujana Impian 2\nBULLET::::- SK Seri Sekamat\nBULLET::::- SK Taman Jasmin\nBULLET::::- SK Taman Sri Jelok\nBULLET::::- SRJK(C) Yu Hua\nBULLET::::- SRJK(C) Yu Hua 2 (under construction)\nBULLET::::- SRJK(C) Sungai Chua\nBULLET::::- SRJK(T) Kajang\nBULLET::::- Tanarata International Schools\nBULLET::::- SK Convent Kajang\nBULLET::::- SK Taman Rakan\n\nBULLET::::- Rafflesia International School@Kajang 2\nBULLET::::- SMK Convent Kajang\nBULLET::::- SM Integrasi Tahfiz Ilmuwan Bangi\nBULLET::::- SM Rafflesia@Kajang 2\nBULLET::::- SM Teknik Kajang\nBULLET::::- SMAP Kajang\nBULLET::::- SMJK Yu Hua Kajang\nBULLET::::- SMK Jalan Bukit\nBULLET::::- SMK Jalan Reko\nBULLET::::- SMK Kajang Utama\nBULLET::::- SMK Saujana Impian\nBULLET::::- SMK Sultan Abdul Aziz Shah (SAAS)\nBULLET::::- SMK Sungai Ramal (SEMARAK)\nBULLET::::- SMK Taman Jasmin 2\nBULLET::::- SMK Tinggi Kajang (Kajang High School)\nBULLET::::- SMKA Maahad Hamidiah\nBULLET::::- Tanarata International Schools\n\nKajang is home to institutions of higher learning, which includes:\nBULLET::::- Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman (UTAR) Sungai Long Campus\nBULLET::::- Universiti Tenaga Nasional\nBULLET::::- Infrastructure University Kuala Lumpur\nBULLET::::- New Era University College\nBULLET::::- German-Malaysian Institute\nBULLET::::- Universiti Kuala Lumpur Malaysia France Institute (MFI)\nBULLET::::- Universiti Kuala Lumpur Medical Science and Technology (MESTECH)\n\nAfter the Malaysian general election, in 2018, became part of the parliamentary constituency in the Dewan Rakyat of the Malaysian Parliament. The seat is held by Ong Kian Ming from PH-DAP.\n\nIn the Selangor State Legislative Assembly, Kajang is one of three state seats within the Bangi parliamentary district; the other two are and . The incumbent Assemblyperson for Kajang is Hee Loy Sian from PH-PKR.\n\nUntil 9 May 2018, Kajang was part of the parliamentary constituency in the Dewan Rakyat of the Malaysian Parliament. \n\nIn the Selangor State Legislative Assembly, Kajang was one of three state seats within the Hulu Langat parliamentary district; the other two were and .\n\nBULLET::::- Lt Adnan Bin Saidi, the hero of Battle of Singapore in Bukit Chandu during World War II.\nBULLET::::- Ning Baizura, a singer.\nBULLET::::- Nora Danish, actress.\nBULLET::::- K. Reuben, D. Christie Jayaseelan and Safee Sali, are Malaysian football players.\nBULLET::::- K. Sanbagamaran, a former Selangor FA and Malaysia national football team player.\nBULLET::::- Ramli Ibrahim, Malaysia’s Dance Icon for Indian Classical Dance.\n\nBULLET::::- Kajang Facebook\nBULLET::::- Kajang Municipal Council Official Website\n"}
{"id": "16912", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16912", "title": "Karl Benz", "text": "Karl Benz\n\nKarl Friedrich Benz or Carl Friedrich Benz (; 25 November 1844 – 4 April 1929) was a German engine designer, automobile engineer. His Benz Patent Motorcar from 1885 is considered the first practical automobile. He received a patent for the motorcar in 1886.\n\nKarl Benz was born Karl Friedrich Michael Vaillant, on 25 November 1844 in Mühlburg, now a borough of Karlsruhe, Baden-Württemberg, which is part of modern (Germany), to Josephine Vaillant and a locomotive driver, Johann Georg Benz, whom she married a few months later. According to German law, the child acquired the name \"Benz\" by legal marriage of his parents Benz and Vaillant. When he was two years old, his father died of pneumonia, and his name was changed to Karl Friedrich Benz in remembrance of his father.\n\nDespite living in near poverty, his mother strove to give him a good education. Benz attended the local Grammar School in Karlsruhe and was a prodigious student. In 1853, at the age of nine he started at the scientifically oriented Lyceum. Next he studied at the Poly-Technical University under the instruction of Ferdinand Redtenbacher.\n\nBenz had originally focused his studies on locksmithing, but he eventually followed his father's steps toward locomotive engineering. On 30 September 1860, at age 15, he passed the entrance exam for mechanical engineering at the University of Karlsruhe, which he subsequently attended. Benz graduated 9 July 1864 aged 19.\n\nFollowing his formal education, Benz had seven years of professional training in several companies, but did not fit well in any of them. The training started in Karlsruhe with two years of varied jobs in a mechanical engineering company.\n\nHe then moved to Mannheim to work as a draftsman and designer in a scales factory. In 1868 he went to Pforzheim to work for a bridge building company \"Gebrüder Benckiser Eisenwerke und Maschinenfabrik\". Finally, he went to Vienna for a short period to work at an iron construction company.\n\nIn 1871, at the age of twenty-seven, Karl Benz joined August Ritter in launching the Iron Foundry and Mechanical Workshop in Mannheim, later renamed Factory for Machines for Sheet-metal Working.\n\nThe enterprise's first year went very badly. Ritter turned out to be unreliable, and the business's tools were impounded. The difficulty was overcome when Benz's fiancée, Bertha Ringer, bought out Ritter's share in the company using her dowry.\n\nOn 20 July 1872, Karl Benz and Bertha Ringer married. They had five children: Eugen (1873), Richard (1874), Clara (1877), Thilde (1882), and Ellen (1890).\n\nDespite the business misfortunes, Karl Benz led in the development of new engines in the early factory he and his wife owned. To get more revenues, in 1878 he began to work on new patents. First, he concentrated all his efforts on creating a reliable petrol two-stroke engine. Benz finished his two-stroke engine on 31 December 1879, New Year's Eve, and was granted a patent for it in 28 June 1880.\n\nKarl Benz showed his real genius, however, through his successive inventions registered while designing what would become the production standard for his two-stroke engine. Benz soon patented the speed regulation system, the ignition using sparks with battery, the spark plug, the carburetor, the clutch, the gear shift, and the water radiator.\n\nProblems arose again when the banks at Mannheim demanded that Bertha and Karl Benz's enterprise be incorporated due to the high production costs it maintained. The Benzes were forced to improvise an association with photographer Emil Bühler and his brother (a cheese merchant), to get additional bank support. The company became the joint-stock company \"Gasmotoren Fabrik Mannheim\" in 1882.\n\nAfter all the necessary incorporation agreements, Benz was unhappy because he was left with merely five percent of the shares and a modest position as director. Worst of all, his ideas weren't considered when designing new products, so he withdrew from that corporation just one year later, in 1883.\n\n+ 1885 Benz Patent Motorwagen\n!align=leftThree wheels\n!align=leftTubular steel frame\n!align=leftRack and pinion steering, connected to a driver end tiller; wheel chained to front axle\n!align=leftElectric ignition\n!align=leftDifferential rear end gears\n!align=leftWater-cooled internal combustion engine\n!align=leftGas or petrol four-stroke horizontally mounted engine\n!align=leftSingle cylinder, Bore 116 mm, Stroke 160 mm\n!align=leftPatent model: 958 cc, 0.8 hp, 16 km/h\n!align=leftCommercialized model: 1600 cc, ¾ hp, 13 km/h\n\nBenz's lifelong hobby brought him to a bicycle repair shop in Mannheim owned by Max Rose and Friedrich Wilhelm Eßlinger. In 1883, the three founded a new company producing industrial machines: \"Benz & Companie Rheinische Gasmotoren-Fabrik\", usually referred to as \"Benz & Cie.\" Quickly growing to twenty-five employees, it soon began to produce static gas engines as well.\n\nThe success of the company gave Benz the opportunity to indulge in his old passion of designing a \"horseless carriage\". Based on his experience with, and fondness for, bicycles, he used similar technology when he created an automobile. It featured wire wheels (unlike carriages' wooden ones)\n\nIt was the first automobile entirely designed as such to generate its own power, not simply a motorized stage coach or horse carriage, which is why Karl Benz was granted his patent and is regarded as its inventor.\n\nThe Motorwagen was patented on 29 January 1886 as DRP-37435: \"automobile fueled by gas\". The 1885 version was difficult to control, leading to a collision with a wall during a public demonstration. The first successful tests on public roads were carried out in the early summer of 1886. The next year Benz created the Motorwagen Model 2, which had several modifications, and in 1889, the definitive Model 3 with wooden wheels was introduced, showing at the Paris Expo the same year.\n\nBenz began to sell the vehicle (advertising it as \"\"Benz Patent Motorwagen\"\") in the late summer of 1888, making it the first commercially available automobile in history. The second customer of the Motorwagen was a Parisian bicycle manufacturer Emile Roger, who had already been building Benz engines under license from Karl Benz for several years. Roger added the Benz automobiles (many built in France) to the line he carried in Paris and initially most were sold there.\n\nThe early 1888 version of the Motorwagen had only two gears and could not climb hills unaided. This limitation was rectified after Bertha Benz made her famous trip driving one of the vehicles a great distance and suggested to her husband the addition of a third gear for climbing hills. In the course of this trip she also invented brake pads.\n\nThe world's first ever long distance automobile trip was undertaken by Bertha Benz using a Model 3. On the morning of 5 August 1888 Bertha – supposedly without the knowledge of her husband – took the vehicle on a trip from Mannheim to Pforzheim to visit her mother, taking her sons Eugen and Richard with her. In addition to having to locate pharmacies along the way to refuel, she repaired various technical and mechanical problems. One of these included the invention of brake lining; after some longer downhill slopes she ordered a shoemaker to nail leather onto the brake blocks. Bertha Benz and sons finally arrived at nightfall, announcing the achievement to Karl by telegram. It had been her intention to demonstrate the feasibility of using the Benz Motorwagen for travel and to generate publicity in the manner now referred to as live marketing. Today, the event is celebrated every two years in Germany with an antique automobile rally. \n\nIn 2008, the Bertha Benz Memorial Route was officially approved as a route of the industrial heritage of mankind, because it follows Bertha Benz's tracks of the world's first long-distance journey by automobile in 1888. The public can now follow the 194 km of signposted route from Mannheim via Heidelberg to Pforzheim (Black Forest) and back. The return trip – which didn't go through Heidelberg – was along a different, slightly shorter route, as shown on the maps of the Bertha Benz Memorial Route.\n\nBenz's Model 3 made its wide-scale debut to the world in the 1889 World's Fair in Paris; about twenty-five Motorwagens were built between 1886 and 1893.\n\nThe great demand for static internal combustion engines forced Karl Benz to enlarge the factory in Mannheim, and in 1886 a new building located on Waldhofstrasse (operating until 1908) was added. \"Benz & Cie.\" had grown in the interim from 50 employees in 1889 to 430 in 1899.\n\nDuring the last years of the nineteenth century, \"Benz\" was the largest automobile company in the world with 572 units produced in 1899.\n\nBecause of its size, in 1899, \"Benz & Cie.\" became a joint-stock company with the arrival of Friedrich von Fischer and Julius Ganß, who came aboard as members of the Board of Management. Ganß worked in the commercialization department, which is somewhat similar to marketing in contemporary corporations.\n\nThe new directors recommended that Benz should create a less expensive automobile suitable for mass production. In 1893, Karl Benz created the \"Victoria\", a two-passenger automobile with a engine, which could reach the top speed of and had a pivotal front axle operated by a roller-chained tiller for steering. The model was successful with 85 units sold in 1893.\n\nThe Benz \"Velo\" also participated in the world's first automobile race, the 1894 Paris to Rouen, where Émile Roger finished 14th, after covering the in 10 hours 01-minute at an average speed of .\n\nIn 1895, Benz designed the first truck with an internal combustion engine in history. Benz also built the first motor buses in history in 1895, for the \"Netphener\" bus company.\nIn 1896, Karl Benz was granted a patent for his design of the first flat engine. It had horizontally opposed pistons, a design in which the corresponding pistons reach top dead centre simultaneously, thus balancing each other with respect to momentum. Flat engines with four or fewer cylinders are most commonly called boxer engines, \"boxermotor\" in German, and also are known as \"horizontally opposed engines\". This design is still used by Porsche, Subaru, and some high performance engines used in racing cars. In motorcycles, the most famous boxer engine is found in BMW Motorrad, though the boxer engine design was used in many other models, including Victoria, Harley-Davidson XA, Zündapp, Wooler, Douglas Dragonfly, Ratier, Universal, IMZ-Ural, Dnepr, Gnome et Rhône, Chang Jiang, Marusho, and the Honda Gold Wing.\n\nAlthough Gottlieb Daimler died in March 1900—and there is no evidence that Benz and Daimler knew each other nor that they knew about each other's early achievements—eventually, competition with Daimler Motoren Gesellschaft (DMG) in Stuttgart began to challenge the leadership of Benz & Cie. In October 1900, the main designer of DMG, Wilhelm Maybach, built the engine that would later be used in the \"Mercedes-35hp\" of 1902. The engine was built to the specifications of Emil Jellinek under a contract for him to purchase thirty-six vehicles with the engine, and for him to become a dealer of the special series. Jellinek stipulated the new engine be named Daimler-\"Mercedes\" (for his daughter). Maybach would quit DMG in 1907, but he designed the model and all of the important changes. After testing, the first was delivered to Jellinek on 22 December 1900. Jellinek continued to make suggestions for changes to the model and obtained good results racing the automobile in the next few years, encouraging DMG to engage in commercial production of automobiles, which they did in 1902.\n\nBenz countered with \"Parsifil\", introduced in 1903 with a vertical twin engine that achieved a top speed of . Then, without consulting Benz, the other directors hired some French designers.\n\nFrance was a country with an extensive automobile industry based on Maybach's creations. Because of this action, after difficult discussions, Karl Benz announced his retirement from design management on 24 January 1903, although he remained as director on the Board of Management through its merger with DMG in 1926 and, remained on the board of the new Daimler-Benz corporation until his death in 1929.\n\nHe was inducted into the Automotive Hall of Fame in 1984 and the European Automotive Hall of Fame.\n\nBenz's sons Eugen and Richard left Benz & Cie. in 1903, but Richard returned to the company in 1904 as the designer of passenger vehicles.\n\nThat year, sales of Benz & Cie. reached 3,480 automobiles, and the company remained the leading manufacturer of automobiles.\n\nAlong with continuing as a director of Benz & Cie., Karl Benz would soon found another company, \"C. Benz Söhne\", (with his son Eugen and closely held within the family), a privately held company for manufacturing automobiles. The brand name used the first initial of the French variant of Benz's first name, \"Carl\".\n\nIn 1909, the \"Blitzen Benz\" was built in Mannheim by Benz & Cie. The bird-beaked vehicle had a 21.5-liter (1312ci), engine, and on 9 November 1909 in the hands of Victor Hémery of France, the land speed racer at Brooklands, set a record of 226.91 km/h (141.94 mph), said to be \"faster than any plane, train, or automobile\" at the time, a record that was not exceeded for ten years by any other vehicle. It was transported to several countries, including the United States, to establish multiple records of this achievement.\n\nKarl Benz, Bertha Benz, and their son, Eugen, moved east of Mannheim to live in nearby Ladenburg, and solely with their own capital, founded the private company, C. Benz Sons (German: \"Benz Söhne\") in 1906, producing automobiles and gas engines. The latter type was replaced by petrol engines because of lack of demand.\nThis company never issued stocks publicly, building its own line of automobiles independently from Benz & Cie., which was located in Mannheim. The \"Benz Sons\" automobiles were of good quality and became popular in London as taxis.\n\nIn 1912, Karl Benz liquidated all of his shares in Benz Sons and left the family-held company in Ladenburg to Eugen and Richard, but he remained as a director of Benz & Cie.\n\nDuring a birthday celebration for him in his home town of Karlsruhe on 25 November 1914, the seventy-year-old Karl Benz was awarded an honorary doctorate by his alma mater, the \"Karlsruhe University\", thereby becoming—Dr. Ing. h. c. Karl Benz.\n\nAlmost from the very beginning of the production of automobiles, participation in sports car racing became a major method to gain publicity for manufacturers. At first, the production models were raced and the Benz \"Velo\" participated in the first automobile race: . Later, investment in developing racecars for motorsports produced returns through sales generated by the association of the name of the automobile with the winners. Unique race vehicles were built at the time, as seen in the photograph here of the Benz, the first mid-engine and aerodynamically designed, \"Tropfenwagen\", a \"teardrop\" body introduced at the 1923 European Grand Prix at Monza.\n\nIn the last production year of the \"Benz Sons\" company, 1923, three hundred and fifty units were built. During the following year, 1924, Karl Benz built two additional 8/25 hp units of the automobile manufactured by this company, tailored for his personal use, which he never sold; they are still preserved.\n\nThe German economic crisis worsened. In 1923 \"Benz & Cie.\" produced only 1,382 units in Mannheim, and \"DMG\" made only 1,020 in Stuttgart. The average cost of an automobile was 25 million marks because of rapid inflation. Negotiations between the two companies resumed and in 1924 they signed an \"Agreement of Mutual Interest\" valid until the year 2000. Both enterprises standardized design, production, purchasing, sales, and advertising—marketing their automobile models jointly—although keeping their respective brands.\n\nOn 28 June 1926, Benz & Cie. and DMG finally merged as the \"Daimler-Benz\" company, baptizing all of its automobiles, \"Mercedes-Benz\", honoring the most important model of the DMG automobiles, the 1902 \"Mercedes 35 hp\", along with the Benz name. The name of that DMG model had been selected after ten-year-old Mercédès Jellinek, the daughter of Emil Jellinek who had set the specifications for the new model. Between 1900 and 1909 he was a member of DMG's board of management, however had resigned long before the merger.\n\nKarl Benz was a member of the new \"Daimler-Benz\" board of management for the remainder of his life. A new logo was created in 1926, consisting of a three pointed star (representing Daimler's motto: \"\"engines for land, air, and water\"\") surrounded by traditional laurels from the Benz logo, and the brand of all of its automobiles was labeled \"Mercedes-Benz\". Model names would follow the brand name in the same convention as today.\n\nThe next year, 1927, the number of units sold tripled to 7,918 and the diesel line was launched for truck production. In 1928, the \"Mercedes-Benz SSK\" was presented.\n\nOn 4 April 1929, Karl Benz died at home in Ladenburg at the age of eighty-four from a bronchial inflammation. Until her death on 5 May 1944, Bertha Benz continued to reside in their last home. Members of the family resided in the home for thirty more years. The Benz home now has been designated as historic and is used as a scientific meeting facility for a nonprofit foundation, the \"Gottlieb Daimler and Karl Benz Foundation\", that honors both Bertha and Karl Benz for their roles in the history of automobiles.\nIn 2011, a dramatized television movie about the life of Karl and Bertha Benz was made named \"Carl & Bertha\" which premiered on 11 May and was aired by Das Erste on 23 May. A trailer of the movie and a \"making of\" special were released on YouTube.\n\nBULLET::::- Benz (unit)\nBULLET::::- Bertha Benz, his wife and automotive pioneer\nBULLET::::- Bertha Benz Memorial Route\nBULLET::::- German inventors and discoverers\nBULLET::::- Mercedes-Benz\nBULLET::::- History of the internal combustion engine\nBULLET::::- Siegfried Marcus\n\nBULLET::::- (autobiography)\nBULLET::::- (first edition) (bibrec)\nBULLET::::- Elis, Angela: \"Mein Traum ist länger als die Nacht. Wie Bertha Benz ihren Mann zu Weltruhm fuhr.\" Hoffmann und Campe, Hamburg 2010,\nBULLET::::- Mercedes-Benz AG (Hrsg.), \"Benz & Cie.: Zum 150. Geburtstag von Karl Benz\", Motorbuch Verlag: Stuttgart, 1994 1. Aufl. 296 S., 492 Abb., 124 in Farbe, , (biography)\nBULLET::::- (biography) Image of cover.\n\nBULLET::::- Brief biographies of Karl Benz and Bertha Benz, with portraits, an extensive archive, and detailed histories presented at the Mercedes-Benz Museum.\nBULLET::::- Mercedes-Benz corporate archives , company archives , history , media management archives , and publications\nBULLET::::- copies of the honorary doctorate and Baden State medal in gold, both awarded to Karl Benz in his lifetime.\nBULLET::::- Das Automuseum Dr. Carl Benz in der alten Benz Fabrik is the \"Dr. Carl Benz Auto Museum\" created by a private group in 1996 in a former Benz factory for an ancillary business founded with his sons in Ladenburg, which was separate from his major companies. The company opened in 1906 and closed in 1923, the site has a description of this museum and contemporary photographs with \"C. Benz SÖHNE KG\" painted on the building, which contains historical photographs, some restored automobiles, and a chronology of the life of Karl Benz\nBULLET::::- Karl Benz on 3-wheelers.com\nBULLET::::- Bertha Benz Memorial Route\nBULLET::::- Prof. John H. Lienhard on BERTHA Benz's RIDE\nBULLET::::- The Karl Benz family grave site in Ladenburg The urn contains the ashes of their son, Richard Benz, and the inscription on the gravestone reads:\nBULLET::::- The Gottlieb Daimler and Karl Benz Foundation founded in 1986 at the last residence of Bertha and Karl Benz in Ladenburg.\n"}
{"id": "16913", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16913", "title": "Ceiba pentandra", "text": "Ceiba pentandra\n\nCeiba pentandra is a tropical tree of the order Malvales and the family Malvaceae (previously separated in the family Bombacaceae), native to Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean, northern South America, and (as the variety \"C. pentandra\" var. \"guineensis\") to tropical west Africa. A somewhat smaller variety is found throughout southern Asia and the East Indies. Kapok is a name used in English speaking countries for both the tree and the cotton-like fluff obtained from its seed pods. In Spanish speaking countries the tree is commonly known as \"ceiba\". The tree is cultivated for the seed fibre, particularly in south-east Asia, and is also known as the Java cotton, Java kapok, silk-cotton, samauma, or ceiba.\n\nThe tree grows to , as confirmed by climbing and tape drop with reports of Kapoks up to Trunks can often be up to in diameter above the extensive buttress roots. The very largest individuals, however, can be thick or more above the buttresses.\n\nThe buttress roots can be clearly seen in photographs extending up the trunk of some specimens and extending out from the trunk as much as and then continuing below ground to a total length of \n\nThe trunk and many of the larger branches are often crowded with large simple thorns. These major branches, usually 4 to 6 in number, can be up to thick and form a crown of foliage as much as in width. The palmate leaves are composed of 5 to 9 leaflets, each up to long.\n\nThe trees produce several hundred pods containing seeds surrounded by a fluffy, yellowish fibre that is a mix of lignin and cellulose.\n\nThe referenced reports make it clear that C. pentandra is among the largest trees in the world.\n\nThe commercial tree is most heavily cultivated in the rainforests of Asia, notably in Java (hence its nicknames), the Philippines, Malaysia, and Hainan Island in China, as well as in South America.\n\nThe flowers are an important source of nectar and pollen for honey bees and bats. \n\nBats are the primary pollinators of the night-blooming flowers.\n\nNative tribes along the Amazon River harvest the fibre to wrap around their blowgun darts. The fibres create a seal that allows the pressure to force the dart through the tube.\n\nThe fibre is light, very buoyant, resilient, resistant to water, but it is very flammable. The process of harvesting and separating the fibre is labour-intensive and manual. It is difficult to spin, but is used as an alternative to down as filling in mattresses, pillows, upholstery, zafus, and stuffed toys such as teddy bears, and for insulation. It was previously much used in life jackets and similar devices until synthetic materials largely replaced the fibre. The seeds produce an oil that is used locally in soap and can be used as fertilizer.\n\n\"Ceiba pentandra\" bark decoction has been used as a diuretic, aphrodisiac, and to treat headache, as well as type II diabetes. It is used as an additive in some versions of the psychedelic drink Ayahuasca.\n\nA vegetable oil can be pressed from the seeds. The oil has a yellow colour and a pleasant, mild odour and taste, resembling cottonseed oil. It becomes rancid quickly when exposed to air. Kapok oil is produced in India, Indonesia and Malaysia. It has an iodine value of 85–100; this makes it a nondrying oil, which means that it does not dry out significantly when exposed to air. The oil has some potential as a biofuel and in paint preparation.\n\nThe tree is a sacred symbol in Maya mythology.\n\nAccording to the folklore of Trinidad and Tobago, the Castle of the Devil is a huge \"C. pentandra\" growing deep in the forest in which Bazil the demon of death was imprisoned by a carpenter. The carpenter tricked the devil into entering the tree in which he carved seven rooms, one above the other, into the trunk. Folklore claims that Bazil still resides in that tree.\n\nMost masks coming from Burkina Faso, especially those of Bobo and Mossi people, are carved from \"C. pentandra\" timber.\n\n\"Ceiba pentandra\" is the national emblem of Guatemala, Puerto Rico, and Equatorial Guinea. It appears on the coat of arms and flag of Equatorial Guinea.\n\nThe Cotton Tree (Sierra Leone) is a landmark in downtown Freetown, Sierra Leone, and is considered a symbol of freedom for the slaves that immigrated there.\n\nBULLET::::- Fiber crop\nBULLET::::- Parque de la Ceiba\n\nBULLET::::- Kapok Fibers\nBULLET::::- Seed Fibers\nBULLET::::- Germplasm Resources Information Network: \"Ceiba pentandra\"\nBULLET::::- Ceiba pentandra in Brunken, U., Schmidt, M., Dressler, S., Janssen, T., Thombiano, A. & Zizka, G. 2008. West African plants – A Photo Guide. Forschungsinstitut Senckenberg, Frankfurt/Main.\n"}
{"id": "16914", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16914", "title": "Kyushu", "text": "Kyushu\n\nIn the 8th-century Taihō Code reforms, Dazaifu was established as a special administrative term for the region.\n\n, Kyushu has a population of 12,970,479 and covers .\n\nThe island is mountainous, and Japan's most active volcano, Mt Aso at , is on Kyushu. There are many other signs of tectonic activity, including numerous areas of hot springs. The most famous of these are in Beppu, on the east shore, and around Mt. Aso, in central Kyushu. The island is separated from Honshu by the Kanmon Straits. Kyushu is the nearest to the Asian continent which made it the gateway to Japan.\n\nThe name \"Kyūshū\" comes from the nine ancient provinces of Saikaidō situated on the island: Chikuzen, Chikugo, Hizen, Higo, Buzen, Bungo, Hyūga, Osumi, and Satsuma.\n\nToday's is a politically defined region that consists of the seven prefectures on the island of Kyushu (which also includes the former Tsushima and Iki as part of Nagasaki), plus Okinawa Prefecture to the south:\n\nBULLET::::- Northern Kyushu\nBULLET::::- Fukuoka Prefecture\nBULLET::::- Kumamoto Prefecture\nBULLET::::- Nagasaki Prefecture\nBULLET::::- Ōita Prefecture\nBULLET::::- Saga Prefecture\nBULLET::::- Southern Kyushu\nBULLET::::- Kagoshima Prefecture\nBULLET::::- Miyazaki Prefecture\nBULLET::::- Okinawa Prefecture\n\nKyushu has 10.3 percent of the population of Japan. Most of Kyushu's population is concentrated along the northwest, in the cities of Fukuoka and Kitakyushu, with population corridors stretching southwest into Sasebo and Nagasaki and south into Kumamoto and Kagoshima. Except for Oita and Miyazaki, the eastern seaboard shows a general decline in population.\n\nKyushu is described as a stronghold of the Liberal Democratic Party.\n\nBULLET::::- Fukuoka (population: 1,588,924)\nBULLET::::- Kitakyushu (population: 940,978)\nBULLET::::- Kumamoto (population: 738,907)\n\nBULLET::::- Kagoshima\nBULLET::::- Ōita\nBULLET::::- Nagasaki\nBULLET::::- Miyazaki\nBULLET::::- Naha\nBULLET::::- Kurume\nBULLET::::- Sasebo\nBULLET::::- Saga\n\nParts of Kyushu have a subtropical climate, particularly Miyazaki prefecture and Kagoshima prefecture. Major agricultural products are rice, tea, tobacco, sweet potatoes, and soy; also, silk is widely produced. The island is noted for various types of porcelain, including Arita, Imari, Satsuma, and Karatsu. Heavy industry is concentrated in the north around Fukuoka, Kitakyushu, Nagasaki, and Oita and includes chemicals, automobiles, semiconductors, and metal processing.\n\nIn 2010, the graduate employment rate in the region was the lowest nationwide, at 88.9%.\n\nBesides the volcanic area of the south, there are significant mud hot springs in the northern part of the island, around Beppu. The springs are the site of occurrence of certain extremophile microorganisms, which are capable of surviving in extremely hot environments.\n\nMajor universities and colleges in Kyushu:\nBULLET::::- National universities\nBULLET::::- Kyushu University – One of seven former \"Imperial Universities\"\nBULLET::::- Kyushu Institute of Technology\nBULLET::::- Saga University\nBULLET::::- Nagasaki University\nBULLET::::- Kumamoto University\nBULLET::::- Fukuoka University of Education\nBULLET::::- Oita University\nBULLET::::- Miyazaki University\nBULLET::::- Kagoshima University\nBULLET::::- National Institute of Fitness and Sports in Kanoya\nBULLET::::- University of the Ryukyus\nBULLET::::- Universities run by local governments\nBULLET::::- University of Kitakyushu\nBULLET::::- Kyushu Dental College\nBULLET::::- Fukuoka Women's University\nBULLET::::- Fukuoka Prefectural University\nBULLET::::- Nagasaki Prefectural University\nBULLET::::- Oita University of Nursing and Health Sciences\nBULLET::::- Prefectural University of Kumamoto\nBULLET::::- Miyazaki Municipal University\nBULLET::::- Miyazaki Prefectural Nursing University\nBULLET::::- Okinawa Prefectural University of Arts\nBULLET::::- Major private universities\nBULLET::::- Fukuoka University – University with the largest number of students in Kyushu\nBULLET::::- Kumamoto Gakuen University\nBULLET::::- Ritsumeikan Asia Pacific University\nBULLET::::- Seinan Gakuin University\nBULLET::::- Kyushu Sangyo University – Baseball team won the Japanese National Championship in 2005\nBULLET::::- University of Occupational and Environmental Health\nBULLET::::- Kurume University\n\nThe island is linked to the larger island of Honshu by the Kanmon Tunnels, which carry both the San'yō Shinkansen and non-Shinkansen trains of the Kyushu Railway Company, as well as vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle traffic. The Kanmon Bridge also connects the island with Honshu. Railways on the island are operated by the Kyushu Railway Company, and Nishitetsu Railway.\n\nBULLET::::- Japanese archipelago\nBULLET::::- Geography of Japan\nBULLET::::- List of regions in Japan\nBULLET::::- Northern Kyushu, Southern Kyushu\nBULLET::::- Azumi people, an ancient group of people who inhabited parts of northern Kyūshū\nBULLET::::- Group Kyushu\nBULLET::::- Western Army (Japan)\nBULLET::::- United States Fleet Activities Sasebo\nBULLET::::- Hoenn, a fictional region in the Pokémon franchise which is based on Kyushu\nBULLET::::- Kanmonkyo Bridge, that connects Kyūshū with Honshū\nBULLET::::- Kyushu National Museum\nBULLET::::- Kyushu dialects, Hichiku dialect, Hōnichi dialect and Kagoshima dialect\n\nBULLET::::- Nussbaum, Louis-Frédéric and Käthe Roth. (2005). \"Japan encyclopedia.\" Cambridge: Harvard University Press. ;\n"}
{"id": "16915", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16915", "title": "KAB-500KR", "text": "KAB-500KR\n\nThe KAB-500Kr (Correctable air bomb - 500 kg) is an electro-optical TV-guided fire and forget bomb developed by the Soviet Air Force in the 1980s. It remains in service with the CIS and various export customers.\n\nThe KAB-500Kr is analogous to the American GBU-15 weapon. It uses a standard Soviet/Russian FAB-500 general-purpose bomb, with a nominal weight of , as a warhead, adding a low-light television seeker and guidance fins to turn it into a guided, unpowered glide bomb.\n\nThe bomb is long and weighs , of which is a hardened, armor-piercing warhead capable of penetrating up to of reinforced concrete. The weapon's seeker can lock onto a target at ranges of up to , depending on visibility. The KAB-500-OD variant is equipped with a fuel-air explosive warhead. The technology of KAB-500Kr is also used for larger bombs, such as KAB-1500Kr based on the 1500 kg class FAB-1500 iron bomb.\nThere is also training bomb KAB-500Kr-U\n\nThe KAB-500S-E is a version with satellite guidance\n"}
{"id": "16916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16916", "title": "KAB-500L", "text": "KAB-500L\n\nThe KAB-500L is a laser-guided bomb developed by the Soviet Air Force. It remains in service with the CIS and post-Soviet Russian Air Force.\n\nThe KAB-500L is a standard FAB-500 general-purpose bomb, which has a nominal weight of , fitted with a semi-active laser seeker and guidance fins, turning it into an unpowered guided bomb.\n\nThe KAB-500L is long and weighs . Its warhead makes up of the total weight, of which roughly 50% is blast-effect high explosive. Russian sources credit it with a CEP of . The technology of KAB-500L is also used for larger bombs, such as the KAB-1500L family.\n\nIt is also deployed by the Indian Air Force. The primary launch platform is Su-30MKI.\n\nKAB-500S-E is a Precision-Guided Munition (PGM) whose guidance system is based on GLONASS. The weapon can be dropped from aircraft flying at an altitude from 500 meters to 5000 meters and with an airspeed of 500–1150 km/h. The CEP is 7–12 meters. These bombs were used for the first time in the Russian military intervention in the Syrian Civil War in September 2015.\n\nBULLET::::- Asia’s Advanced Precision Guided Munitions\n"}
{"id": "16917", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16917", "title": "Kamov Ka-50", "text": "Kamov Ka-50\n\nThe Kamov Ka-50 \"Black Shark\" (, English: kitefin shark, NATO reporting name: Hokum A) is a Russian single-seat attack helicopter with the distinctive coaxial rotor system of the Kamov design bureau. It was designed in the 1980s and adopted for service in the Russian army in 1995. It is manufactured by the Progress company in Arsenyev. It is used as a heavily armed scout helicopter. It is the world's first operational helicopter with a rescue ejection system.\n\nDuring the late 1990s, Kamov and Israel Aerospace Industries developed a tandem-seat cockpit version, the Kamov Ka-50-2 \"Erdogan\" (, ), to compete in Turkey's attack helicopter competition. Kamov also designed another two-seat variant, the Kamov Ka-52 \"Alligator\" (, NATO reporting name: Hokum B).\n\nThe Ka-50 is the production version of the V-80Sh-1 prototype. Production of the attack helicopter was ordered by the Soviet Council of Ministers on 14 December 1987. Development of the helicopter was first reported in the West in 1984, while the first photograph appeared in 1989. During operational testing from 1985 to 1986, the workload on the pilot was found to be similar to that of a fighter-bomber pilot, such that the pilot could perform both flying and navigation duties.\n\nLike other Kamov helicopters, it features Kamov's characteristic coaxial contra-rotating rotor system, which removes the need for the entire tail rotor assembly and improves the aircraft's aerobatic qualities—it can perform loops, rolls and \"the funnel\" (circle-strafing), where the aircraft maintains a line-of-sight to the target while flying circles of varying altitude, elevation and airspeed around it. The omission of the tail rotor is a qualitative advantage, because the torque-countering tail rotor can use up to 30% of engine power. The Ka-50's entire transmission presents a comparatively small target to ground fire.\n\nFor improved pilot survivability the Ka-50 is fitted with a NPP Zvezda (transl. Star) K-37-800 ejection seat, which is a rare feature for a helicopter. Before the rocket in the ejection seat deploys, the rotor blades are blown away by explosive charges in the rotor disc and the canopy is jettisoned.\nFollowing initial flight testing and system tests, the Council ordered the first batch of helicopters in 1990. The attack helicopter was first described publicly as the \"Ka-50\" in March 1992 at a symposium in the United Kingdom. The helicopter was unveiled at the Mosaeroshow '92 at Zhukovskiy in August 1992. The following month, the second production example made its foreign debut at the Farnborough Airshow, where it was displayed with an image of a werewolf on its rudder—gaining the popular nickname \"Werewolf\". The fifth prototype, painted black, played the title role in the move \"Чёрная акула\" (Black Shark), which made Ka-50 known by its current nickname.\n\nIn November 1993, four production helicopters were flown to the Army Aviation Combat Training Centre at Torzhok to begin field trials. The president of the Russian Federation authorized the fielding of the Ka-50 with the Russian Army on 28 August 1995. The collapse of the Soviet Union led to a severe drop in defense procurement. This resulted in only a dozen Ka-50s delivered, instead of the planned several hundred to replace the Mil Mi-24.\n\nThe single-seat configuration was considered undesirable by NATO. The first two Ka-50 prototypes had false windows painted on them, which successfully misled the first western reports of the aircraft in the mid-1980s, to the point of some analysts even concluding that its primary mission was as an air superiority aircraft for hunting and killing NATO attack helicopters, an alarming but expected Soviet move by NATO planners following the recent J-CATCH program evaluation.\n\nThe Ka-50 and its modifications have been chosen as the special forces' support helicopter, while the Mil Mi-28 has become the main army's gunship. The production of Ka-50 was recommenced in 2006. In 2009, the Russian Air Force received three units built from incomplete airframes dating from the mid-1990s.\n\nFrom the time the Ka-50 was ordered in 1987, it was known that the limited night-time capability of the original version would have to be upgraded to meet night attack requirements. Initially, Ka-50N was meant to be fitted with the Merkury Low-Light TV (LLTV) system. Due to lack of funding, the system was late and experienced reliability and capability issues. As a result, focus shifted to forward looking infrared (FLIR) systems. Kamov drafted a design in 1993 that included the Shkval-N sighting system with an infrared sensor. Many variants were tried. On some, the original Shkval was supplemented by a thermal imaging system, while others saw a complete replacement by the Samshit day-and-night system (also used on Ka-52). Some of the imagers included in the trials were manufactured by the French SAGEM and Thomson companies. Kamov was forced to consider foreign analogues as a temporary replacement for domestic imaging systems because of their slow development.\n\nTrials led to two \"final\" versions: Ka-50N \"Night Shark\" (, \"velvet belly lanternshark\") and Ka-50Sh (, \"ball\"; because of the spherical FLIR turret). The first Ka-50Sh, which was the 8th pre-production aircraft, Bort 018, first flew on 4 March 1997. The Kamov company and Black Shark logos were displayed on the endplate fins and the vertical tail. It featured the Samshit-50 system installed within a 640 mm (25 in) diameter sphere under the nose. Shkval system was moved to the nose cone area. Neither of the Ka-50 night-attack versions has entered full production.\n\nIn the early 1980s, while comparative tests of the V-80 (Ka-50 prototype) and the Mi-28 were being conducted, the Kamov design team came up with a proposal to develop a dedicated helicopter to conduct battlefield reconnaissance, provide target designation, support and coordinate group attack helicopter operations. However, the economic hardships that hit the nation in the late 1980s hampered this new development program. This prompted Kamov's Designer General to choose a modified version of Ka-50 on which to install the reconnaissance and target designation system. The modified \"Black Shark\" required a second crew member to operate the optronics/radar reconnaissance suite. Kamov decided to use side-by-side seating arrangement, due to the verified improvements in co-operation between the crew members. This twin-seat version was designated Ka-52.\nIn comparison to the original Ka-50, it has a \"softer\" nose profile and a radar system with two antennas—mast-mounted for aerial targets and nose-mounted for ground targets. Day-and-night TV/thermal sighting system in two spherical turrets (one over the cockpit and the second under the nose) are also fitted. The Ka-52 has the side-mounted cannon of the original Ka-50. It features six wing-mounted hardpoints compared to four on the Ka-50. To keep the weight and performance on par with that of the Ka-50, the armor and the capacity of the cannon magazine/feed were reduced. Also some flight parameters deteriorated: rate of climb dropped from 10 to 8 m/s and maximum positive load factor became 3.0 g. Most of the problems were solved by installing the new VK-2500 engine. The Ka-52 is approved for day, night and adverse weather conditions.\n\nManufacturing of the first Ka-52 airframe began in mid-1996. Series production was started in autumn 2008. , the 696th Instructor and Research Helicopter Regiment, based at Torzhok Air Base, is operating eight helicopters, in varying degrees of capability and/or modification, for research and development. In December 2010, four new, series-production Kamov Ka-52s were delivered to the Air Base of the 344th Centre for Combat Training and Aircrew Conversion.\nThe first phase of the official tests (ГСИ) was completed in December 2008 and after that permission was given for the production of an experimental batch for phase 2 (ГСИ, including fire tests and the search for targets)\n\nSerial production of the Ka-52 began at the Progress Arsenyev Aviation Company plant in Arsenyev, Primorsky Krai by end of the 2008. After the completion of the state trials, the Ka-52 entered service in May 2011 with first operational units joining the Russian Air Force the same month. Under previous State Defense Procurement Plans, the Russian Armed Forces was to receive 2 experimental and 24 serial Ka-52s by 2012. The second long-term contract worth of 120 billion rubbles signed in 2011, is to provide the Russian Air Force in total with 146 Ka-52 helicopters until 2020. In February 2018, the Russian Ministry of Defence expressed an interest to purchase additional 114 Ka-52s within the new State Armament Program for 2018-2027.\n\nIn 2015, Egypt signed a deal for the purchase of 46 Ka-52 helicopters, the contract is expected to be carried out in full by 2020. Russian Helicopters started producing its first export models in early 2017, the overall production was doubled in order to meet new demands. The first batch of 3 Ka-52 attack helicopters was delivered to Egypt in July 2017, with a second batch of another 3 helicopters being delivered in August. By year-end 2017, Egypt had received 19 Ka-52s.\n\nEgypt's helicopter is a modified version of the basic Ka-52 Alligator that serves in the Russian Air Force. Unlike the basic model, the Egyptian Ka-52 utilizes anti-corrosion materials and has a reinforced fuselage structure. It received new landing gear and wheels, designed for the increased takeoff weight of the helicopter. The Egyptian model features updated avionics and a new cooling system for operating in hot climate. Dmitry Rogozin, Deputy Prime Minister of Russia on defense and space industry, proposed to name it the \"Nile Crocodile\".\n\nThe helicopter is equipped with the new OES-52 electro-optical observation and laser targeting system, replacing the standard GOES-451 mounted under the nose. The new optronic system began development in 2011 as a collaboration between Kamov and Sagem, and is based on the French company's STRIX sighting System. The OES-52 provides greater range of target detection and recognition.\n\nThe helicopter features the Arbalet-52 Dual-band coherent pulse radar, which has an Earth mapping range of 32 km and a detection range of 25 km for ground targets and 15 km for aerial targets.\n\nThe \"Nile Crocodiles\" will receive President-S airborne defense systems for protection against guided missiles. The system includes both radar and laser warning receivers, MAW sensors, chaff/flare dispensers, in addition to ECM and DIRCM jammers. Egyptian Ka-52s feature two new DIRCM sets installed on either side of the fuselage, which are different from the standard L370-5 sets.\n\nEgypt plans to arm its Ka-52s with Russian anti-tank guided missiles. The Air Force has chosen two types of missiles; namely the Vikhr and the Ataka laser-guided missiles.\n\nMistral class amphibious assault ships, ordered by the Russian Defense Ministry, were to contain rotary-wing assets, formed into aviation groups. Each of these groups was planned to include eight attack and eight assault/transport helicopters. The Ka-52K \"Katran\" (, 'mud shark'), a navalised derivative of the Ka-52, has been selected as the new ship-borne attack type for the Russian Naval Aviation. Its features include folding rotor blades, folding wings and life-support systems for the crew members, who will fly in immersion suits. The fuselage and systems receive special anti-corrosion treatment and a new fire-control radar will be capable of operating in \"Sea Mode\" and of supporting anti-ship missiles. Russian Naval Aviation will need at least 40 Ka-52Ks, the first of which was tentatively slated to enter squadron service by early 2015, coinciding with the delivery of the first carrier. The first of four Ka-52Ks ordered for the Russian Navy flew on the 7 March 2015; the Navy also has option on a further 28 helicopters. In total, 4 pre-series Ka-52K are currently operated and used for testing by the Russian Navy.\n\nHowever, following the Russian annexation of Crimea the sale of the Mistrals was cancelled and they have since been sold to Egypt. Russia won the Egyptian tender for providing deck helicopters Ka-52K for the Egyptian Mistral carriers. Pre-contract work is underway, including final agreement on the helicopter's technical concept and other financial conditions.\nIn 1997, Israel Aerospace Industries (IAI) in cooperation with the Kamov bureau entered the Ka-50-2 \"Erdoğan\" in a Turkish design competition for a $4 billion contract for 145 (later changed to 50) combat helicopters.\n\nThe Ka-50-2 is a tandem cockpit variant of the Ka-50. It featured a modern, Israeli-made \"glass cockpit\" avionics and a turret-mounted folding (for landing clearance) 30 mm cannon instead of the fixed cannon on the Ka-50. It features combat-proven avionics and advanced anti-tank guided missiles for a high level of combat effectiveness. The helicopter has excellent flight performance, and high combat survivability due to its coaxial rotor technology. It is equipped with IAI's flexible modular avionics suite, which can be readily tailored to meet the TLF's operational requirements and provides growth potential.\n\nIAI and Kamov performed flights of the variant with IAI's Core Avionics. These flights demonstrated the helicopter's \"glass cockpit\" with multifunctional displays and Control and Display Unit (CDU) driven by centralized mission computers. Also tested were its flight navigation and the operation of the Helicopter Multi-Mission Optronic Stabilized Payload (HMOSP) targeting system. The demonstration flights included night mission capability demonstrations using Night Vision Goggles (NVG) and the day/night targeting system.\n\nTurkey initially selected an improved version of the Bell AH-1 SuperCobra over the Erdogan, Eurocopter Tiger, AH-64 Apache, Denel Rooivalk, and A129 Mangusta. In the end, the contract was awarded to the A129 in 2007.\n\nThe Ka-50 and its two-seat version Ka-52 are high-performance combat helicopters with day and night capability, high survivability and fire power, to defeat air targets and heavily armoured tanks armed with air defence weapons. It was designed to be small, fast and agile to improve survivability and lethality.\n\nThe coaxial rotor design provides a hovering ceiling of 4,000 m and vertical rate of climb of 10 m a second at an altitude of 2,500 m. The rotor blades are made from polymer materials. The coaxial-rotor configuration results in moments of inertia values relative to vertical and lateral axes between 1.5 and two times less than the values found in single-rotor helicopters with tail rotors. Absence of the tail rotor enables the helicopter to perform flat turns within the entire flight speed range. A maximum vertical load factor of 3.5 g combined with low moments of inertia give the Ka-50 a high level of agility. Flight systems include inertial navigation system (INS), autopilot and head-up display (HUD). Sensors include forward-looking infrared (FLIR) and terrain-following radar.\n\nThe Kamov Ka-50 is also fitted with an electronic radio and sighting-piloting-navigating system allowing flights at day and night in VFR and IFR weather conditions. The novelty of this avionics is based on the system of precise target designation with digital coded communication system, which ensures the exchange of information (precise enemy coordinates) between helicopters flying far apart from each other as well as with ground command posts. The Ka-52 is also equipped with a \"Phazotron\" cockpit radio-locator, allowing flights in adverse meteorological conditions and at night. The necessary information acquired by this radio-locator is transferred to the cockpit's multi-functional display screen. For conducting a fight, both pilots are equipped with range-finders built-in their helmets and they can use night vision eyepieces for night flights.\n\nFor its own protection, Ka-50 is fitted with a radar warning receiver, electronic warfare system and chaff and flare dispenser. The dispensers are placed in aerodynamic containers fitted at wings’ ends. Each casing (container) contains two dispensers with 32 x 26 mm countermeasures each. The whole system works on principle of evaluated response based on infrared or electronic impulse irradiation. Extensive all-round armour installed in the cockpit protects the pilot against 12.7 mm armour-piercing bullets and 23 mm projectile fragments. The rotor blades are rated to withstand several hits of ground-based automatic weapons.\n\nOther survivability features include twin-engine design for redundancy, protection for vital aircraft systems, and crash absorbing land gear and fuselage. Also, the coaxial main rotor configuration does not require tail rotor, which can improve survivability.\n\nIt is the world's first operational helicopter with a rescue ejection system, which allows the pilot to escape at all altitudes and speeds. The K-37-800 rocket-assisted ejection system is manufactured by the Zvezda Research and Production Enterprise Joint Stock Company in the Moscow region.\n\nThe aircraft has one Shipunov 2A42. It has selective fire, and a dual-feed, which allows for a cyclic rate of fire between 200 and 800 rounds per minute. This autocannon is mounted near the centre of fuselage and carries 460 high-fragmentation, explosive incendiary, or armour-piercing rounds. The type of ammunition is also selected by the pilot during flight. The integrated 30 mm cannon is semi-rigidly fixed on the helicopter's side, movable only slightly in elevation and azimuth. Semi-rigid mounting improves the cannon's accuracy, giving the 30 mm a longer practical range and better hit ratio at medium ranges than with a free-turning turret mount.\n\nThe fire control system automatically shares all target information in real time, allowing one helicopter to engage a target spotted by another aircraft, and the system can also input target information from ground-based forward scouts with personnel-carried target designation gear.\n\nA substantial load of weapons can be carried on four external hardpoints under the stub wings, plus two on the wingtips, a total of some 2,000 kg (depending on the mix). The pylons can be tilted up to 10-degree downward. Fuel tanks may be mounted on a suspension point, whenever necessary.\n\nAnti-tank armament comprises twelve laser-guided Vikhr anti-tank missiles (transl. Vortex or whirlwind), with a maximum range of some 8 km. The laser guidance is reported to be virtually jam-proof and the system features automatic guidance to target, enabling evasive action immediately after missile launch, alternatively it can also use Ataka laser-guided anti-tank missiles.\n\nKamov-52K can be armed with Hermes-A anti-tank guided missiles.\n\nKa-50/52 can also carry several rocket pods, including the S-13 and S-8 rockets. The \"dumb\" rocket pods could be upgraded to laser guided with the proposed Ugroza system.\n\nKa-50 took part in the Russian Army's operations against separatists in the Chechen Republic during the Second Chechen War. In December 2000, a pair of production Ka-50s arrived to the area. With the Ka-50s was a Ka-29 to provide reconnaissance and target designation. On 6 January 2001, the Ka-50 used live weapons against a real enemy for the first time. On 9 January, at the entry into a mountain gorge in the area of a settlement named Komsomolskoye, a single Ka-50 accompanied by an Mi-24 used S-8 unguided rockets to destroy a warehouse full of ammunition belonging to Chechen insurgents. On 6 February, in the forest-covered mountain area to the south of the village of Tsentoroj, the strike group composed of two Ka-50s and the sole Ka-29 discovered and, from a range of 3 km, destroyed a fortified camp of insurgents using two \"9K121 Vikhr\" guided missiles. 14 February, saw a similar strike group carrying out a \"hunting\" mission in the area of Oak-Yurt and Hatun. In difficult conditions, pilots found and destroyed eight targets. These missions tested the type's airframe, as well as its on-board systems and armament. Its successful performance in difficult, mountainous terrain once again confirmed the usefulness of the many advanced features of the Ka-50's design, including its power and maneuverability.\n\nKa-52 helicopters were spotted being deployed in support of the Russian military intervention in the Syrian Civil War in 2015, various sources stating they were involved in defense of the Russian base in Latakia, providing escort for search and rescue helicopters, and supporting Russian special forces. For the first time, Ka-52s were seen near the town of Al-Qaryatayn, liberated in early April 2016 from Daesh. They took part in the 2017 Palmyra offensive. On 12 August 2017, they took part in a Syrian paratroopers operation conducting a reconnaissance-strike mission.\n\nOn 5 May 2018, a Ka-52 crashed near Mayadin due to a technical failure, according to some sources.\n\nIt has participated in a number of exercises, including \"Boundary 2004\" in the Edelweiss mountain range in Kyrgyzstan during August 2004. The \"Shark\" demonstrated its advantages by operating at a high altitude and an air temperature of more than 30 °C. A Ka-50 provided cover for the landing of troops and then worked on the ground targets using its cannons and rockets.\n\nIndia issued a request for proposal for 22 attack helicopters for the Indian Air Force in May 2008. The Ka-50, the Mil Mi-28, and the Eurocopter Tiger were the front-runners for this order as of October 2008. The tender though was eventually cancelled and later India announced a new tender, with revised conditions. Russia again offered the Mi-28N and Ka-52.\n\nThe Russian Air Force has accepted 12 Ka-52 helicopters for operational service in 2011, and the total number of completed Ka-52s was already 65 units. 20 Ka-52 aircraft were located at the 575th Airbase Chernigovsky District, Eastern Military District. 16 were at 393rd \"Sevastopol\" Airbase Korenovsk, Southern Military District, 12 were transferred to newly formed 15th Army Aviation Brigade of the Western Military District at the airport of Ostrov, 8 – Torzhok 344th Centre for Combat Training and Flight Personnel Training. Five test aircraft are owned by JSC \"Kamov\"; two machines were lost in accidents. The Ka-52 was displayed to the international community at the 2013 Paris Air Show.\n\nIn 2013, the AAC \"Progress\" has completed the contract with the Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation, signed in 2009, and would begin the next long-term contract for supplying 143 Ka-52, worth about 120 billion rubles (≈US$3.5 bln).\n\nIn June 2015, Sergei Kornev, the head of Rosoboronexport's delegation, said that Russia has signed its first contracts on the export of Ka-52 Alligator attack helicopters. \"We have the Ka-52 in its export model and we have contracts for it, and it's already being spun because it has a good, firm future\" he said at the airshow outside Paris. Kornev did not specify the volume of contracts or with whom they were signed.\n\nBULLET::::- Kamov V-80: Prototype version for Ka-50.\nBULLET::::- Kamov Ka-50: Single-seat version.\nBULLET::::- Kamov Ka-50N: Ka-50 with night attack capability.\nBULLET::::- Kamov Ka-50Sh: Ka-50 with improved night attack capability.\nBULLET::::- Kamov Ka-50-2 \"Erdogan\": Version with a two-seat tandem cockpit.\nBULLET::::- Kamov Ka-52 \"Alligator\": Highly upgraded version with a two-seat side-by-side cockpit for the Russian Air Force.\nBULLET::::- Kamov Ka-52K \"Katran\": Naval version with folding blade and reinforced landing gear, wing shortened for basing on ships and the possibility of using Kh-35 anti-ship missile.\n\nBULLET::::- Egyptian Air Force\nBULLET::::- Russian Air Force\nBULLET::::- Russian Naval Aviation\n\nBULLET::::- Notes\nBULLET::::- Bibliography\n\nBULLET::::- Donald, David, and Daniel J. March. \"Ka-50/52, Kamov's 'Hokum' family\". \"Modern Battlefield Warplanes\". AIRtime Publishing, 2004. .\n\nBULLET::::- Kamov Ka-50, and Kamov Ka-52 official pages\nBULLET::::- Helicopter site\nBULLET::::- The history of the Ka-50 Black Shark, Part 1, Part 2, and Part 3 on rian.ru\nBULLET::::- Ka-50 page on GlobalSecurity.org\n"}
{"id": "16919", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16919", "title": "Kenny Dalglish", "text": "Kenny Dalglish\n\nSir Kenneth Mathieson Dalglish (born 4 March 1951) is a Scottish former football player and manager. He made more than 300 appearances for Celtic and Liverpool and earned over 100 caps for the Scotland national team. Dalglish won the Ballon d'Or Silver Award in 1983, the PFA Players' Player of the Year in 1983, and the FWA Footballer of the Year in 1979 and 1983. In 2009, \"FourFourTwo\" named Dalglish the greatest striker in post-war British football, and in 2006, he topped a Liverpool fans' poll of \"100 Players Who Shook the Kop\". He has been inducted into both the Scottish and English Football Halls of Fame.\n\nDalglish began his career with Celtic in 1971, going on to win four Scottish league championships, four Scottish Cups and one Scottish League Cup with the club. In 1977, Liverpool manager Bob Paisley paid a British transfer record of £440,000 to bring Dalglish to Liverpool. His years at Liverpool were among the club's most successful periods, as he won six English league championships, the FA Cup, four League Cups, five FA Charity Shields, three European Cups and one European Super Cup. In international football, Dalglish made 102 appearances and scored 30 goals for Scotland between 1971 and 1986, becoming their most capped player and joint-leading goalscorer (with Denis Law).\n\nDalglish became player-manager of Liverpool in 1985 after the resignation of Joe Fagan, winning a further three First Divisions, an FA Cup and four FA Charity Shields, before resigning in 1991. Eight months later, Dalglish made a return to football management with Blackburn Rovers, whom he led from the Second Division to win the Premier League in 1995. Soon afterwards, he stepped down as manager to become Director of Football at the club, before leaving altogether in 1996. In January 1997, Dalglish took over as manager at Newcastle United. Newcastle finished runners-up in both the Premier League and FA Cup during his first season, but they only finished 13th in 1997–98, which led to his dismissal the following season. Dalglish went on to be appointed Director of Football at Celtic in 1999, and later manager, where he won the Scottish League Cup before an acrimonious departure the following year.\n\nBetween 2000 and 2010, Dalglish focused on charitable concerns, founding The Marina Dalglish Appeal with his wife to raise money for cancer care. In January 2011, Dalglish returned to Liverpool for a spell as caretaker manager after the dismissal of Roy Hodgson, becoming the permanent manager in May 2011. Despite winning the League Cup which earned them a place in the UEFA Europa League, and reaching the FA Cup Final, Liverpool only finished 8th in the Premier League, and Dalglish was dismissed in May 2012. In October 2013, Dalglish returned to Anfield as a non-executive director, and had Anfield's Centenary Stand renamed after him in May 2017.\n\nDalglish, the son of an engineer, was born in Dalmarnock in the East End of Glasgow, and was brought up in Milton in the north of the city. He moved to the docklands of Govan, near Ibrox, home of Rangers, when he was 15, and he grew up supporting Rangers.\n\nDalglish attended Miltonbank Primary School in Milton and started out as a goalkeeper. He then attended High Possil Senior Secondary School, where he won the inter-schools five-a-side and the inter-year five-a-side competitions. He won the Scottish Cup playing for Glasgow Schoolboys and Glasgow Schools, and was then selected for the Scottish schoolboys team that went undefeated in a home nations Victory Shield tournament. In 1966, Dalglish had unsuccessful trials at West Ham and Liverpool.\n\nDalglish signed a provisional contract with Celtic in May 1967. The club's manager Jock Stein sent his assistant Sean Fallon to see Dalglish and his parents at their home, which had Rangers-related pictures on the walls. In his first season Dalglish was loaned out to Cumbernauld United, for whom he scored 37 goals. During this time he also worked as an apprentice joiner. Stein wanted Dalglish to spend a second season on loan at Cumbernauld, but the youngster wanted to turn professional. Dalglish got his wish, and became a regular member of the highly rated Celtic reserve team that became known as the Quality Street Gang, due to its having a large number of future Scottish internationals, including Danny McGrain, George Connelly, Lou Macari, and David Hay. Dalglish made his first-team competitive debut for Celtic in a Scottish League Cup quarter-final tie against Hamilton Academical on 25 September 1968, coming on as a second-half substitute in a 4–2 win.\n\nHe played with the reserves throughout the 1968–69 season, but only scored four goals in 17 games. The following season, he moved into midfield, which saw his performances improve. Stein put Dalglish in the starting XI for the first team in a league match against Raith Rovers on 4 October 1969. Celtic won 7–1 but Dalglish didn't score, nor did he score in the next three first-team games he played in during season 1969–70. The reserves, however, benefited from his goalscoring talent from midfield as he helped them to the league and cup double, with him scoring 19 goals in 31 games.\n\nDalglish continued his goalscoring form in the reserves into the next season, scoring 23 goals. A highlight of his season came in the Reserve Cup Final against Rangers. Dalglish scored one goal in a 4–1 win in the first leg, then in the second leg scored a hat-trick in a 6–1 win to clinch the cup. Still not a first-team regular, Dalglish was in the stands when the Ibrox disaster occurred at an Old Firm match in January 1971, when 66 Rangers fans died. On 17 May 1971, he played for Celtic against Kilmarnock in a testimonial match for the Rugby Park club's long serving midfielder, Frank Beattie. Dalglish scored six goals for Celtic in a 7–2 win.\n\nThe 1971–72 season saw Dalglish finally establish himself in the Celtic first team, scoring 29 goals in 53 games and helping Celtic win their seventh consecutive league title. Dalglish also played in Celtic's 6–1 win over Hibernian in the 1972 Scottish Cup Final. In 1972–73 Dalglish was Celtic's leading scorer, with 39 goals in all competitions, and saw Celtic win yet another league championship. Celtic won a league and cup double in 1973–74 and reached the semi-finals of the European Cup. The ties against Atlético Madrid were acrimonious, and Dalglish described the first leg in Glasgow where the Spanish side had three players sent off as \"without doubt the worst game I have ever played in as far as violence is concerned.\"\n\nDalglish was made Celtic captain in the 1975–76 season, during which Celtic failed to win a trophy for the first time in 12 years. Stein had been badly injured in a car crash and missed most of that season while recovering from his injuries. Celtic won another league and cup double in 1976–77, with Dalglish scoring 27 goals in all competitions. On 10 August 1977, after making 320 appearances and scoring 167 goals for Celtic, Dalglish was signed by Liverpool manager Bob Paisley for a British transfer fee record of £440,000 (£ today). The deal was unpopular with the Celtic fans, and Dalglish was booed by the crowd when he returned to Celtic Park in August 1978 to play in a testimonial match for Stein.\n\nDalglish was signed to replace Kevin Keegan, and quickly settled into his new club. He made his debut on 13 August 1977 in the season opener at Wembley, in the 1977 FA Charity Shield against Manchester United. He scored his first goal for Liverpool in his league debut a week later on 20 August, against Middlesbrough. Dalglish also scored three days later on his Anfield debut in a 2–0 victory over Newcastle United, and he scored Liverpool's sixth goal when they beat Keegan's Hamburg 6–0 in the second leg of the 1977 European Super Cup. By the end of his first season with Liverpool, Dalglish had played 62 times and scored 31 goals, including the winning goal in the 1978 European Cup Final at Wembley against Bruges.\n\nIn his second season Dalglish recorded a personal best of 21 league goals for the club, and he was also named Football Writers' Association Footballer of the Year. He did not miss a league game for Liverpool until the 1980–81 season, when he appeared in 34 out of 42 league games and scored only eight goals as Liverpool finished fifth in the league, but still won the European Cup and Football League Cup. He recovered his goal-scoring form the following season, and was an ever-present player in the league once again, scoring 13 goals as Liverpool became league champions for the 13th time, and the third time since Dalglish's arrival. It was also around this time that he began to form a potent strike partnership with Ian Rush; Dalglish began to play just off Rush, \"running riot in the extra space afforded to him in the hole\". Dalglish was voted PFA Players' Player of the Year for the 1982–83 season, during which he scored 18 league goals as Liverpool retained their title. From 1983 Dalglish became less prolific as a goalscorer, though he remained a regular player.\n\nAfter becoming player-manager on the retirement of Joe Fagan in the 1985 close season, Dalglish selected himself for just 21 First Division games in 1985–86 as Liverpool won the double, but he started the FA Cup final win over Everton. On the last day of the league season, his goal in a 1–0 away win over Chelsea gave Liverpool their 16th league title. Dalglish had a personally better campaign in the 1986–87 season, scoring six goals in 18 league appearances, but by then he was committed to giving younger players priority for a first-team place.\n\nWith the sale of Ian Rush to Juventus in 1987, Dalglish formed a new striker partnership of new signings John Aldridge and Peter Beardsley for the 1987–88 season, and he played only twice in a league campaign which saw Liverpool gain their 17th title. Dalglish did not play in Liverpool's 1988–89 campaign, and he made his final league appearance on 5 May 1990 as a substitute against Derby. At 39, he was one of the oldest players ever to play for Liverpool. His final goal had come three years earlier, in a 3–0 home league win over Nottingham Forest on 18 April 1987.\n\nTommy Docherty gave Dalglish his debut for the Scottish national side as a substitute in the 1–0 Euro 1972 qualifier victory over Belgium on 10 November 1971 at Pittodrie. Dalglish scored his first goal for Scotland a year later on 15 November 1972 in the 2–0 World Cup qualifier win over Denmark at Hampden Park. Scotland eventually qualified and he went to the 1974 World Cup in West Germany, where they were eliminated during the group stages despite not losing any of their three games.\n\nIn 1976, Dalglish scored the winning goal for Scotland at Hampden Park against England, by nutmegging Ray Clemence. A year later Dalglish scored against the same opponents and goalkeeper at Wembley, in another 2–1 win. Dalglish went on to play in both the 1978 World Cup in Argentina – scoring against eventual runners-up the Netherlands in a famous 3–2 win – and the 1982 World Cup in Spain, scoring against New Zealand. On both occasions Scotland failed to get past the group stage. Dalglish was selected for the 22-man squad travelling to Mexico for the 1986 World Cup, but had to withdraw due to injury.\n\nIn total, Dalglish played 102 times for Scotland (a national record) and he scored 30 goals (also a national record, which matched that set by Denis Law). His final appearance for Scotland, after 15 years as a full international, was on 12 November 1986 at Hampden Park in a Euro 1988 qualifying game against Luxembourg, which Scotland won 3–0. His 30th and final international goal had been two years earlier, on 14 November 1984, in a 3–1 win over Spain in a World Cup qualifier, also at Hampden Park.\n\nAfter the Heysel Stadium disaster in 1985 and Joe Fagan's subsequent resignation as manager, Dalglish became player-manager of Liverpool. In his first season in charge in 1985–86, he guided the club to its first \"double\". Liverpool achieved this by winning the League Championship by two points over Everton (Dalglish himself scored the winner in a 1–0 victory over Chelsea at Stamford Bridge to secure the title on the final day of the season), and the FA Cup by beating Everton in the final.\n\nThe 1986–87 season was trophyless for Liverpool. They lost 2–1 to Arsenal in the League Cup final at Wembley. Before the 1987–88 season, Dalglish signed two new players: striker Peter Beardsley from Newcastle and winger John Barnes from Watford. He had already purchased goalscorer John Aldridge from Oxford United (a replacement for Ian Rush, who was moving to Italy) in the spring of 1987 and early into the new campaign, bought Oxford United midfielder Ray Houghton. The new-look Liverpool side shaped by Dalglish topped the league for almost the entire season, and had a run of 37 matches unbeaten in all competitions (including 29 in the league; 22 wins and 7 draws) from the beginning of the season to 21 February 1988, when they lost to Everton in the league. Liverpool were crowned champions with four games left to play, having suffered just two defeats from 40 games. However, Dalglish's side lost the 1988 FA Cup Final to underdogs Wimbledon.\n\nIn the summer of 1988, Dalglish re-signed Ian Rush. Liverpool beat Everton 3–2 after extra time in the second all-Merseyside FA Cup final in 1989, but was deprived of a second Double in the final game of the season, when Arsenal secured a last-minute goal to take the title from Liverpool. In the 1989–90 season Liverpool won their third league title under Dalglish. They missed out on the Double and a third successive FA Cup final appearance when they lost 4–3 in extra-time to Crystal Palace in an FA Cup semi-final at Villa Park. At the end of the season Dalglish received his third Manager of the Year award. Dalglish resigned as manager of Liverpool on 22 February 1991, two days after a 4–4 draw with rivals Everton in an FA Cup fifth round tie at Goodison Park, in which Liverpool surrendered the lead four times. At the time of his resignation, the club were three points ahead in the league and still in contention for the FA Cup.\n\nDalglish was the manager of Liverpool at the time of the Hillsborough disaster on 15 April 1989. The disaster claimed 94 lives on the day, with the final death toll reaching 96. Dalglish attended many funerals of the victims – including four in one day. – and his presence in the aftermath of the disaster has been described as \"colossal and heroic\". Dalglish broke a twenty-year silence about the disaster in March 2009, expressing regret that the police and the FA did not consider delaying the kick-off of the match. During the Hillsborough Memorial Service on 15 April 2011, Liverpool MP Steve Rotheram announced he would submit an Early Day Motion to have Dalglish knighted, \"not only for his outstanding playing and managerial career, but also the charity work he has done with his wife, Marina, for breast cancer support and what he did after Hillsborough. It is common knowledge it affected him deeply\".\n\nDalglish returned to management in October 1991, at Second Division Blackburn Rovers. By the turn of 1992 they were top of the Second Division, and then suffered a dip in form before recovering to qualify for the playoffs, during which Dalglish led Blackburn into the new Premier League by beating Leicester City 1–0 in the Second Division Play-off final at Wembley. The resulting promotion meant that Blackburn were back in the top flight of English football for the first time since 1966. In the 1992 close season, Dalglish signed Southampton's Alan Shearer for a British record fee of £3.5 million. Despite a serious injury which ruled Shearer out for half the season, Dalglish achieved fourth position with the team in the first year of the new Premier League. The following year, Dalglish failed in an attempt to sign Roy Keane. Blackburn finished two positions higher the following season, as runners-up to Manchester United. By this time, Dalglish had added England internationals Tim Flowers and David Batty to his squad.\n\nAt the start of the 1994–95 season Dalglish paid a record £5 million for Chris Sutton, with whom Shearer formed an effective strike partnership. By the last game of the season, both Blackburn and Manchester United were in contention for the title. Blackburn had to travel to Liverpool, and Manchester United faced West Ham United in London. Blackburn lost 2–1, but still won the title since United failed to win in London. The title meant that Dalglish was only the fourth football manager in history to lead two different clubs to top-flight league championships in England, after Tom Watson, Herbert Chapman and Brian Clough. Dalglish became Director of Football at Blackburn in June 1995. He left the club at the end of the 1995–96 season after a disappointing campaign under his replacement, Ray Harford.\n\nFollowing his departure from Blackburn Dalglish was appointed for a brief spell as an \"international talent scout\" at his boyhood club Rangers. He was reported as having played a central role in the signing of Chile international Sebastián Rozental.\n\nIn January 1997, Dalglish was appointed manager of Premier League side Newcastle United on a three-and-a-half-year contract, taking over from Kevin Keegan. Dalglish guided the club from fourth position to a runner-up spot in May and a place in the new format of the following season's UEFA Champions League. He then broke up the team which had finished second two years running, selling popular players like Peter Beardsley, Lee Clark, Les Ferdinand and David Ginola and replacing them with ageing stars like John Barnes (34), Ian Rush (36) and Stuart Pearce (35), as well as virtual unknowns like Des Hamilton and Garry Brady. He also made some good long-term signings like Gary Speed and Shay Given. The 1997–98 campaign saw Newcastle finish in only 13th place and, despite Dalglish achieving some notable successes during the season (including a 3–2 UEFA Champions League win over Barcelona and an FA Cup final appearance against Arsenal), he was dismissed by Freddie Shepherd after two draws in the opening two games of the subsequent 1998–99 season, and replaced by former Chelsea manager Ruud Gullit. One commentator from \"The Independent\" has since written, \"His 20 months at Newcastle United are the only part of Kenny Dalglish's career that came anywhere near failure\".\n\nIn June 1999 he was appointed director of football operations at Celtic, with his former Liverpool player John Barnes appointed as head coach. Barnes was dismissed in February 2000 and Dalglish took charge of the first team on an interim basis. He guided them to the Scottish League Cup final, where they beat Aberdeen 2–0 at Hampden Park. Dalglish was dismissed in June 2000, after the appointment of Martin O'Neill as manager. After a brief legal battle, Dalglish accepted a settlement of £600,000 from Celtic.\n\nIn April 2009 Liverpool manager Rafael Benítez invited Dalglish to take up a role at the club's youth academy. The appointment was confirmed in July 2009, and Dalglish was also made the club's ambassador. Following Benítez's departure from Liverpool in June 2010, Dalglish was asked to help find a replacement, and in July Fulham's Roy Hodgson was appointed manager.\n\nA poor run of results at the start of the 2010–11 season led to Liverpool fans calling for Dalglish's return as manager as early as October 2010, and with no subsequent improvement in Liverpool's results up to the end of the year (during which time the club was bought by New England Sports Ventures), Hodgson left Liverpool and Dalglish was appointed caretaker manager on 8 January 2011. Dalglish's first game in charge was on 9 January 2011 at Old Trafford against Manchester United in the 3rd round of the FA Cup, which Liverpool lost 1–0. Dalglish's first league game in charge was against Blackpool on 12 January 2011; Liverpool lost 2–1. After the game, Dalglish admitted that Liverpool faced \"a big challenge\".\n\nShortly after his appointment, Dalglish indicated he would like the job on a permanent basis if it was offered to him, and on 19 January the Liverpool chairman Tom Werner stated that the club's owners would favour this option. On 22 January 2011, Dalglish led Liverpool to their first win since his return, against Wolves at Molineux. After signing Andy Carroll from Newcastle for a British record transfer fee of £35 million and Luis Suárez from Ajax for £22.8 million at the end of January (in the wake of Fernando Torres's sale to Chelsea for £50 million), some journalists noted that Dalglish had begun to assert his authority at the club. Following a 1–0 victory against Chelsea at Stamford Bridge in February 2011, described by Alan Smith as \"a quite brilliant display in terms of discipline and spirit\" and a \"defensive masterplan\" by David Pleat, Henry Winter wrote, \"it can only be a matter of time before he [Dalglish] is confirmed as long-term manager\".\n\nOn 12 May 2011, Liverpool announced that Dalglish had been given a three-year contract. His first official match in charge was 2–0 defeat to Harry Redknapp's Spurs at Anfield. Dalglish's second stint in charge at Anfield proved controversial at times. The Scot defended Luis Suárez in the wake of the striker's eight-match ban for racially abusing Manchester United defender Patrice Evra when the teams met in October 2011. After the Uruguayan's apparent refusal to shake Evra's hand in the return fixture in February 2012, an apology from both player and manager came only after the intervention of the owners.\n\nIn February 2012, Dalglish led Liverpool to their first trophy in six years, with victory in the 2011–12 Football League Cup. In the same season he also led Liverpool to the 2012 FA Cup Final where they lost 2–1 to Chelsea. Despite the success in domestic cups, Liverpool finished eighth in the league, their worst showing in the league since 1994, failing to qualify for Europe's Champions League for a third straight season. Following the end of the season, Liverpool dismissed Dalglish on 16 May 2012.\n\nIn October 2013, Dalglish returned to Liverpool as a non-executive director.\n\nOn 13 October 2017, Anfield's Centenary Stand was officially renamed the Kenny Dalglish Stand in recognition of his unique contribution to the club.\n\nDalglish has been married to Marina since 26 November 1974. The couple have four children, Kelly, Paul, Lynsey and Lauren. Kelly has worked as a football presenter for BBC Radio 5 Live and Sky Sports. Paul followed in his father's footsteps as a footballer, playing in the Premier League and Scottish Premiership before traveling to the United States to play for the Houston Dynamo in Major League Soccer. He retired in 2008 and became a coach, spending time as head coach of Ottawa Fury FC and Miami FC in the second-division leagues of North America. Dalglish's wife Marina was diagnosed with breast cancer in March 2003, but was treated at Aintree University Hospital in Liverpool and recovered. She later launched a charity to fund new cancer treatment equipment for UK hospitals.\n\nDalglish was appointed a Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) in the 1985 New Year Honours for services to football. He was appointed a Knight Bachelor in the 2018 Birthday Honours for services to football, charity and the City of Liverpool.\n\nIn 2004, Dalglish and his wife founded the charity \"The Marina Dalglish Appeal\" to raise money to help treat cancer. Dalglish has participated in a number of events to raise money for the charity, including a replay of the 1986 FA Cup Final. In June 2007 a Centre for Oncology at Aintree University Hospital was opened, after the charity had raised £1.5 million. Dalglish often competes in the annual \"Gary Player Invitational Tournament\", a charity golfing event which raises money for children's causes around the world. On 1 July 2011, Dalglish was awarded an honorary degree by the University of Ulster, for services to football and charity.\n\n+ Appearances and goals by club, season and competition\n!rowspan=2Club\n!rowspan=2Season\n!colspan=3League\n!colspan=2National Cup\n!colspan=2League Cup\n!colspan=2Europe\n!colspan=2Total\n!Division!!Apps!!Goals!!Apps!!Goals!!Apps!!Goals!!Apps!!Goals!!Apps!!Goals\nrowspan=10Celtic1968–69rowspan=\"7\"ScottishDivision One0000100010\n1969–702000200040\n1970–713010001050\n1971–7231174185705023\n1972–733223651110435341\n1973–74331861103725624\n1974–7533165283204821\n1975–76rowspan=2ScottishPremier Division352411104535132\n1976–773514711010215426\n!colspan=2Total\n!204!!112!!30!!11!!60!!35!!28!!9!!322!!167\nrowspan=14Liverpool1977–78rowspan=13First Division42201196946131\n1978–7942217410405425\n1979–8042168274205922\n1980–813482287915318\n1981–82421332105626122\n1982–8342183170515720\n1983–843370082935012\n1984–85366701070516\n1985–862136121colspan=2–295\n1986–871860052colspan=2–238\n1987–88200000colspan=2–20\n1988–89000010colspan=2–10\n1989–90100000colspan=2–10\n!colspan=2Total\n!355!!118!!37!!13!!59!!27!!51!!11!!502!!169\n! colspan=3Career total !! 559 !! 230 !! 67 !! 24 !! 118 !! 62 !! 79 !! 20 !! 824 !! 336\n\n! colspan=3  Scotland national team\n!Year!!Apps!!Goals\n!Total  102  30\n\n+ Managerial record by team and tenure\n!rowspan=2Team\n!rowspan=2From\n!rowspan=2To\n!colspan=5Record\n!rowspan=2\n!!!!!!!!!\nalign=leftLiverpool\nalign=left30 May 1985\nalign=left21 February 1991\n\nalign=leftBlackburn Rovers\nalign=left12 October 1991\nalign=left25 June 1995\n\nalign=leftNewcastle United\nalign=left14 January 1997\nalign=left27 August 1998\n\nalign=leftCeltic\nalign=left10 February 2000\nalign=left1 June 2000\n\nalign=leftLiverpool\nalign=left8 January 2011\nalign=left16 May 2012\n\n!colspan=3Total\n\nCeltic\nBULLET::::- Scottish Division One/Premier Division: 1971–72, 1972–73, 1973–74, 1976–77\nBULLET::::- Scottish Cup: 1971–72, 1973–74, 1974–75, 1976–77\nBULLET::::- Scottish League Cup: 1974–75\n\nLiverpool\nBULLET::::- Football League First Division: 1978–79, 1979–80, 1981–82, 1982–83, 1983–84, 1985–86\nBULLET::::- FA Cup: 1985–86\nBULLET::::- Football League Cup: 1980–81, 1981–82, 1982–83, 1983–84\nBULLET::::- FA Charity Shield: 1977 (shared), 1979, 1980, 1982, 1986 (shared)\nBULLET::::- European Cup: 1977–78, 1980–81, 1983–84\nBULLET::::- European Super Cup: 1977\n\nIndividual\nBULLET::::- Ballon d'Or runner-up: 1983\nBULLET::::- IOC European Footballer of the Season: 1977–78\nBULLET::::- PFA Players' Player of the Year: 1982–83\nBULLET::::- FWA Footballer of the Year: 1978–79, 1982–83\nBULLET::::- English Football Hall of Fame (Player): 2002\nBULLET::::- Scottish Football Hall of Fame: 2004\nBULLET::::- FIFA 100: 2004\nBULLET::::- European Hall of Fame (Player): 2008\n\nLiverpool\nBULLET::::- Football League First Division: 1985–86, 1987–88, 1989–90\nBULLET::::- FA Cup: 1985–86, 1988–89\nBULLET::::- Football League Cup: 2011–12\nBULLET::::- Football League Super Cup: 1986–87\nBULLET::::- FA Charity Shield: 1986 (shared), 1988, 1989, 1990 (shared)\n\nBlackburn Rovers\nBULLET::::- Premier League: 1994–95\nBULLET::::- Football League Second Division play-offs: 1992\n\nCeltic\nBULLET::::- Scottish League Cup: 1999–2000\n\nIndividual\nBULLET::::- FWA Tribute Award: 1987\nBULLET::::- Premier League Manager of the Season: 1994–95\nBULLET::::- Premier League Manager of the Month: January 1994, November 1994\n\nBULLET::::- Member of the Order of the British Empire: 1985\nBULLET::::- Knight Bachelor: 2018\n\nBULLET::::- List of English football championship winning managers\n\n\nBULLET::::- Official past players at Liverpool fc.tv\nBULLET::::- English Football Hall of Fame Profile\nBULLET::::- LFCHistory.net Player profile\nBULLET::::- LFCHistory.net Manager profile\nBULLET::::- ESPN Profile\nBULLET::::- FIFA.com profile\n"}
{"id": "16920", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16920", "title": "Knowledge representation and reasoning", "text": "Knowledge representation and reasoning\n\nKnowledge representation and reasoning (KR², KR&R) is the field of artificial intelligence (AI) dedicated to representing information about the world in a form that a computer system can utilize to solve complex tasks such as diagnosing a medical condition or having a dialog in a natural language. Knowledge representation incorporates findings from psychology about how humans solve problems and represent knowledge in order to design formalisms that will make complex systems easier to design and build. Knowledge representation and reasoning also incorporates findings from logic to automate various kinds of \"reasoning\", such as the application of rules or the relations of sets and subsets.\n\nExamples of knowledge representation formalisms include semantic nets, systems architecture, frames, rules, and ontologies. Examples of automated reasoning engines include inference engines, theorem provers, and classifiers.\n\nThe KR conference series was established to share ideas and progress on this challenging field.\n\nThe earliest work in computerized knowledge representation was focused on general problem solvers such as the General Problem Solver (GPS) system developed by Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon in 1959. These systems featured data structures for planning and decomposition. The system would begin with a goal. It would then decompose that goal into sub-goals and then set out to construct strategies that could accomplish each subgoal.\n\nIn these early days of AI, general search algorithms such as A* were also developed. However, the amorphous problem definitions for systems such as GPS meant that they worked only for very constrained toy domains (e.g. the \"blocks world\"). In order to tackle non-toy problems, AI researchers such as Ed Feigenbaum and Frederick Hayes-Roth realized that it was necessary to focus systems on more constrained problems.\n\nThese efforts led to the cognitive revolution in psychology and to the phase of AI focused on knowledge representation that resulted in expert systems in the 1970s and 80s, production systems, frame languages, etc. Rather than general problem solvers, AI changed its focus to expert systems that could match human competence on a specific task, such as medical diagnosis.\n\nExpert systems gave us the terminology still in use today where AI systems are divided into a Knowledge Base with facts about the world and rules and an inference engine that applies the rules to the knowledge base in order to answer questions and solve problems. In these early systems the knowledge base tended to be a fairly flat structure, essentially assertions about the values of variables used by the rules.\n\nIn addition to expert systems, other researchers developed the concept of frame-based languages in the mid-1980s. A frame is similar to an object class: It is an abstract description of a category describing things in the world, problems, and potential solutions. Frames were originally used on systems geared toward human interaction, e.g. understanding natural language and the social settings in which various default expectations such as ordering food in a restaurant narrow the search space and allow the system to choose appropriate responses to dynamic situations.\n\nIt was not long before the frame communities and the rule-based researchers realized that there was synergy between their approaches. Frames were good for representing the real world, described as classes, subclasses, slots (data values) with various constraints on possible values. Rules were good for representing and utilizing complex logic such as the process to make a medical diagnosis. Integrated systems were developed that combined Frames and Rules. One of the most powerful and well known was the 1983 Knowledge Engineering Environment (KEE) from Intellicorp. KEE had a complete rule engine with forward and backward chaining. It also had a complete frame based knowledge base with triggers, slots (data values), inheritance, and message passing. Although message passing originated in the object-oriented community rather than AI it was quickly embraced by AI researchers as well in environments such as KEE and in the operating systems for Lisp machines from Symbolics, Xerox, and Texas Instruments.\n\nThe integration of Frames, rules, and object-oriented programming was significantly driven by commercial ventures such as KEE and Symbolics spun off from various research projects. At the same time as this was occurring, there was another strain of research which was less commercially focused and was driven by mathematical logic and automated theorem proving. One of the most influential languages in this research was the KL-ONE language of the mid-'80s. KL-ONE was a frame language that had a rigorous semantics, formal definitions for concepts such as an Is-A relation. KL-ONE and languages that were influenced by it such as Loom had an automated reasoning engine that was based on formal logic rather than on IF-THEN rules. This reasoner is called the classifier. A classifier can analyze a set of declarations and infer new assertions, for example, redefine a class to be a subclass or superclass of some other class that wasn't formally specified. In this way the classifier can function as an inference engine, deducing new facts from an existing knowledge base. The classifier can also provide consistency checking on a knowledge base (which in the case of KL-ONE languages is also referred to as an Ontology).\n\nAnother area of knowledge representation research was the problem of common sense reasoning. One of the first realizations learned from trying to make software that can function with human natural language was that humans regularly draw on an extensive foundation of knowledge about the real world that we simply take for granted but that is not at all obvious to an artificial agent. Basic principles of common sense physics, causality, intentions, etc. An example is the frame problem, that in an event driven logic there need to be axioms that state things maintain position from one moment to the next unless they are moved by some external force. In order to make a true artificial intelligence agent that can converse with humans using natural language and can process basic statements and questions about the world, it is essential to represent this kind of knowledge. One of the most ambitious programs to tackle this problem was Doug Lenat's Cyc project. Cyc established its own Frame language and had large numbers of analysts document various areas of common sense reasoning in that language. The knowledge recorded in Cyc included common sense models of time, causality, physics, intentions, and many others.\n\nThe starting point for knowledge representation is the \"knowledge representation hypothesis\" first formalized by Brian C. Smith in 1985:\n\nAny mechanically embodied intelligent process will be structural ingredients that a) we as external observers naturally take to represent a propositional account of the knowledge that the overall process exhibits, and b) independent of such external semantic attribution, play a formal but causal and essential role in engendering the behavior that manifests that knowledge.\n\nCurrently one of the most active areas of knowledge representation research are projects associated with the Semantic Web. The Semantic Web seeks to add a layer of semantics (meaning) on top of the current Internet. Rather than indexing web sites and pages via keywords, the Semantic Web creates large ontologies of concepts. Searching for a concept will be more effective than traditional text only searches. Frame languages and automatic classification play a big part in the vision for the future Semantic Web. The automatic classification gives developers technology to provide order on a constantly evolving network of knowledge. Defining ontologies that are static and incapable of evolving on the fly would be very limiting for Internet-based systems. The classifier technology provides the ability to deal with the dynamic environment of the Internet.\n\nRecent projects funded primarily by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) have integrated frame languages and classifiers with markup languages based on XML. The Resource Description Framework (RDF) provides the basic capability to define classes, subclasses, and properties of objects. The Web Ontology Language (OWL) provides additional levels of semantics and enables integration with classification engines.\n\nKnowledge-representation is a field of artificial intelligence that focuses on designing computer representations that capture information about the world that can be used to solve complex problems.\n\nThe justification for knowledge representation is that conventional procedural code is not the best formalism to use to solve complex problems. Knowledge representation makes complex software easier to define and maintain than procedural code and can be used in expert systems.\n\nFor example, talking to experts in terms of business rules rather than code lessens the semantic gap between users and developers and makes development of complex systems more practical.\n\nKnowledge representation goes hand in hand with automated reasoning because one of the main purposes of explicitly representing knowledge is to be able to reason about that knowledge, to make inferences, assert new knowledge, etc. Virtually all knowledge representation languages have a reasoning or inference engine as part of the system.\n\nA key trade-off in the design of a knowledge representation formalism is that between expressivity and practicality. The ultimate knowledge representation formalism in terms of expressive power and compactness is First Order Logic (FOL). There is no more powerful formalism than that used by mathematicians to define general propositions about the world. However, FOL has two drawbacks as a knowledge representation formalism: ease of use and practicality of implementation. First order logic can be intimidating even for many software developers. Languages which do not have the complete formal power of FOL can still provide close to the same expressive power with a user interface that is more practical for the average developer to understand. The issue of practicality of implementation is that FOL in some ways is too expressive. With FOL it is possible to create statements (e.g. quantification over infinite sets) that would cause a system to never terminate if it attempted to verify them.\n\nThus, a subset of FOL can be both easier to use and more practical to implement. This was a driving motivation behind rule-based expert systems. IF-THEN rules provide a subset of FOL but a very useful one that is also very intuitive. The history of most of the early AI knowledge representation formalisms; from databases to semantic nets to theorem provers and production systems can be viewed as various design decisions on whether to emphasize expressive power or computability and efficiency.\n\nIn a key 1993 paper on the topic, Randall Davis of MIT outlined five distinct roles to analyze a knowledge representation framework:\n\nBULLET::::- A knowledge representation (KR) is most fundamentally a surrogate, a substitute for the thing itself, used to enable an entity to determine consequences by thinking rather than acting, i.e., by reasoning about the world rather than taking action in it.\nBULLET::::- It is a set of ontological commitments, i.e., an answer to the question: In what terms should I think about the world?\nBULLET::::- It is a fragmentary theory of intelligent reasoning, expressed in terms of three components: (i) the representation's fundamental conception of intelligent reasoning; (ii) the set of inferences the representation sanctions; and (iii) the set of inferences it recommends.\nBULLET::::- It is a medium for pragmatically efficient computation, i.e., the computational environment in which thinking is accomplished. One contribution to this pragmatic efficiency is supplied by the guidance a representation provides for organizing information so as to facilitate making the recommended inferences.\nBULLET::::- It is a medium of human expression, i.e., a language in which we say things about the world.\n\nKnowledge representation and reasoning are a key enabling technology for the Semantic Web. Languages based on the Frame model with automatic classification provide a layer of semantics on top of the existing Internet. Rather than searching via text strings as is typical today, it will be possible to define logical queries and find pages that map to those queries. The automated reasoning component in these systems is an engine known as the classifier. Classifiers focus on the subsumption relations in a knowledge base rather than rules. A classifier can infer new classes and dynamically change the ontology as new information becomes available. This capability is ideal for the ever-changing and evolving information space of the Internet.\n\nThe Semantic Web integrates concepts from knowledge representation and reasoning with markup languages based on XML. The Resource Description Framework (RDF) provides the basic capabilities to define knowledge-based objects on the Internet with basic features such as Is-A relations and object properties. The Web Ontology Language (OWL) adds additional semantics and integrates with automatic classification reasoners.\n\nIn 1985, Ron Brachman categorized the core issues for knowledge representation as follows:\n\nBULLET::::- Primitives. What is the underlying framework used to represent knowledge? Semantic networks were one of the first knowledge representation primitives. Also, data structures and algorithms for general fast search. In this area, there is a strong overlap with research in data structures and algorithms in computer science. In early systems, the Lisp programming language, which was modeled after the lambda calculus, was often used as a form of functional knowledge representation. Frames and Rules were the next kind of primitive. Frame languages had various mechanisms for expressing and enforcing constraints on frame data. All data in frames are stored in slots. Slots are analogous to relations in entity-relation modeling and to object properties in object-oriented modeling. Another technique for primitives is to define languages that are modeled after First Order Logic (FOL). The most well known example is Prolog, but there are also many special purpose theorem proving environments. These environments can validate logical models and can deduce new theories from existing models. Essentially they automate the process a logician would go through in analyzing a model. Theorem proving technology had some specific practical applications in the areas of software engineering. For example, it is possible to prove that a software program rigidly adheres to a formal logical specification.\nBULLET::::- Meta-representation. This is also known as the issue of reflection in computer science. It refers to the capability of a formalism to have access to information about its own state. An example would be the meta-object protocol in Smalltalk and CLOS that gives developers run time access to the class objects and enables them to dynamically redefine the structure of the knowledge base even at run time. Meta-representation means the knowledge representation language is itself expressed in that language. For example, in most Frame based environments all frames would be instances of a frame class. That class object can be inspected at run time, so that the object can understand and even change its internal structure or the structure of other parts of the model. In rule-based environments, the rules were also usually instances of rule classes. Part of the meta protocol for rules were the meta rules that prioritized rule firing.\nBULLET::::- Incompleteness. Traditional logic requires additional axioms and constraints to deal with the real world as opposed to the world of mathematics. Also, it is often useful to associate degrees of confidence with a statement. I.e., not simply say \"Socrates is Human\" but rather \"Socrates is Human with confidence 50%\". This was one of the early innovations from expert systems research which migrated to some commercial tools, the ability to associate certainty factors with rules and conclusions. Later research in this area is known as fuzzy logic.\nBULLET::::- Definitions and universals vs. facts and defaults. Universals are general statements about the world such as \"All humans are mortal\". Facts are specific examples of universals such as \"Socrates is a human and therefore mortal\". In logical terms definitions and universals are about universal quantification while facts and defaults are about existential quantifications. All forms of knowledge representation must deal with this aspect and most do so with some variant of set theory, modeling universals as sets and subsets and definitions as elements in those sets.\nBULLET::::- Non-monotonic reasoning. Non-monotonic reasoning allows various kinds of hypothetical reasoning. The system associates facts asserted with the rules and facts used to justify them and as those facts change updates the dependent knowledge as well. In rule based systems this capability is known as a truth maintenance system.\nBULLET::::- Expressive adequacy. The standard that Brachman and most AI researchers use to measure expressive adequacy is usually First Order Logic (FOL). Theoretical limitations mean that a full implementation of FOL is not practical. Researchers should be clear about how expressive (how much of full FOL expressive power) they intend their representation to be.\nBULLET::::- Reasoning efficiency. This refers to the run time efficiency of the system. The ability of the knowledge base to be updated and the reasoner to develop new inferences in a reasonable period of time. In some ways, this is the flip side of expressive adequacy. In general, the more powerful a representation, the more it has expressive adequacy, the less efficient its automated reasoning engine will be. Efficiency was often an issue, especially for early applications of knowledge representation technology. They were usually implemented in interpreted environments such as Lisp, which were slow compared to more traditional platforms of the time.\n\nIn the early years of knowledge-based systems the knowledge-bases were fairly small. The knowledge-bases that were meant to actually solve real problems rather than do proof of concept demonstrations needed to focus on well defined problems. So for example, not just medical diagnosis as a whole topic, but medical diagnosis of certain kinds of diseases.\n\nAs knowledge-based technology scaled up, the need for larger knowledge bases and for modular knowledge bases that could communicate and integrate with each other became apparent. This gave rise to the discipline of ontology engineering, designing and building large knowledge bases that could be used by multiple projects. One of the leading research projects in this area was the Cyc project. Cyc was an attempt to build a huge encyclopedic knowledge base that would contain not just expert knowledge but common sense knowledge. In designing an artificial intelligence agent, it was soon realized that representing common sense knowledge, knowledge that humans simply take for granted, was essential to make an AI that could interact with humans using natural language. Cyc was meant to address this problem. The language they defined was known as CycL.\n\nAfter CycL, a number of ontology languages have been developed. Most are declarative languages, and are either frame languages, or are based on first-order logic. Modularity—the ability to define boundaries around specific domains and problem spaces—is essential for these languages because as stated by Tom Gruber, \"Every ontology is a treaty- a social agreement among people with common motive in sharing.\" There are always many competing and differing views that make any general purpose ontology impossible. A general purpose ontology would have to be applicable in any domain and different areas of knowledge need to be unified.\n\nThere is a long history of work attempting to build ontologies for a variety of task domains, e.g., an ontology for liquids, the lumped element model widely used in representing electronic circuits (e.g.,), as well as ontologies for time, belief, and even programming itself. Each of these offers a way to see some part of the world.\n\nThe lumped element model, for instance, suggests that we think of circuits in terms of components with connections between them, with signals flowing instantaneously along the connections. This is a useful view, but not the only possible one. A different ontology arises if we need to attend to the electrodynamics in the device: Here signals propagate at finite speed and an object (like a resistor) that was previously viewed as a single component with an I/O behavior may now have to be thought of as an extended medium through which an electromagnetic wave flows.\n\nOntologies can of course be written down in a wide variety of languages and notations (e.g., logic, LISP, etc.); the essential information is not the form of that language but the content, i.e., the set of concepts offered as a way of thinking about the world. Simply put, the important part is notions like connections and components, not the choice between writing them as predicates or LISP constructs.\n\nThe commitment made selecting one or another ontology can produce a sharply different view of the task at hand. Consider the difference that arises in selecting the lumped element view of a circuit rather than the electrodynamic view of the same device. As a second example, medical diagnosis viewed in terms of rules (e.g., MYCIN) looks substantially different from the same task viewed in terms of frames (e.g., INTERNIST). Where MYCIN sees the medical world as made up of empirical associations connecting symptom to disease, INTERNIST sees a set of prototypes, in particular prototypical diseases, to be matched against the case at hand.\n\nBULLET::::- Belief revision\nBULLET::::- Chunking (psychology)\nBULLET::::- Commonsense knowledge base\nBULLET::::- Conceptual graph\nBULLET::::- DATR, a language for lexical knowledge representation\nBULLET::::- Logico-linguistic modeling\nBULLET::::- Personal knowledge base\nBULLET::::- Knowledge management\nBULLET::::- Semantic technology\nBULLET::::- Valuation-based system\nBULLET::::- Alphabet of human thought\n\nBULLET::::- Ronald J. Brachman; What IS-A is and isn't. An Analysis of Taxonomic Links in Semantic Networks; IEEE Computer, 16 (10); October 1983\nBULLET::::- Ronald J. Brachman, Hector J. Levesque \"Knowledge Representation and Reasoning\", Morgan Kaufmann, 2004\nBULLET::::- Ronald J. Brachman, Hector J. Levesque (eds) \"Readings in Knowledge Representation\", Morgan Kaufmann, 1985,\nBULLET::::- Chein, M., Mugnier, M.-L. (2009),\"Graph-based Knowledge Representation: Computational Foundations of Conceptual Graphs\", Springer, 2009.\nBULLET::::- Randall Davis, Howard Shrobe, and Peter Szolovits; What Is a Knowledge Representation? AI Magazine, 14(1):17-33,1993\nBULLET::::- Ronald Fagin, Joseph Y. Halpern, Yoram Moses, Moshe Y. Vardi \"Reasoning About Knowledge\", MIT Press, 1995,\nBULLET::::- Jean-Luc Hainaut, Jean-Marc Hick, Vincent Englebert, Jean Henrard, Didier Roland: Understanding Implementations of IS-A Relations. ER 1996: 42-57\nBULLET::::- Hermann Helbig: \"Knowledge Representation and the Semantics of Natural Language\", Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York 2006\nBULLET::::- Frank van Harmelen, Vladimir Lifschitz and Bruce Porter: Handbook of Knowledge Representation 2007.\nBULLET::::- Arthur B. Markman: \"Knowledge Representation\" Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1998\nBULLET::::- John F. Sowa: \"Knowledge Representation\": Logical, Philosophical, and Computational Foundations. Brooks/Cole: New York, 2000\nBULLET::::- Adrian Walker, Michael McCord, John F. Sowa, and Walter G. Wilson: \"Knowledge Systems and Prolog\", Second Edition, Addison-Wesley, 1990\nBULLET::::- Mary-Anne Williams and Hans Rott: \"Frontiers in Belief Revision, Kluwer\", 2001.\n\nBULLET::::- What is a Knowledge Representation? by Randall Davis and others\nBULLET::::- Introduction to Knowledge Modeling by Pejman Makhfi\nBULLET::::- Introduction to Description Logics course by Enrico Franconi, Faculty of Computer Science, Free University of Bolzano, Italy\nBULLET::::- DATR Lexical knowledge representation language\nBULLET::::- Loom Project Home Page\nBULLET::::- Description Logic in Practice: A CLASSIC Application\nBULLET::::- The Rule Markup Initiative\nBULLET::::- Nelements KOS - a non-free 3d knowledge representation system\n"}
{"id": "16921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16921", "title": "Knowledge Aided Retrieval in Activity Context", "text": "Knowledge Aided Retrieval in Activity Context\n\nKnowledge Aided Retrieval in Activity Context (KARNAC) is a system being developed in the United States for use in profiling different categories of terrorist attacks to determine the components of possible future terrorist incidents.\n\nInformation for KARNAC is generally to be derived from structured, semi-structured and unstructured databases. This would include information derived from gun registrations, driver's licenses, residential and criminal records, as well as the Internet, newspapers and county records.\n\nFor example, the system might raise an alert if someone attempted to buy components for bomb making, hired a car and rented a hotel room near the White House.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Wired\" article\n"}
{"id": "16923", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16923", "title": "Kernow", "text": "Kernow\n\nKernow may refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- Cornwall (), a county of the UK\nBULLET::::- Kernow (bus company), a bus company in Cornwall\nBULLET::::- Mebyon Kernow, a political party in Cornwall\n\nBULLET::::- Cornouaille (), a region of Brittany, France\nBULLET::::- Kern (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Cornwall (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Cornwallis (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Cornouaille (disambiguation)\n"}
{"id": "16926", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16926", "title": "Kabaddi", "text": "Kabaddi\n\nKabaddi is a contact team sport, played between two teams of seven players each. The objective of the game is for a single player on offence, referred to as a \"raider\", to run into the opposing team's half of a court, tag out as many of their defenders as possible, and return to their own half of the court, all without being tackled by the defenders, and in a single breath. Points are scored tagged by the raider, while the opposing team earns a point for stopping the raider. Players are taken out of the game if they are tagged or tackled, but are brought back in for each point scored by their team from a tag or tackle. \n\nIt is popular in South Asia and other surrounding Asian countries. Although accounts of kabaddi appear in the histories of ancient India, the game was popularised as a competitive sport in the 20th century. It is the national sport of Bangladesh. It is the state game of the Indian states of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, and Uttar Pradesh.\n\nThere are two major disciplines of Kabaddi: so-called Punjabi kabaddi, also referred to as \"circle style,\" comprises traditional forms of the sport that are played on a circular field outdoors, while the \"standard style,\" played on a rectangular court indoors, is a discipline played in major professional leagues and international competitions such as the Asian Games.\n\nThe game is known by numerous names in different parts of South Asia, such as: \"kabaddi \" or \"chedugudu\" in Andhra Pradesh; \"kabaddi\" in Maharashtra, Karnataka, Kerala and Telangana; \"kabadi\" or \"ha-du-du\" in Bangladesh; \"bhavatik\" in Maldives, \"kauddi\" or \"kabaddi\" in the Punjab region; \"hu-tu-tu\" in Western India, \"hu-do-do\" in Eastern India; \"chadakudu\" in South India; \"kapardi\" in Nepal; and \"kabadi\" or \"sadugudu\" in Tamil Nadu.\n\nAlthough unverified, theories from religious believers state that Kabaddi originated from either the Vedic period of ancient India, or the Sistan region of present-day Iran. The game was said to have been popular among the Yadava people; an abhang by Tukaram stated that the god Krishna played the game in his youth, while the Mahabharata contains an account of Arjuna being able to sneak into hostile areas also take out enemies unscathed, which they are claiming that parallels the gameplay of kabaddi. \n\nThere are also accounts of Gautama Buddha having played the game recreationally. \n\nDespite these conflicting claims, India has been credited with having helped to popularize kabaddi as a competitive sport, with the first organized competitions occurring in the 1920s, their introduction to the programme of the Indian Olympic Games in 1938, the establishment of the All-India Kabaddi Federation in 1950, and it being played as a demonstration sport at the inaugural 1951 Asian Games in New Delhi. These developments helped to formalize the sport, which had traditionally been played in villages, for legitimate international competition. \n\nAfter being demonstrated again at the 1982 Asian Games in Delhi, Kabaddi was added to the Asian Games' programme beginning in 1990.\n\nIn the international team version of kabaddi, two teams of seven members each occupy opposite halves of a court of in case of men and in case of women. Each has five supplementary players held in reserve, i.e. for substitution. The game is played with 20-minute halves with a 5-minute half break in which the teams exchange sides. During each play, known as a \"raid\", a player from the attacking side, known as the \"raider\", runs into the opposing team's side of the court and attempts to tag as many of the seven defending players as far as possible for a raider. For a raid to be eligible for points, the raider must cross the baulk line in the defending team's territory, and return to their half of the field without being tackled (note that if an attacker touches a defender and hasn't yet reached the baulk line, they don't need to reach the baulk line to score points and may return to their half of the court). While doing so, the raider must also loudly chant the word \"kabaddi\", confirming to referees that their raid is done on a single breath without inhaling. A 30-second shot clock is also enforced on each raid.\n\nA point is scored for each defender tagged. If the raider steps beyond the bonus line marked in the defending team's territory, they earn an additional point known as a bonus point. If the raider is successfully stopped, the opposing team earns a point instead. All players tagged are taken out of the game, but one is \"revived\" for each point a team scores from a subsequent tag or tackle (bonus points do not revive players). Players who step out of the boundary or lobbies are also out. A raid where no points are scored by the raider is referred to as an \"empty raid\". By contrast, a play where the raider scores three or more points is referred to as a \"super raid\". If a team gets all seven players on the opposing team out at once (\"All Out\"), they earn two additional points and the players are placed back in the game.\n\nAdditional rules are used in the Pro Kabaddi League: if a team has two empty raids in a row, the next raider must score a point on their next raid, because the next raid is a \"do-or-die\" raid. In this raid, the player must either get a point or be out. If the raider does not get a point then the opposite team will get a point and the raider will be declared out. Additionally when fewer than four players left on the field, tackles are worth 2 points (\"super tackle\").\n\nThere are four major forms of Indian kabaddi recognised by the amateur federation. In Sanjeevani kabaddi, one player is revived against one player of the opposite team who is out. The game is played over 40 minutes with a five minute break between halves. There are seven players on each side and the team that outs all the players on the opponent’s side scores four extra points. In Gaminee style, seven players play on each side and a player put out has to remain out until all his team members are out. The team that is successful in outing all the players of the opponent’s side secures a point. The game continues until five or seven such points are secured and has no fixed time duration. Amar style resembles the Sanjeevani form in the time frame rule, but a player who is declared out stays inside the court while play continues. For every player of the opposition touched \"out\", a team earns a point. Punjabi kabaddi is a variation that is played on a circular pitch of a diameter of .\n\nThe following competitions are played in standard format, for that of circle style kabaddi, see Punjabi kabaddi.\n\nThe standard style Kabaddi World Cup is an outdoor international kabaddi competition conducted by the International Kabaddi Federation (IKF), contested by men's and women's national teams. The competition has been previously contested in 2004, 2007 and 2016. All the tournaments have been won by India. India defeated Iran by 38-29 in the final of the championship game to clinch the title of 2016.\n\nAfter the establishment of a new kabaddi organization named World Kabaddi Federation, a world cup in 2019 at Malacca, Malaysia will be organized. It will be the largest world cup in kabaddi history, consisting of 32 men teams.\n\nKabaddi has been played at the Asian Games since 1990. The Indian national team had won every men's and women's kabaddi competition in the Asian Games from 1990 through 2014. At the 2018 Asian Games, Iran became the first country outside of India to win gold medals in Kabaddi, with India's men's team winning bronze, and India's women's team being beaten by Iran to win silver.\n\nThe Pro Kabaddi League was established in 2014. The league modeled its business upon that of the Indian Premier League of Twenty20 cricket, with a large focus on marketing, the backing of local broadcaster Star Sports, and changes to the sport’s rules and its presentation to make it more suitable for a television audience. The Pro Kabaddi League quickly became a ratings success on Indian television; the 2014 season was watched by at least 435 million viewers over the course of the season, and the inaugural championship match was seen by 98.6 million viewers.\n\nThe Inaugural edition of the IIPKL was on 13 May at the Pune, India. The title for the inaugural season was won by the Bangalore Rhinos \n\nIn May 2018, the Super Kabaddi League was first held in Pakistan, as part of a larger push to promote renewed interest in the sport in Pakistan.\n\nWomen’s Kabaddi Challenge is a women's kabaddi league. The first season was played from 28 June to 31 July 2016 and was broadcast by Star Sports in India. Three teams took part and the league played across seven cities in India. The final was played alongside the men’s version on 31 July. The Storm Queens produced a last-second turnaround to defeat the Fire Birds 24-23.\n\nAKC's tenth season was played in Gorgan, Iran in 2017 in which India won its tenth gold by defeating Pakistan in the finals.\n\nThe inaugural edition of the Kabaddi Masters was held in Dubai from 22 to 30 June 2018. It was the first Kabaddi tournament to be held in the UAE. It featured 6 teams. India won the tournament by defeating Iran in the final with a scoreline of 44-26, with the Indian Defense out performing the Iran Defense.\n\nThe inaugular junior Kabaddi world championship was held in Kish island,Iran From 11 to 14 November 2019.It featured 13 teams.\nIran won the tournament by defeating Kenya in the final with a final scoreline 42-22.\nNote:- Team India did not participated in this tournament\n\nIt is the professional Kabaddi league held in Iran\n\nFirst edition of European Kabaddi championship was held in Scotland in 2019 .Final match was between Poland and Holland.Poland won the final with score line 47-27\n\nKabaddi is a popular sport in the subcontinent. The Kabaddi Federation of India (KFI) was founded in 1950, and it compiled a standard set of rules. The governing body for Kabaddi in Pakistan is Pakistan Kabaddi Federation.\n\nIn Bangladesh, there is a variation of Kabaddi called Ha-du-du, going back to ancient times. Ha-du-du has no definite rules and is played with different rules in different areas. Kabaddi is the national sport of Bangladesh, given official status in 1972. The Amateur Kabaddi Federation of Bangladesh was formed in 1973. \n\nIn Iran, the Community of Kabaddi was formed in 1996 (the same year they joined the Asian Kabaddi Federation) and in 2001 they joined the International Kabaddi Federation. The Iran Amateur Kabaddi Federation was formed in 2004.\n\nKabaddi is one of the national sports of Nepal. Kabaddi is played and taught at a very early age in most primary schools beginning in the third grade or so in most Nepali schools. Kabaddi was also played by the British Army for fun, to keep fit and as an enticement to recruit soldiers from the British Asian community. Kabaddi was brought to the United Kingdom by Indian, Bangladeshi and Pakistani immigrants. The governing body for Kabaddi in the United Kingdom is the England Kabaddi Federation UK.\n\nBULLET::::- Films depicting kabaddi\nBULLET::::- \"Gunga Jumna\" (1961)\nBULLET::::- \"Kudumba Thalaivan\" (1962)\nBULLET::::- \"Ganga Ki Saugandh\" (1978)\nBULLET::::- \"Naseeb\" (1981)\nBULLET::::- \"Little Buddha\" (1993)\nBULLET::::- \"Pardes\" (1997)\nBULLET::::- \"Hu Tu Tu\" (1999)\nBULLET::::- \"Kabaddi Kabaddi\" (2003)\nBULLET::::- \"Okkadu\" (2003)\nBULLET::::- \"Ghilli\" (2004)\nBULLET::::- \"Ajay\" (2006)\nBULLET::::- \"Kabaddi\" (2009)\nBULLET::::- \"Vennila Kabadi Kuzhu\" (2009)\nBULLET::::- \"Bheemli Kabadi Jattu\" (2010)\nBULLET::::- \"Chal Dhar Pakad\" (2010)\nBULLET::::- \"Kabaddi Ik Mohabbat\" (2010)\nBULLET::::- \"Kabaddi Once Again\" (2012)\nBULLET::::- \"Badlapur Boys\" (2014)\nBULLET::::- \"Tevar\" (2015)\nBULLET::::- \"Thoppil Joppan\" (2016)\nBULLET::::- \"Georgettan's Pooram\" (2017)\nBULLET::::- \"bathhi kabaddi league \"(2017)\nBULLET::::- \"Student of the Year 2\" (2019)\nBULLET::::- Anime and manga depicting kabaddi\nBULLET::::- \"Full Metal Panic? Fumoffu\" (2003)\nBULLET::::- \"Gintama\" (2006)\nBULLET::::- \"Teekyu\" (2013)\nBULLET::::- \"Durarara!!×2 Shō\" (2015)\nBULLET::::- \"Chio's School Road\" (2016, manga; 2018, anime)\nBULLET::::- \"Uwagaki\" (2009)\n\nBULLET::::- Dramas depicting kabaddi\nBULLET::::- \"Bitter Sweet\" (2015)\nBULLET::::- \"Azhagiya Tamil Magal\" (2017)\nBULLET::::- \"Varanasi kabbadi league \"(2017)\nBULLET::::- Super Kabaddi League Pakistan (2017)\n\nBULLET::::- Punjabi Kabaddi\nBULLET::::- Kabaddi in India\nBULLET::::- Boli Khela\n\nBULLET::::- World Kabaddi\nPro Kabaddi 2019\nBULLET::::- A Game Called Kabbadi – slideshow by \"The New York Times\"\n"}
{"id": "16928", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16928", "title": "Kerameikos", "text": "Kerameikos\n\nKerameikos (, ) also known by its Latinized form Ceramicus, is an area of Athens, Greece, located to the northwest of the Acropolis, which includes an extensive area both within and outside the ancient city walls, on both sides of the Dipylon (Δίπυλον) Gate and by the banks of the Eridanos River. It was the potters' quarter of the city, from which the English word \"ceramic\" is derived, and was also the site of an important cemetery and numerous funerary sculptures erected along the road out of the city towards Eleusis.\n\n \n\nThe area took its name from the city square or dēmos (δῆμος) of the Kerameis (Κεραμεῖς, potters), which in turn derived its name from the word κέραμος (\"kéramos\", \"pottery clay\", from which the English word \"ceramic\" is derived). The \"Inner Kerameikos\" was the former \"potters' quarter\" within the city and \"Outer Kerameikos\" covers the cemetery and also the \"Dēmósion Sēma\" (δημόσιον σῆμα, public graveyard) just outside the city walls, where Pericles delivered his funeral oration in 431 BC. The cemetery was also where the Ηiera Hodos (the Sacred Way, i.e. the road to Eleusis) began, along which the procession moved for the Eleusinian Mysteries. The quarter was located there because of the abundance of clay mud carried over by the Eridanos River.\n\nThe area has undergone a number of archaeological excavations in recent years, though the excavated area covers only a small portion of the ancient \"dēmos\". It was originally an area of marshland along the banks of the Eridanos river which was used as a cemetery as long ago as the 3rd millennium BC. It became the site of an organised cemetery from about 1200 BC; numerous cist graves and burial offerings from the period have been discovered by archaeologists. Houses were constructed on the higher drier ground to the south. During the Archaic period increasingly large and complex grave mounds and monuments were built along the south bank of the Eridanos, lining the Sacred Way.\n\nThe building of the new city wall in 478 BC, following the Persian sack of Athens in 480 BC, fundamentally changed the appearance of the area. At the suggestion of Themistocles, all of the funerary sculptures were built into the city wall and two large city gates facing north-west were erected in the Kerameikos. The Sacred Way ran through the Sacred Gate, on the southern side, to Eleusis. On the northern side a wide road, the Dromos, ran through the double-arched Dipylon Gate (also known as the Thriasian Gate) and on to the Platonic Academy a few miles away. State graves were built on either side of the Dipylon Gate, for the interment of prominent personages such as notable warriors and statesmen, including Pericles and Cleisthenes.\n\nAfter the construction of the city wall, the Sacred Way and a forking street known as the Street of the Tombs again became lined with imposing sepulchral monuments belonging to the families of rich Athenians, dating to before the late 4th century BC. The construction of such lavish mausolea was banned by decree in 317 BC, following which only small columns or inscribed square marble blocks were permitted as grave stones. The Roman occupation of Athens led to a resurgence of monument-building, although little is left of them today.\n\nDuring the Classical period an important public building, the Pompeion, stood inside the walls in the area between the two gates. This served a key function in the procession (\"pompē\", πομπή) in honour of Athena during the Panathenaic Festival. It consisted of a large courtyard surrounded by columns and banquet rooms, where the nobility of Athens would eat the sacrificial meat for the festival. According to ancient Greek sources, a hecatomb (a sacrifice of 100 cows) was carried out for the festival and the people received the meat in the Kerameikos, possibly in the Dipylon courtyard; excavators have found heaps of bones in front of the city wall.\nThe Pompeion and many other buildings in the vicinity of the Sacred Gate were razed to the ground by the marauding army of the Roman dictator Sulla, during his sacking of Athens in 86 BC; an episode that Plutarch described as a bloodbath. During the 2nd century AD, a storehouse was constructed on the site of the Pompeion, but it was destroyed during the invasion of the Heruli in 267 AD. The ruins became the site of potters' workshops until about 500 AD, when two parallel colonnades were built behind the city gates, overrunning the old city walls. A new Festival Gate was constructed to the east with three entrances leading into the city. This was in turn destroyed in raids by the invading Avars and Slavs at the end of the 6th century, and the Kerameikos fell into obscurity. It was not rediscovered until a Greek worker dug up a stele in April 1863.\n\nArchaeological excavations in the Kerameikos began in 1870 under the auspices of the Greek Archaeological Society. They have continued from 1913 to the present day under the German Archaeological Institute at Athens. \n\nDuring the construction of Kerameikos station for the expanded Athens Metro, a plague pit and approximately 1,000 tombs from the 4th and 5th centuries BC were discovered. The Greek archaeologist Efi Baziotopoulou-Valavani, who excavated the site, has dated the grave to between 430 and 426 BC. Thucydides described the panic caused by the plague, possibly an epidemic of typhoid which struck the besieged city in 430 BC. The epidemic lasted for two years and killed an estimated one third of the population. He wrote that bodies were abandoned in temples and streets, to be subsequently collected and hastily buried. The disease reappeared in the winter of 427 BC. \n\nLatest findings in the Kerameikos include the excavation of a 2.1 m tall Kouros, unearthed by the German Archaeological Institute at Athens under the direction of Professor Wolf-Dietrich Niemeier. This Kouros is the larger twin of the one now kept in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, and both were made by the same anonymous sculptor called the \"Dipylon Master\".\n\nLarge areas adjacent to those already excavated remain in to be explored, as they lie under the fabric of modern-day Athens. Expropriation of these areas has been delayed until funding is secured.\n\nThe area is enclosed and visitable through an entrance on the last block of Ermou Street, close to the intersection with Peiraios Street. The Kerameikos Museum is housed there, in a small neoclassical building that houses the most extensive collection of burial-related artifacts in Greece, varying from large-scale marble sculpture to funerary urns, stelae, jewelry, toys etc. The original burial monument sculptures are displayed within the museum, having been replaced by plaster replicas \"in situ\". The museum incorporates inner and outer courtyards, where the larger sculptures are kept. Down the hill from the museum, visitors can wander among the Outer Kerameikos ruins, the \"Demosion Sema\", the banks of the Eridanos where some water still flows, the remains of the \"Pompeion\" and the \"Dipylon\" Gate, and walk the first blocks of the Sacred Way towards Eleusis and of the Panathenaic Way towards the Acropolis. The bulk of the area lies about 7–10 meters below modern street level, having in the past been inundated by centuries' worth of sediment accumulation from the floods of the Eridanos.\n\nAs of spring 2007 Keramikos is the name given to the metro station which belongs to Line 3 of the Athens Metro is adjacent to the Technopolis of Gazi.\n\nBULLET::::- Ursula Knigge: \"Der Kerameikos von Athen. Führung durch Ausgrabungen und Geschichte\". Krene-Verl., Athen 1988.\nBULLET::::- Wolf-Dietrich Niemeier: \"Der Kuros vom Heiligen Tor. Überraschende Neufunde archaischer Skulptur im Kerameikos in Athen\". Zabern, Mainz 2002. (Zaberns Bildbände zur Archäologie)\nBULLET::::- \"Akten des Internationalen Symposions Die Ausgrabungen im Kerameikos, Bilanz und Perspektiven. Athen, 27.–31. Januar 1999\". Zabern, Mainz am Rhein 2001. (Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archäologischen Instituts, Athenische Abteilung, 114)\n\nBULLET::::- Kerameikos, Hellenic Ministry of Culture\nBULLET::::- www.athensinfoguide.com Kerameikos\nBULLET::::- A Mycenaean Fountain on the Athenian Acropolis by Oscar Broneer\nBULLET::::- Kerameikos, Ergebnisse Der Ausgrabungen by Wilhelm Kraiker, Karl Kubler\nBULLET::::- The Kerameikos Cemetery, New York Times\nBULLET::::- Kerameikos photos\n"}
{"id": "16930", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16930", "title": "Kabir Bedi", "text": "Kabir Bedi\n\nKabir Bedi (born 16 January 1946) is an Indian film actor. His career has spanned three continents covering India, the United States and especially Italy among other European countries in three media: film, television and theatre. He is noted for his role as Emperor Shah Jahan in \"\" and the villainous Sanjay Verma in the 80's blockbuster \"Khoon Bhari Maang\". He is best known in Italy and Europe for playing the pirate \"Sandokan\" in the popular Italian TV mini series and for his role as the villainous Gobinda in the 1983 James Bond film \"Octopussy\". Kabir Bedi is well known in Italy and is fluent in Italian. He is based in India and lives in Mumbai.\n\nBedi was one of three children born into a Sikh family that had devoted itself to India's fight for independence from British colonial rule. His father, Baba Pyare Lal Singh Bedi, a Punjabi Sikh, was an author and philosopher. His mother, Freda Bedi was a British woman born in Derby, England, who became famous as the first Western woman to take ordination in Tibetan Buddhism. Kabir Bedi did his schooling at Sherwood College, Nainital, Uttarakhand and graduation from St. Stephen's College, Delhi.\n\nBedi married four times and had three children, Pooja, Siddharth (deceased) and Adam. He was married to Protima Bedi, an Odissi dancer. Their daughter Pooja Bedi is a magazine/newspaper columnist and former actress. Their son, Siddharth, who went to Carnegie Mellon University, was diagnosed with schizophrenia and committed suicide in 1997 at the age of 26.\n\nAs his marriage with Protima began to break down he famously started a relationship with Parveen Babi. They never married. He later married British-born fashion designer Susan Humphreys. Their son, Adam Bedi, is an international model who made his Hindi Film debut with the thriller, \"Hello? Kaun Hai!\". This marriage ended in divorce.\n\nIn the early 1990s, Bedi married TV and radio presenter Nikki Bedi. They had no children and divorced in 2005. After that, Bedi has been in a relationship with British-born Parveen Dusanj, whom he married a day before his 70th birthday.\n\nBedi supports the anti-Government struggle in Myanmar, and is an official ambassador of the Burma Campaign UK. He is also the Brand Ambassador for Rotary International South Asia for their Teach Programme and the Total Literacy Mission in India and South Asia.\n\nKabir Bedi began his career in Indian theatre and then moved on to Hindi films. Bedi remains one of the first international actors from India who started out in Hindi films, worked in Hollywood films and became a star in Europe.\n\nAs a stage actor, Kabir has performed Shakespeare's \"Othello\" as well as portrayed a historical Indian king, \"Tughlaq\"; and a self-destructive alcoholic in \"The Vultures\". In London he also starred in \"The Far Pavilions\", the West End musical adaptation of M. M. Kaye's novel, at the Shaftesbury Theatre.\nIn 2011 Kabir played Emperor Shah Jahan, in 'Taj', a play written by John Murrell, a Canadian playwright for the Luminato Festival in Toronto. In 2013, this play was recommissioned and went on an 8-week multi-city tour of Canada.\n\nIn the James Bond film \"Octopussy\", he played the villain's aide Gobinda.\n\nKabir has acted in over 60 Indian films. In the historical epic \"\", Kabir starred as the Emperor Shah Jahan. Other starring Hindi film roles include Raj Khosla's \"Kacche Dhaage\", Rakesh Roshan's \"Khoon Bhari Maang\" and Farah Khan's \"Main Hoon Na\".\n\nKabir Bedi shot a movie with Hrithik Roshan (\"Kites\"), Govinda (\"Showman\"), and Akshay Kumar (\"Blue\"). He also starred in Deepa Mehta's film, \"Kamagata Maru\" with Amitabh Bachchan and John Abraham. He acted in the Tamil film 'Aravaan', directed by Vasanthabalan.\n\nKabir played roles in Columbia Pictures' \"The Beast of War\", a film on the Russian war in Afghanistan, directed by Kevin Reynolds, as well as the acclaimed Italian film \"Andata Ritorno\", by Marco Ponti, winner of the David di Donatello Award.\nIn 2017, he acted in a Telugu historical movie \"Gautamiputra Satakarni\", as Nahapana, an important ruler of the Western Kshatrapas.\n\nKabir has appeared on American television, in Hallmark's African epic \"Forbidden Territory\", and Ken Follett's \"On Wings of Eagles\" and also \"Red Eagle\". He played Friar Sands in \"The Lost Empire\", for NBC. Kabir also acted in \"Dynasty\", \"Murder, She Wrote\", \"Magnum, P.I.\", \"Hunter\", \"Knight Rider\" and \"\".\n\nIn Europe, his greatest success was \"Sandokan\", the saga of a romantic Southeast Asian pirate during British colonial times; an Italian-German-French TV series which broke viewership records across Europe. Kabir recently starred in a prime-time Italian television series, \"Un Medico in Famiglia\", on RAI TV.\n\nFor over a year, Kabir starred in \"The Bold and the Beautiful\", the second most-watched television show in the world, seen by over a billion people in 149 countries.\n\nHe had his own cinematic talk show on Indian TV, \"\"Director's Cut\"\", a 13-part special series interviewing the country's leading directors. His success on television continued in 2013 with award-winning prime-time shows “\"Guns and Glory: The Indian Soldier\"” & “\"Vandemataram\"”, for India's news channels - Headlines Today & Aaj Tak.\n\nIn the Indian Biblical television series 'Bible Ki Kahaniya', Bedi played both the young and aged Abraham.\n\nIn 2007 he starred in \"Chat\", a radio show aired by RAI Radio2, in the role of Sandokan. In 2012, he did a series of Radio One programmes titled, 'Women of Gold' and 'Men of Steel' in honour of industry champions in India. In 2017 he did another series in English for Radio One, 'Ten On Ten' celebrating top ten innovations out of India. He also did the year end special series, 'Best of 2017'.\n\nKabir Bedi is a regular contributor to Indian publications including the Times of India and Tehelka on political and social issues affecting the country. He is also seen debating such topics on Indian national television.\n\nIn February 2017, Bedi was announced as the new 'brand ambassador' for international development organisation, Sightsavers, saying on his appointment, \"Today there is immense awareness and attempt towards eye health and care in India and Sightsavers have shown way to people at large in the country with their achievements in the area of eye care.\"\n\nSince 1982 Kabir has been a voting member of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (who are responsible for presenting the Oscar awards) and he is a voting member of the Screen Actors Guild.\n\nHe has won numerous film, advertising and popularity awards across Europe and India.\n\nBy decree of the President of the Italian Republic of 2 June 2010, Kabir Bedi was officially knighted. He received the highest ranking civilian honour of the Italian Republic and was bestowed the title of \"Cavaliere\" (Knight) of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic. He has recently received Honorary Degree from Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology (KIIT) University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha,India.\n\n! Year !! Film Title !! Character\nrowspan=\"2\"1971\n\"Seema\" \nrowspan=\"3\"1972\nrowspan=\"2\"1973\nrowspan=\"3\"1974\n\"Manzilein Aur Bhi Hain\" \n\"Maa Bahen Aur Biwi\" \n\"Ishq Ishq Ishq\" Diwana/Ravikant Vyas\nrowspan=\"2\"1975\nrowspan=\"5\"1976\nrowspan=\"2\"1977\n1978\nrowspan=\"3\"1979\n\"Ashanti\" Malik\n1981\nrowspan=\"2\"1982\n1983\nrowspan=\"3\"1988\nrowspan=\"3\"1990\n\" Haar Jeet\" \nrowspan=\"3\"1991\nrowspan=\"4\"1992\n\"Yalgaar\"  Raj Pratap Singhal\nrowspan=\"2\"1993\nrowspan=\"3\"1994\n\"Lie Down with Lions\"Kabir\nrowspan=\"3\"1995\n1996\nrowspan=\"1\"1998\n1999\n2001\nrowspan=\"2\"2002\nrowspan=\"2\"2003\nrowspan=\"6\"2004\n\"Roundtrip\" Tolstoj (Italian film) \nrowspan=\"2\"2005\n\"\" Emperor Shah Jahan\nrowspan=\"4\"2006\n\"A All About Her\" \n\"Take 3 Girls\"Mo\n2008\n2009\n2010\nrowspan=\"1\"2011\nrowspan=\"2\"2012\nrowspan=\"2\"2015\nrowspan=\"2\"2016\nrowspan=\"3\"2017\n\"Paisa Vasool\" RAW Chief\n\"Saheb, Biwi Aur Gangster 3\"Maharaja Hari Singh\n\n! TV Title !! Release Year!! Status !! Character\n\"\" 1977  European TV Mini series  Sandokan\n\"Dynasty\" 1982  TV Series  Farouk Ahmed\n\"General Hospital\" 1983  TV Series  Rama\n\"Knight Rider\" November 1985 TV Series  Vascone\n\"Dynasty\" 1986  TV Series  Farouk Ahmed\n\"The Days and Nights of Molly Dod\" May 1987  TV Series  Bill\n\"Misteri della Giungla Nera, I – a.k.a. The Mysteries of the Dark Jungle\" 1991  TV Mini Series  Kammamuri\n\"Il Principe del Deserto – a.k.a. Desert Law\" 1991  TV Series  Moulet Beni-Zair\n\"The Bold and the Beautiful\" September 1994  TV Series  Prince Omar\n\"\" 20 November 1995  TV Series  Kamir\n\"Il Ritorno di Sandokan 6 October 1996  TV Mini Series  Sandokan\n\"Noi siamo angeli – a.k.a. We are Angels\" 16 February 1997  TV Mini Series  Gen. Napoleon Durate\n\"Team Knight Rider\" 9 February 1998  TV Series  Aristotle Drago\n\"Murder, She Wrote\" February 1988  TV Series  Vikram Singh\n\"Magnum, P.I.\" 10 February 1988  TV Series  Malcolm\n\"L'isola dei famosi\" 2004  Italian Reality Show  Himself\n\"The Bold and the Beautiful\" 4 May 2005  TV Series  Prince Omar\n\"Vivere\" May 2006  Italian TV Series  Emir Ibrahim\n\"Director's Cut\" 2007  TV Special Series  Himself\n\"Un medico in famiglia 5\" 2007  Italian TV Series  Kabir\n\"Ganga Kii Dheej\" 2010–2011  Hindi TV Series  Dada Bhai\n\"Buddha\" 2013  Hindi TV Series  Asita Muni (Cameo)\n\"VandeMataram\" 2013  TV Special News Series  Himself\n\"Guns & Glory: The Indian Soldier\" 2013  TV Special News Series  Himself\n\"Jai Ho\" 2014  TV Special News Series  Himself\n\"Thinkistan\"  2019  Web Series  Danish Azeem\n\n! Radio Title !! Release Year !! Status !! Character\n\n! Film title !! Actor !! Character !! Dub Language !! Original Language !! Original Year Release !! Dub Year Release !! Notes\n\n! Project!! Type !! Language !! Year\nDHL  Advertisement  Hindi  2015\n\n! The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences\n! The Screen Actors Guild \n! The American Federation of Television and Radio Artists \n! The British Actors' Equity Association \n\nBULLET::::- Special Feature – \"Global Appeal – Kabir Bedi\" in The Stage\nBULLET::::- Images from the 1976 Sandokan miniseries\nBULLET::::- Candid in-depth interview with Kabir Bedi in 2007\nBULLET::::- Extensive interview with Filmfare in October 2001\nBULLET::::- Interviewed by Indian Express in 1999\nBULLET::::- Kabir Bedi discussing Taj theatre tour 2013\n"}
{"id": "16931", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16931", "title": "Kaber", "text": "Kaber\n\nKaber may refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- a variant spelling for caber\n\nBULLET::::- Kaber (Jubilees), a person named in Jubilees\n\nBULLET::::- Kaber, Cumbria\n"}
{"id": "16932", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16932", "title": "Kamov Ka-25", "text": "Kamov Ka-25\n\nThe Kamov Ka-25 (NATO reporting name \"Hormone\") was a naval helicopter, developed for the Soviet Navy in the USSR from .\n\nIn the late 1950s there was an urgent demand for anti-submarine helicopters for deployment on new ships equipped with helicopter platforms entering service with the Soviet Navy. Kamov's compact design was chosen for production in 1958. To speed the development of the new anti-submarine helicopter Kamov designed and built a prototype to prove the cabin and dynamic components layout; designated Ka-20, this demonstrator was not equipped with mission equipment, corrosion protection or shipboard operational equipment. The Ka-20 was displayed at the 1961 Tushino Aviation Day display.\n\nDefinitive prototypes of the Ka-25 incorporated mission equipment and corrosion protection for the structure. The rotor system introduced aluminium alloy blades pressurised with nitrogen for crack detection, lubricated hinges, hydraulic powered controls, alcohol de-icing and automatic blade folding. Power was supplied by two free-turbine engines sat atop the cabin, with electrically de-iced inlets, plain lateral exhausts with no Infra-Red countermeasures, driving the main gearbox directly and a cooling fan for the gearbox and hydraulic oil coolers aft of the main gearbox. Construction was of stressed skin duralumin throughout with flush-riveting, as well as some bonding and honeycomb sandwich panels. The 1.5m × 1,25m × 3.94m cabin had a sliding door to port flight deck forward of the cabin and fuel tanks underfloor filled using a pressure refueling nozzle on the port side. A short boom at the rear of the cabin had a central fin and twin toed in fins at the ends of the tailplane mainly for use during auto-rotation. The undercarriage consisted of two noncastoring mainwheels with sprag brakes attached to the fuselage by parallel 'V' struts with a single angled shock absorber to dissipate landing loads, and two castoring nosewheels on straight shock absorbing legs attached directly to the fuselage either side of the cockpit which folded rearwards to reduce interference with the RADAR, all wheels were fitted with emergency rapid inflation flotation collars. Flying controls all act on the co-axial rotors with pitch, roll and collective similar to a conventional single rotor helicopter. Yaw was through differential collective which has a secondary effect of torque, an automatic mixer box ensured that total lift on the rotors remained constant during yaw maneuvers, to improve handling during deck landings. Optional extras included fold up seats for 12 passengers, rescue hoist, external auxiliary fuel tanks or containers for cameras, flares, smoke floats or beacons.\n\nBULLET::::- Ka-25BSh\n\nBULLET::::- Ka-25BShZ\n\nBULLET::::- Ka-25C\n\nBULLET::::- Ka-25F\n\nBULLET::::- Ka-25K\n\nBULLET::::- Ka-25K\n\nBULLET::::- Ka-25PS\n\nBULLET::::- Ka-25T\n\nBULLET::::- Ka-25TL\n\nCurrent operators\nBULLET::::- Syrian Navy\n\nFormer operators\nBULLET::::- Bulgarian Navy\nBULLET::::- Indian Naval Air Arm\nBULLET::::- Russian Naval Aviation\nBULLET::::- Soviet Naval Aviation\nBULLET::::- Ukrainian Navy\nBULLET::::- Vietnam People's Navy\nBULLET::::- Yugoslav Air Force\n\nBULLET::::- Gunston, Bill. “The Osprey Encyclopaedia of Russian Aircraft 1875–1995”. London, Osprey. 1995.\n\nBULLET::::- http://www.kamov.net/kamov-navy/kamov-ka-25-2/\n"}
{"id": "16933", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16933", "title": "Kainite", "text": "Kainite\n\nKainite ( or ) (KMg(SO)Cl·3HO) is an evaporite mineral in the class of \"Sulfates (selenates, etc.) with additional anions, with HO\" according to the Nickel-Strunz classification. It is a hydrated potassium-magnesium sulfate-chloride, naturally occurring in irregular granular masses or as crystalline coatings in cavities or fissures. This mineral is dull and soft, and is colored white, yellowish, grey, reddish, or blue to violet. Its name is derived from Greek καινος [kainos] (\"(hitherto) unknown\"), as it was the first mineral discovered that contained both sulfate and chloride as anions. Kainite forms monoclinic crystals.\n\nKainite is of bitter taste and soluble in water. On recrystallization picromerite is deposited from the solution.\n\nKainite was discovered in the Stassfurt salt mines in today's Saxony-Anhalt, Germany in 1865 by the mine official Schöne and was first described by Carl Friedrich Jacob Zincken.\n\nKainite is a typical secondary mineral that forms through metamorphosis in marine deposits of potassium carbonate, and is also occasionally formed through resublimation from volcanic vapours. It is often accompanied by anhydrite, carnallite, halite, and kieserite.\n\nKainite is only found in comparatively few places, among them in salt mines in central and northern Germany, Bad Ischl (Austria), on Pasquasia in Sicily, in Whitby (UK), and in the Carlsbad Potash District in New Mexico, in volcanic deposits in Kamchatka and in Iceland, and in salt lakes in western China. It has also been identified in Gusev Crater on Mars.\n\nKainite is used as a source of potassium and magnesium compounds, as a fertilizer, and as gritting salt.\n"}
{"id": "16934", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16934", "title": "KAIST", "text": "KAIST\n\nKAIST (formally the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology) is a national research university located in Daedeok Innopolis, Daejeon, South Korea. KAIST was established by the Korean government in 1971 as the nation's first research-oriented science and engineering institution. KAIST also has been internationally accredited in business education, and hosting the Secretariat of AAPBS. KAIST has approximately 10,200 full-time students and 1,140 faculty researchers and had a total budget of US$765 million in 2013, of which US$459 million was from research contracts. \n\nFrom 1980 to 2008, the institute was known as the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology. In 2008, the name was shortened to \"KAIST\".\n\nIn 2007, KAIST partnered with international institutions and adopted dual degree programs for its students. Its partner institutions include the Technical University of Denmark, Carnegie Mellon University, the Georgia Institute of Technology (Georgia Tech), the Technical University of Berlin, and the Technical University of Munich.\n\nThe institute was founded in 1971 as the Korea Advanced Institute of Science (KAIS) by a loan of US$6 million (US$34 million 2014) from the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and supported by President Park Chung-Hee. The institute's academic scheme was mainly designed by Frederick E. Terman, vice president of Stanford University, and Chung Geum-mo, a professor at the Polytechnic Institution of Brooklyn. The institute's two main functions were to train advanced scientists and engineers and develop a structure of graduate education in the country. Research studies began by 1973 and undergraduates studied for bachelor's degrees by 1984.\n\nIn 1981 the government merged the Korean Advanced Institute of Science and the Korean Institute of Science and Technology (KIST) to form the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, or KAIST. Due to differing research philosophies, KIST and KAIST split in 1989. In the same year KAIST and the Korea Institute of Technology (KIT) combined and moved from Seoul to the Daedeok Science Town in Daejeon. \nThe first act of President Suh upon his inauguration in July 2006 was to lay out the KAIST Development Plan. The ‘KAIST Development Five-Year Plan’ was finalized on February 5, 2007 by KAIST Steering Committee. The goals of KAIST set by Suh were to become one of the best science and technology universities in the world, and to become one of the top-10 universities by 2011. In January 2008, the university dropped its full name, \"Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology\", and changed its official name to only \"KAIST\".\n\n February 16, 1971\n\nAdmission to KAIST is based on overall grades, grades on math and science courses, recommendation letters from teachers, study plan, personal statements, and other data that show the excellence of potential students, and does not rely on a standardized test conducted by the university. In 2014, the acceptance rate for local students was 14.9%, and for international students at 13.2%.\n\nFull scholarships are given to all students including international students in the bachelor, master and doctorate courses. Doctoral students are given military-exemption benefits from South Korea's compulsory military service. Up to 80% of courses taught in KAIST are conducted in English. \n\nUndergraduate students can join the school through an “open major system” that allows students to take classes for three terms and then choose a discipline that suits their aptitude, and undergraduates are allowed to change their major anytime. KAIST has also produced many doctorates through the integrated master’s and doctoral program and early-completion system. Students must publish papers in internationally renowned academic journals for graduation.\n\nKAIST produced a total of 48,398 alumni from 1975 to 2014, with 13,743 bachelor's, 24,776 master's, and 9,879 doctorate degree holders. As of October 2015, 11,354 students were enrolled in KAIST with 4,469 bachelor’s, 3,091 master’s, and 3,794 doctoral students. More than 70 percent of KAIST undergraduates come from specialized science high schools. On average, about 600 international students from more than 70 different countries come to study at KAIST, making KAIST one of the most ethnically diverse universities in the country.\n\nKAIST is organized into 6 colleges, 2 schools and 33 departments/divisions. \nBULLET::::- College of Natural Sciences\nBULLET::::- Department of Physics\nBULLET::::- Department of Mathematical Sciences\nBULLET::::- Department of Chemistry\nBULLET::::- Graduate School of Nanoscience and Technology\n\nBULLET::::- College of Life Science and Bioengineering\nBULLET::::- Department of Biological Sciences\nBULLET::::- Graduate School of Medical Science and Engineering\n\nBULLET::::- College of Engineering\nBULLET::::- School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering\nBULLET::::- Department of Mechanical Engineering\nBULLET::::- Department of Aerospace Engineering\nBULLET::::- School of Electrical Engineering\nBULLET::::- School of Computing\nBULLET::::- Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering\nBULLET::::- Department of Bio and Brain Engineering\nBULLET::::- Department of Industrial Design\nBULLET::::- Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering\nBULLET::::- Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering\nBULLET::::- Department of Materials Science and Engineering\nBULLET::::- Department of Nuclear and Quantum Engineering\nBULLET::::- Department of Information and Communications Engineering\nBULLET::::- The Cho Chun Shik Graduate School of Green Transportation\nBULLET::::- Graduate School of EEWS (Energy, Environment, Water, and Sustainability)\nBULLET::::- Graduate School of AI (GSAI)\n\nBULLET::::- College of Liberal Arts and Convergence Science\nBULLET::::- School of Humanities and Social Sciences\nBULLET::::- Graduate School of Culture Technology\nBULLET::::- Moon Soul Graduate School of Future Strategy (Korean only)\nBULLET::::- Graduate School of Science and Technology Policy\n\nBULLET::::- College of Business\nBULLET::::- MS/Ph.D\nBULLET::::- School of Business and Technology Management\nBULLET::::- School of Management Engineering\nBULLET::::- Graduate School of Finance\nBULLET::::- Graduate School of Information and Media Management\nBULLET::::- Graduate School of Green Growth\nBULLET::::- School of Transdisciplinary Studies\n\nKAIST also has three affiliated institutes including the Korea Institute of Advanced Study (KIAS), National NanoFab Center (NNFC), and Korea Science Academy (KSA).\n\nKAIST has two campuses in Daejeon and one campus in Seoul. The university is mainly located in the Daedeok Science Town in the city of Daejeon, 150 kilometers south of the capital Seoul. Daedeok is also home to some 50 public and private research institutes, universities such as CNU and high-tech venture capital companies.\n\nMost lectures, research activities, and housing services are located in the Daejeon main campus. It has a total of 29 dormitories. Twenty-three dormitories for male students and four dormitories for female students are located on the outskirts of the campus, and two apartments for married students are located outside the campus.\n\nThe Seoul campus is the home of the Business Faculty of the university. The graduate schools of finance, management and information & media management are located there. The total area of the Seoul campus is .\n\nThe Munji campus, the former campus of Information and Communications University until its merger with KAIST, is located ca. away from the main campus. It has a total of two dormitories, one for undergraduate students and the other for graduate students. The Institute for Basic Science (IBS) Center for Axion and Precision Physics Research is located here doing particle and nuclear physics related to dark matter and the Rare Isotope Science Project has the Superconducting Radio Frequency test facility.\n\nThe KAIST main library was established in 1971 as KAIS library, and it went through a merge and separation process with KIST library. It merged with KIT in March 1990. A contemporary 5 story building was constructed as the main library, and it is being operated with an annex library. The library uses the American LC Classification Schedule. \n\nThe library underwent expansion and remodeling, which finished in 2018, to include conference rooms, collaboration rooms, and media rooms.\n\nKAIST's Seokrim Taeulje is a festival held by KAIST for three days every spring semester. The festival preparation committee under the undergraduate student council will be in charge of planning and execution, various food booths and experience booths will be opened, and stage events such as club performances and a song festival will be held. Also called the Cherry Blossom Festival, students eat strawberries on the lawn.\n\nSeven KAIST Institutes (KIs) have been set up: the KI for the BioCentury, the KI for Information Technology Convergence, the KI for the Design of Complex Systems, the KI for Entertainment Engineering, the KI for the NanoCentury, the KI for Eco-Energy, and the KI for Urban Space and Systems. Each KI is operated as an independent research center at the level of a college, receiving support in terms of finance and facilities. In terms of ownership of intellectual property rights, KAIST holds 2,694 domestic patents and 723 international patents so far.\n\nResearchers at KAIST have developed the Online Electric Vehicle (OLEV), a technique of powering vehicles through cables underneath the surface of the road via non-contact magnetic charging (a power source is placed underneath the road surface and power is wirelessly picked up on the vehicle itself). In July 2009 the researchers successfully supplied up to 60% power to a bus over a gap of from a power line embedded in the ground using power supply and pick up technology developed in-house.\n\nIn February 2018 the Korea Times published an article which stated that KAIST was starting an AI weapons research project together with the Korean arms manufacturer Hanwa. The allegations were of developing lethal autonomous weapons with Hanwa. This has led to researchers from 30 countries boycotting KAIST, which has denied existence of the program.\n\nIn 2016 and 2017 Thomson Reuters named KAIST the sixth most innovative university in the world and the most innovative university in the Asia Pacific region. In 2016/17 QS World University Rankings ranked KAIST 46th overall in the world and 6th within Asia, coming 13th in Material Sciences and 14th in Engineering and Technology. In the 2009 THE-QS World University Rankings (in 2010 Times Higher Education World University Rankings and QS World University Rankings parted ways to produce separate rankings) for Engineering & IT, the University was placed 21st in the world and 1st in Korea and was placed 69th overall. KAIST was again recognized as a number one University in Korea by JoongAng Ilbo Review. In the year of 2009, KAIST's department of industrial design has also been listed in the top 30 Design Schools by Business Week. KAIST ranked the best university in Republic of Korea and the 7th university in Asia in the Top 100 Asian Universities list, the first regional ranking issued by THE-QS World Rankings.\nBULLET::::- QS University Subject Rankings (2017):\nBULLET::::- 13th, materials science\nBULLET::::- 15th, civil engineering and structural engineering\nBULLET::::- 15th, mechanical engineering\nBULLET::::- 15th, chemical engineering\nBULLET::::- 17th, electrical engineering\nBULLET::::- 18th, chemistry\nBULLET::::- 33rd, computer science and information systems\nBULLET::::- 44th, Physics & Astronomy\nBULLET::::- 47th, Mathematics\nTimes Higher Education ranked KAIST the 3rd best university in the world under the age of 50 years in its 2015 league table.\n\nBULLET::::- Soon-dal Choi, electrical engineer; successfully developed and launched a satellite, KITSAT-3\nBULLET::::- Dong-ho Cho, electrical engineer; developed online electric vehicle (OLEV), listed on Time Magazine's top fifty inventions of 2010\nBULLET::::- Jun-ho Choi, discoverer of hSNF5 body protein involved in reproduction of Papilloma virus\nBULLET::::- Yang-Kyu Choi, developed world's smallest terabyte flash memory\nBULLET::::- Cho Zang-hee, developed PET Imaging while at Colombia, developed Imaging for MRI/PET/CAT at KAIS, Later KAIST\nBULLET::::- James D. Cumming, Foreign Guest Professor, published first paper with Cho Zang-hee on MRI Imaging resolution improvement.\nBULLET::::- Heun Lee, identified mechanism behind hydrogen storage in ice particles\nBULLET::::- Ji-O Lee, chemist; identified structure of protein causing sepsis\nBULLET::::- Sang-yup Lee, developed chip to diagnose Wilson's disease\nBULLET::::- Gi-hyong Gho, mathematician; developed world's first public key crypto system (PKCS) technology\nBULLET::::- Jong-kyong Jeong, identified cause of Parkinson's disease\nBULLET::::- Eunseong Kim, physicist; discovered new evidence for the existence of a super solid\nBULLET::::- Jin-woo Kim, identified the cause behind senile retinal degeneration disease\nBULLET::::- Se-jin Kwan, aerospace engineer; successfully developed and tested a moon lander\nBULLET::::- Chang Hee Nam, physicist; developed attosecond pulse generation and compression technology\nBULLET::::- Gweng-su Rhim, developed next generation Transparent Resistive Random Access Memory (TRRAM)\nBULLET::::- Seung-man Yang, developed new photonics crystal-based optofluidic technology\nBULLET::::- Yoon-tae Young, physicist; first to observe proper function of complexin protein to control neuron communication\nBULLET::::- Giltsu Choi, photobiologist; identified key genes regulating seed germination in response to light in plants.\nBULLET::::- Dan Keun Sung, electronic engineer\n\nBULLET::::- Ryong Ryoo, chemist\n\nBULLET::::- Yi So-Yeon, first Korean to fly in space\nBULLET::::- Tony Kim, founder of ProtoPie\n\nBULLET::::- Sung-kyun Na, founder and CEO of Neowiz, Korea's first internet supplier (KAIST graduate school)\nBULLET::::- Jungju Kim, NEXON CEO\nBULLET::::- Hae-jin Lee, Next Human Network (NHN Corporation)\nBULLET::::- Chang-han Kim, PUBG CEO\n\nBULLET::::- So-jung Kim, Singer\nBULLET::::- Jang-won Lee, Singer (Peppertones)\nBULLET::::- Jae-pyung Shin, Singer (Peppertones)\nBULLET::::- So-hee Yoon, Actress\n\nBULLET::::- The Times-QS World University Rankings 2009 - KAIST 69th overall, 21st in the field of Engineering/Technology\n\nBULLET::::- List of national universities in South Korea\nBULLET::::- List of universities and colleges in South Korea\nBULLET::::- Education in Korea\nBULLET::::- List of Korea-related topics\n\n"}
{"id": "16936", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16936", "title": "Kabyle", "text": "Kabyle\n\nBULLET::::- Kabyle people, an ethnic group in Algeria\nBULLET::::- Kabyle language\nBULLET::::- Kabyle alphabet, also known as Berber Latin alphabet\nBULLET::::- Kabyle grammar\nBULLET::::- Kabylie, the Kabyle ethnic homeland\nBULLET::::- Kabyles du Pacifique, a group of Algerians deported to New Caledonia after an uprising in 1871\nBULLET::::- Kabyle (ancient city), an ancient Thracian city in southeastern Bulgaria\nBULLET::::- Kabile, Bulgaria, a modern village near the Thracian city\nBULLET::::- Kabyle musket\n\nBULLET::::- JS Kabylie, Algerian football team\n"}
{"id": "16938", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16938", "title": "Kaolinite", "text": "Kaolinite\n\nKaolinite () is a clay mineral, part of the group of industrial minerals with the chemical composition AlSiO(OH). It is a layered silicate mineral, with one tetrahedral sheet of silica () linked through oxygen atoms to one octahedral sheet of alumina () octahedra. Rocks that are rich in kaolinite are known as kaolin or china clay.\n\nThe name \"kaolin\" is derived from \"Gaoling\" (), a Chinese village near Jingdezhen in southeastern China's Jiangxi Province. The name entered English in 1727 from the French version of the word: \"kaolin\", following François Xavier d'Entrecolles's reports on the making of Jingdezhen porcelain.\n\nKaolinite has a low shrink–swell capacity and a low cation-exchange capacity (1–15 meq/100 g). It is a soft, earthy, usually white, mineral (dioctahedral phyllosilicate clay), produced by the chemical weathering of aluminium silicate minerals like feldspar. In many parts of the world it is colored pink-orange-red by iron oxide, giving it a distinct rust hue. Lighter concentrations yield white, yellow, or light orange colors. Alternating layers are sometimes found, as at Providence Canyon State Park in Georgia, United States. Commercial grades of kaolin are supplied and transported as dry powder, semi-dry noodle, or liquid slurry.\n\nThe chemical formula for kaolinite as used in mineralogy is , however, in ceramics applications the formula is typically written in terms of oxides, thus the formula for kaolinite is .\n\nKaolinite group clays undergo a series of phase transformations upon thermal treatment in air at atmospheric pressure.\n\nBelow , exposure to dry air will slowly remove liquid water from the kaolin. The end-state for this transformation is referred to as \"leather dry\". Between 100 °C and about , any remaining liquid water is expelled from kaolinite. The end state for this transformation is referred to as \"bone dry\". Throughout this temperature range, the expulsion of water is reversible: if the kaolin is exposed to liquid water, it will be reabsorbed and disintegrate into its fine particulate form. Subsequent transformations are \"not\" reversible, and represent permanent chemical changes.\n\nEndothermic dehydration of kaolinite begins at 550–600 °C producing disordered metakaolin, but continuous hydroxyl loss is observed up to . Although historically there was much disagreement concerning the nature of the metakaolin phase, extensive research has led to a general consensus that metakaolin is not a simple mixture of amorphous silica () and alumina (), but rather a complex amorphous structure that retains some longer-range order (but not strictly crystalline) due to stacking of its hexagonal layers.<chem>Al2Si2O5(OH)4 -> Al2Si2O7 + 2 H2O</chem>\n\nFurther heating to 925–950 °C converts metakaolin to an aluminium-silicon spinel which is sometimes also referred to as a gamma-alumina type structure:<chem>2 Al2Si2O7 -> Si3Al4O12 + SiO2</chem>\n\nUpon calcination above 1050 °C, the spinel phase nucleates and transforms to platelet mullite and highly crystalline cristobalite:<chem>3 Si3Al4O12 -> 2(3 Al2O3. 2 SiO2) + 5 SiO2</chem>\n\nFinally, at 1400 °C the \"needle\" form of mullite appears, offering substantial increases in structural strength and heat resistance. This is a structural but not chemical transformation. See stoneware for more information on this form.\n\nKaolinite is one of the most common minerals; it is mined, as kaolin, in Malaysia, Pakistan, Vietnam, Brazil, Bulgaria, Bangladesh, France, the United Kingdom, Iran, Germany, India, Australia, South Korea, the People's Republic of China, the Czech Republic, Spain, South Africa, and the United States.\n\nMantles of kaolinitic saprolite are common in Western and Northern Europe. The ages of these mantles are Mesozoic to Early Cenozoic.\n\nKaolinite clay occurs in abundance in soils that have formed from the chemical weathering of rocks in hot, moist climates—for example in tropical rainforest areas. Comparing soils along a gradient towards progressively cooler or drier climates, the proportion of kaolinite decreases, while the proportion of other clay minerals such as illite (in cooler climates) or smectite (in drier climates) increases. Such climatically-related differences in clay mineral content are often used to infer changes in climates in the geological past, where ancient soils have been buried and preserved. \n\nIn the \"Institut National pour l'Etude Agronomique au Congo Belge\" (INEAC) classification system, soils in which the clay fraction is predominantly kaolinite are called \"kaolisol\" (from kaolin and soil).\n\nIn the US, the main kaolin deposits are found in central Georgia, on a stretch of the Atlantic Seaboard fall line between Augusta and Macon. This area of thirteen counties is called the \"white gold\" belt; Sandersville is known as the \"Kaolin Capital of the World\" due to its abundance of kaolin. In the late 1800s, an active kaolin surface-mining industry existed in the extreme southeast corner of Pennsylvania, near the towns of Landenberg and Kaolin, and in what is present-day White Clay Creek Preserve. The product was brought by train to Newark, Delaware, on the Newark-Pomeroy line, along which can still be seen many open-pit clay mines. The deposits were formed between the late Cretaceous and early Paleogene, about 100 million to 45 million years ago, in sediments derived from weathered igneous and metakaolin rocks. Kaolin production in the US during 2011 was 5.5 million tons.\n\nDuring the Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum sediments were enriched with kaolinite from a detrital source due to denudation.\n\nDifficulties are encountered when trying to explain kaolinite formation under atmospheric conditions by extrapolation of thermodynamic data from the more successful high-temperature syntheses (as for example Meijer and Van der Plas, 1980 have pointed out). La Iglesia and Van Oosterwijk-Gastuche (1978) thought that the conditions under which kaolinite will nucleate can be deduced from stability diagrams, based as they are on dissolution data. Because of a lack of convincing results in their own experiments, La Iglesia and Van Oosterwijk-Gastuche (1978) had to conclude, however, that there were other, still unknown, factors involved in the low-temperature nucleation of kaolinite. Because of the observed very slow crystallization rates of kaolinite from solution at room temperature Fripiat and Herbillon (1971) postulated the existence of high activation energies in the low-temperature nucleation of kaolinite.\n\nAt high temperatures, equilibrium thermodynamic models appear to be satisfactory for the description of kaolinite dissolution and nucleation, because the thermal energy suffices to overcome the energy barriers involved in the nucleation process. The importance of syntheses at ambient temperature and atmospheric pressure towards the understanding of the mechanism involved in the nucleation of clay minerals lies in overcoming these energy barriers. As indicated by Caillère and Hénin (1960) the processes involved will have to be studied in well-defined experiments, because it is virtually impossible to isolate the factors involved by mere deduction from complex natural physico-chemical systems such as the soil environment.\nFripiat and Herbillon (1971), in a review on the formation of kaolinite, raised the fundamental question how a disordered material (i.e., the amorphous fraction of tropical soils) could ever be transformed into a corresponding ordered structure. This transformation seems to take place in soils without major changes in the environment, in a relatively short period of time, and at ambient temperature (and pressure).\n\nLow-temperature synthesis of clay minerals (with kaolinite as an example) has several aspects. In the first place the silicic acid to be supplied to the growing crystal must be in a monomeric form, i.e., silica should be present in very dilute solution (Caillère et al., 1957; Caillère and Hénin, 1960; Wey and Siffert, 1962; Millot, 1970). In order to prevent the formation of amorphous silica gels precipitating from supersaturated solutions without reacting with the aluminium or magnesium cations to form crystalline silicates, the silicic acid must be present in concentrations below the maximum solubility of amorphous silica. The principle behind this prerequisite can be found in structural chemistry: \"Since the polysilicate ions are not of uniform size, they cannot arrange themselves along with the metal ions into a regular crystal lattice.\" (Iler, 1955, p. 182)\n\nThe second aspect of the low-temperature synthesis of kaolinite is that the aluminium cations must be hexacoordinated with respect to oxygen (Caillère and Hénin, 1947; Caillère et al., 1953; Hénin and Robichet, 1955). Gastuche et al. (1962), as well as Caillère and Hénin (1962) have concluded, that only in those instances when the aluminium hydroxide is in the form of gibbsite, kaolinite can ever be formed. If not, the precipitate formed will be a \"mixed alumino-silicic gel\" (as Millot, 1970, p. 343 put it). If it were the only requirement, large amounts of kaolinite could be harvested simply by adding gibbsite powder to a silica solution. Undoubtedly a marked degree of adsorption of the silica in solution by the gibbsite surfaces will take place, but, as stated before, mere adsorption does not create the layer lattice typical of kaolinite crystals.\n\nThe third aspect is that these two initial components must be incorporated into one and the same mixed crystal with a layer structure. From the following equation (as given by Gastuche and DeKimpe, 1962) for kaolinite formation<chem>2Al(OH)3 + 2H4SiO4 -> Si2O5 . 2Al(OH)3 + 5H2O</chem>it can be seen, that five molecules of water must be removed from the reaction for every molecule of kaolinite formed. Field evidence illustrating the importance of the removal of water from the kaolinite reaction has been supplied by Gastuche and DeKimpe (1962). While studying soil formation on a basaltic rock in Kivu (Zaïre), they noted how the occurrence of kaolinite depended on the of the area involved. A clear distinction was found between areas with good drainage (i.e., areas with a marked difference between wet and dry seasons) and those areas with poor drainage (i.e., perennially swampy areas). Only in the areas with distinct seasonal alternations between wet and dry was kaolinite found. The possible significance of alternating wet and dry conditions on the transition of allophane into kaolinite has been stressed by Tamura and Jackson (1953). The role of alternations between wetting and drying on the formation of kaolinite has also been noted by Moore (1964).\n\nSyntheses of kaolinite at high temperatures (more than ) are relatively well known. There are for example the syntheses of Van Nieuwenberg and Pieters (1929); Noll (1934); Noll (1936); Norton (1939); Roy and Osborn (1954); Roy (1961); Hawkins and Roy (1962); Tomura et al. (1985); Satokawa et al. (1994) and Huertas et al. (1999).\nRelatively few low-temperature syntheses have become known (cf. Brindley and DeKimpe (1961); DeKimpe (1969); Bogatyrev et al. (1997)).\n\nLaboratory syntheses of kaolinite at room temperature and atmospheric pressure have been described by DeKimpe et al. (1961). From those tests the role of periodicity becomes convincingly clear. DeKimpe et al. (1961) had used daily additions of alumina (as ) and silica (in the form of ethyl silicate) during at least two months. In addition, adjustments of the pH took place every day by way of adding either hydrochloric acid or sodium hydroxide. Such daily additions of Si and Al to the solution in combination with the daily titrations with hydrochloric acid or sodium hydroxide during at least 60 days will have introduced the necessary element of periodicity. \nOnly now the actual role of what has been described as the \"aging\" (\"Alterung\") of amorphous alumino-silicates (as for example Harder, 1978 had noted) can be fully understood. Time as such is not bringing about any change in a closed system at equilibrium; but a series of alternations, of periodically changing conditions (by definition, taking place in an open system), will bring about the low-temperature formation of more and more of the stable phase kaolinite instead of (ill-defined) amorphous alumino-silicates.\n\nThe main use of the mineral kaolinite (about 50% of the time) is the production of paper; its use ensures the gloss on some grades of coated paper.\n\nKaolin is also known for its capabilities to induce and accelerate blood clotting. In April 2008 the US Naval Medical Research Institute announced the successful use of a kaolinite-derived aluminosilicate infusion in traditional gauze, known commercially as QuikClot Combat Gauze, which is still the hemostat of choice for all branches of the US military.\n\nKaolin is used (or was used in the past):\nBULLET::::- in ceramics (it is the main component of porcelain)\nBULLET::::- in toothpaste\nBULLET::::- as a light-diffusing material in white incandescent light bulbs\nBULLET::::- in cosmetics\nBULLET::::- in industrial insulation material called Kaowool (a form of mineral wool)\nBULLET::::- in 'pre-work' skin protection and barrier creams\nBULLET::::- in paint to extend the titanium dioxide () white pigment and modify gloss levels\nBULLET::::- for modifying the properties of rubber upon vulcanization\nBULLET::::- in adhesives to modify rheology\nBULLET::::- in organic farming as a spray applied to crops to deter insect damage, and in the case of apples, to prevent sun scald\nBULLET::::- as whitewash in traditional stone masonry homes in Nepal (the most common method is to paint the upper part with white kaolin clay and the middle with red clay; the red clay may extend to the bottom, or the bottom may be painted black)\nBULLET::::- as a filler in Edison Diamond Discs\nBULLET::::- as a filler to give bulk, or a coating to improve the surface in papermaking\nBULLET::::- as an indicator in radiological dating since kaolinite can contain very small traces of uranium and thorium\nBULLET::::- to soothe an upset stomach, similar to the way parrots (and later, humans) in South America originally used it (more recently, industrially-produced kaolinite preparations were common for treatment of diarrhea; the most common of these was Kaopectate, which abandoned the use of kaolin in favor of attapulgite and then (in the United States) bismuth subsalicylate (the active ingredient in Pepto-Bismol))\nBULLET::::- for facial masks or soap (known as \"White Clay\")\nBULLET::::- as adsorbents in water and wastewater treatment\nBULLET::::- to induce blood clotting in diagnostic procedures, e.g. Kaolin clotting time\nBULLET::::- in its altered metakaolin form, as a pozzolan; when added to a concrete mix, metakaolin accelerates the hydration of Portland cement and takes part in the pozzolanic reaction with the portlandite formed in the hydration of the main cement minerals (e.g. alite)\nBULLET::::- in its altered metakaolin form, as a base component for geopolymer compounds\n\nHumans sometimes eat kaolin for health or to suppress hunger, a practice known as geophagy. Consumption is greater among women, especially during pregnancy. This practice has also been observed within a small population of African-American women in the Southern United States, especially Georgia. There, the kaolin is called \"white dirt\", \"chalk\", or \"white clay\".\n\nPeople can be exposed to kaolin in the workplace by breathing in the powder or from skin or eye contact.\n\nThe Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has set the legal limit (permissible exposure limit) for kaolin exposure in the workplace as 15 mg/m total exposure and 5 mg/m respiratory exposure over an 8-hour workday. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has set a recommended exposure limit (REL) of 10 mg/m total exposure TWA 5 mg/m respiratory exposure over an 8-hour workday.\n\n\nBULLET::::- CDC – NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards\n"}
{"id": "16941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16941", "title": "Kawasaki Ki-56", "text": "Kawasaki Ki-56\n\nThe Kawasaki Ki-56 (一式貨物輸送機, Type 1 Freight Transport) was a Japanese two-engine light transport aircraft used during World War II. It was known to the Allies by the reporting name \"Thalia\". 121 were built between 1940 and 1943.\n\nThe Kawasaki Ki-56 was derived from the Lockheed Model 14 Super Electra aircraft that the \"Kawasaki Kokuki Kogyo Kabushiki Kaisha\" (The Kawasaki Aircraft Engineering Company Limited) had built under licence. In September 1939 Kawasaki was asked by the Koku Hombu to design an improved version as Ki-56. A number was also built by Tachikawa Hikoki K.K..\n\nThe Japanese invasion of Sumatra in the Dutch East Indies campaign began with a paratroop drop from Ki-56 transports on Airfield P1 and the oil refineries near Palembang. Royal Air Force Hawker Hurricane fighters flying from P1 to locate the Japanese invasion fleet passed the incoming Ki-56s, but thought them to be friendly Lockheed Hudsons (also developed from the Lockheed Model 14) returning from a raid. The defending anti-aircraft gunners at P1 were equally fooled, until the parachutes began to open. Once the AA guns opened fire one transport was shot down, another force-landed, and others veered off course, but the paratroop drop was effective and the airfield and oil installations were overrun.\n\nBULLET::::- Notes\nBULLET::::- Bibliography\n\nBULLET::::- Pilot Friend\n"}
{"id": "16942", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16942", "title": "MV Wilhelm Gustloff", "text": "MV Wilhelm Gustloff\n\nMV \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" was a German military transport ship which was sunk on 30 January 1945 by in the Baltic Sea while evacuating German civilians, German officials, refugees from Prussia, Lithuania, Latvia, Poland, Estonia and Croatia and military personnel from Gotenhafen (Gdynia) as the Red Army advanced. By one estimate, 9,400 people died, which makes it the largest loss of life in a single ship sinking in history.\n\nConstructed as a cruise ship for the Nazi \"Kraft durch Freude\" (Strength Through Joy) organisation in 1937, she had been requisitioned by the \"Kriegsmarine\" (German navy) in 1939. It was believed that the ship was actually a German aircraft carrier disguised as a cruise ship due to its long upper deck. She served as a hospital ship in 1939 and 1940. She was then assigned as a floating barracks for naval personnel in Gdynia (Gotenhafen) before being put into service to transport evacuees in 1945.\n\n\"Wilhelm Gustloff\" was constructed by the Blohm & Voss shipyards. Measuring long by wide, with a capacity of , she was launched on 5 May 1937.\n\nThe ship was originally intended to be named \"Adolf Hitler\" but instead was christened after Wilhelm Gustloff, leader of the National Socialist Party's Swiss branch, who had been assassinated by a Jewish medical student in 1936. Hitler decided on the name change after sitting next to Gustloff's widow during his memorial service.\n\nAfter completing sea trials in the North Sea from 15 to 16 March 1938 she was handed over to her owners.\n\n\"Wilhelm Gustloff\" was the first purpose-built cruise ship for the German Labour Front (\"Deutsche Arbeitsfront\", DAF) and used by subsidiary organisation \"Kraft durch Freude\" (KdF) (Strength Through Joy). Her purposes were to provide recreational and cultural activities for German functionaries and workers, including concerts, cruises, and other holiday trips, and to serve as a public relations tool, to present \"a more acceptable image of the Third Reich.\" She was the flagship of the KdF cruise fleet, her last civilian role, until the spring of 1939.\n\nShe made her unofficial maiden voyage between 24 and 27 March 1938 carrying Austrians in an attempt to convince them to vote for the annexation of Austria by Germany.\n\nOn 29 March 1938 she departed on her third voyage carrying workers and their families from the Blohm & Voss shipyard on a three-day cruise.\n\nOn the 8 April 1938 the \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" under the command of Captain Carl Lübbe departed Hamburg for England where she anchored over three miles offshore of Tilbury so as to remain in international waters. This allowed her to act as a floating polling station for German and Austrian citizens living in England who wished to vote on the approaching plebiscite on Anschluss (Union of Austria with Germany). During the 10 April, 1,172 Germans and 806 Austrian eligible voters were ferried between the docks at Tilbury to the ship where 1,968 votes were cast in favour of the union and 10 voted against.\n\nOnce the voting was complete, the Wilhelm Gustloff departed, reaching Hamburg on the 12 April.\n\nFor her third voyage she left Hamburg on the 1 April 1938 under the command of Carl Lübbe to join the KdF ships \"Der Deutsche\", \"Oceania\" and \"Sierra Cordoba\" on a group cruise of a North Sea. A storm developed on 3 April with winds up to that forced the four ships apart. On 2 April the 1,836 gross ton coal freighter \"Pegaway\" had departed Tyne under the command of Captain G. W. Ward with a load of coal for Hamburg. The storm washed cargo and machinery from her decks and as the storm increased in intensity she lost manoeuvrability. By the 4 March was taking on water and slowly sinking. At 4am the captain issued an SOS when the ship was 20 miles northwest of the island of Terschelling in the West Frisian Islands group off the coast of the Netherlands. The closest of the ships that answered the distress call was the \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" which reached the \"Pegaway\" at 6am. She launched her Lifeboat No.1 with a crew of 12 under the command of 2nd officer Meyer. The oar-powered lifeboat was unable in the heavy seas to come aside the Pegaway and looked in danger of needing rescuing. Lifeboat No.6 with a crew of 10 under the command of 2nd officer Schürmann was then lowered. As it had a motor it was better able to handle the waves. After first assisting their shipmates in lifeboat No.1, to head back towards the Wilhelm Gustloff, Schürmann was able to reach the \"Pegaway\". One by one the 19 men on the \"Pegaway\" jumped into the sea and were hauled onto Lifeboat No. 6, with both them and the crew of the lifeboat back at the Wilhelm Gustloff by 7:45am. By now the Dutch tugboat had arrived but was unable to save the \"Pegaway\", which soon rolled to port and sank. Lifeboat No.1 had been so badly damaged by the waves that after its crew had climbed up via ladders to the safety of their ship it was set adrift to later be washed up on the shores of Terschelling on 2 May.\n\nAfter undertaking a further voyage on 14 to 19 April 1938 she went on an Osterfahrt (Easter Voyage) before her actual official maiden voyage which was undertaken between 21 April to 6 May 1938 when she joined the \"Der Deutsche\", \"Oceania\" and \"Sierra Cordoba\" on a group cruise to the Madeira Islands. On the second day of her voyage the 58 year old Captain Carl Lübbe died on the bridge from a heart attack. He was replaced by Friedrich Petersen who after commanding the ship for the remainder of this cruise left the ship until he returned to command it on the voyage during which it was sunk.\n\nBetween the 20 May to 2 June 1939 she was diverted from her pleasure cruises when with seven other ships in the KdF fleet she transported the Condor Legion back from Spain following the victory of the Nationalist forces under General Francisco Franco, in the Spanish Civil War.\nFrom the 14 March 1938 until the 26 August 1939, the \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" took over 80,000 passengers on a total of 60 voyages, all around Europe.\n\nFrom September 1939 to November 1940, she served as a hospital ship, officially designated \"Lazarettschiff D\".\n\nBeginning on 20 November 1940, the medical equipment was removed from the ship, and she was repainted from the hospital ship colours of white with a green stripe to standard naval grey.\nAs a consequence of the British blockade of the German coastline, she was used as an accommodations ship (barracks) for approximately 1,000 U-boat trainees of the 2nd Submarine Training Division (2. \"Unterseeboot-Lehrdivision\") in the port of Gdynia, which had been occupied by Germany and renamed \"Gotenhafen\", located near Gdańsk. \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" sat in dock there for over four years. In 1942, was used as a stand-in for in the German film version of the disaster. Filmed in Gotenhafen, the 2nd Submarine Training Division acted as extras in the movie. Eventually she was put back into service to transport civilians and military personnel as part of Operation Hannibal.\n\nOperation Hannibal was the naval evacuation of German troops and civilians as the Red Army advanced. The \"Wilhelm Gustloff's\" final voyage was to evacuate German refugees, military personnel, and technicians from Courland, East Prussia, and Danzig-West Prussia. Many had worked at advanced weapon bases in the Baltic from Gdynia/Gotenhafen to Kiel.\n\nThe ship's complement and passenger lists cited 6,050 people on board, but these did not include many civilians who boarded the ship without being recorded in the official embarkation records. Heinz Schön, a German archivist and \"Gustloff\" survivor who extensively researched the sinking during the 1980s and 1990s, concluded that \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" was carrying a crew of 173 (naval armed forces auxiliaries), 918 officers, NCOs, and men of the 2 \"Unterseeboot-Lehrdivision\", 373 female naval auxiliary helpers, 162 wounded soldiers, and 8,956 civilians, of which an estimated 5,000 were children, for a total of 10,582 passengers and crew. The passengers, besides civilians, included Gestapo personnel, members of the Organisation Todt, and Nazi officials with their families. The ship was overcrowded, and due to the temperature and humidity inside, many passengers defied orders not to remove their life jackets.\n\nThe ship left Danzig (Gdańsk) at 12:30 pm on 30 January 1945, accompanied by the passenger liner \"Hansa\", also filled with civilians and military personnel, and two torpedo boats. \"Hansa\" and one torpedo boat developed mechanical problems and could not continue, leaving \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" with one torpedo boat escort, \"Löwe\". The ship had four captains (\"Wilhelm Gustloff\"<nowiki>'</nowiki>s captain, two merchant marine captains, and the captain of the U-Boat complement housed on the vessel) on board, and they disagreed on the best course of action to guard against submarine attacks. Against the advice of the military commander, Lieutenant Commander Wilhelm Zahn (a submariner who argued for a course in shallow waters close to shore and without lights), the \"Wilhelm Gustloff\"<nowiki>'</nowiki>s captain Friedrich Petersen decided to head for deep water which was known to have been cleared of mines. When he was informed by a mysterious radio message of an oncoming German minesweeper convoy, he decided to activate his ship's red and green navigation lights so as to avoid a collision in the dark, making \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" easy to spot in the night.\n\nAs \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" had been fitted with anti-aircraft guns, and the Germans, in obedience to the rules of war, did not mark her as a hospital ship, no notification of her operating in a hospital capacity had been given and, as she was transporting military personnel, she did not have any protection as a hospital ship under international accords.\n\nThe ship was soon sighted by the , under the command of Captain Alexander Marinesko. The submarine sensor on board the escorting torpedo boat had frozen, rendering it inoperable, as had \"Wilhelm Gustloff\"s anti-aircraft guns, leaving the vessels defenseless. Marinesko followed the ships to their starboard (seaward) side for two hours before making a daring move to surface his submarine and steer it around \"Wilhelm Gustloff\"'s stern, to attack it from the port side closer to shore, from whence the attack would be less expected. At around 9 pm (CET), Marinesko ordered his crew to launch four torpedoes at \"Wilhelm Gustloff\"s port side, about offshore, between Großendorf and Leba. The first was nicknamed \"for the Motherland,\" the second \"for Leningrad,\" the third \"for the Soviet people\", and the fourth, which got jammed in the torpedo tubes and had to be dismantled, \"for Stalin.\" The three torpedoes which were fired successfully all struck \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" on her port side.\n\nThe first torpedo struck \"Wilhelm Gustloff\"'s bow, causing the watertight doors to seal off the area which contained quarters where off-duty crew members were sleeping. The second torpedo hit the accommodations for the women's naval auxiliary, located in the ship's drained swimming pool, dislodging the pool tiles at high velocity, which caused heavy casualties; only three of the 373 quartered there survived. The third torpedo was a direct hit on the engine room located amidships, disabling all power and communications.\n\nReportedly, only nine lifeboats were able to be lowered; the rest had frozen in their davits and had to be broken free. About 20 minutes after the torpedoes' impact, \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" listed dramatically to port, so that the lifeboats lowered on the high starboard side crashed into the ship's tilting side, destroying many lifeboats and spilling their occupants across the ship's side.\n\nThe water temperature in the Baltic Sea at that time of year is usually around ; however, this was a particularly cold night, with an air temperature of and ice floes covering the surface. Many deaths were caused either directly by the torpedoes or by drowning in the onrushing water. Others were crushed in the initial stampede caused by panicked passengers on the stairs and decks. Many others jumped into the icy Baltic. The majority of those who perished succumbed to exposure in the freezing water.\n\nLess than 40 minutes after being struck, \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" was lying on her side. She sank bow-first 10 minutes later, in of water.\n\nGerman forces were able to rescue 996 of the survivors from the attack: the torpedo boat rescued 564 people; the torpedo boat \"Löwe\", 472; the minesweeper \"M387\", 98; the minesweeper \"M375\", 43; the minesweeper \"M341\", 37; the steamer \"Göttingen\", 28; the torpedo recovery boat (\"Torpedofangboot\") \"TF19\", 7; the freighter \"Gotenland\", two; and the patrol boat (\"Vorpostenboot\") \"V1703\", one baby.\n\nAll four captains on \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" survived her sinking, but an official naval inquiry was only started against Wilhelm Zahn. His degree of responsibility was never resolved, however, because of Nazi Germany's collapse in 1945.\n\nThe figures from Heinz Schön's research make the loss in the sinking to be 9,343 total, including about 5,000 children. Schön's more recent research is backed up by estimates made by a different method. An \"Unsolved History\" episode that aired in March 2003, on the Discovery Channel, undertook a computer analysis of her sinking. Using \"maritime EXODUS\" software, it was estimated 9,600 people died out of more than 10,600 on board. This analysis considered the passenger density based on witness reports and a simulation of escape routes and survivability with the timeline of the sinking.\n\nMany ships carrying civilians were sunk during the war by both the Allies and Axis Powers. However, based on the latest estimates of passenger numbers and those known to be saved, \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" remains by far the largest loss of life resulting from the sinking of one vessel in maritime history. Günter Grass said in an interview published by \"The New York Times\" in April 2003, \"One of the many reasons I wrote \"Crabwalk\" was to take the subject away from the extreme Right... They said the tragedy of \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" was a war crime. It wasn't. It was terrible, but it was a result of war, a terrible result of war.\"\n\nAbout 1,000 German naval officers and men were aboard during, and died in, the sinking of \"Wilhelm Gustloff\". The women on board the ship at the time of the sinking were inaccurately described by Soviet propaganda as \"SS personnel from the German concentration camps\". There were, however, 373 female naval auxiliaries amongst the passengers.\n\nOn the night of 9–10 February, just 11 days after the sinking, \"S-13\" sank another German ship, , killing about 4,500 people.\n\nBefore sinking \"Wilhelm Gustloff\", Alexander Marinesko was facing a court martial due to his problems with alcohol and for being caught in a brothel while he and his crew were off duty, so Marinesko was thus deemed \"not suitable to be a hero\" for his actions. Therefore, instead of gaining the title \"Hero of the Soviet Union,\" he was awarded the lesser Order of the Red Banner of Military Valour. Although widely recognized as a brilliant commander, he was downgraded in rank to lieutenant and dishonorably discharged from the navy in October 1945.\n\nIn 1960, he was reinstated as captain third class and granted a full pension. In 1963, Marinesko was given the traditional ceremony due to a captain upon his successful return from a mission.\n\nHe died three weeks later from cancer. Marinesko was posthumously named a Hero of the Soviet Union by Mikhail Gorbachev in 1990.\n\nNoted as \"Obstacle No. 73\" on Polish navigation charts, and classified as a war grave, \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" rests at , about offshore, east of Łeba and west of Władysławowo (the former Leba and Großendorf respectively). It is one of the largest shipwrecks on the Baltic Sea floor and has been attracting much interest from treasure hunters searching for the lost Amber Room. In order to protect the property on board the war grave-wreck of \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" and to protect the environment, the Polish Maritime Office in Gdynia has forbidden diving within a radius of the wreck.\n\nIn 2006, a bell recovered from the wreck and subsequently used as a decoration in a Polish seafood restaurant was lent to the privately funded \"Forced Paths\" exhibition in Berlin.\n\nBULLET::::- In German\nThe most prolific German author and historian on the subject of \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" is Heinz Schön, one of the shipwreck's survivors, whose books (in German) include:\n\nBULLET::::- \"Der Untergang der \"Wilhelm Gustloff\". Tatsachenbericht eines Überlebenden.\" (The sinking of the \"Wilhelm Gustloff\". Factual account of a survivor.) Karina-Goltze-Verlag K.-G., Göttingen 1952;\nBULLET::::- \"SOS Wilhelm Gustloff. Die größte Schiffskatastrophe der Geschichte.\" (SOS \"Wilhelm Gustloff\". The biggest shipping disaster in history.) Motorbuch Verlag Pietsch, Stuttgart 1998, ;\nBULLET::::- \"Die Gustloff – Katastrophe. Bericht eines Überlebenden über die größte Schiffskatastrophe im Zweiten Weltkrieg.\" (The Gustloff catastrophe. Account of a survivor of the biggest shipping disaster in the Second World War.) Motorbuch Verlag, 2002, ;\nBULLET::::- \"Die letzte Fahrt der Wilhelm Gustloff. Dokumentation eines Überlebenden.\" (The last trip of \"Wilhelm Gustloff\". Account of a survivor.) Motorbuch Verlag, Stuttgart 2008, .\nBULLET::::- Günter Grass: \"Im Krebsgang,\" which has also been translated (by Miguel Sáenz) from German to Spanish as \"A Paso de Cangrejo\". Alfaguara – Santillana Ediciones Generales, S.L. 2002 (Madrid), .\n\nBULLET::::- In English\nRecent years have seen increased interest in \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" disaster in countries outside Germany, with various books either written in or translated into English, including:\nBULLET::::- Ruta Sepetys: \"Salt to the Sea\", Philomel Books, Penguin Random, New York, 2016, . \"Salt to the Sea\" is an account of several fictional young adults who were upon the \"Gustloff\" during its sinking.\nBULLET::::- Cathryn Prince: \"Death in the Baltic: The World War II Sinking of the Wilhelm Gustloff\", Palgrave Macmillan, New York, 2013,\nBULLET::::- Christopher Dobson, John Miller, and Ronald Payne: \"The Cruellest Night\", Hodder & Stoughton, London, 1979, .\nBULLET::::- A.V. Sellwood: \"The Damned Don't Drown. The Sinking of the Wilhelm Gustloff.\" Naval Institute Press, Annapolis, MD, 1973, (fiction). In Sellwood's own words, this is a \"\"reconstruction of the tragedy\"\", with material drawn from \"\"interviews with some of the survivors and official documents\"\".\nBULLET::::- Günter Grass: \"Im Krebsgang,\" which has been translated into English as \"Crabwalk\". Steidl Verlag, Göttingen 2002, (fiction). Combines historical elements, such as the sinking of the Wilhelm Gustloff, with fictional elements, such as the book's major characters and events.\nBULLET::::- Clive Cussler & Paul Kemprecos: \"Polar Shift\", Puttnam, New York, 2005, . Novel containing lengthy sequences set on the Gustloff.\nBULLET::::- John Ries: \"History's Greatest Naval Disasters. The Little-Known Stories of the Wilhelm Gustloff, the General Steuben and the Goya\". In the controversial \"Journal of Historical Review\", 1992, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 371–381.\nBULLET::::- Philip Sayers: \"The Search for Baltic Gold\", 2012, novel, Desperation, disaster and discovery - the secret of Hitler's doomed flagship.\nBULLET::::- Guy Saville: \"The Madagaskar Plan\", 2015, . In this alternate history novel, the Gustloff is salvaged after being torpedoed and moored off the coast of Madagascar. It has become the depository for the records of the Jews deported to the island. An extended sequence is set on the ship.\nBULLET::::- Roger Weston: \"Fatal Return\", 2012. Novel linked to the history and sinking of the Wilhelm Gustloff.\nBULLET::::- Philip Kerr: \"The Other Side of Silence,\" one of his Bernie Gunther novels, includes the tragedy of the sinking of the Wilhelm Gustloff woven into the fabric of the novels' fictionalized heroes and other characters.\nBULLET::::- Roger Moorhouse: \"Ship of Fate: The Story of the MV Wilhelm Gustloff\" (Kindle Single) Kindle Edition. Endeavour Press, 2016. ASIN: B01E7EEGG8. \"Ship of Fate: The Story of the MV Wilhelm Gustloff\" explains the history of the ship from its construction in 1930 until the sinking in 1945.\n\nBULLET::::- In French\nBULLET::::- Eric Dupont: \"La Fiancée Américaine\", Ed. Marchand de Feuilles, 2012, .\n\nBULLET::::- \"Nacht fiel über Gotenhafen\" (Night fell over Gotenhafen), feature film, 1959\nBULLET::::- \"Die Gustloff\" (\"The Gustloff\"), two-part telemovie by Joseph Vilsmaier, 2008 (\"Ship of No Return: The Last Voyage of the Gustloff\", Australian title)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Killer Submarine,\" an episode of \"History's Mysteries\", 1999.\nBULLET::::- \"Die große Flucht. Der Untergang der Gustloff\" (The Great Escape. The sinking of \"Wilhelm Gustloff\"), 2001.\nBULLET::::- \"The Sinking of the Wilhelm Gustloff\", \"The Sea Hunters\" (television program), 2002.\nBULLET::::- \"Wilhelm Gustloff: World's Deadliest Sea Disaster\", \"Unsolved History\" (television program), 2003.\nBULLET::::- \"Ghosts of the Baltic Sea,\" 2006.\nBULLET::::- \"Sinking Hitler's Supership,\" 2008. National Geographic documentary using extensive footage from the 2008 German miniseries.\nBULLET::::- \"Sinking the Gustloff\", 2009\nBULLET::::- \"The Nazi Titanic\" (television program), 2010.\n\nBULLET::::- MV \"Goya\" Part of Operation \"Hannibal\", the \"Goya\" was also sunk by a Soviet submarine with just 183 survivors from its 7,000 passengers and crew.\nBULLET::::- Soviet hospital ship \"Armenia\", sunk by German aircraft with only 8 survivors from its 5,000–7,000 passengers and crew.\nBULLET::::- SS \"Cap Arcona\"\nBULLET::::- MV \"Awa Maru\"\nBULLET::::- \"Iosif Stalin\"\nBULLET::::- \"Deutschland\"\nBULLET::::- \"Thielbek\"\nBULLET::::- \"Lancastria\"\nBULLET::::- \"Lusitania\"\nBULLET::::- List by death toll of ships sunk by submarines\nBULLET::::- List of maritime disasters\nBULLET::::- List of shipwrecks\nBULLET::::- Eric Braeden, a survivor\n\nBULLET::::- Kappes, Irwin J.; The Greatest Marine Disaster in History...and why you probably never heard of it, 2003.\nBULLET::::- Leja, Michael; \"Die letzte Fahrt der \"Wilhelm Gustloff\"\"; ZDF (1 August 2005), reports that earlier estimates of approximately 6000 drowned have been revised upwards by more recent sources to about 9300. An article in German.\nBULLET::::- Pipes, Jason; \"A Memorial to the Wilhelm Gustloff\"\nBULLET::::- Schön, Heinz; \"Die Gustloff Katastrophe\" (Motorbuch Verlag, Stuttgart, 2002)\nBULLET::::- Williams, David; \"Wartime Disasters at Sea\" (Patrick Stephens Limited, Nr Yeovil, UK, 1997) .\nBULLET::::- Bishop, Leigh; \"Shipwreck Expedition May 2003, led by Mike Boring\", 2003\n\nBULLET::::- Details, map and position info on www.wrecksite.eu\nBULLET::::- Location of the wreck\nBULLET::::- \"Schiff ohne Klassen - Die Wilhelm Gustloff \" 1938 propaganda film\nBULLET::::- Maritimequest \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" Photo Gallery\nBULLET::::- National Geographic Channel Timeline\nBULLET::::- \"Sinking the Gustloff\" (Film about \"Gustloff\" survivors)\nBULLET::::- The \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" Museum – The Ultimate Visual Record\nBULLET::::- \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" hi-rez images gallery\n"}
{"id": "16947", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16947", "title": "Kerberos (protocol)", "text": "Kerberos (protocol)\n\nKerberos () is a computer-network authentication protocol that works on the basis of \"tickets\" to allow nodes communicating over a non-secure network to prove their identity to one another in a secure manner. The protocol was named after the character \"Kerberos\" (or \"Cerberus\") from Greek mythology, the ferocious three-headed guard dog of Hades. Its designers aimed it primarily at a client–server model and it provides mutual authentication—both the user and the server verify each other's identity. Kerberos protocol messages are protected against eavesdropping and replay attacks.\n\nKerberos builds on symmetric key cryptography and requires a trusted third party, and optionally may use public-key cryptography during certain phases of authentication. Kerberos uses UDP port 88 by default.\n\nMassachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) developed Kerberos to protect network services provided by Project Athena. The protocol is based on the earlier Needham–Schroeder symmetric key protocol. Several versions of the protocol exist; versions 1–3 occurred only internally at MIT.\n\nKerberos version 4 was primarily designed by Steve Miller and Clifford Neuman. Published in the late 1980s, version 4 was also targeted at Project Athena.\n\nNeuman and Kohl published version 5 in 1993 with the intention of overcoming existing limitations and security problems. Version 5 appeared as RFC 1510, and was made obsolete by RFC 4120 in 2005. \n\nAuthorities in the United States classified Kerberos as \"Auxiliary Military Equipment\" on the US Munitions List and banned its export because it used the Data Encryption Standard (DES) encryption algorithm (with 56-bit keys). A Kerberos 4 implementation developed at the Royal Institute of Technology in Sweden named KTH-KRB (rebranded to Heimdal at version 5) made the system available outside the US before the US changed its cryptography export regulations (\"circa\" 2000). The Swedish implementation was based on a limited version called eBones. eBones was based on the exported MIT Bones release (stripped of both the encryption functions and the calls to them) based on version Kerberos 4 patch-level 9.\n\nIn 2005, the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) Kerberos working group updated specifications. Updates included:\nBULLET::::- Encryption and Checksum Specifications (RFC 3961).\nBULLET::::- Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) Encryption for Kerberos 5 (RFC 3962).\nBULLET::::- A new edition of the Kerberos V5 specification \"The Kerberos Network Authentication Service (V5)\" (RFC 4120). This version obsoletes RFC 1510, clarifies aspects of the protocol and intended use in a more detailed and clearer explanation.\nBULLET::::- A new edition of the Generic Security Services Application Program Interface (GSS-API) specification \"The Kerberos Version 5 Generic Security Service Application Program Interface (GSS-API) Mechanism: Version 2.\" (RFC 4121).\n\nMIT makes an implementation of Kerberos freely available, under copyright permissions similar to those used for BSD. In 2007, MIT formed the Kerberos Consortium to foster continued development. Founding sponsors include vendors such as Oracle, Apple Inc., Google, Microsoft, Centrify Corporation and TeamF1 Inc., and academic institutions such as the Royal Institute of Technology in Sweden, Stanford University, MIT, and vendors such as CyberSafe offering commercially supported versions.\n\nWindows 2000 and later versions use Kerberos as its default authentication method. Some Microsoft additions to the Kerberos suite of protocols are documented in RFC 3244 \"Microsoft Windows 2000 Kerberos Change Password and Set Password Protocols\". RFC 4757 documents Microsoft's use of the RC4 cipher. While Microsoft uses and extends the Kerberos protocol, it does not use the MIT software.\n\nKerberos is used as preferred authentication method:\nIn general, joining a client to a Windows domain means enabling Kerberos as default protocol for authentications from that client to services in the Windows domain and all domains with trust relationships to that domain.\n\nIn contrast, when either client or server or both are not joined to a domain (or not part of the same trusted domain environment), Windows will instead use NTLM for authentication between client and server.\n\nIntranet web applications can enforce Kerberos as an authentication method for domain joined clients by using APIs provided under SSPI.\n\nMany UNIX and UNIX-like operating systems, including FreeBSD, OpenBSD, Apple's macOS, Red Hat Enterprise Linux, Oracle's Solaris, IBM's AIX and Z/OS, HP's HP-UX and OpenVMS and others, include software for Kerberos authentication of users or services. Embedded implementation of the Kerberos V authentication protocol for client agents and network services running on embedded platforms is also available from companies.\n\nThe client authenticates itself to the Server (AS) which forwards the username to a key distribution center (KDC). The KDC issues a ticket-granting ticket (TGT), which is time stamped and encrypts it using the ticket-granting service's (TGS) secret key and returns the encrypted result to the user's workstation. This is done infrequently, typically at user logon; the TGT expires at some point although it may be transparently renewed by the user's session manager while they are logged in.\n\nWhen the client needs to communicate with a service on another node (a \"principal\", in Kerberos parlance), the client sends the TGT to the TGS, which usually shares the same host as the KDC. Service must be registered at TGS with a Service Principal Name (SPN). The client uses the SPN to request access to this service. After verifying that the TGT is valid and that the user is permitted to access the requested service, the TGS issues ticket and session keys to the client. The client then sends the ticket to the service server (SS) along with its service request.\n\nThe protocol is described in detail below.\n\nBULLET::::1. A user enters a username and password on the client machine(s). Other credential mechanisms like pkinit (RFC 4556) allow for the use of public keys in place of a password.\nBULLET::::2. The client transforms the password into the key of a symmetric cipher. This either uses the built-in key scheduling, or a one-way hash, depending on the cipher-suite used.\n\nBULLET::::1. The client sends a cleartext message of the user ID to the AS (Authentication Server) requesting services on behalf of the user. (Note: Neither the secret key nor the password is sent to the AS.)\nBULLET::::2. The AS checks to see if the client is in its database. If it is, the AS generates the secret key by hashing the password of the user found at the database (e.g., Active Directory in Windows Server) and sends back the following two messages to the client:\nBULLET::::- Message A: \"Client/TGS Session Key\" encrypted using the secret key of the client/user.\nBULLET::::- Message B: \"Ticket-Granting-Ticket\" (TGT, which includes the client ID, client network address, ticket validity period, and the \"client/TGS session key\") encrypted using the secret key of the TGS.\nBULLET::::3. Once the client receives messages A and B, it attempts to decrypt message A with the secret key generated from the password entered by the user. If the user entered password does not match the password in the AS database, the client's secret key will be different and thus unable to decrypt message A. With a valid password and secret key the client decrypts message A to obtain the \"Client/TGS Session Key\". This session key is used for further communications with the TGS. (Note: The client cannot decrypt Message B, as it is encrypted using TGS's secret key.) At this point, the client has enough information to authenticate itself to the TGS.\n\nBULLET::::1. When requesting services, the client sends the following messages to the TGS:\nBULLET::::- Message C: Composed of the TGT from message B and the ID of the requested service.\nBULLET::::- Message D: Authenticator (which is composed of the client ID and the timestamp), encrypted using the \"Client/TGS Session Key\".\nBULLET::::2. Upon receiving messages C and D, the TGS retrieves message B out of message C. It decrypts message B using the TGS secret key. This gives it the \"client/TGS session key\". Using this key, the TGS decrypts message D (Authenticator) and compare client ID from message C and D, if they match server sends the following two messages to the client:\nBULLET::::- Message E: \"Client-to-server ticket\" (which includes the client ID, client network address, validity period and \"Client/Server Session Key\") encrypted using the service's secret key.\nBULLET::::- Message F: \"Client/Server Session Key\" encrypted with the \"Client/TGS Session Key\".\n\nBULLET::::1. Upon receiving messages E and F from TGS, the client has enough information to authenticate itself to the Service Server (SS). The client connects to the SS and sends the following two messages:\nBULLET::::- Message E: from the previous step (the \"client-to-server ticket\", encrypted using service's secret key).\nBULLET::::- Message G: a new Authenticator, which includes the client ID, timestamp and is encrypted using \"Client/Server Session Key\".\nBULLET::::2. The SS decrypts the ticket (message E) using its own secret key to retrieve the \"Client/Server Session Key\". Using the sessions key, SS decrypts the Authenticator and compares client ID from messages E and G, if they match server sends the following message to the client to confirm its true identity and willingness to serve the client:\nBULLET::::- Message H: the timestamp found in client's Authenticator (plus 1 in version 4, but not necessary in version 5), encrypted using the \"Client/Server Session Key\".\nBULLET::::3. The client decrypts the confirmation (message H) using the \"Client/Server Session Key\" and checks whether the timestamp is correct. If so, then the client can trust the server and can start issuing service requests to the server.\nBULLET::::4. The server provides the requested services to the client.\n\nBULLET::::- Single point of failure: It requires continuous availability of a central server. When the Kerberos server is down, new users cannot log in. This can be mitigated by using multiple Kerberos servers and fallback authentication mechanisms.\nBULLET::::- Kerberos has strict time requirements, which means the clocks of the involved hosts must be synchronized within configured limits. The tickets have a time availability period and if the host clock is not synchronized with the Kerberos server clock, the authentication will fail. The default configuration per MIT requires that clock times be no more than five minutes apart. In practice Network Time Protocol daemons are usually used to keep the host clocks synchronized. Note that some servers (Microsoft's implementation being one of them) may return a KRB_AP_ERR_SKEW result containing the encrypted server time in case both clocks have an offset greater than the configured maximum value. In that case, the client could retry by calculating the time using the provided server time to find the offset. This behavior is documented in RFC 4430.\nBULLET::::- The administration protocol is not standardized and differs between server implementations. Password changes are described in RFC 3244.\nBULLET::::- In case of symmetric cryptography adoption (Kerberos can work using symmetric or asymmetric (public-key) cryptography), since all authentications are controlled by a centralized key distribution center (KDC), compromise of this authentication infrastructure will allow an attacker to impersonate any user.\nBULLET::::- Each network service which requires a different host name will need its own set of Kerberos keys. This complicates virtual hosting and clusters.\nBULLET::::- Kerberos requires user accounts and services to have a trusted relationship to the Kerberos token server.\nBULLET::::- The required client trust makes creating staged environments (e.g., separate domains for test environment, pre-production environment and production environment) difficult: Either domain trust relationships need to be created that prevent a strict separation of environment domains or additional user clients need to be provided for each environment.\n\nThe Data Encryption Standard (DES) cipher can be used in combination with Kerberos, but is no longer an Internet standard because it is weak. Security vulnerabilities exist in many legacy products that implement Kerberos because they have not been updated to use newer ciphers like AES instead of DES.\n\nIn November 2014, Microsoft released a patch (MS14-068) to rectify an exploitable vulnerability in Windows implementation of the Kerberos Key Distribution Center (KDC). The vulnerability purportedly allows users to \"elevate\" (and abuse) their privileges, up to Domain level.\n\nBULLET::::- Single sign-on\nBULLET::::- Identity management\nBULLET::::- SPNEGO\nBULLET::::- S/Key\nBULLET::::- Secure remote password protocol (SRP)\nBULLET::::- Generic Security Services Application Program Interface (GSS-API)\nBULLET::::- Host Identity Protocol (HIP)\nBULLET::::- List of single sign-on implementations\n\nBULLET::::- General\n\nBULLET::::- RFCs\nBULLET::::- RFC 1510 The Kerberos Network Authentication Service (V5) [Obsolete]\nBULLET::::- RFC 1964 The Kerberos Version 5 GSS-API Mechanism\nBULLET::::- RFC 3961 Encryption and Checksum Specifications for Kerberos 5\nBULLET::::- RFC 3962 Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) Encryption for Kerberos 5\nBULLET::::- RFC 4120 The Kerberos Network Authentication Service (V5) [Current]\nBULLET::::- RFC 4121 The Kerberos Version 5 Generic Security Service Application Program Interface (GSS-API) Mechanism: Version 2\nBULLET::::- RFC 4537 Kerberos Cryptosystem Negotiation Extension\nBULLET::::- RFC 4556 Public Key Cryptography for Initial Authentication in Kerberos (PKINIT)\nBULLET::::- RFC 4557 Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP) Support for Public Key Cryptography for Initial Authentication in Kerberos (PKINIT)\nBULLET::::- RFC 4757 The RC4-HMAC Kerberos Encryption Types Used by Microsoft Windows [Obsolete]\nBULLET::::- RFC 5021 Extended Kerberos Version 5 Key Distribution Center (KDC) Exchanges over TCP\nBULLET::::- RFC 5349 Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC) Support for Public Key Cryptography for Initial Authentication in Kerberos (PKINIT)\nBULLET::::- RFC 5868 Problem Statement on the Cross-Realm Operation of Kerberos\nBULLET::::- RFC 5896 Generic Security Service Application Program Interface (GSS-API): Delegate if Approved by Policy\nBULLET::::- RFC 6111 Additional Kerberos Naming Constraints\nBULLET::::- RFC 6112 Anonymity Support for Kerberos\nBULLET::::- RFC 6113 A Generalized Framework for Kerberos Pre-Authentication\nBULLET::::- RFC 6251 Using Kerberos Version 5 over the Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol\nBULLET::::- RFC 6448 The Unencrypted Form of Kerberos 5 KRB-CRED Message\nBULLET::::- RFC 6542 Kerberos Version 5 Generic Security Service Application Program Interface (GSS-API) Channel Binding Hash Agility\nBULLET::::- RFC 6560 One-Time Password (OTP) Pre-Authentication\nBULLET::::- RFC 6649 Deprecate DES, RC4-HMAC-EXP, and Other Weak Cryptographic Algorithms in Kerberos\nBULLET::::- RFC 6784 Kerberos Options for DHCPv6\nBULLET::::- RFC 6803 Camellia Encryption for Kerberos 5\nBULLET::::- RFC 6806 Kerberos Principal Name Canonicalization and Cross-Realm Referrals\nBULLET::::- RFC 6880 An Information Model for Kerberos Version 5\n\n\nBULLET::::- Kerberos Consortium\nBULLET::::- Kerberos page at MIT website\nBULLET::::- Kerberos Working Group at IETF website\nBULLET::::- Kerberos Sequence Diagram\nBULLET::::- Heimdal/Kerberos implementation\n"}
{"id": "16948", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16948", "title": "Ketamine", "text": "Ketamine\n\nKetamine is a medication mainly used for starting and maintaining anesthesia. It induces a trance-like state while providing pain relief, sedation, and memory loss. Other uses include for chronic pain, sedation in intensive care, and depression. Heart function, breathing, and airway reflexes generally remain functional. Effects typically begin within five minutes when given by injection, and last up to approximately 25 minutes.\nCommon side effects include agitation, confusion, or hallucinations as the medication wears off. Elevated blood pressure and muscle tremors are relatively common. Spasms of the larynx may rarely occur. Ketamine is an NMDA receptor antagonist, but it may also have other actions.\nKetamine was discovered in 1962, first tested in humans in 1964, and approved for use in the United States in 1970. It was extensively used for surgical anesthesia in the Vietnam War due to its safety. It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines, the most effective and safe medicines needed in a health system. It is available as a generic medication. The wholesale price in the developing world is between US$0.84 and US$3.22 per vial. Ketamine is also used as a recreational drug for its hallucinogenic and dissociative effects.\nUses as an anesthetic:\nSince it suppresses breathing much less than most other available anesthetics, ketamine is used in medicine as an anesthetic; however, due to the hallucinations it may cause, it is not typically used as a primary anesthetic, although it is the anesthetic of choice when reliable ventilation equipment is not available.\n\nKetamine is frequently used in severely injured people and appears to be safe in this group. A 2011 clinical practice guideline supports the use of ketamine as a dissociative sedative in emergency medicine. It is the drug of choice for people in traumatic shock who are at risk of hypotension. Low blood pressure is harmful in people with severe head injury and ketamine is least likely to cause low blood pressure, often even able to prevent it.\n\nThe effect of ketamine on the respiratory and circulatory systems is different from that of other anesthetics. When used at anesthetic doses, it will usually stimulate rather than depress the circulatory system. It is sometimes possible to perform ketamine anesthesia without protective measures to the airways. Ketamine is considered relatively safe because protective airway reflexes are preserved.\n\nKetamine is used as a bronchodilator in the treatment of severe asthma. However, evidence of clinical benefit is limited.\n\nKetamine may be used for postoperative pain management. Low doses of ketamine may reduce morphine use, nausea, and vomiting after surgery.\n\nKetamine has similar efficacy to opioids in a hospital emergency department setting for management of acute pain and for control of procedural pain.\n\nIt may also be used as an intravenous analgesic with opiates to manage otherwise intractable pain, particularly if this pain is neuropathic. It has the added benefit of counteracting spinal sensitization or wind-up phenomena experienced with chronic pain. At these doses, the psychotropic side effects are less apparent and well managed with benzodiazepines. Ketamine is an analgesic that is most effective when used alongside a low-dose opioid; because, while it does have analgesic effects by itself, the doses required for adequate pain relief when it is used as the sole analgesic agent are considerably higher and far more likely to produce disorienting side effects. A review article in 2013 concluded, \"despite limitations in the breadth and depth of data available, there is evidence that ketamine may be a viable option for treatment-refractory cancer pain\".\n\nLow-dose ketamine is sometimes used in the treatment of complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS). A 2013 systematic review found only low-quality evidence to support the use of ketamine for CRPS.\n\nKetamine has been found to be a rapid-acting antidepressant in depression. It also may be effective in decreasing suicidal ideation, although based on lower quality evidence. The antidepressant effects of ketamine were first shown in small studies in 2000 and 2006. They have since been demonstrated and characterized in subsequent studies. A single low, sub-anesthetic dose of ketamine given via intravenous infusion may produce antidepressant effects within four hours in people with depression. These antidepressant effects may persist for up to several weeks following a single infusion. This is in contrast to conventional antidepressants like selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), which generally require at least several weeks for their benefits to occur and become maximal. Moreover, based on the available preliminary evidence, the magnitude of the antidepressant effects of ketamine appears to be more than double that of conventional antidepressants. On the basis of these findings, ketamine has been described as the single most important advance in the treatment of depression in over 50 years. It has sparked interest in NMDA receptor antagonists for depression, and has shifted the direction of antidepressant research and development.\n\nKetamine has not been approved for use as an antidepressant, but its enantiomer, esketamine, was developed as a nasal spray for treatment-resistant depression and was approved for this indication in the United States in March 2019. The effectiveness of esketamine is limited however, with significant effectiveness for treatment-resistant depression seen in only two of five clinical trials. Although there is evidence to support the effectiveness of ketamine and esketamine in treating depression, there is a lack of consensus on dosing and the effects and safety of long-term therapy. Ketamine can produce euphoria and dissociative hallucinogen effects at higher doses, and thus has an abuse potential. Moreover, ketamine has been associated with cognitive deficits, urotoxicity, hepatotoxicity, and other complications in some individuals with long-term use. These undesirable effects may serve to limit the use of ketamine and esketamine for depression.\n\nKetamine is available in the form of solution for intravenous infusion.\n\nThe use of ketamine is cautioned against in cases of:\nBULLET::::- Conditions worsened by an increase in blood pressure or heart rate, such as angina, stroke, poorly controlled high blood pressure. Ketamine increases both heart rate and blood pressure.\nBULLET::::- Psychiatric disorders: Ketamine can cause hallucinations, and therefore may exacerbate the symptoms of certain psychiatric disorders.\nBULLET::::- Ketamine was once thought to cause increased intracranial pressure (IICP): as of 2014, this is believed not to be the case.\nBULLET::::- Raised intraocular pressure (IOP): Ketamine can further increase IOP.\nBULLET::::- Penetrating eye injury: Can increase risk of loss of eye contents, due to increased IOP.\nBULLET::::- Acute porphyria: Ketamine is considered porphyrinogenic, that is, it may provoke an attack of acute porphyria, a disease of the nervous system, in susceptible people.\n\nWhen administered by trained medical professionals, ketamine is generally safe for those people who are critically ill. Even in these cases, there are known side effects that include one or more of the following:\nBULLET::::- Cardiovascular: abnormal heart rhythms, slow heart rate or fast heart rate, high blood pressure or low blood pressure\nBULLET::::- Central nervous system: Ketamine is traditionally avoided in people with or at risk of intracranial hypertension (ICP) due to concerns about ketamine causing increased intracranial pressure. It does not increase ICP more than opioids.\nBULLET::::- Dermatologic: Transient reddening of the skin, transient measles-like rash\nBULLET::::- Gastrointestinal: reduced appetite, nausea, increased salivation, vomiting\nBULLET::::- Local: Pain, eruptions or rashes at the injection site\nBULLET::::- Neuromuscular and skeletal: Increased skeletal muscle tone (tonic-clonic movements)\nBULLET::::- Ocular: Double vision, increased intraocular pressure, involuntary eye movements, tunnel vision\nBULLET::::- Respiratory: Airway obstruction, cessation of breathing, increased bronchial secretions, reduced effort to breathe, spasm of the vocal cords (larynx)\nBULLET::::- Other: Anaphylaxis, dependence, emergence reaction\nAt anesthetic doses, 10–20% of people experience adverse reactions that occur during emergence from anesthesia, reactions that can manifest as seriously as hallucinations and delirium. These reactions may be less common in some subpopulations, and when administered intramuscularly, and can occur up to 24 hours postoperatively; the chance of this occurring can be reduced by minimizing stimulation to the person during recovery and pretreating with a benzodiazepine, alongside a lower dose of ketamine. People who experience severe reactions may require treatment with a small dose of a short- or ultrashort-acting barbiturate.\n\nTonic-clonic movements are reported at higher anesthetic doses in greater than 10% of people.\n\nIn 1989, psychiatry professor John Olney reported ketamine caused irreversible changes, known as Olney's lesions, in two small areas of the rat brain. However, the rat brain has significant differences in metabolism from the human brain; therefore such changes may not occur in humans.\n\nThe first large-scale, longitudinal study of ketamine users found current frequent (averaging 20 days/month) ketamine users had increased depression and impaired memory by several measures, including verbal, short-term memory, and visual memory. Current infrequent (averaging 3.25 days/month) ketamine users and former ketamine users were not found to differ from controls in memory, attention, and psychological well-being tests. This suggests the infrequent use of ketamine does not cause cognitive deficits, and that any deficits that might occur may be reversible when ketamine use is discontinued. However, abstinent, frequent, and infrequent users all scored higher than controls on a test of delusional symptoms.\n\nShort-term exposure of cultures of GABAergic neurons to ketamine at high concentrations led to a significant loss of differentiated cells in one study, and noncell-death-inducing concentrations of ketamine (10 μg/ml) may still initiate long-term alterations of dendritic arbor in differentiated neurons. The same study also demonstrated chronic (>24 h) administration of ketamine at concentrations as low as 0.01 μg/ml can interfere with the maintenance of dendritic arbor architecture. These results raise the possibility that chronic exposure to low, subanesthetic concentrations of ketamine, while not affecting cell survival, could still impair neuronal maintenance and development.\n\nMore recent studies of ketamine-induced neurotoxicity have focused on primates in an attempt to use a more accurate model than rodents. One such study administered daily ketamine doses consistent with typical recreational doses (1 mg/kg IV) to adolescent cynomolgus monkeys for varying periods of time. Decreased locomotor activity and indicators of increased cell death in the prefrontal cortex were detected in monkeys given daily injections for six months, but not those given daily injections for one month. A study conducted on rhesus monkeys found a 24-hour intravenous infusion of ketamine caused signs of brain damage in five-day-old but not 35-day-old animals.\n\nSome neonatal experts do not recommend the use of ketamine as an anesthetic agent in human neonates because of the potential adverse effects it may have on the developing brain. These neurodegenerative changes in early development have been seen with other drugs that share the same mechanism of action of NMDA receptor antagonism as ketamine.\n\nThe acute effects of ketamine cause cognitive impairment, including reductions in vigilance, verbal fluency, short-term memory, and executive function, as well as schizophrenia-like perceptual changes.\n\nA 2011 systematic review examined 110 reports of irritative urinary tract symptoms from ketamine recreational use. Urinary tract symptoms have been collectively referred as \"ketamine-induced ulcerative cystitis\" or \"ketamine-induced vesicopathy\", and they include urge incontinence, decreased bladder compliance, decreased bladder volume, detrusor overactivity, and painful blood in urine. Bilateral hydronephrosis and renal papillary necrosis have also been reported in some cases. The pathogenesis of papillary necrosis has been investigated in mice, and mononuclear inflammatory infiltration in the renal papilla resulting from ketamine dependence has been suggested as a possible mechanism.\n\nThe time of onset of lower urinary tract symptoms varies depending, in part, on the severity and chronicity of ketamine use; however, it is unclear whether the severity and chronicity of ketamine use correspond linearly to the presentation of these symptoms. All reported cases where the user consumed greater than 5 g/day reported symptoms of the lower urinary tract. Urinary tract symptoms appear to be most common in daily ketamine users who have used the drug recreationally for an extended period of time. These symptoms have presented in only one case of medical use of ketamine. However, following dose reduction, the symptoms remitted.\n\nManagement of these symptoms primarily involves ketamine cessation, for which compliance is low. Other treatments have been used, including antibiotics, NSAIDs, steroids, anticholinergics, and cystodistension. Both hyaluronic acid instillation and combined pentosan polysulfate and ketamine cessation have been shown to provide relief in some people, but in the latter case, it is unclear whether relief resulted from ketamine cessation, administration of pentosan polysulfate, or both. Further follow-up is required to fully assess the efficacy of these treatments.\n\nIn case reports of three people treated with esketamine for relief of chronic pain, liver enzyme abnormalities occurred following repeat treatment with ketamine infusions, with the liver enzyme values returning below the upper reference limit of normal range on cessation of the drug. The result suggests liver enzymes must be monitored during such treatment.\n\nKetamine's potential for dependence has been established in various operant conditioning paradigms, including conditioned place preference and self-administration; further, rats demonstrate locomotor sensitization following repeated exposure to ketamine. Increased subjective feelings of 'high' have been observed in healthy human volunteers exposed to ketamine. Additionally, the rapid onset of effects following smoking, insufflation, and/or intramuscular injection is thought to increase the drug's recreational use potential. The short duration of effects promotes bingeing; tolerance can develop; and withdrawal symptoms, including anxiety, shaking, and palpitations, may be present in some daily users following cessation of use.\n\nKetamine can cause a variety of urinary tract problems that are more likely to occur with heavier and/or higher dosed use, especially in those not watching for a healthy lifestyle, according to a UK study.\n\nPlasma concentrations of ketamine are increased by CYP3A4 inhibitors (e.g., diazepam) and CYP2B6 inhibitors (e.g., orphenadrine) due to inhibition of its metabolism. CYP2B6 and CYP3A4 inducers like carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, and rifampicin may reduce plasma levels of ketamine.\n\nOther drugs which increase blood pressure may interact with ketamine in having an additive effect on blood pressure including: stimulants, SNRI antidepressants, and MAOIs. Increase blood pressure and heart rate, palpitations, and arrhythmias may be potential effects.\n\nKetamine may increase the effects of other sedatives in a dose-dependent manner, including, but not limited to alcohol, benzodiazepines, opioids, quinazolinones, phenothiazines, anticholinergics, and barbiturates.\n\nBenzodiazepines may diminish the antidepressant effects of ketamine. Most conventional antidepressants can likely be combined with ketamine without diminished antidepressant effectiveness or increased side effects.\n\n+ Ketamine and biological targets\n! Site !! Value (μM) !! Type !! Action !! Species !! Ref\n\nD-serine\n0.46–0.57\nEC\nInhibitor\nHuman\n\n>100\nK\nInhibitor\nRat\n\n\"In vitro\", ketamine acts as a selective antagonist of the NMDA receptor, an ionotropic glutamate receptor. It binds specifically to the dizocilpine (MK-801) site of the NMDA receptor, near the channel pore, and is an uncompetitive antagonist. The \"S\"(+) and \"R\"(–) stereoisomers of ketamine bind to the dizocilpine site of the NMDA receptor with different affinities, the former showing approximately 2- to 3-fold greater affinity for the receptor than the latter. Ketamine may also interact with and inhibit the NMDAR via another allosteric site on the receptor. Its full mechanism of action is not well-understood .\n\nBesides NMDA receptor antagonism, other actions of ketamine under laboratory research include:\n\nBULLET::::- Ligand of the μ-, κ-, and δ-opioid receptors\nBULLET::::- Sigma σ and σ receptor agonist\nBULLET::::- Partial agonist of the high-affinity state of the dopamine D receptor\nBULLET::::- Ligand of the serotonin 5-HT receptor\nBULLET::::- Potentiator of the serotonin 5-HT receptor\nBULLET::::- Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor antagonist\nBULLET::::- Negative allosteric modulator of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (e.g., α, αβ)\nBULLET::::- Ligand of estrogen receptor α (ERα)\nBULLET::::- Inhibitor of cholinesterase\nBULLET::::- Inhibitor of the reuptake of serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine\nBULLET::::- Ligand of the PCP site 2\nBULLET::::- Blocker of voltage-gated/dependent sodium and calcium channels\nBULLET::::- Blocker of HCN1 cation channels\nBULLET::::- Decreasing extracellular levels of D-serine, which is required for activation of the NMDA receptor complex, and increasing intracellular levels of the amino acid\nBULLET::::- Inhibitor of nitric oxide synthase\nBULLET::::- Indirect agonist of the AMPA receptor\n\nWith a few exceptions (including interactions with the D and D receptor, nicotinic acetylcholine receptors by metabolites, and ERα) however, these actions are far weaker than ketamine's antagonism of the NMDA receptor (see the activity table to the right). A binding study assessed ketamine at 56 sites including neurotransmitter receptors and transporters and found that it had K (binding affinity) values of >10,000 nM at all sites except the dizocilpine site of the NMDA receptor (K = 659 nM), indicating a minimum of 15-fold selectivity for the NMDA receptor over any other site assessed in this study.\n\nAlthough ketamine is a very weak ligand of the monoamine transporters (K > 60,000 nM), it has been suggested that it may interact with allosteric sites on the monoamine transporters to produce monoamine reuptake inhibition. However, no functional inhibition (IC) of the human monoamine transporters has been observed with ketamine or its metabolites at concentrations of up to 10,000 nM. Moreover, animal studies and at least three human case reports have found no interaction between ketamine and the monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI) tranylcypromine, which is of importance as the combination of a monoamine reuptake inhibitor with an MAOI can produce severe toxicity such as serotonin syndrome or hypertensive crisis. Collectively, these findings shed doubt on the involvement of monoamine reuptake inhibition in the effects of ketamine in humans. Ketamine has been found to increase dopaminergic neurotransmission in the brain, but instead of being due to dopamine reuptake inhibition, this may be via indirect/downstream mechanisms, namely through antagonism of the NMDA receptor.\n\nActive metabolites of ketamine including dehydronorketamine, hydroxynorketamine, and norketamine have been found to act as negative allosteric modulators of the α nicotinic acetylcholine receptor in the KXa7R1 cell line (HEK293 cells transfected with rat nicotinic acetylcholine receptor genes) with subanesthetic and nanomolar potencies (e.g., IC = 55 nM for dehydronorketamine), whereas ketamine itself was inactive at the same concentrations (< 1 μM). These findings suggest that metabolites may contribute importantly to the pharmacodynamics of ketamine by means other than NMDA receptor antagonism.\n\nKetamine has been found to act as a potent partial agonist of the high-affinity state of the human and rat dopamine D receptors in multiple studies. Its apparent potency for this action is similar to that of its NMDA receptor antagonism. However, there are also contradictory data, with studies finding an affinity of ketamine of >10,000 nM for the regular human and rat D receptors, and direct interactions with the D receptor are controversial. Moreover, whereas D receptor agonists like bromocriptine are able to rapidly and powerfully suppress prolactin secretion, subanesthetic doses of ketamine have not been found to do this in humans and in fact have been found to dose-dependently \"increase\" prolactin levels. Imaging studies have shown mixed results on inhibition of striatal [C] raclopride binding by ketamine in humans, with some studies finding a significant decrease and others finding no such effect. However, changes in [C] raclopride binding may be due to changes in dopamine concentrations induced by ketamine rather than binding of ketamine to the D receptor.\n\nKetamine and certain metabolites have been found to act as agonists of the ERα, with affinities in the nanomolar to low micromolar range. The affinity of ketamine for the ERα was about 100-fold lower than that of estradiol. Ketamine and its metabolites may bind to a site on the ERα that is distinct from that of estradiol.\n\nAntagonism of the NMDA receptor is thought to be responsible for the anesthetic, amnesic, dissociative, and hallucinogenic effects of ketamine. The mechanism(s) of action for the antidepressant effects of ketamine at lower doses have yet to be fully elucidated. NMDA receptor antagonism results in analgesia by preventing central sensitization in dorsal horn neurons; in other words, ketamine's actions interfere with pain transmission in the spinal cord. Inhibition of nitric oxide synthase lowers the production of nitric oxide – a gasotransmitter involved in pain perception, hence further contributing to analgesia.\n\nKetamine produces measurable changes in peripheral organ systems, including the cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, and respiratory systems:\nBULLET::::- Cardiovascular: Ketamine stimulates the sympathetic nervous system, resulting in cardiovascular changes.\nBULLET::::- Gastrointestinal: Ketamine produces nausea and vomiting in 15 to 25% of individuals at anesthetic doses.\nBULLET::::- Respiratory: Ketamine causes bronchodilation. Several mechanisms have been hypothesized to explain this effect.\n\nThe exact mechanisms of these effects are not fully understood.\n\nIt has yet to be fully understood how ketamine mediates its robust and rapid-onset antidepressant effects. In any case, it has been elucidated that acute blockade of NMDA receptors in the brain results in an activation of α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptors (AMPA receptors), which in turn modulate a variety of downstream signaling pathways to influence neurotransmission in the limbic system and mediate antidepressant effects of NMDA receptor antagonists like ketamine. Such downstream actions of this activation of AMPA receptors include upregulation of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and activation of its signaling receptor tropomyosin receptor kinase B (TrkB), activation of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway, deactivation of glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3), and inhibition of the phosphorylation of the eukaryotic elongation factor 2 (eEF2) kinase. In addition to blockade of the NMDA receptor, the active metabolite of ketamine hydroxynorketamine, which does not interact importantly with the NMDA receptor but nonetheless indirectly activates AMPA receptors similarly, may also or alternatively be involved in the rapid-onset antidepressant effects of ketamine. Recent research has elucidated that an acute inhibition of the lateral habenula, a part of the brain in the limbic system that has been referred to as the \"anti-reward center\" (projecting to and inhibiting the mesolimbic reward pathway and modulating other limbic areas), may be involved in the antidepressant effects of ketamine.\n\nEsketamine is a more potent NMDA receptor antagonist and dissociative hallucinogen than arketamine, the other enantiomer of ketamine. Because NMDA receptor antagonism was thought to underlie the antidepressant effects of ketamine, esketamine was selected for clinical development as an antidepressant. However, preclinical research has since indicated that arketamine, as well as (2\"R\",6\"R\")-hydroxynorketamine, a metabolite of arketamine with negligible affinity for the NMDA receptor, may be more effective antidepressants than esketamine. In addition, non-ketamine NMDA receptor antagonists in general are less effective antidepressants than ketamine. Indeed, non-ketamine NMDA receptor antagonists, including memantine, lanicemine, rislenemdaz, rapastinel, and 4-chlorokynurenine, have thus far failed to demonstrate sufficient effectiveness for depression. It is now thought that NMDA receptor antagonism may not be responsible for the antidepressant effects of ketamine. For these reasons, , arketamine and (2\"R\",6\"R\")-hydroxynorketamine are both entering clinical trials for the treatment of depression.\n\nDrowsiness, dissociation, and psychosis-like effects (e.g., hallucinations, delirium) are reported in patients treated with ketamine starting at circulating concentrations of around 50 to 200 ng/mL (210–841 nM), while analgesia begins at levels of approximately 100 to 200 ng/mL (421–841 nM). The typical intravenous antidepressant dosage of ketamine used to treat depression is low and results in maximal plasma concentrations of 70 to 200 ng/mL (294–841 nM). Circulating concentrations of around 2,000 to 3,000 ng/mL (8,413–12,620 nM) are employed during anesthesia, and patients may start to awaken once levels of ketamine have decreased to about 500 to 1,000 ng/mL (2,103–4,207 nM). There is wide variation in the peak concentrations of ketamine that have been reported in association with anesthesia in the literature, with values ranging from 2,211–3,447 ng/mL (9,300–14,500 nM) to as high as 22,370 ng/mL (94,100 nM). Bioactive concentrations of ketamine are lower than total plasma levels due to plasma protein binding, although plasma protein binding is relatively low with ketamine (approximately 12 to 47% protein-bound). Concentrations of ketamine in the brain have been reported to be several-fold higher than in plasma.\n\nKetamine can be absorbed by intravenous, intramuscular, oral, and topical routes due to both its water and lipid solubilities. In medical settings, ketamine is usually injected intravenously or intramuscularly. The medication can be started using the oral route, or people may be changed from a subcutaneous infusion once pain is controlled. Oral ketamine is easily broken down by bile acids, and hence has a low bioavailability. Often, lozenges or \"gummies\" for sublingual or buccal absorption prepared by a compounding pharmacy are used to combat this issue. Some specialists stop the subcutaneous infusion when the first dose of oral ketamine is given. Others gradually reduce the infusion dose as the oral dose is increased.\n\nBioavailability through the oral route reaches 17 to 29%; bioavailability through other routes are: 93% intramuscularly, 8 to 50% intranasally, 24 to 30% sublingually, and 11 to 30% rectally. The onset of action of ketamine is seconds intravenously, 1 to 5 minutes intramuscularly, 15 to 30 minutes subcutaneously, 5 to 10 minutes via insufflation, and 15 to 30 minutes orally. Maximal concentrations of ketamine are reached in 1 to 3 minutes intravenously, 5 to 15 minutes intramuscularly, 10 to 20 minutes intranasally, 30 minutes orally, 30 to 45 minutes rectally, and 30 to 45 minutes sublingually.\n\nKetamine is rapidly distributed and, due to its high lipophilicity, rapidly crosses the blood–brain barrier into the central nervous system. Its distribution half-life is about 7 to 11 minutes. The plasma protein binding of ketamine is relatively low at 12 to 47%.\n\nWhen administered orally, ketamine undergoes first-pass metabolism, where it is biotransformed in the liver by CYP3A4 (major), CYP2B6 (minor), and CYP2C9 (minor) isoenzymes into norketamine (through \"N\"-demethylation) and ultimately dehydronorketamine. Intermediate in the biotransformation of norketamine into dehydronorketamine is the hydroxylation of norketamine into hydroxynorketamine by CYP2B6 and CYP2A6. As the major metabolite of ketamine, norketamine is one-third to one-fifth as potent as an anesthetic, and plasma levels of this metabolite are three times higher than ketamine following oral administration. Ketamine and its metabolites are also conjugated.\n\nThe duration of action of ketamine in a clinical setting is 0.5 to 2 hours intramuscularly and 4 to 6 hours orally.\n\nKetamine is eliminated about 90% in urine and about 1 to 5% in feces. The medication is excreted mostly in the form of metabolites, with only 2 to 4% remaining unchanged. Dehydronorketamine, followed by norketamine, is the most prevalent metabolite detected in urine.\n\nIn chemical structure, ketamine is an arylcyclohexylamine derivative. Ketamine is a chiral compound. Most pharmaceutical preparations of ketamine are racemic; however, some brands reportedly have (mostly undocumented) differences in their enantiomeric proportions. The more active enantiomer, esketamine (\"S\"-ketamine), is also available for medical use under the brand name Ketanest S, while the less active enantiomer, arketamine (\"R\"-ketamine), has never been marketed as an enantiopure drug for clinical use.\n\nThe optical rotation of a given enantiomer of ketamine can vary between its salts and free base form. The free base form of (\"S\")‑ketamine exhibits dextrorotation and is therefore labelled (\"S\")‑(+)‑ketamine. However, its hydrochloride salt shows levorotation and is thus labelled (\"S\")‑(−)‑ketamine hydrochloride. The difference originates from the conformation of the cyclohexanone ring. In both the free base and the hydrochloride, the cyclohexanone ring adopts a chair conformation, but the orientation of the substituents varies. In the free base, the \"o\"-chlorophenyl group adopts an equatorial position and the methylamino group adopts an axial position. In the hydrochloride salt, the positions are reversed, with the \"o\"-chlorophenyl group axial and the methylamino group equatorial. Not all salts of ketamine show different optical rotation to the free base: (\"S\")-ketamine (\"R\",\"R\")-tartrate is levorotatory, like (\"S\")‑ketamine.\n\n+ Conformational and optical-sign effects of amine-salt formation of \"(S)\"-ketamine\n! Free-base amine<br>(equatorial chlorophenyl)\n! Hydrochloride salt<br>(axial chlorophenyl)\n! Skeletal<br>structure\n! X-ray<br>structure\n\nOther arylcyclohexylamines and analogues of ketamine include eticyclidine (PCE), 3-MeO-PCE, methoxetamine (MXE), tiletamine, phencyclidine (PCP), tenocyclidine (TCP), and many others.\n\nKetamine may be quantitated in blood or plasma to confirm a diagnosis of poisoning in hospitalized patients, provide evidence in an impaired driving arrest or to assist in a medicolegal death investigation. Blood or plasma ketamine concentrations are usually in a range of 0.5–5.0 mg/L in persons receiving the drug therapeutically (during general anesthesia), 1–2 mg/L in those arrested for impaired driving and 3–20 mg/L in victims of acute fatal overdosage. Urine is often the preferred specimen for routine drug use monitoring purposes. The presence of norketamine, a pharmacologically-active metabolite, is useful for confirmation of ketamine ingestion.\n\nKetamine was first synthesized in 1962 by Calvin L. Stevens, a professor of Chemistry at Wayne State University and a Parke-Davis consultant conducting research on alpha-hydroxyimine rearrangements. It was known by the developmental code name \"CI-581\". After promising preclinical research in animals, ketamine was introduced to testing in human prisoners in 1964. These investigations demonstrated ketamine's short duration of action and reduced behavioral toxicity made it a favorable choice over phencyclidine (PCP) as a dissociative anesthetic. Following FDA approval in 1970, ketamine anesthesia was first given to American soldiers during the Vietnam War.\n\nNonmedical use of ketamine began on the West Coast of the United States in the early 1970s. Early use was documented in underground literature such as \"The Fabulous Furry Freak Brothers\". It was used in psychiatric and other academic research through the 1970s, culminating in 1978 with the publishing of psychonaut John Lilly's \"The Scientist\", and Marcia Moore and Howard Alltounian's \"Journeys into the Bright World\", which documented the unusual phenomenology of ketamine intoxication. The incidence of nonmedical ketamine use increased through the end of the century, especially in the context of raves and other parties. However, its emergence as a club drug differs from other club drugs (e.g., MDMA) due to its anesthetic properties (e.g., slurred speech, immobilization) at higher doses; in addition, there are reports of ketamine being sold as \"ecstasy\". The use of ketamine as part of a \"postclubbing experience\" has also been documented. Ketamine's rise in the dance culture was rapid in Hong Kong by the end of the 1990s. Before becoming a federally controlled substance in the United States in 1999, ketamine was available as diverted pharmaceutical preparations and as a pure powder sold in bulk quantities from domestic chemical supply companies. Much of the current ketamine diverted for nonmedical use originates in China and India.\n\n\"Ketamine\" is the English generic name of the drug and its and , while \"ketamine hydrochloride\" is its , , , and . Its generic name in Spanish and Italian and its are \"ketamina\", in French and its are \"kétamine\", in German is \"Ketamin\", and in Latin is \"ketaminum\".\n\nThe \"S\"(+) stereoisomer of ketamine is known as \"esketamine\", and this is its while \"esketamine hydrochloride\" is its .\n\nKetamine is primarily sold throughout the world under the brand name Ketalar. It is also marketed under a variety of other brand names, including Calypsol, Ketamin, Ketamina, Ketamine, Ketaminol, Ketanest, Ketaset, Tekam, and Vetalar among others.\n\nEsketamine is sold mainly under the brand names Ketanest and Ketanest-S.\n\nAfter the publication of the NIH-run antidepressant clinical trial, clinics began opening in which the intravenous ketamine is given for depression. This practice is an off label use of ketamine in the United States. As of 2015 there were about 60 such clinics in the US; the procedure was not covered by insurance, and people paid between $400 and $1700 out of pocket for a treatment. It was estimated in 2018 that there were approximately 300 of these clinics. With the approval of esketamine for depression, it is expected that this will change.\n\nA chain of such clinics in Australia run by Aura Medical Corporation was closed down by regulatory authorities in 2015, because the clinics' marketing was not supported by scientific research and because the clinic sent people home with ketamine and needles to administer infusions to themselves.\n\nWhile ketamine is legally marketed in many countries worldwide, it is also a controlled substance in many countries.\n\nIn Australia, ketamine is listed as a schedule 8 controlled drug under the Poisons Standard (October 2015). Schedule 8 drugs are outlined in the Poisons Act 1964 as \"Substances which should be available for use but require restriction of manufacture, supply, distribution, possession and use to reduce abuse, misuse and physical or psychological dependence.\"\n\nIn Canada, ketamine is classified as a Schedule I narcotic, since 2005.\n\nIn Hong Kong, since 2000, ketamine has been regulated under Schedule 1 of Hong Kong Chapter 134 \"Dangerous Drugs Ordinance\". It can only be used legally by health professionals, for university research purposes, or with a physician's prescription.\n\nBy 2002, ketamine was classified as class III in Taiwan; given the recent rise in prevalence in East Asia, however, rescheduling into class I or II is being considered.\n\nIn December 2013, the government of India, in response to rising recreational use and the use of ketamine as a date rape drug, has added it to Schedule X of the Drug and Cosmetics Act requiring a special license for sale and maintenance of records of all sales for two years.\n\nIn the United Kingdom, it became labeled a Class C drug on 1 January 2006. On 10 December 2013, the UK Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs (ACMD) recommended that the government reclassify ketamine to become a Class B drug, and on 12 February 2014 the Home Office announced it would follow this advice \"in light of the evidence of chronic harms associated with ketamine use, including chronic bladder and other urinary tract damage\".\n\nThe UK Minister of State for Crime Prevention, Norman Baker, responding to the ACMD's advice, said the issue of its recheduling for medical and veterinary use would be addressed \"separately to allow for a period of consultation\".\n\nThe increase in recreational use prompted ketamine to be placed in Schedule III of the United States Controlled Substance Act in August 1999.\n\nRecreational use of ketamine was documented in the early 1970s in underground literature (e.g., \"The Fabulous Furry Freak Brothers\"). It was used in psychiatric and other academic research through the 1970s, culminating in 1978 with the publishing of psychonaut John Lilly's \"The Scientist\", and Marcia Moore and Howard Alltounian's \"Journeys into the Bright World\", which documented the unusual phenomenology of ketamine intoxication. The incidence of non-medical ketamine use increased through the end of the century, especially in the context of raves and other parties. Its emergence as a club drug differs from other club drugs (e.g., MDMA), however, due to its anesthetic properties (e.g., slurred speech, immobilization) at higher doses; in addition, reports of ketamine being sold as \"ecstasy\" are common. In the 1993 book \"E for Ecstasy\" (about the uses of the street drug Ecstasy in the UK), the writer, activist, and Ecstasy advocate Nicholas Saunders highlighted test results showing that certain consignments of the drug also contained ketamine. Consignments of Ecstasy known as \"Strawberry\" contained what Saunders described as a \"potentially dangerous combination of ketamine, ephedrine, and selegiline\", as did a consignment of \"Sitting Duck\" Ecstasy tablets.\n\nThe use of ketamine as part of a \"post-clubbing experience\" has also been documented. Ketamine's rise in the dance culture was most rapid in Hong Kong by the end of the 1990s.\n\nKetamine use as a recreational drug has been implicated in deaths globally, with more than 90 deaths in England and Wales in the years of 2005–2013. They include accidental poisonings, drownings, traffic accidents, and suicides. The majority of deaths were among young people. This has led to increased regulation (e.g., upgrading ketamine from a Class C to a Class B banned substance in the U.K.).\n\nUnlike the other well-known dissociatives phencyclidine (PCP) and dextromethorphan (DXM), ketamine is very short-acting. It takes effect within about 10 minutes, while its hallucinogenic effects last 60 minutes when insufflated or injected and up to two hours when ingested orally.\n\nAt subanesthetic doses—under-dosaged from a medical point of view—ketamine produces a dissociative state, characterised by a sense of detachment from one's physical body and the external world which is known as depersonalization and derealization. At sufficiently high doses, users may experience what is called the \"K-hole\", a state of dissociation with visual and auditory hallucinations. John C. Lilly, Marcia Moore and D. M. Turner (amongst others) have written extensively about their own entheogenic use of, and psychonautic experiences with ketamine. Turner died prematurely due to drowning during presumed unsupervised ketamine use.\n\nBecause of its ability to cause confusion and amnesia, ketamine has been used for date rape.\n\nProduction for recreational use has been traced to 1967, when it was referred to as \"mean green\" and \"rockmesc\". Recreational names for ketamine include \"Special K\", \"K\", \"Kitty\", \"Kallie Ziltz\", \"Kartáč\", \"Ket\", \"K2\", \"Vitamin K\", \"Super K\", \"Honey oil\", \"Jet\", \"Super acid\", \"Mauve\", \"Special LA coke\", \"Purple\", \"Cat Valium\", \"Knod-off\", \"Skittles\", \"Blind Squid\", \"Keller\", \"Kelly's Day\", \"New ecstasy\", \"Psychedelic heroin\", \"bump\", \"Majestic\". A mixture of ketamine with cocaine is called \"Calvin Klein\" or \"CK1\". In Hong Kong, where illicit use of the drug is popular, ketamine is colloquially referred to as \"kai-jai\".\n\nAccording to the ongoing \"Monitoring the Future\" study conducted by University of Michigan, prevalence rates of recreational ketamine use among American secondary school students (grades 8, 10, and 12) have varied between 0.8–2.5% since 1999, with recent rates at the lower end of this range. The \"2006 National Survey on Drug Use and Health\" (NSDUH) reports a rate of 0.1% for persons ages 12 or older with the highest rate (0.2%) in those ages 18–25. Further, 203,000 people are estimated to have used ketamine in 2006, and an estimated 2.3 million people used ketamine at least once in their life. A total of 529 emergency department visits in 2009 were ketamine-related.\n\nIn 2003, the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration conducted Operation TKO, a probe into the quality of ketamine being imported from Mexico. As a result of operation TKO, U.S. and Mexican authorities shut down the Mexico City company Laboratorios Ttokkyo, which was the biggest producer of ketamine in Mexico. According to the DEA, over 80% of ketamine seized in the United States is of Mexican origin. As of 2011, it was mostly shipped from places like India as cheap as $5/gram. The World Health Organization Expert Committee on Drug Dependence, in its thirty-third report (2003), recommended research into its recreational use due to growing concerns about its rising popularity in Europe, Asia, and North America.\n\nWhile most of Canada sees ketamine use roughly on par with other Western nations, the Toronto region has been known as an epicentre for ketamine use in the West. This unusual badge was enough to attract the attention of National Geographic filmmakers for their \"Drugs, Inc.\" television series.\n\nCases of ketamine use in club venues have been observed in the Czech Republic, France, Italy, Hungary, The Netherlands and the United Kingdom. Additional reports of use and dependence have been reported in Poland and Portugal.\n\nAustralia's \"2010 National Drug Strategy Household Survey report\" shows a prevalence of recent ketamine use of 0.3% in 2004 and 0.2% in 2007 and 2010 in persons aged 14 or older.\n\nIn China, the small village of Boshe in eastern Guangdong was confirmed as a main production centre when it was raided in 2013.\n\nEstablished by the Hong Kong Narcotics Division of the Security Bureau, the Central Registry of Drug Abuse (CRDA) maintains a database of all the illicit drug users who have come into contact with law enforcement, treatment, health care, and social organizations. The compiled data are confidential under \"The Dangerous Drugs Ordinance\" of Hong Kong, and statistics are made freely available online on a quarterly basis. Statistics from the CRDA show that the number of ketamine users (all ages) in Hong Kong has increased from 1605 (9.8% of total drug users) in 2000 to 5212 (37.6%) in 2009. Increasing trends of ketamine use among illicit drug users under the age of 21 were also reported, rising from 36.9% of young drug users in 2000 to 84.3% in 2009.\n\nA survey conducted among school-attending Taiwanese adolescents reported prevalence rates of 0.15% in 2004, 0.18% in 2005, and 0.15% in 2006 in middle-school (grades 7 and 9) students; in Taiwanese high-school (grades 10 and 12) students, prevalence was 1.13% in 2004, 0.66% in 2005, and 0.44% in 2006. From the same survey, a large portion (42.8%) of those who reported ecstasy use also reported ketamine use. Ketamine was the second-most used illicit drug (behind ecstasy) in absconding Taiwanese adolescents as reported by a multi-city street outreach survey. In a study comparing the reporting rates between web questionnaires and paper-and-pencil questionnaires, ketamine use was reported a higher rate in the web version. Urine samples taken at a club in Taipei, Taiwan showed high rates of ketamine use at 47.0%; this prevalence was compared with that of detainees suspected of recreational drug use in the general public, of which 2.0% of the samples tested positive for ketamine use.\n\nRussian doctor Evgeny Krupitsky has claimed to have obtained encouraging results by using ketamine as part of a treatment for alcohol addiction which combines psychedelic and aversive techniques. Krupitsky and Kolp summarized their work to date in 2007.\n\nIn veterinary anesthesia, ketamine is often used for its anesthetic and analgesic effects on cats, dogs, rabbits, rats, and other small animals. It is highly used in induction and anesthetic maintenance in horses. It is an important part of the \"rodent cocktail\", a mixture of drugs used for anesthetizing rodents. Veterinarians often use ketamine with sedative drugs to produce balanced anesthesia and analgesia, and as a constant-rate infusion to help prevent pain wind-up. Ketamine is used to manage pain among large animals, though it has less effect on bovines. It is the primary intravenous anesthetic agent used in equine surgery, often in conjunction with detomidine and thiopental, or sometimes guanfacine.\n\nKetamine appears not to produce sedation or anesthesia in snails. Instead, it appears to have an excitatory effect.\n\nBULLET::::- Ketamine on RxList\nBULLET::::- DEA: Ketamine Fact Sheet\n"}
{"id": "16954", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16954", "title": "Kickapoo people", "text": "Kickapoo people\n\nThe Kickapoo People (Kickapoo: Kiikaapoa or Kiikaapoi) are an Algonquian-speaking Native American and Indigenous Mexican tribe. \"Anishinaabeg\" say the name \"Kickapoo\" (\"Giiwigaabaw\" in the Anishinaabe language and its Kickapoo cognate \"Kiwikapawa\") means \"Stands here and there,\" which may have referred to the tribe's migratory patterns. The name can also mean \"wanderer\". This interpretation is contested and generally believed to be a folk etymology.\n\nToday there are three federally recognized Kickapoo tribes in the United States: Kickapoo Tribe of Indians of the Kickapoo Reservation in Kansas, the Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma, and the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas. The Oklahoma and Texas bands are politically associated with each other. The Kickapoo in Kansas came from a relocation from southern Missouri in 1832 as a land exchange from their reserve there. Around 3,000 people are enrolled tribal members. Another band, the Tribu Kikapú, resides in Múzquiz Municipality in the Mexican state of Coahuila. Smaller bands live in Sonora and Durango.\n\nThe Kickapoo are an Algonquian-language people who likely migrated to or developed as a people in a large territory along the Wabash River in the area of modern Terre Haute, Indiana. They were confederated with the larger Wabash Confederacy, which included the Piankeshaw to their south, the Wea to their north, and the powerful Miami Tribe, to their east. A subgroup occupied the Upper Iowa River region in what was later known as northeast Iowa and the Root River region in southeast Minnesota in the late 1600s and early 1700s. This group was probably known by the clan name \"Mahouea\", derived from the Illinoian word for wolf, \"m'hwea\".\n\nThe earliest European contact with the Kickapoo tribe occurred during the La Salle Expeditions into Illinois Country in the late 17th century. The French colonists set up remote fur trading posts throughout the region, including on the Wabash River. They typically would set up posts at or near Native American villages, and Terre Haute was founded as a French village. The Kickapoo had to contend with a changing cast of Europeans; the British defeated the French in the Seven Years' War and took over nominal rule of this area after 1763. They increased their own trading with the Kickapoo.\n\nThe United States acquired this territory east of the Mississippi River and north of the Ohio River after it gained independence from the United Kingdom. As white settlers moved into the region from the United States eastern areas, beginning in the early 19th century, the Kickapoo were under pressure. They negotiated with the United States over their territory in several treaties, including the Treaty of Vincennes, the Treaty of Grouseland, and the Treaty of Fort Wayne. They sold most of their lands to the United States and moved north to settle among the Wea.\n\nRising tensions between the regional tribes and the United States led to Tecumseh's War in 1811. The Kickapoo were one of Tecumseh's closest allies. Many Kickapoo warriors participated in the Battle of Tippecanoe and the subsequent War of 1812 on the side of the British, hoping to expel the American settlers from the region. A prominent, nonviolent spiritual leader among the Kickapoo was Kennekuk, who led his followers during Indian Removal in the 1830s to their current tribal lands in Kansas. He died there in 1852.\n\nThe close of the war led to a change of federal Indian policy in the Indiana Territory, and later the state of Indiana. American leaders began to advocate the removal of tribes to lands west of the Mississippi River, to extinguish their claims to lands wanted by American settlers. The Kickapoo were among the first tribes to leave Indiana under this program. They accepted land in Kansas and an annual subsidy in exchange for leaving the state.\n\nKickapoo speak an Algonquian language closely related to that of the Sauk and Fox. They are classified with the Central \n\nAlgonquians, and are also related to the Illinois Confederation.\n\nIn 1985 the Kickapoo Nation's School in Horton, Kansas, began a language immersion program for elementary school grades to revive teaching and use of the Kickapoo language in grades K-6. Efforts in language education continue at most Kickapoo sites. In 2010, the Head Start Program at the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas (KTTT) reservation, which teaches the Kickapoo language, became \"the first Native American school to earn Texas School Ready! (TSR) Project certification.\"\n\nAlso in 2010, Mexico's \"Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia (INAH) participated in the elaboration of a Kickapoo alphabet that may be used by more than 700 members of the group that dwell in Mexico and the United States, in the states of Coahuila and Texas. Previously no Kickapoo alphabet was used in Mexico; although there is a syllabic writing system it has no element ordination, organization or classification method.\" The Kickapoo in Mexico are known for their whistled speech.\n\nTexts, recordings, and a vocabulary of the language are available.\n\nThe Kickapoo language and members of the Kickapoo tribe were featured in the movie \"The Only Good Indian\" (2009), directed by Greg Wilmott and starring Wes Studi. This was a fictionalized account of Native American children forced to attend an Indian boarding school, where they were forced to speak English and give up their cultures.\nThere are eleven consonant phonemes in Kickapoo:\n!Labial\n!Dental\n!Alveolar\n!Postalveolar/<br>Palatal\n!Velar\n!Glottal\n!Stop\n\n!Fricative\n!Nasal\n\n!Approximant\n\nThe voiceless sounds can sometimes be voiced as , but infrequently. Some speakers may pronounce // as .\n\nThe eight vowel sounds in Kickapoo are as follows: short and long . Three of the vowels , have allophones: .\n\nThere are three federally recognized Kickapoo communities in the United States: one in Kansas, one in Texas, and the third in Oklahoma. The Mexican Kickapoo are closely tied to the Texas and Oklahoma communities. These groups migrate annually among the three locations to maintain connections. Indeed, the Texas and Mexican branch are the same cross-border nation, called Kickapoo of Coahuila/Texas \n\nThe Kickapoo Indian Reservation of Kansas is located at in the northeastern part of the state in parts of three counties: Brown, Jackson, and Atchison. It has a land area of and a resident population of 4,419 as of the 2000 census. The largest community on the reservation is the city of Horton. The other communities are:\n\nBULLET::::- Muscotah\nBULLET::::- Netawaka\nBULLET::::- Powhattan\nBULLET::::- Whiting\nBULLET::::- Willis\nThe Kickapoo Indian Reservation of Texas is located at on the Rio Grande on the U.S.-Mexico border in western Maverick County, just south of the city of Eagle Pass, as part of the community of Rosita South. It has a land area of and a 2000 census population of 420 persons. The Texas Indian Commission officially recognized the tribe in 1977.\n\nOther Kickapoo in Maverick County, Texas, constitute the \"South Texas Subgroup of the Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma\". That band owns of non-reservation land in Maverick County, primarily to the north of Eagle Pass. It has an office in that city.\n\nAfter being expelled from the Republic of Texas, many Kickapoo moved south to Mexico, but the population of two villages settled in Indian Territory. One village settled within the Chickasaw Nation and the other within the Muscogee Creek Nation. These Kickapoo were granted their own reservation in 1883 and became recognized as the Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma.\n\nThe reservation was short-lived. In 1893 under the Dawes Act, their communal tribal lands were broken up and assigned to separate member households by allotments. The tribe's government was dismantled by the Curtis Act of 1898, which encouraged assimilation by Native Americans to the majority culture. Tribal members struggled under these conditions.\n\nIn the 1930s the federal and state governments encouraged tribes to reorganize their governments. This one formed the Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma in 1936, under the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act.\n\nToday the Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma is headquartered in McLoud, Oklahoma. Their tribal jurisdictional area is in Oklahoma, Pottawatomie, and Lincoln counties. They have 2,719 enrolled tribal members.\n\nBULLET::::- Kickapoo whistled speech\nBULLET::::- Mascouten\n\nBULLET::::- Grant Foreman, \"The Last Trek of the Indians: An Account of the Removal of the Indians from North of the Ohio River\", Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1946\nBULLET::::- Arrell M. Gibson, \"The Kickapoo: Lords of the Middle Border,\" Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1963\nBULLET::::- Mager Elisabeth (2017) Ethnic Consciousness in Cultural Survival: The Morongo Band of Mission Indians and the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas . American Indian Culture and Research Journal: 2017, Vol. 41, No. 1, pp. 47–72.\nBULLET::::- M. Christopher Nunley, \"Kickapoo Indians,\" in \"The New Handbook of Texas\", Austin: Texas State Historical Association, 1996.\nBULLET::::- Muriel H. Wright, \"A Guide to the Indian Tribes of Oklahoma,\" Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1986\nBULLET::::- Joseph B. Herring, \"Kennekuk: The Kickapoo Prophet,\" Lawrence: University of Kansas Press, 1988\n\nBULLET::::- Kickapoo Tribe of Kansas, official website\nBULLET::::- Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma, official website\nBULLET::::- Kickapoo language, alphabet and pronunciation\nBULLET::::- Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas, official website\nBULLET::::- Matthew R. Garrett, \"Kickapoo Foreign Policy, 1650–1830\", PhD dissertation, University of Nebraska, 2006, at Digital Commons\nBULLET::::- Kickapoo Reservation, Kansas and Kickapoo Reservation, Texas United States Census Bureau\nBULLET::::- \"First Nations: Kickapoo\", Lee Sultzman Tolatsga]\n"}
{"id": "16957", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16957", "title": "Kata (disambiguation)", "text": "Kata (disambiguation)\n\nKata is a martial arts term referring to a pattern of defense-and-attack. Kata may also mean:\n\nPeople:\nBULLET::::- Kata (name)\nBULLET::::- Kata people or Katirs, alternative name for a tribal group of Afghanistan\nBULLET::::- Katariina Souri (born 1968), Finnish author, artist, columnist, and a Playboy Playmate of the Month\nBULLET::::- Kata, Georgian royal princess of 11th century\nBULLET::::- Kata, Georgian royal princess of 12th century\nBULLET::::- Solomone Kata, Tongan rugby league player\n\nPlaces:\nBULLET::::- Kata, Burma, a town\nBULLET::::- Kata, Estonia, a village\nBULLET::::- Kata, Iran, a village\nBULLET::::- Kata, Tibet, a village\n\nOther:\nBULLET::::- Kata (programming), exercises in programming which help hone your skills through practice and repetition\nBULLET::::- Kata (mathematics), a name proposed for a direction in a fourth spatial dimension\nBULLET::::- KATA (AM), a California radio station\nBULLET::::- KATA-CD, a Dallas, TX, television station\nBULLET::::- Kata Station, a train station in Owase, Japan\nBULLET::::- An abbreviation for Katakana character set in the Japanese writing language\nBULLET::::- \"Kata\", a Grenada drum\nBULLET::::- \"Kata\", a West-African local name for Ovine rinderpest\n\nBULLET::::- Khata, a name for ceremonial white silk scarves most often Tibet which are an auspicious symbol and lend a positive note to the start of any enterprise or relationship\n"}
{"id": "16959", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16959", "title": "Katyusha rocket launcher", "text": "Katyusha rocket launcher\n\nThe Katyusha multiple rocket launcher () is a type of rocket artillery first built and fielded by the Soviet Union in World War II. Multiple rocket launchers such as these deliver explosives to a target area more quickly than conventional artillery, but with lower accuracy and requiring a longer time to reload. They are fragile compared to artillery guns, but are inexpensive, easy to produce, and usable on any chassis. The Katyushas of World War II, the first self-propelled artillery mass-produced by the Soviet Union, were usually mounted on ordinary trucks. This mobility gave the Katyusha, and other self-propelled artillery, another advantage: being able to deliver a large blow all at once, and then move before being located and attacked with counter-battery fire.\n\nKatyusha weapons of World War II included the BM-13 launcher, light BM-8, and heavy BM-31. Today, the nickname is also applied to newer truck-mounted post-Soviet – in addition to non-Soviet – multiple rocket launchers, notably the common BM-21 Grad and its derivatives.\n\nAlthough this type of weapon has existed since the 15th century (Leonardo da Vinci having perfected a similar machine), the design of the Katyusha may have been influenced by Giuseppe Fieschi's \"Machine infernale\" - Fieschi was honored in a religious service at a Moscow church at the prompting of Soviet General Kotskov, the inventor of the Katyusha rocket launcher.\n\nInitially, concerns for secrecy kept the military designation of the Katyushas from being known by the soldiers who operated them. They were called by code names such as \"Kostikov guns\", after the head of the RNII, the Reaction-Engine Scientific Research Institute, and finally classed as \"Guards Mortars\". The name \"BM-13\" was only allowed into secret documents in 1942, and remained classified until after the war.\n\nBecause they were marked with the letter \"K\" (for Voronezh Komintern Factory), Red Army troops adopted a nickname from Mikhail Isakovsky's popular wartime song, \"\"Katyusha\"\", about a girl longing for her absent beloved, who has gone away on military service. Katyusha is the Russian equivalent of \"Katie\", an endearing diminutive form of the name Katherine: \"Yekaterina →Katya →Katyusha\".\n\nGerman troops coined the nickname \"Stalin's organ\" (), after Soviet leader Joseph Stalin, comparing the visual resemblance of the launch array to a pipe organ, and the sound of the weapon's rocket motors, a distinctive howling sound which terrified the German troops, adding a psychological warfare aspect to their use. Weapons of this type are known by the same name in Denmark (), Finland (), France (), Norway (), the Netherlands and Belgium (), Hungary (), Spain and other Spanish-speaking countries () as well as in Sweden ().\n\nThe heavy BM-31 launcher was also referred to as \"Andryusha\" (\"Андрюша\", an affectionate diminutive of \"Andrew\").\n\nKatyusha rocket launchers, which were invented in Voronezh, were mounted on many platforms during World War II, including on trucks, artillery tractors, tanks, and armoured trains, as well as on naval and riverine vessels as assault support weapons. Soviet engineers also mounted single Katyusha rockets on lengths of railway track to serve in urban combat.\n\nThe design was relatively simple, consisting of racks of parallel rails on which rockets were mounted, with a folding frame to raise the rails to launch position. Each truck had 14 to 48 launchers. The M-13 rocket of the BM-13 system was long, in diameter and weighed .\n\nThe weapon is less accurate than conventional artillery guns, but is extremely effective in saturation bombardment, and was particularly feared by German soldiers. A battery of four BM-13 launchers could fire a salvo in 7–10 seconds that delivered 4.35 tons of high explosives over a impact zone, making its power roughly equivalent to that of 72 conventional artillery guns. With an efficient crew, the launchers could redeploy to a new location immediately after firing, denying the enemy the opportunity for counterbattery fire. Katyusha batteries were often massed in very large numbers to create a shock effect on enemy forces. The weapon's disadvantage was the long time it took to reload a launcher, in contrast to conventional guns which could sustain a continuous low rate of fire.\n\nIn June 1938, the Soviet Reaction-Engine Scientific Research Institute (RNII) in Moscow was authorized by the Main Artillery Directorate (GAU) to develop a multiple rocket launcher for the RS-132 aircraft rocket (RS for , 'rocket-powered shell'). I. Gvay led a design team in Chelyabinsk, Russia, which built several prototype launchers firing the modified 132 mm M-132 rockets over the sides of ZiS-5 trucks. These proved unstable, and V.N. Galkovskiy proposed mounting the launch rails longitudinally. In August 1939, the result was the BM-13 (BM stands for \"боевая машина\" (translit. \"boyevaya mashina\"), 'combat vehicle' for M-13 rockets).\n\nThe first large-scale testing of the rocket launchers took place at the end of 1938, when 233 rounds of various types were used. A salvo of rockets could completely straddle a target at a range of 5,500 metres (3.4 mi). But the artillery branch was not fond of the Katyusha, because it took up to 50 minutes to load and fire 24 rounds, while a conventional howitzer could fire 95 to 150 rounds in the same time. Testing with various rockets was conducted through 1940, and the BM-13-16 with launch rails for sixteen rockets was authorized for production. Only forty launchers were built before Germany invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941.\n\nAfter their success in the first month of the war, mass production was ordered and the development of other models proceeded. The Katyusha was inexpensive and could be manufactured in light industrial installations which did not have the heavy equipment to build conventional artillery gun barrels. By the end of 1942, 3,237 Katyusha launchers of all types had been built, and by the end of the war total production reached about 10,000.\n\nThe truck-mounted Katyushas were installed on ZiS-6 6×4 trucks, as well as the two-axle ZiS-5 and ZiS-5V. In 1941, a small number of BM-13 launchers were mounted on STZ-5 artillery tractors. A few were also tried on KV tank chassis as the KV-1K, but this was a needless waste of heavy armour. Starting in 1942, they were also mounted on various British, Canadian and U.S. Lend-Lease trucks, in which case they were sometimes referred to as BM-13S. The cross-country performance of the Studebaker US6 2½-ton 6x6 truck was so good that it became the GAU's standard mounting in 1943, designated BM-13N (\"normalizovanniy\", 'standardized'), and more than 1,800 of this model were manufactured by the end of World War II. After World War II, BM-13s were based on Soviet-built ZiS-151 trucks.\n\nThe 82 mm BM-8 was approved in August 1941, and deployed as the BM-8-36 on truck beds and BM-8-24 on T-40 and T-60 light tank chassis. Later these were also installed on GAZ-67 jeeps as the BM-8-8, and on the larger Studebaker trucks as the BM-8-48. In 1942, the team of scientists Leonid Shvarts, Moisei Komissarchik and engineer Yakov Shor received the Stalin prize for the development of the BM-8-48.\n\nBased on the M-13, the M-30 rocket was developed in 1942. Its bulbous warhead required it to be fired from a grounded frame, called the M-30 (single frame, four round; later double frame, 8 round), instead of a launch rail mounted on a truck. In 1944 it became the basis for the BM-31-12 truck-mounted launcher.\n\nA battery of BM-13-16 launchers included four firing vehicles, two reload trucks and two technical support trucks, with each firing vehicle having a crew of six. Reloading was executed in 3–4 minutes, although the standard procedure was to switch to a new position some 10 km away due to the ease with which the battery could be identified by the enemy. Three batteries were combined into a division (company), and three divisions into a separate mine-firing regiment of rocket artillery.\n\nSoviet World War II rocket systems were named according to standard templates which are the following:\nBULLET::::- BM-x-y (names used for ground vehicles)\nBULLET::::- M-x-y (names used for towed trailers and sledges)\nBULLET::::- y-M-x (names used for navy)\n\nwhere:\nBULLET::::- x is a model of a missile.\nBULLET::::- y is a number of launch rails/tubes.\n\nIn particular, BM-8-16 is a vehicle which fires M-8 missiles and has 16 rails. BM-31-12 is a vehicle which fires M-31 missiles and has 12 launch tubes. Short names such as BM-8 or BM-13 were used too. Number of launch rails/tubes is absent here. Such names describe launchers only no matter what vehicle they are mounted on. In particular BM-8-24 had a number of variants: vehicle mounted (ZiS-5 truck), tank mounted (T-40) and tractor mounted (STZ-3). All of them had the same name: BM-8-24. Other launchers had a number of variants mounted on different vehicles too. Typical set of vehicles for soviet missile systems is the following:\nBULLET::::- ZIS-5 (truck),\nBULLET::::- ZIS-6 (truck),\nBULLET::::- GAZ-AA (truck),\nBULLET::::- STZ-5 (tractor),\nBULLET::::- T-40 (tank),\nBULLET::::- Studebaker US6 (truck),\nBULLET::::- Armored train car,\nBULLET::::- River boat,\nBULLET::::- Towed sledge,\nBULLET::::- Towed trailer,\nBULLET::::- Backpack (portable variant, so called \"mountain Katyusha\"),\nBULLET::::- ZiS-151 (truck, used after the war);\n\nNote: There was also an experimental KV-1K – Katyusha mounted on KV-1 tank which was not taken in service.\n\nA list of some implementations of the Katyusha follows:\n\nRockets used in the above implementations were:\n! Weapon name\n! Caliber (mm)\n! Range (max)\n! Warhead\n\nThe M-8 and M-13 rocket could also be fitted with smoke warheads, although this was not common.\n\nThe multiple rocket launchers were top secret in the beginning of World War II. A special unit of the NKVD troops was raised to operate them. On July 14, 1941, an experimental artillery battery of seven launchers was first used in battle at Orsha in the Vitebsk Region of Belarus, under the command of Captain Ivan Flyorov, destroying a concentration of German troops with tanks, armored vehicles and trucks at the marketplace, causing massive German Army casualties and its retreat from the town in panic. Following the success, the Red Army organized new Guards mortar batteries for the support of infantry divisions. A battery's complement was standardized at four launchers. They remained under NKVD control until German \"Nebelwerfer\" rocket launchers became common later in the war.\n\nOn August 8, 1941, Stalin ordered the formation of eight special Guards mortar regiments under the direct control of the Reserve of the Supreme High Command (RVGK). Each regiment comprised three battalions of three batteries, totalling 36 BM-13 or BM-8 launchers. Independent Guards mortar battalions were also formed, comprising 12 launchers in three batteries of four. By the end of 1941, there were eight regiments, 35 independent battalions, and two independent batteries in service, fielding a total of 554 launchers.\n\nIn June 1942 heavy Guards mortar battalions were formed around the new M-30 static rocket launch frames, consisting of 96 launchers in three batteries. In July, a battalion of BM-13s was added to the establishment of a tank corps. In 1944, the BM-31 was used in motorized heavy Guards mortar battalions of 48 launchers. In 1943, Guards mortar brigades, and later divisions, were formed equipped with static launchers.\n\nBy the end of 1942, 57 regiments were in service—together with the smaller independent battalions, this was the equivalent of 216 batteries: 21% BM-8 light launchers, 56% BM-13, and 23% M-30 heavy launchers. By the end of the war, the equivalent of 518 batteries were in service.\n\nThe success and economy of multiple rocket launchers (MRL) have led them to continue to be developed. In the years following WWII, the BM-13 was replaced by the 140 mm BM-14 and the BM-31 was replaced by the 240 mm BM-24. During the Cold War, the Soviet Union fielded several models of Katyusha-like MRL, notably the BM-21 Grad launchers somewhat inspired by the earlier weapon, and the larger BM-27 Uragan. Advances in artillery munitions have been applied to some Katyusha-type multiple launch rocket systems, including bomblet submunitions, remotely deployed land mines, and chemical warheads.\n\nWith the breakup of the Soviet Union, Russia inherited most of its military arsenal including its large complement of MRLs. In recent history, they have been used by Russian forces during the First and Second Chechen Wars and by Armenian and Azerbaijani forces during the Nagorno-Karabakh War. Georgian government forces are reported to have used BM-21 Grad or similar rocket artillery in fighting in the 2008 South Ossetia war.\n\nKatyusha-like launchers were exported to Afghanistan, Angola, Czechoslovakia, Egypt, East Germany, Hungary, Iran, Iraq, Mongolia, North Korea, Poland, Syria, Yemen and Vietnam. They were also built in Czechoslovakia, the People's Republic of China, North Korea, and Iran.\n\nProper Katyushas (BM-13s) also saw action in the Korean War, used by the Chinese People's Volunteer Army against the South and United Nations forces. Soviet BM-13s were known to have been imported to China before the Sino-Soviet split and were operational in the People's Liberation Army.\n\nIsrael captured BM-24 MRLs during the Six-Day War (1967), used them in two battalions during the Yom Kippur War (1973) and the 1982 Lebanon War, and later developed the MAR-240 launcher for the same rockets, based on a Sherman tank chassis.\n\nThe rockets were employed by the Tanzania People's Defence Force in the Uganda-Tanzania War. Tanzanian forces called them \"Baba Mtakatifu\" (Kiswahili for \"Holy Father\") while the Ugandans called them Saba Saba.\n\nDuring the 2006 Lebanon War, Hezbollah fired between 3,970 and 4,228 rockets, from light truck-mounts and single-rail man-portable launchers. About 95% of these were 122 mm (4.8 in) Syrian-manufactured M-21OF type artillery rockets which carried warheads up to 30 kg (66 lb) and had a range of 20 km, perhaps up to 30 km (19 mi). Most rockets fired at Israel from the Gaza Strip are of the simpler Qassam rocket type, but Hamas has also launched 122-mm Grad-type Katyusha rockets against several cities in Israel, although they are not reported to have truck-mounted launchers. Although Katyusha originally referred to the mobile launcher, today the rockets are often referred to as Katyushas.\n\nSome allege that the CIA bought Katyushas from the Egyptian military and supplied them to the Mujahideen (via Pakistan's ISI) during the Soviet Afghan war.\n\nKatyusha-like MRLs were also allegedly used by the Rwandan Patriotic Front during its 1990 invasion of Rwanda, through the 1994 genocide. They were effective in battle, but translated into much anti-Tutsi sentiment in the local media.\n\nIt was reported that BM-21 Grad launchers were used against American forces during the 2003 invasion of Iraq. They have also been used in the Afghanistan and Iraq insurgencies. In Iraq, according to Associated Press and Agence France-Presse reports, Katyusha-like rockets were fired at the Green Zone late March 2008.\n\nKatyusha rockets were reportedly used by both Gaddafi Loyalists and anti-Gaddafi forces during the Libyan Civil War.\n\nAlso, several countries have continued to build and operate Katyusha-like systems well into the 21st century, as for example the Teruel MRL of the Spanish Army.\n\nIn February 2013, the Defence Ministry of Yemen reported seizing an Iranian ship, and that the ship's cargo included (among its other weapons) Katyusha rockets.\n\nIn August 2013 the Irish republican dissident group Óglaigh na hÉireann was blamed for planting a Katyusha-style rocket in undergrowth next to a field near Cullyhanna in South Armagh in an area used by soldiers on training exercises. The weapon was to be triggered using a mobile phone.\n\nOn May 19, 2019, a Katyusha rocket was fired inside the Green Zone in Baghdad, Iraq, landing less than a mile from the US Embassy near the statue of the Unknown Soldier. No casualties were reported.\n\nBULLET::::- Hwacha, Korean gunpowder-based flaming arrow launcher from the 1500s\nBULLET::::- Congreve rocket, British military weapon designed by Sir William Congreve in 1804\nBULLET::::- Nebelwerfer, the most common barrage rocket series employed by the \"Wehrmacht\" in World War II\nBULLET::::- Panzerwerfer, German rocket launcher mounted on a half-track\nBULLET::::- Wurfrahmen 40, another German rocket launcher mounted on a half-track\nBULLET::::- Land Mattress, employed by Allied forces in World War II\nBULLET::::- T34 Calliope, rocket launcher mounted on M-4 Sherman tank chassis. Last vehicle-mounted highly-mobile multiple-rocket launcher by US land forces, before abandoning this concept till the latter's concept comeback in the mid-1980s.\nBULLET::::- List of rocket artillery\n\nNotes\nBibliography\n\nFurther reading\nBULLET::::- Prenatt, Jamie and Hook, Adam (2016) \"Katyusha – Russian Multiple Rocket Launchers 1941–Present\", Oxford: Osprey Publishing Ltd.\n\nBULLET::::- Photos of various mounts of Katyushas\nBULLET::::- \"Creation and Development of Rocket Artillery in the First Phase of the War\", translation of a 1976 article published by the USSR Defence Ministry (broken link, see archive)\nBULLET::::- Photo of a Cuban BM-21 in Angola\n"}
{"id": "16960", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16960", "title": "Kathy Acker", "text": "Kathy Acker\n\nKathy Acker (April 18, 1947 – November 30, 1997) was an American experimental novelist, playwright, essayist, postmodernist and sex-positive feminist writer. She was influenced by the Black Mountain School poets, the writer William S. Burroughs, the artist and theoretician David Antin, French critical theory, feminist artists Carolee Schneeman and Eleanor Antin, and by philosophy, mysticism, and pornography.\n\nThe sole biological daughter of Donald and Claire (née Weill) Lehman, Kathy Acker was born Karen Lehman in New York City, in 1947, although the Library of Congress gives her birth year as 1948, while The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica gave her birth year as April 18, 1948, New York, New York, U.S. and died Nov. 30, 1997, Tijuana, Mexico.) and most obituaries, including \"The New York Times\", cited the year as 1944. Her family was from a wealthy, assimilated, German-Jewish background that was culturally, but not religiously Jewish. Her paternal grandmother, Florence Weill, was an Austrian Jew who had inherited a small fortune from the glove-making business. Acker's grandparents went into political exile from Alsace-Lorraine prior to World War I due to the rising nationalism of pre-Nazi Germany, moving to Paris and then to the United States. According to Acker, her grandparents were \"first generation French-German Jews\" whose ancestors originally hailed from the Pale of Settlement. In an interview with the magazine \"Tattoo Jew\", Acker stated that religious Judaism \"means nothing to me. I don't run away from it, it just means nothing to me\" and elaborated that her parents were \"high-German Jews\" who held cultural prejudices against Yiddish-speaking Eastern European Jews (\"I was trained to run away from Polish Jews.\").\n\nThe pregnancy was unplanned; Donald Lehman abandoned the family before Karen's birth. Her stepfather's name, Albert Alexander, appears on the birth certificate but not on the April 18, 1947 registry of births in NYC (New York, New York, Birth Index, 1910-1965), which clearly states Karen Lehman. Her relationship with her domineering mother even into adulthood was fraught with hostility and anxiety because Acker felt unloved and unwanted. Her mother soon remarried, to Albert Alexander, whose surname Kathy was given, although the writer later described her mother's union with Alexander as a passionless marriage to an ineffectual man. Karen (later Kathy) had a half-sister, Wendy, by her mother's second marriage, but the two women were never close and long estranged. By the time of Kathy's death, she had requested that her friends not contact Wendy, as some had suggested. Acker was raised in her mother and stepfather's home on New York's prosperous Upper East Side. In 1978, Claire Alexander, Karen's mother, committed suicide. As an adult, Acker tried to track down her father, but abandoned her search after she discovered that her father had killed a trespasser on his yacht and spent six months in a psychiatric asylum until the state excused him of murder charges.\n\nIn 1966, she married Robert Acker, and changed her last name from Alexander to Acker. Robert Acker was the son of lower-middle-class Polish-Jewish immigrants. Kathy's parents had held hopes that their daughter would marry a wealthy man and did not expect the marriage to last long.. Although her birth name was Karen, she was known as Kathy by her friends and family. Her first work appeared in print as part of the burgeoning New York City literary underground of the mid-1970s. Like other young women struggling to be writers and artists, she worked for a few months as a stripper, and listening to the stories of women so different from those she had known before profoundly influenced her early work, and changed her understanding of gender and power relationships.\n\nDuring the 1970s Acker often moved back and forth between San Diego, San Francisco and New York. She married composer and experimental musician Peter Gordon shortly before the end of their seven-year relationship. Later, she had relationships with theorist, publisher, and critic Sylvère Lotringer and then with filmmaker and film theorist Peter Wollen.\n\nIn 1996, Acker left San Francisco and moved to London to live with writer and music critic Charles Shaar Murray.\n\nShe married twice. While most of her relationships were with men she was openly bisexual. In 1979, she won the Pushcart Prize for her short story \"New York City in 1979\". During the early 1980s she lived in London, where she wrote several of her most critically acclaimed works. After returning to the United States in the late 1980s she worked as an adjunct professor at the San Francisco Art Institute for about six years and as a visiting professor at several universities, including the University of Idaho, the University of California, San Diego, University of California, Santa Barbara, the California Institute of Arts, and Roanoke College.\n\nIn April 1996 Acker was diagnosed with breast cancer and she elected to have a double mastectomy. In January 1997 she wrote about her loss of faith in conventional medicine in a \"Guardian\" article, \"The Gift of Disease\".\n\nIn the article, she explains that after unsuccessful surgery, which left her feeling physically mutilated and emotionally debilitated, she rejected the passivity of the patient in the medical mainstream and began to seek out the advice of nutritionists, acupuncturists, psychic healers, and Chinese herbalists. She found appealing the claim that instead of being an object of knowledge, as in Western medicine, the patient becomes a seer, a seeker of wisdom, that illness becomes the teacher and the patient the student. However, after pursuing several forms of alternative medicine in England and the United States, Acker died a year and a half later, on November 30, 1997, aged 50, from complications of cancer in a Tijuana, Mexico alternative cancer clinic, the only alternative-treatment facility that accepted her with her advanced stage of cancer. She died in what was called \"Room 101\", to which her friend Alan Moore quipped, \"There's nothing that woman can't turn into a literary reference\". (Room 101, in the climax of George Orwell's \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\", is the basement torture chamber in which the Party attempts to subject a prisoner to his or her own worst fears.)\n\nAt Brandeis University she engaged in undergraduate coursework in Classics at a time when Angela Davis was also at the university. She became interested in writing novels, and moved to California to attend University of California, San Diego where David Antin, Eleanor Antin, and Jerome Rothenberg were among her teachers. She received her bachelor's degree in 1968. After moving to New York, she attended two years of graduate school at the City University of New York in Classics, specializing in Greek. She did not earn a graduate degree. During her time in New York she was employed as a file clerk, secretary, stripper, and porn performer.\n\nAcker was associated with the New York punk movement of the late 1970s and early 1980s. The punk aesthetic influenced her literary style.\n\nIn the 1970s, before the term \"postmodernism\" was popular, Acker began writing her books. These books contain features that would eventually be considered postmodernist work. Her controversial body of work borrows heavily from the experimental styles of William S. Burroughs and Marguerite Duras. Her writing strategies at times used forms of pastiche and deployed Burroughs's cut-up technique, involving cutting-up and scrambling passages and sentences into a somewhat random remix. Acker defined her writing as existing post-nouveau roman European tradition.\n\nIn her texts, she combines biographical elements, power, sex and violence. Indeed, critics often compare her writing to that of Alain Robbe-Grillet and Jean Genet. Critics have noticed links to Gertrude Stein and photographers Cindy Sherman and Sherrie Levine. Acker's novels also exhibit a fascination with and an indebtedness to tattoos. She dedicated \"Empire of the Senseless\" to her tattooist.\n\nAcker published her first book, \"Politics\", in 1972. Although the collection of poems and essays did not garner much critical or public attention, it did establish her reputation within the New York punk scene. In 1973, she published her first novel (under the pseudonym Black Tarantula), \"The Childlike Life of the Black Tarantula: Some Lives of Murderesses\". The following year she published her second novel, \"I Dreamt I Was a Nymphomaniac: Imagining\". Both works are reprinted in \"Portrait of an Eye\".\n\nIn 1979, she received popular attention when she won a Pushcart Prize for her short story \"New York City in 1979\". She did not receive critical attention, however, until she published \"Great Expectations\" in 1982. The opening of \"Great Expectations\" is an obvious re-writing of Charles Dickens's work of the same name. It features her usual subject matter, including a semi-autobiographical account of her mother's suicide and the appropriation of several other texts, including Pierre Guyotat's violent and sexually explicit \"Eden Eden Eden\". That same year, Acker published a chapbook, entitled \"Hello, I'm Erica Jong\". She appropriated from a number of influential writers. These writers include Charles Dickens, Nathaniel Hawthorne, John Keats, William Faulkner, T.S Eliot, Charlotte and Emily Brontë, Marquis de Sade, Georges Bataille, and Arthur Rimbaud.\n\nAcker wrote the script for the 1983 film \"Variety\". Acker wrote a text on the photographer Marcus Leatherdale that was published in 1983, in an art catalogue for the Molotov Gallery in Vienna.\n\nIn 1984, Acker's first British publication, the novel \"Blood and Guts in High School\" was published soon after its publication by Grove Press in New York.\n\nThat same year, she was signed by Grove Press, one of the legendary independent publishers committed to controversial and avant-garde writing; she was one of the last writers taken on by Barney Rosset before the end of his tenure there. Most of her work was published by them, including re-issues of important earlier work. She wrote for several magazines and anthologies, including the periodicals \"RE/Search\", \"Angel Exhaust\", \"monochrom\" and \"Rapid Eye\". As she neared the end of her life, her work was more well received by the conventional press; for example, \"The Guardian\" published a number of her essays, interviews and articles, among them was an interview with the Spice Girls.\n\n\"In Memoriam to Identity\" draws attention to popular analyses of Rimbaud's life and \"The Sound and the Fury\", constructing or revealing social and literary identity. Although known in the literary world for creating a whole new style of feminist prose and for her transgressive fiction, she was also a punk and feminist icon for her devoted portrayals of subcultures, strong-willed women, and violence.\n\nNotwithstanding the increased recognition she got for \"Great Expectations\", \"Blood and Guts in High School\" is often considered Acker's breakthrough work. Published in 1984, it is one of her most extreme explorations of sexuality and violence. Borrowing from, among other texts, Nathaniel Hawthorne's \"The Scarlet Letter\", \"Blood and Guts\" details the experiences of Janey Smith, a sex addicted and pelvic inflammatory disease-ridden urbanite who is in love with a father who sells her into slavery. Many critics criticized it for being demeaning toward women, and Germany banned it completely. Acker published the German court judgment against \"Blood and Guts in High School\" in \"Hannibal Lecter, My Father\".\n\nAcker published \"Empire of the Senseless\" in 1988 and considered it a turning point in her writing. While she still borrows from other texts, including Mark Twain's \"The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn\", the appropriation is less obvious. However, one of Acker's more controversial appropriations is from William Gibson's 1984 text, \"Neuromancer\", in which Acker equates code with the female body and its militaristic implications. In 1988, she published \"Literal Madness: Three Novels\", which included three previously published works: \"Florida\" deconstructs and reduces John Huston's 1948 film noir \"Key Largo\" into its base sexual politics, \"Kathy Goes to Haiti\" details a young woman's relationship and sexual exploits while on vacation, and \"My Death My Life by Pier Paolo Pasolini\" provides a fictional \"autobiography\" of the Italian filmmaker in which he solves his own murder.\n\nBetween 1990-93, she published four more books: \"In Memoriam to Identity\" (1990); \"Hannibal Lecter, My Father\" (1991); \"Portrait of an Eye: Three Novels\" (1992), also composed of already published works; and \"My Mother: Demonology\" (1992). Her last novel, \"Pussy, King of the Pirates\", was published in 1996.\n\nIn 2007, Amandla Publishing re-published Acker's articles that she wrote for the \"New Statesman\" from 1989–91. Grove Press published two unpublished early novellas in the volume \"Rip-Off Red, Girl Detective and The Burning Bombing of America\", and a collection of selected work, \"Essential Acker\", edited by Amy Scholder and Dennis Cooper in 2002.\n\nThree volumes of her non-fiction have been published and re-published since her death. In 2002, New York University staged \"Discipline and Anarchy\", a retrospective exhibition of her works, while in 2008 London's Institute of Contemporary Arts screened an evening of films influenced by Acker.\n\nA collection of essays on Acker's work, \"Lust For Life: On the Writings of Kathy Acker\", edited by Carla Harryman, Avital Ronell, and Amy Scholder, was published by Verso in 2006 and includes essays by Nayland Blake, Leslie Dick, Robert Glück, Carla Harryman, Laurence Rickels, Avital Ronell, Barrett Watten, and Peter Wollen. In 2009, the first collection of essays to focus on academic study of Acker, \"Kathy Acker and Transnationalism\" was published. \nIn 2015, Semiotext(e) published \"I'm Very Into You\", a book of Acker's email correspondence with media theorist McKenzie Wark, edited by Matias Viegener, her executor and head of the Kathy Acker Literary Trust. Her personal library is housed in a reading room at the University of Cologne in Germany, and her papers are divided between NYU's Fales Library and the Rubenstein Rare Book and Manuscript Library at Duke University. A limited body of her recorded readings and discussions of her works exists in the special collections archive of University of California, San Diego.\n\nIn 2013, the Acker Award was launched and named for Kathy Acker. Awarded to living and deceased members of the San Francisco or New York avant-garde art scene, the award is financed by Alan Kaufman and Clayton Patterson.\n\nIn 2017, American writer and artist Chris Kraus published \"After Kathy Acker: A Literary Biography\", the first book-length biography of Acker's life experiences and literary strategies.\n\nIn 2018, British writer Olivia Laing published \"Crudo\", a fictional text covered by references to Acker's texts and whose main character is a woman called Kathy, suffering double breast cancer; yet book's events are situated in August–September 2017.\n\nIn 2019, Amy Scholder and Douglas A. Martin co-edited \"Kathy Acker: The Last Interview and Other Conversations\".\n\nBULLET::::- \"Politics\" (1972)\nBULLET::::- \"Childlike Life of the Black Tarantula By the Black Tarantula\" (1973)\nBULLET::::- \"I Dreamt I Was a Nymphomaniac: Imagining\" (1974)\nBULLET::::- \"Adult Life of Toulouse Lautrec\" (1978)\nBULLET::::- \"Florida\" (1978)\nBULLET::::- \"Kathy Goes To Haiti\" (1978)\nBULLET::::- \"N.Y.C. in 1979\" (1981)\nBULLET::::- \"Great Expectations\" (1983)\nBULLET::::- \"Algeria : A Series of Invocations Because Nothing Else Works\" (1984)\nBULLET::::- \"Blood and Guts in High School\" (1984)\nBULLET::::- \"Don Quixote: Which Was a Dream\" (1986)\nBULLET::::- \"Literal Madness: Three Novels\" (Reprinted 1987)\nBULLET::::- \"My Death My Life by Pier Paolo Pasolini\"\nBULLET::::- \"Wordplays 5 : An Anthology of New American Drama\" (1987)\nBULLET::::- \"Empire of the Senseless\" (1988)\nBULLET::::- \"In Memoriam to Identity\" (1990)\nBULLET::::- \"Hannibal Lecter, My Father\" (1991)\nBULLET::::- \"My Mother: Demonology\" (1994)\nBULLET::::- \"The Stabbing Hand\" – \"spoken word guest appearance on alternate mix of song by Oxbow included on reissues of album \"Let Me Be a Woman\" (1995)\"\nBULLET::::- \"Pussycat Fever\" (1995)\nBULLET::::- \"Dust. Essays\" (1995)\nBULLET::::- \"Pussy, King of the Pirates\" (1996)\nBULLET::::- \"Bodies of Work : Essays\" (1997)\nBULLET::::- \"Portrait of an Eye: Three Novels\" (Reprinted 1998)\nBULLET::::- \"Redoing Childhood\" (2000) spoken word CD, KRS 349.\nBULLET::::- \"Rip-Off Red, Girl Detective\" (pub. 2002 from manuscript of 1973)\nBULLET::::- Essential Acker: The Selected Writings of Kathy Acker (Acker, Kathy)Sep 12, 2002\nBULLET::::- New York City in 1979 (Penguin Modern) Feb 22, 2018\nBULLET::::- \"Kathy Acker (1971-1975)\", ed. Justin Gajoux and Claire Finch, critical edition of unpublished early writings from 1971-1975 (Éditions Ismael, 2019, 656p.)\n\nBULLET::::- Delirium, a comic book character created by Neil Gaiman based on his friend Kathy Acker.\nBULLET::::- Postmodern feminism\n\nBULLET::::- \"no one can find little girls any more: Kathy Acker in Australia\" (1997). Documentary film by Jonathan and Felicity Dawson. Griffith University, 90 minutes. Footage from this film is included in Who's Afraid of Kathy Acker? A documentary by Barbara Caspar\nBULLET::::- \"Devouring Institutions: The Life Work of Kathy Acker\", ed. Michael Hardin (Hyperbole/San Diego State University Press: 2004). DEVOURING INSTITUTIONS\nBULLET::::- \"Lust for Life: On the Writings of Kathy Acker\", ed. Carla Harryman, Avital Ronell, and Amy Scholder (Verso, 2006)\nBULLET::::- \"Kathy Acker and Transnationalism\", ed. Polina Mackay and Kathryn Nicol (Cambridge Scholars, 2009)\nBULLET::::- \"I'm Very into You: Correspondence 1995--1996\", by Kathy Acker and McKenzie Wark, edited by Matias Viegener (Semiotext(e), 2017)\nBULLET::::- \"After Kathy Acker: A Literary Biography\", by Chris Kraus (Semiotext(e), 2017)\nBULLET::::- Pérez, Rolando. \"What is Don Quijote/Don Quixote And…And…And the Disjunctive Synthesis of Cervantes and Kathy Acker\", Cervantes ilimitado: cuatrocientos años del Quijote. Ed. Nuria Morgado. ALDEEU, 2016. pp. 75–100.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Part 2\" · \"Part 3\"\nBULLET::::- Acker interview with the Spice Girls.\nBULLET::::- \"Kathy Acker Papers, 1972–1997 and undated\", at Duke University\n"}
