{"id": "15661", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15661", "title": "History of Jamaica", "text": "History of Jamaica\n\nThe Caribbean island of Jamaica was inhabited by the Arawak tribes prior to the arrival of Columbus in 1494. Early inhabitants of Jamaica named the land \"Xaymaca\", meaning \"Land of wood and water\". The Spanish enslaved the Arawaks, who were so ravaged by their conflict with the Europeans and by foreign diseases that nearly the entire native population was extinct by 1600. The Spanish also transported hundreds of West African slaves to the island.\n\nIn the year 1655, the English invaded Jamaica, defeating the Spanish colonists. African slaves took advantage of the political turmoil and escaped to the island's interior, forming independent communities (known as the Maroons). Meanwhile, on the coast, the English built the settlement of Port Royal, which became a base of operations for pirates and privateers, including Captain Henry Morgan.\n\nIn the 18th century, sugar cane replaced piracy as British Jamaica's main source of income. The sugar industry was labour-intensive and the British brought hundreds of thousands of enslaved Africans to Jamaica, so that by 1850 black Jamaicans outnumbered whites by a ratio of twenty to one. Enslaved Jamaicans mounted over a dozen major uprisings during the 18th century, including Tacky's revolt in 1760. There were also periodic skirmishes between the British and the mountain communities, culminating in the First Maroon War of the 1730s and the Second Maroon War of the 1790s.\n\nThe first inhabitants of Jamaica probably came from islands to the east in two waves of migration. About 600 CE the culture known as the “Redware people” arrived; little is known of them, however, beyond the red pottery they left. Alligator Pond in Manchester Parish and Little River in St. Ann Parish are among the earliest known sites of this Ostionoid people, who lived near the coast and extensively hunted turtles and fish.\n\nAround 800 CE, Arawak arrived, eventually settling throughout the island. Living in villages ruled by tribal chiefs called caciques, they sustained themselves on fishing and the cultivation of maize and cassava. At the height of their civilisation, their population is estimated to have numbered as much as 60,000.\n\nThe Arawak brought from South America a system of raising yuca known as \"conuco.\" To add nutrients to the soil, the Arawak burned local bushes and trees and heaped the ash into large mounds, into which they then planted yuca cuttings. Most Arawak lived in large circular buildings (\"bohios\"), constructed with wooden poles, woven straw, and palm leaves. The Arawak spoke an Arawakan language and did not have writing. Some of the words used by them, such as \"barbacoa\" (\"barbecue\"), \"hamaca\" (\"hammock\"), \"kanoa\" (\"canoe\"), \"tabaco\" (\"tobacco\"), \"yuca\", \"batata\" (\"sweet potato\"), and \"juracán\" (\"hurricane\"), have been incorporated into Spanish and English.\n\nChristopher Columbus is believed to be the first European to reach Jamaica. He landed on the island on 5 May 1494, during his second voyage to the Americas. Columbus returned to Jamaica during his fourth voyage to the Americas. He had been sailing around the Caribbean nearly a year when a storm beached his ships in St. Ann's Bay, Jamaica, on 25 June 1503. For a year Columbus and his men remained stranded on the island, finally departing in June 1504.\n\nThe Spanish crown granted the island to the Columbus family, but for decades it was something of a backwater, valued chiefly as a supply base for food and animal hides. In 1509 Juan de Esquivel founded the first permanent European settlement, the town of Sevilla la Nueva (New Seville), on the north coast. A decade later, Friar Bartolomé de las Casas wrote Spanish authorities about Esquivel's conduct during the Higüey massacre of 1503.\n\nIn 1534 the capital was moved to Villa de la Vega (later Santiago de la Vega), now called Spanish Town. This settlement served as the capital of both Spanish and English Jamaica, from its founding in 1534 until 1872, after which the capital was moved to Kingston.\n\nThe Spanish enslaved many of the Arawak; some escaped, but most died from European diseases and overwork. The Spaniards also introduced the first African slaves. By the early 17th century, when virtually no Taino remained in the region, the population of the island was about 3,000, including a small number of African slaves. Disappointed in the lack of gold on the isle, the Spanish mainly used Jamaica as a military base to supply colonising efforts in the mainland Americas.\n\nThe Spanish colonists did not bring women in the first expeditions and took Taíno women for their common-law wives, resulting in mestizo children. Sexual violence against the Taíno women by the Spanish was also common.\n\nAlthough the Taino referred to the island as \"Xaymaca\", the Spanish gradually changed the name to \"Jamaica\". In the so-called Admiral's map of 1507 the island was labeled as \"Jamaiqua\" and in Peter Martyr's work \"Decades\" of 1511, he referred to it as both \"Jamaica\" and \"Jamica\".\n\nIn late 1654, English leader Oliver Cromwell launched the \"Western Design\" armada against Spain's colonies in the Caribbean. In April 1655, General Robert Venables led the armada in an attack on Spain's fort at Santo Domingo, Hispaniola. After the Spanish repulsed this poorly-executed attack, the English force then sailed for Jamaica, the only Spanish West Indies island that did not have new defensive works. In May 1655, around 7,000 English soldiers landed near Jamaica's Spanish Town capital and soon overwhelmed the small number of Spanish troops (at the time, Jamaica's entire population only numbered around 2,500). Spain never recaptured Jamaica, losing the Battle of Ocho Rios in 1657 and the Battle of Rio Nuevo in 1658. In 1660, the turning point was when some Spanish runaway slaves, who became Jamaican Maroons, switched sides from the Spanish to the English. For England, Jamaica was to be the 'dagger pointed at the heart of the Spanish Empire,' although in fact it was a possession of little economic value then. England gained formal possession of Jamaica from Spain in 1670 through the Treaty of Madrid. Removing the pressing need for constant defense against Spanish attack, this change served as an incentive to planting.\n\nCromwell increased the island's European population by sending indentured servants and prisoners to Jamaica. Due to the wars in Ireland at this time two-thirds of this 17th-century European population was Irish. But tropical diseases kept the number of Europeans under 10,000 until about 1740. Although the African slave population in the 1670s and 1680s never exceeded 10,000, by the end of the 17th century imports of slaves increased the black population to at least five times the number of whites. Thereafter, Jamaica's African population did not increase significantly in number until well into the 18th century, in part because ships coming from the west coast of Africa preferred to unload at the islands of the Eastern Caribbean. At the beginning of the 18th century, the number of slaves in Jamaica did not exceed 45,000, but by 1800 it had increased to over 300,000.\n\nBeginning with the Stuart monarchy's appointment of a civil governor to Jamaica in 1661, political patterns were established that lasted well into the 20th century. The second governor, Lord Windsor, brought with him in 1662 a proclamation from the king giving Jamaica's non-slave populace the rights of English citizens, including the right to make their own laws. Although he spent only ten weeks in Jamaica, Lord Windsor laid the foundations of a governing system that was to last for two centuries: a crown-appointed governor acting with the advice of a nominated council in the legislature. The legislature consisted of the governor and an elected but highly unrepresentative House of Assembly. For years, the planter-dominated Assembly was in continual conflict with the various governors and the Stuart kings; there were also contentious factions within the assembly itself. For much of the 1670s and 1680s, Charles II and James II and the assembly feuded over such matters as the purchase of slaves from ships not run by the royal English trading company. The last Stuart governor, Christopher Monck, 2nd Duke of Albemarle, who was more interested in treasure hunting than in planting, turned the planter oligarchy out of office. After the duke's death in 1688, the planters, who had fled Jamaica to London, succeeded in lobbying James II to order a return to the pre-Albemarle political arrangement (the local control of Jamaican planters belonging to the assembly).\n\nFollowing the 1655 conquest, Spain repeatedly attempted to recapture Jamaica. In response, in 1657, Governor Edward D'Oyley invited the Brethren of the Coast to come to Port Royal and make it their home port. The Brethren was made up of a group of pirates who were descendants of cattle-hunting \"boucaniers\" (later Anglicised to buccaneers), who had turned to piracy after being robbed by the Spanish (and subsequently thrown out of Hispaniola). These pirates concentrated their attacks on Spanish shipping, whose interests were considered the major threat to the town. These pirates later became legal English privateers who were given letters of marque by Jamaica's governor. Around the same time that pirates were invited to Port Royal, England launched a series of attacks against Spanish shipping vessels and coastal towns. By sending the newly appointed privateers after Spanish ships and settlements, England had successfully set up a system of defense for Port Royal. Jamaica became a haven of privateers, buccaneers, and occasionally outright pirates: Christopher Myngs, Edward Mansvelt, and most famously, Henry Morgan.\n\nEngland gained formal possession of Jamaica from Spain in 1670 through the Treaty of Madrid. Removing the pressing need for constant defense against Spanish attack, this change served as an incentive to planting. This settlement also improved the supply of slaves and resulted in more protection, including military support, for the planters against foreign competition. As a result, the sugar monoculture and slave-worked plantation society spread across Jamaica throughout the 18th century, decreasing Jamaica's dependence on privateers for protection and funds.\n\nHowever, the English colonial authorities continued to have difficulties suppressing the Spanish Maroons, who made their homes in the mountainous interior, and mounted periodic raids on estates and towns, such as Spanish Town. The Karmahaly Maroons continued to stay in the forested mountains, and periodically fought the English.\n\nAnother blow to Jamaica's partnership with privateers was the violent earthquake which destroyed much of Port Royal on 7 June 1692. Two-thirds of the town sank into the sea immediately after the main shock. After the earthquake, the town was partially rebuilt but the colonial government was relocated to Spanish Town, which had been the capital under Spanish rule. Port Royal was further devastated by a fire in 1703 and a hurricane in 1722. Most of the sea trade moved to Kingston. By the late 18th century, Port Royal was largely abandoned.\n\nIn the mid-17th century, sugarcane had been brought into the British West Indies by the Dutch, from Brazil. Upon landing in Jamaica and other islands, they quickly urged local growers to change their main crops from cotton and tobacco to sugarcane. With depressed prices of cotton and tobacco, due mainly to stiff competition from the North American colonies, the farmers switched, leading to a boom in the Caribbean economies. Sugarcane was quickly snapped up by the British, who used it in cakes and to sweeten tea. In the 18th century, sugar replaced piracy as Jamaica's main source of income. The sugar industry was labour-intensive and the British brought hundreds of thousands of enslaved Africans to Jamaica. By 1832, the median-size plantation in Jamaica had about 150 slaves, and nearly one of every four bondsmen lived on units that had at least 250 slaves. In \"The Book of Night Women\", author Marlon James indicates that the ratio of slave owner to enslaved Africans is 1:33. James also depicts atrocities that slave owners subjected slaves to, and violent resistance from the slaves; numerous slaves died in pursuit of freedom. After slavery was abolished in 1834, sugarcane plantations used a variety of forms of labour including workers imported from India under contracts of indenture.\n\nWhen the British captured Jamaica in 1655, the Spanish colonists fled, leaving a large number of African slaves. These former Spanish slaves created three \"Palenques\", or settlements. Former slaves organised under the leadership of Juan de Serras allied with the Spanish guerrillas on the western end of the Cockpit Country, while those under Juan de Bolas established themselves in modern-day Clarendon Parish and served as a \"black militia\" for the English. The third chose to join those who had previously escaped from the Spanish to live and intermarry with the Arawak people. Each group of Maroons established distinct independent communities in the mountainous interior of Jamaica. They survived by subsistence farming and periodic raids of plantations. Over time, the Maroons came to control large areas of the Jamaican interior. Early in the 18th century, the Maroons took a heavy toll on the British troops and local militia sent against them in the interior, in what came to be known as the First Maroon War.\n\nThe First Maroon War came to an end with a 1739–40 agreement between the Maroons and the British government. The Maroons were to remain in their five main towns (Accompong; Cudjoe's Town (Trelawny Town); Nanny Town, later known as Moore Town; Scott's Hall (Jamaica); and Charles Town, Jamaica), living under their own rulers and a British supervisor. In exchange, they were asked to agree not to harbour new runaway slaves, but rather to help catch them. This last clause in the treaty naturally caused a split between the Maroons and the rest of the black population, although from time to time runaways from the plantations still found their way into Maroon settlements. Another provision of the agreement was that the Maroons would serve to protect the island from invaders. The latter was because the Maroons were revered by the British as skilled warriors. The person responsible for the compromise with the British was the Leeward Maroon leader, Cudjoe, a short, almost dwarf-like man who for years fought skillfully and bravely to maintain his people's independence. As he grew older, however, Cudjoe became increasingly disillusioned. He ran into quarrels with his lieutenants and with other Maroon groups. He felt that the only hope for the future was honorable peace with the enemy, which was just what the British were thinking. The 1739 treaty should be seen in this light. A year later, the even more rebellious Windward Maroons of Trelawny Town also agreed to sign a treaty under pressure from both white Jamaicans and the Leeward Maroons.\n\nIn May 1760, Tacky, a slave overseer on the Frontier plantation in Saint Mary Parish, led a group of enslaved Africans in taking over the Frontier and Trinity plantations while killing their enslavers. They then marched to the storeroom at Fort Haldane, where the munitions to defend the town of Port Maria were kept. After killing the storekeeper, Tacky and his men stole nearly 4 barrels of gunpowder and 40 firearms with shot, before marching on to overrun the plantations at Heywood Hall and Esher. By dawn, hundreds of other slaves had joined Tacky and his followers. At Ballard's Valley, the rebels stopped to rejoice in their success. One slave from Esher decided to slip away and sound the alarm. Obeahmen (Caribbean witch doctors) quickly circulated around the camp dispensing a powder that they claimed would protect the men from injury in battle and loudly proclaimed that an Obeahman could not be killed. Confidence was high. Soon there were 70 to 80 mounted militia on their way along with some Maroons from Scott's Hall, who were bound by treaty to suppress such rebellions. When the militia learned of the Obeahman's boast of not being able to be killed, an Obeahman was captured, killed and hung with his mask, ornaments of teeth and bone and feather trimmings at a prominent place visible from the encampment of rebels. Many of the rebels, confidence shaken, returned to their plantations. Tacky and 25 or so men decided to fight on. Tacky and his men went running through the woods being chased by the Maroons and their legendary marksman, Davy the Maroon. While running at full speed, Davy shot Tacky and cut off his head as evidence of his feat, for which he would be richly rewarded. Tacky's head was later displayed on a pole in Spanish Town until a follower took it down in the middle of the night. The rest of Tacky's men were found in a cave near Tacky Falls, having committed suicide rather than going back to slavery.\n\nIn 1795, the Second Maroon War was instigated when two Maroons were flogged by a black slave for allegedly stealing two pigs. When six Maroon leaders came to the British to present their grievances, the British took them as prisoners. This sparked an eight-month conflict, spurred by the fact that Maroons felt that they were being mistreated under the terms of Cudjoe's Treaty of 1739, which ended the First Maroon War. The war lasted for five months as a bloody stalemate. The British 5,000 troops and militia outnumbered the Maroons ten to one, but the mountainous and forested topography of Jamaica proved ideal for guerrilla warfare. The Maroons surrendered in December 1795. A treaty signed in December between Major General George Walpole and the Maroon leaders established that the Maroons would beg on their knees for the King's forgiveness, return all runaway slaves, and be relocated elsewhere in Jamaica. The governor of Jamaica ratified the treaty, but gave the Maroons only three days to present themselves to beg forgiveness on 1 January 1796. Suspicious of British intentions, most of the Maroons did not surrender until mid-March. The British used the contrived breach of treaty as a pretext to deport the entire Trelawny Town Maroons to Nova Scotia. After a few years the Maroons were again deported to the new British settlement of Sierra Leone in West Africa.\n\nIn 1831, enslaved Baptist preacher Samuel Sharpe led a strike among demanding more freedom and a working wage of \"half the going wage rate.\" Upon refusal of their demands, the strike escalated into a full rebellion, in part because Sharpe had also made military preparations with a rebel military group known as the Black Regiment led by a slave known as Colonel Johnson of Retrieve Estate, about 150 strong with 50 guns among them. Colonel Johnson's Black Regiment clashed with a local militia led by Colonel Grignon at old Montpelier on December 28. The militia retreated to Montego Bay while the Black Regiment advanced an invasion of estates in the hills, inviting more slaves to join while burning houses, fields and other properties, setting off a trail of fires through the Great River Valley in Westmoreland and St. Elizabeth to St James.\n\nThe Baptist War, as it was known, became the largest slave uprising in the British West Indies, lasting 10 days and mobilised as many as 60,000 of Jamaica's 300,000 slaves. The rebellion was suppressed by British forces under the control of Sir Willoughby Cotton. The reaction of the Jamaican Government and plantocracy was far more brutal. Approximately five hundred slaves were killed in total: 207 during the revolt and somewhere in the range between 310 and 340 slaves were killed through \"various forms of judicial executions\" after the rebellion was concluded, at times, for quite minor offences (one recorded execution indicates the crime being the theft of a pig; another, a cow). An 1853 account by Henry Bleby described how three or four simultaneous executions were commonly observed; bodies would be allowed to pile up until workhouse slaves carted the bodies away at night and buried them in mass graves outside town. The brutality of the plantocracy during the revolt is thought to have accelerated the process of emancipation, with initial measures beginning in 1833.\n\nBecause of the loss of property and life in the 1831 Baptist War rebellion, the British Parliament held two inquiries. Their reports on conditions contributed greatly to the abolition movement and passage of the 1833 law to abolish slavery as of August 1, 1834, throughout the British Empire. The Jamaican slaves were bound (indentured) to their former owners' service, albeit with a guarantee of rights, until 1838 under what was called the \"Apprenticeship System\".\n\nWith the abolition of the slave trade in 1808 and slavery itself in 1834, however, the island's sugar- and slave-based economy faltered. The period after emancipation in 1834 initially was marked by a conflict between the plantocracy and elements in the Colonial Office over the extent to which individual freedom should be coupled with political participation for blacks. In 1840 the assembly changed the voting qualifications in a way that enabled a majority of blacks and people of mixed race (browns or mulattos) to vote. But neither change in the political system, nor abolition of slavery changed the planter's chief interest, which lay in the continued profitability of their estates, and they continued to dominate the elitist assembly. Nevertheless, at the end of the 19th century and in the early years of the 20th century, the crown began to allow some Jamaicans – mostly local merchants, urban professionals, and artisans—into the appointed councils.\n\nTensions resulted in the October 1865 Morant Bay rebellion led by Paul Bogle. The rebellion was sparked on 7 October, when a black man was put on trial and imprisoned for allegedly trespassing on a long-abandoned plantation. During the proceedings, James Geoghegon, a black spectator, disrupted the trial, and in the police's attempts to seize him and remove him from the courthouse, a fight broke out between the police and other spectators. While pursuing Geoghegon, the two policeman were beaten with sticks and stones. The following Monday arrest warrants were issued for several men for rioting, resisting arrest, and assaulting the police. Among them was Baptist preacher Paul Bogle. A few days later on 11 October, Mr. Paul Bogle marched with a group of protesters to Morant Bay. When the group arrived at the court house they were met by a small and inexperienced volunteer militia. The crowd began pelting the militia with rocks and sticks, and the militia opened fire on the group, killing seven black protesters before retreating.\n\nGovernor John Eyre sent government troops, under Brigadier-General Alexander Nelson, to hunt down the poorly armed rebels and bring Paul Bogle back to Morant Bay for trial. The troops met with no organised resistance, but regardless they killed blacks indiscriminately, most of whom had not been involved in the riot or rebellion: according to one soldier, \"we slaughtered all before us… man or woman or child\". In the end, 439 black Jamaicans were killed directly by soldiers, and 354 more (including Paul Bogle) were arrested and later executed, some without proper trials. Paul Bogle was executed \"either the same evening he was tried or the next morning.\" Other punishments included flogging for over 600 men and women (including some pregnant women), and long prison sentences, with thousands of homes belonging to black Jamaicans were burned down without any justifiable reason.\n\nGeorge William Gordon, a Jamaican businessman and politician, who had been critical of Governor John Eyre and his policies, was later arrested by Governor John Eyre who believed he had been behind the rebellion. Despite having very little to do with it, Gordon was eventually executed. Though he was arrested in Kingston, he was transferred by Eyre to Morant Bay, where he could be tried under martial law. The execution and trial of Gordon via martial law raised some constitutional issues back in Britain, where concerns emerged about whether British dependencies should be ruled under the government of law, or through military license. The speedy trial saw Gordon hanged on 23 October, just two days after his trial had begun. He and William Bogle, Paul's brother, \"were both tried together, and executed at the same time.\n\nDuring most of the 18th century, a monocrop economy based on sugarcane production for export flourished. In the last quarter of the century, however, the Jamaican sugar economy declined as famines, hurricanes, colonial wars, and wars of independence disrupted trade. By the 1820s, Jamaican sugar had become less competitive with that from high-volume producers such as Cuba and production subsequently declined. By 1882 sugar output was less than half the level achieved in 1828. A major reason for the decline was the British Parliament's 1807 abolition of the slave trade, under which the transportation of slaves to Jamaica after 1 March 1808 was forbidden; the abolition of the slave trade was followed by the abolition of slavery in 1834 and full emancipation within four years. Unable to convert the ex-slaves into a sharecropping tenant class similar to the one established in the post-Civil War South of the United States, planters became increasingly dependent on wage labour and began recruiting workers abroad, primarily from India, China, and Sierra Leone. Many of the former slaves settled in peasant or small farm communities in the interior of the island, the \"yam belt,\" where they engaged in subsistence and some cash crop farming.\n\nThe second half of the 19th century was a period of severe economic decline for Jamaica. Low crop prices, droughts, and disease led to serious social unrest, culminating in the Morant Bay rebellions of 1865. However, renewed British administration after the 1865 rebellion, in the form of crown colony status, resulted in some social and economic progress as well as investment in the physical infrastructure. Agricultural development was the centrepiece of restored British rule in Jamaica. In 1868 the first large-scale irrigation project was launched. In 1895 the Jamaica Agricultural Society was founded to promote more scientific and profitable methods of farming. Also in the 1890s, the Crown Lands Settlement Scheme was introduced, a land reform program of sorts, which allowed small farmers to purchase two hectares or more of land on favourable terms.\nBetween 1865 and 1930, the character of landholding in Jamaica changed substantially, as sugar declined in importance. As many former plantations went bankrupt, some land was sold to Jamaican peasants under the Crown Lands Settlement whereas other cane fields were consolidated by dominant British producers, most notably by the British firm Tate and Lyle. Although the concentration of land and wealth in Jamaica was not as drastic as in the Spanish-speaking Caribbean, by the 1920s the typical sugar plantation on the island had increased to an average of 266 hectares. But, as noted, smallscale agriculture in Jamaica survived the consolidation of land by sugar powers. The number of small holdings in fact tripled between 1865 and 1930, thus retaining a large portion of the population as peasantry. Most of the expansion in small holdings took place before 1910, with farms averaging between two and twenty hectares.\n\nThe rise of the banana trade during the second half of the 19th century also changed production and trade patterns on the island. Bananas were first exported in 1867, and banana farming grew rapidly thereafter. By 1890, bananas had replaced sugar as Jamaica's principal export. Production rose from 5 million stems (32 percent of exports) in 1897 to an average of 20 million stems a year in the 1920s and 1930s, or over half of domestic exports. As with sugar, the presence of American companies, like the well-known United Fruit Company in Jamaica, was a driving force behind renewed agricultural exports. The British also became more interested in Jamaican bananas than in the country's sugar. Expansion of banana production, however, was hampered by serious labour shortages. The rise of the banana economy took place amidst a general exodus of up to 11,000 Jamaicans a year.\n\nIn 1846 Jamaican planters, adversely affected by the loss of slave labour, suffered a crushing blow when Britain passed the Sugar Duties Act, eliminating Jamaica's traditionally favoured status as its primary supplier of sugar. The Jamaica House of Assembly stumbled from one crisis to another until the collapse of the sugar trade, when racial and religious tensions came to a head during the Morant Bay rebellion of 1865. Although suppressed ruthlessly, the severe rioting so alarmed the planters that the two-centuries-old assembly voted to abolish itself and asked for the establishment of direct British rule. In 1866 the new governor John Peter Grant arrived to implement a series of reforms which accompanied the transition to a crown colony. The government consisted of the Legislative Council and the executive Privy Council containing members of both chambers of the House of Assembly, but the Colonial Office exercised effective power through a presiding British governor. The council included a few handpicked prominent Jamaicans for the sake of appearance only. In the late 19th century, crown colony rule was modified; representation and limited self-rule were reintroduced gradually into Jamaica after 1884. The colony's legal structure was reformed along the lines of English common law and county courts, and a constabulary force was established. The smooth working of the crown colony system was dependent on a good understanding and an identity of interests between the governing officials, who were [British, and most of the nonofficial, nominated members of the Legislative Council, who were Jamaicans. The elected members of this body were in a permanent minority and without any influence or administrative power. The unstated alliance – based on shared color, attitudes, and interest – between the British officials and the Jamaican upper class was reinforced in London, where the West India Committee lobbied for Jamaican interests. Jamaica's white or near-white propertied class continued to hold the dominant position in every respect; the vast majority of the black population remained poor and unenfranchised.\n\nUntil it was disestablished in 1870, the Church of England in Jamaica was the established church. It represented the white English community. It received funding from the colonial government, and was given responsibility for providing religious instruction to the slaves. It was challenged by Methodist missionaries from England, and the Methodists in turn were denounced as troublemakers. The Church of England in Jamaica established the Jamaica Home and Foreign Missionary Society in 1861; its mission stations multiplied, with financial help from religious organizations in London. The Society sent its own missionaries to West Africa. Baptist missions grew rapidly, thanks to missionaries from England and the United States, and became the largest denomination by 1900. Baptist missionaries denounced the apprentice system as a form of slavery. In the 1870s and 1880s the Methodists opened a high school and a theological college. Other Protestant groups included the Moravians, Presbyterians, Congregationalists, Seventh-day Adventist, Church of God, and others. There were several thousand Roman Catholics. The population was largely Christian by 1900, and most families were linked with the church or a Sunday School. Traditional pagan practices persisted in unorganized fashion, such as witchcraft.\n\nIn 1872, the government passed an act to transfer government offices from Spanish Town to Kingston. Kingston had been founded as a refuge for survivors of the 1692 earthquake that destroyed Port Royal. The town did not begin to grow until after the further destruction of Port Royal by fire in 1703. Surveyor John Goffe drew up a plan for the town based on a grid bounded by North, East, West and Harbour Streets. By 1716 it had become the largest town and the center of trade for Jamaica. The government sold land to people with the regulation that they purchase no more than the amount of the land that they owned in Port Royal, and only land on the sea front. Gradually wealthy merchants began to move their residences from above their businesses to the farm lands north on the plains of Liguanea. In 1755 the governor, Sir Charles Knowles, had decided to transfer the government offices from Spanish Town to Kingston. It was thought by some to be an unsuitable location for the Assembly in proximity to the moral distractions of Kingston, and the next governor rescinded the Act. However, by 1780 the population of Kingston was 11,000, and the merchants began lobbying for the administrative capital to be transferred from Spanish Town, which was by then eclipsed by the commercial activity in Kingston. The 1907 Kingston earthquake destroyed much of the city. Considered by many writers of that time one of the world's deadliest earthquakes, it resulted in the death of over eight hundred Jamaicans and destroyed the homes of over ten thousand more.\n\nMarcus Mosiah Garvey, a black activist and Trade Unionist, founded the Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League in 1914, one of Jamaica's first political parties in 1929, and a workers association in the early 1930s. Garvey also promoted the Back-to-Africa movement, which called for those of African descent to return to the homelands of their ancestors. Garvey, to no avail, pleaded with the colonial government to improve living conditions for indigenous peoples in the West Indies.\n\nThe Rastafari movement, a new religion, emerged among impoverished and socially disenfranchised Afro-Jamaican communities in 1930s Jamaica. Its Afrocentric ideology was largely a reaction against Jamaica's then-dominant British colonial culture. It was influenced by both Ethiopianism and the Back-to-Africa movement promoted by black nationalist figures like Marcus Garvey. The movement developed after several Christian clergymen, most notably Leonard Howell, proclaimed that the crowning of Haile Selassie as Emperor of Ethiopia in 1930 fulfilled a Biblical prophecy. By the 1950s, Rastafari's counter-cultural stance had brought the movement into conflict with wider Jamaican society, including violent clashes with law enforcement. In the 1960s and 1970s it gained increased respectability within Jamaica and greater visibility abroad through the popularity of Rasta-inspired reggae musicians like Bob Marley. Enthusiasm for Rastafari declined in the 1980s, following the deaths of Haile Selassie and Marley.\n\nThe Great Depression caused sugar prices to slump in 1929 and led to the return of many Jamaicans. Economic stagnation, discontent with unemployment, low wages, high prices, and poor living conditions caused social unrest in the 1930s. Uprisings in Jamaica began on the Frome Sugar Estate in the western parish of Westmoreland and quickly spread east to Kingston. Jamaica, in particular, set the pace for the region in its demands for economic development from British colonial rule.\n\nBecause of disturbances in Jamaica and the rest of the region, the British in 1938 appointed the Moyne Commission. An immediate result of the Commission was the Colonial Development Welfare Act, which provided for the expenditure of approximately Ł1 million a year for twenty years on coordinated development in the British West Indies. Concrete actions, however, were not implemented to deal with Jamaica's massive structural problems.\n\nThe rise of nationalism, as distinct from island identification or desire for self-determination, is generally dated to the 1938 labour riots that affected both Jamaica and the islands of the Eastern Caribbean. William Alexander Bustamante, a moneylender in the capital city of Kingston who had formed the Jamaica Trade Workers and Tradesmen Union (JTWTU) three years earlier, captured the imagination of the black masses with his messianic personality, even though he himself was light-skinned, affluent, and aristocratic. Bustamante emerged from the 1938 strikes and other disturbances as a populist leader and the principal spokesperson for the militant urban working class, and in that year, using the JTWTU as a stepping stone, he founded the Bustamante Industrial Trade Union (BITU), which inaugurated Jamaica's workers movement.\n\nA distant cousin of Bustamante's, Norman W. Manley, concluded as a result of the 1938 riots that the real basis for national unity in Jamaica lay in the masses. Unlike the union-oriented Bustamante, however, Manley was more interested in access to control over state power and political rights for the masses. On 18 September 1938, he inaugurated the People's National Party (PNP), which had begun as a nationalist movement supported by the mixed-race middle class and the liberal sector of the business community with leaders who were highly educated members of the upper middle class. The 1938 riots spurred the PNP to unionise labour, although it would be several years before the PNP formed major labour unions. The party concentrated its earliest efforts on establishing a network both in urban areas and in banana-growing rural parishes, later working on building support among small farmers and in areas of bauxite mining.\n\nThe PNP adopted a socialist ideology in 1940 and later joined the Socialist International, allying itself formally with the social democratic parties of Western Europe. Guided by socialist principles, Manley was not a doctrinaire socialist. PNP socialism during the 1940s was similar to British Labour Party ideas on state control of the factors of production, equality of opportunity, and a welfare state, although a left-wing element in the PNP held more orthodox Marxist views and worked for the internationalisation of the trade union movement through the Caribbean Labour Congress. In those formative years of Jamaican political and union activity, relations between Manley and Bustamante were cordial. Manley defended Bustamante in court against charges brought by the British for his labour activism in the 1938 riots and looked after the BITU during Bustamante's imprisonment.\n\nBustamante had political ambitions of his own, however. In 1942, while still incarcerated, he founded a political party to rival the PNP, called the Jamaica Labour Party (JLP). The new party, whose leaders were of a lower class than those of the PNP, was supported by conservative businessmen and 60,000 dues-paying BITU members, who encompassed dock and sugar plantation workers and other unskilled urban labourers. On his release in 1943, Bustamante began building up the JLP. Meanwhile, several PNP leaders organised the leftist-oriented Trade Union Congress (TUC). Thus, from an early stage in modern Jamaica, unionised labour was an integral part of organised political life.\n\nFor the next quarter century, Bustamante and Manley competed for centre stage in Jamaican political affairs, the former espousing the cause of the \"barefoot man\"; the latter, \"democratic socialism,\" a loosely defined political and economic theory aimed at achieving a classless system of government. Jamaica's two founding fathers projected quite different popular images. Bustamante, lacking even a high school diploma, was an autocratic, charismatic, and highly adept politician; Manley was an athletic, Oxford-trained lawyer, Rhodes scholar, humanist, and liberal intellectual. Although considerably more reserved than Bustamante, Manley was well liked and widely respected. He was also a visionary nationalist who became the driving force behind the crown colony's quest for independence.\n\nFollowing the 1938 disturbances in the West Indies, London sent the Moyne Commission to study conditions in the British Caribbean territories. Its findings led in the early 1940s to better wages and a new constitution. Issued on 20 November 1944, the Constitution modified the crown colony system and inaugurated limited self-government based on the Westminster model of government and universal adult suffrage. It also embodied the island's principles of ministerial responsibility and the rule of law. Thirty-one percent of the population participated in the 1944 elections. The JPL – helped by its promises to create jobs, its practice of dispensing public funds in pro-JLP parishes, and the PNP's relatively radical platform – won an 18 percent majority of the votes over the PNP, as well as 22 seats in the 32-member House of Representatives, with 5 going to the PNP and 5 to other short-lived parties. In 1945 Bustamante took office as Jamaica's first premier (the pre-independence title for head of government).\n\nUnder the new charter, the British governor, assisted by the six-member Privy Council and ten-member Executive Council, remained responsible solely to the crown. The Jamaican Legislative Council became the upper house, or Senate, of the bicameral Parliament. House members were elected by adult suffrage from single-member electoral districts called constituencies. Despite these changes, ultimate power remained concentrated in the hands of the governor and other high officials.\n\nAfter World War II, Jamaica began a relatively long transition to full political independence. Jamaicans preferred British culture over American, but they had a love-hate relationship with the British and resented British domination, racism, and the dictatorial Colonial Office. Britain gradually granted the colony more self-government under periodic constitutional changes. Jamaica's political patterns and governmental structure were shaped during two decades of what was called \"constitutional decolonisation,\" the period between 1944 and independence in 1962.\n\nHaving seen how little popular appeal the PNP's 1944 campaign position had, the party shifted toward the centre in 1949 and remained there until 1974. The PNP actually won a 0.8-percent majority of the votes over the JLP in the 1949 election, although the JLP won a majority of the House seats. In the 1950s, the PNP and JLP became increasingly similar in their sociological composition and ideological outlook. During the cold war years, socialism became an explosive domestic issue. The JLP exploited it among property owners and churchgoers, attracting more middle-class support. As a result, PNP leaders diluted their socialist rhetoric, and in 1952 the PNP moderated its image by expelling four prominent leftists who had controlled the TUC. The PNP then formed the more conservative National Workers Union (NWU). Henceforth, PNP socialism meant little more than national planning within a framework of private property and foreign capital. The PNP retained, however, a basic commitment to socialist precepts, such as public control of resources and a more equitable income distribution. Manley's PNP came to office for the first time after winning the 1955 elections with an 11-percent majority over the JLP and 50.5 percent of the popular vote.\n\nAmendments to the constitution that took effect in May 1953 reconstituted the Executive Council and provided for eight ministers to be selected from among House members. The first ministries were subsequently established. These amendments also enlarged the limited powers of the House of Representatives and made elected members of the governor's executive council responsible to the legislature. Manley, elected chief minister beginning in January 1955, accelerated the process of decolonisation during his able stewardship. Further progress toward self-government was achieved under constitutional amendments in 1955 and 1956, and cabinet government was established on 11 November 1957.\n\nAssured by British declarations that independence would be granted to a collective West Indian state rather than to individual colonies, Manley supported Jamaica's joining nine other British territories in the West Indies Federation, established on 3 January 1958. Manley became the island's premier after the PNP again won a decisive victory in the general election in July 1959, securing thirty of forty-five House seats.\n\nMembership in the federation remained an issue in Jamaican politics. Bustamante, reversing his previously supportive position on the issue, warned of the financial implications of membership – Jamaica was responsible for 43 percent of its own financing – and an inequity in Jamaica's proportional representation in the federation's House of Assembly. Manley's PNP favoured staying in the federation, but he agreed to hold a referendum in September 1961 to decide on the issue. When 54 percent of the electorate voted to withdraw, Jamaica left the federation, which dissolved in 1962 after Trinidad and Tobago also pulled out. Manley believed that the rejection of his pro-federation policy in the 1961 referendum called for a renewed mandate from the electorate, but the JLP won the election of early 1962 by a fraction. Bustamante assumed the premiership that April, and Manley spent his remaining few years in politics as leader of the opposition.\n\nJamaica received its independence on 6 August 1962. The new nation retained, however, its membership in the Commonwealth of Nations and adopted a Westminster-style parliamentary system. Bustamante, at the age of 78, became the new nation's first prime minister.\n\nBustamante subsequently became the first Prime Minister of Jamaica. The island country joined the Commonwealth of Nations, an organisation of ex-British territories. Jamaica continues to be a Commonwealth realm, with the British Monarch as Queen of Jamaica and head of state.\n\nAn extensive period of postwar growth transformed Jamaica into an increasingly industrial society. This pattern was accelerated with the export of bauxite beginning in the 1950s. The economic structure shifted from a dependence on agriculture that in 1950 accounted for 30.8 percent of GDP to an agricultural contribution of 12.9 percent in 1960 and 6.7 percent in 1970. During the same period, the contribution to GDP of mining increased from less than 1 percent in 1950 to 9.3 percent in 1960 and 12.6 percent in 1970.\n\nBustamante's government also continued the government's repression of Rastafarians. During the Coral Gardens incident, one prominent example of state violence against Rastafarians, where following a violent confrontation between Rastafarians and police forces at a gas station, Bustamante issued the police and military an order to \"bring in all Rastas, dead or alive.\" 54 years later, following a government investigation into the incident, the government of Jamaica issued an apology, taking unequivocal responsibility for the Bustamante government's actions and making significant financial reparations to remaining survivors of the incident.\n\nJamaica's reggae music developed from Ska and rocksteady in the 1960s. The shift from rocksteady to reggae was illustrated by the organ shuffle pioneered by Jamaican musicians like Jackie Mittoo and Winston Wright and featured in transitional singles \"Say What You're Saying\" (1967) by Clancy Eccles and \"People Funny Boy\" (1968) by Lee \"Scratch\" Perry. The Pioneers' 1968 track \"Long Shot (Bus' Me Bet)\" has been identified as the earliest recorded example of the new rhythm sound that became known as reggae.\n\nEarly 1968 was when the first \"bona fide\" reggae records were released: \"Nanny Goat\" by Larry Marshall and \"No More Heartaches\" by The Beltones. That same year, the newest Jamaican sound began to spawn big-name imitators in other countries. American artist Johnny Nash's 1968 hit \"Hold Me Tight\" has been credited with first putting reggae in the American listener charts. Around the same time, reggae influences were starting to surface in rock and pop music, one example being 1968's \"Ob-La-Di, Ob-La-Da\" by The Beatles. Other significant reggae pioneers include Prince Buster, Desmond Dekker and Ken Boothe.\n\nThe Wailers, a band started by Bob Marley, Peter Tosh and Bunny Wailer in 1963, is perhaps the most recognised band that made the transition through all three stages of early Jamaican popular music: ska, rocksteady and reggae. The Wailers would go on to release some of the earliest reggae records with producer Lee Scratch Perry. After the Wailers disbanded in 1974, Marley then went on to pursue a solo career that culminated in the release of the album \"Exodus\" in 1977, which established his worldwide reputation and produced his status as one of the world's best-selling artists of all time, with sales of more than 75 million records. He was a committed Rastafari who infused his music with a sense of spirituality.\n\nIn the election of 1972, the PNP's Michael Manley defeated the JLP's unpopular incumbent Prime Minister Hugh Shearer. Under Manley, Jamaica established a minimum wage for all workers, including domestic workers. In 1974, Manley proposed free education from primary school to university. The introduction of universally free secondary education was a major step in removing the institutional barriers to private sector and preferred government jobs that required secondary diplomas. The PNP government in 1974 also formed the Jamaica Movement for the Advancement of Literacy (JAMAL), which administered adult education programs with the goal of involving 100,000 adults a year.\n\nLand reform expanded under his administration. Historically, land tenure in Jamaica has been rather inequitable. Project Land Lease (introduced in 1973), attempted an integrated rural development approach, providing tens of thousands of small farmers with land, technical advice, inputs such as fertilisers and access to credit. An estimated 14 percent of idle land was redistributed through this program, much of which had been abandoned during the post-war urban migration and/or purchased by large bauxite companies.\n\nThe minimum voting age was lowered to 18 years, while equal pay for women was introduced. Maternity leave was also introduced, while the government outlawed the stigma of illegitimacy. The Masters and Servants Act was abolished, and a Labour Relations and Industrial Disputes Act provided workers and their trade unions with enhanced rights. The National Housing Trust was established, providing \"the means for most employed people to own their own homes,\" and greatly stimulated housing construction, with more than 40,000 houses built between 1974 and 1980.\n\nSubsidised meals, transportation and uniforms for schoolchildren from disadvantaged backgrounds were introduced, together with free education at primary, secondary, and tertiary levels. Special employment programmes were also launched, together with programmes designed to combat illiteracy. Increases in pensions and poor relief were carried out, along with a reform of local government taxation, an increase in youth training, an expansion of day care centres. and an upgrading of hospitals.\n\nA worker's participation program was introduced, together with a new mental health law and the family court. Free health care for all Jamaicans was introduced, while health clinics and a paramedical system in rural areas were established. Various clinics were also set up to facilitate access to medical drugs. Spending on education was significantly increased, while the number of doctors and dentists in the country rose.\n\nThe One Love Peace Concert was a large concert held in Kingston on April 22, 1978, during a time of political civil war in Jamaica between opposing parties Jamaican Labour Party and the People's National Party. The concert came to its peak during Bob Marley & The Wailers' performance of \"Jammin'\", when Marley joined the hands of political rivals Michael Manley (PNP) and Edward Seaga (JLP).\n\nIn the 1980 election, Edward Seaga and the JLP won by an overwhelming majority – 57 percent of the popular vote and 51 of the 60 seats in the House of Representatives. Seaga immediately began to reverse the policies of his predecessor by privatising industry and seeking closer ties with the USA. Seaga was one of the first foreign heads of government to visit newly elected US president Ronald Reagan early the next year and was one of the architects of the Caribbean Basin Initiative, which was sponsored by Reagan. He delayed his promise to cut diplomatic relations with Cuba until a year later when he accused the Cuban government of giving asylum to Jamaican criminals.\n\nSeaga supported the collapse of the Marxist regime in Grenada and the subsequent US-led invasion of that island in October 1983. On the back of the Grenada invasion, Seaga called snap elections at the end of 1983, which Manley's PNP boycotted. His party thus controlled all seats in parliament. In an unusual move, because the Jamaican constitution required an opposition in the appointed Senate, Seaga appointed eight independent senators to form an official opposition.\n\nSeaga lost much of his US support when he was unable to deliver on his early promises of removing the bauxite levy, and his domestic support also plummeted. Articles attacking Seaga appeared in the US media and foreign investors left the country. Rioting in 1987 and 1988, the continued high popularity of Michael Manley, and complaints of governmental incompetence in the wake of the devastation of the island by Hurricane Gilbert in 1988, also contributed to his defeat in the 1989 elections.\n\nIn 1988, Hurricane Gilbert produced a storm surge and brought up to of rain in the mountainous areas of Jamaica, causing inland flash flooding. 49 people died. Prime Minister Edward Seaga stated that the hardest hit areas near where Gilbert made landfall looked \"like Hiroshima after the atom bomb.\" The storm left US$4 billion (in 1988 dollars) in damage from destroyed crops, buildings, houses, roads, and small aircraft. Two people eventually had to be rescued because of mudslides triggered by Gilbert and were sent to the hospital. The two people were reported to be fine. No planes were going in and out of Kingston, and telephone lines were jammed from Jamaica to Florida.\n\nAs Gilbert lashed Kingston, its winds knocked down power lines, uprooted trees, and flattened fences. On the north coast, waves hit Ocho Rios, a popular tourist resort where hotels were evacuated. Kingston's airport reported severe damage to its aircraft, and all Jamaica-bound flights were cancelled at Miami International Airport. Unofficial estimates state that at least 30 people were killed around the island. Estimated property damage reached more than $200 million. More than 100,000 houses were destroyed or damaged and the country's banana crop was largely destroyed. Hundreds of miles of roads and highways were also heavily damaged. Reconnaissance flights over remote parts of Jamaica reported that 80 percent of the homes on the island had lost their roofs. The poultry industry was also wiped out; the damage from agricultural loss reached $500 million (1988 USD). Hurricane Gilbert was the most destructive storm in the history of Jamaica and the most severe storm since Hurricane Charlie in 1951.\n\nJamaica's film industry was born in 1972 with the release of \"The Harder They Come\", the first feature-length film made by Jamaicans. It starred reggae singer Jimmy Cliff, was directed by Perry Henzell, and was produced by Island Records founder Chris Blackwell. The film is famous for its reggae soundtrack that is said to have \"brought reggae to the world\". Jamaica's other popular films include 1976's \"Smile Orange\", 1982's \"Countryman\", 1991's \"The Lunatic\", 1997's \"Dancehall Queen\", and 1999's \"Third World Cop\". Major figures in the Jamaican film industry include actors Paul Campbell and Carl Bradshaw, actress Audrey Reid, and producer Chris Blackwell.\n\nThe 1989 election. was the first election contested by the People's National Party since 1980, as they had boycotted the 1983 snap election. Prime Minister Edward Seaga announced the election date on January 15, 1989 at a rally in Kingston. He cited emergency conditions caused by Hurricane Gilbert in 1988 as the reason for extending the parliamentary term beyond its normal five-year mandate.\n\nThe date and tone of the election were shaped in part by Hurricane Gilbert, which made landfall in September 1988 and decimated the island. The hurricane caused almost $1 billion worth of damage to the island, with banana and coffee crops wiped out and thousands of homes destroyed. Both parties engaged in campaigning through the distribution of relief supplies, a hallmark of the Jamaican patronage system. Political commentators noted that prior to the hurricane, Edward Seaga and the JLP trailed Michael Manley and the PNP by twenty points in opinion polls. The ability to provide relief as the party in charge allowed Seaga to improve his standing among voters and erode the inevitability of Manley's victory. However, scandals related to the relief effort cost Seaga and the JLP some of the gains made immediately following the hurricane. Scandals that emerged included National Security Minister Errol Anderson personally controlling a warehouse full of disaster relief supplies and candidate Joan Gordon-Webley distributing American-donated flour in sacks with her picture on them.\n\nThe election was characterised by a narrower ideological difference between the two parties on economic issues. Michael Manley facilitated his comeback campaign by moderating his leftist positions and admitting mistakes made as Prime Minister, saying he erred when he involved government in economic production and had abandoned all thoughts of nationalising industry. He cited the PNP's desire to continue the market-oriented policies of the JLP government, but with a more participatory approach. Prime Minister Edward Seaga ran on his record of economic growth and the reduction of unemployment in Jamaica, using the campaign slogan \"Don't Let Them Wreck It Again\" to refer to Manley's tenure as Prime Minister. Seaga during his tenure as Prime Minister emphasised the need to tighten public sector spending and cut close to 27,000 public sector jobs in 1983 and 1984. He shifted his plans as elections neared with a promise to spend J$1 billion on a five-year Social Well-Being Programme, which would build new hospitals and schools in Jamaica. Foreign policy also played a role in the 1989 election. Prime Minister Edward Seaga emphasised his relations with the United States, a relationship which saw Jamaica receiving considerable economic aid from the U.S and additional loans from international institutions. Manley pledged better relations with the United States while at the same time pledging to restore diplomatic relations with Cuba that had been cut under Seaga. With Manley as Prime Minister, Jamaican-American relations had significantly frayed as a result of Manley's economic policies and close relations with Cuba.\n\nThe PNP was re-elected and Manley's second term focused on liberalising Jamaica's economy, with the pursuit of a free-market programme that stood in marked contrast to the interventionist economic policies pursued by Manley's first government. Various measures were, however, undertaken to cushion the negative effects of liberalisation. A Social Support Programme was introduced to provide welfare assistance for poor Jamaicans. In addition, the programme focused on creating direct employment, training, and credit for much of the population. The government also announced a 50% increase in the number of food stamps for the most vulnerable groups (including pregnant women, nursing mothers, and children) was announced. A small number of community councils were also created. In addition, a limited land reform programme was carried out that leased and sold land to small farmers, and land plots were granted to hundreds of farmers. The government also had an admirable record in housing provision, while measures were also taken to protect consumers from illegal and unfair business practices.\n\nIn 1992, citing health reasons, Manley stepped down as Prime Minister and PNP leader. His former Deputy Prime Minister, Percival Patterson, assumed both offices. Patterson led efforts to strengthen the country's social protection and security systems—a critical element of his economic and social policy agenda to mitigate, reduce poverty and social deprivation. His massive investments in modernisation of Jamaica's infrastructure and restructuring of the country's financial sector are widely credited with having led to Jamaica's greatest period of investment in tourism, mining, ICT and energy since the 1960s. He also ended Jamaica's 18-year borrowing relationship with the International Monetary Fund, allowing the country greater latitude in pursuit of its economic policies.\n\nPatterson led the PNP to resounding victories in the 1993 and 1997 elections. Patterson called the 1997 election in November 1997, when his People's National Party was ahead in the opinion polls, inflation had fallen substantially and the national football team had just qualified for the 1998 World Cup. The previous election in 1993 had seen the People's National Party win 52 of the 60 seats.\n\nA record 197 candidates contested the election, with a new political party, the National Democratic Movement, standing in most of the seats. The National Democratic Movement had been founded in 1995 by a former Labour Party chairman, Bruce Golding, after a dispute over the leadership of the Jamaica Labour Party.\n\nThe 1997 election was mainly free of violence as compared to previous elections, although it began with an incident where rival motorcades from the main parties were fired on. The election was the first in Jamaica where a team of international election monitors attended. The monitors were from the Carter Center and included Jimmy Carter, Colin Powell and former heavyweight boxing world champion Evander Holyfield. Just before the election the two main party leaders made a joint appeal for people to avoid marring the election with violence. Election day itself saw one death and four injuries relating to the election, but the 1980 election had seen over 800 deaths.\n\nIn winning the election the People's National Party became the first party to win three consecutive terms. The opposition Jamaica Labour Party only had two more seats in Parliament after the election but their leader Edward Seaga held his seat for a ninth time in a row. The National Democratic Movement failed to win any seats despite a pre-election prediction that they would manage to win a seat.\n\nThe 2002 election. was a victory for the People's National Party, but their number of seats fell from 50 to 34 (out of 60 total). PNP leader P. J. Patterson retained his position as Prime Minister, becoming the first political leader to win three successive elections. Patterson stepped down on 26 February 2006, and was replaced by Portia Simpson-Miller, Jamaica's first female Prime Minister.\n\nThe 2007 elections. had originally been scheduled for August 27, 2007 but were delayed to September 3 due to Hurricane Dean. The preliminary results indicated a slim victory for the opposition Jamaican Labour Party led by Bruce Golding, which grew by two seats from 31–29 to 33–27 after official recounts. The JLP defeated the People's National Party after 18 years of unbroken governance.\n\nIn the 1990s, Jamaica and other Caribbean banana producers argued for the continuation of their preferential access to EU markets, notably the United Kingdom. They feared that otherwise the EU would be flooded with cheap bananas from the Central American plantations, with devastating effects on several Caribbean economies. Negotiations led in 1993 to the EU agreeing to maintain the Caribbean producers' preferential access until the end of Lomé IV, pending possible negotiation on an extension. In 1995, the United States government petitioned to the World Trade Organization to investigate whether the Lomé IV convention had violated WTO rules. Then later in 1996, the WTO Dispute Settlement Body ruled in favor of the plaintiffs, effectively ending the cross-subsidies that had benefited ACP countries for many years. But the US remained unsatisfied and insisted that all preferential trade agreements between the EU and ACP should cease. The WTO Dispute Settlement Body established another panel to discuss the issue and concluded that agreements between the EU and ACP were indeed not compatible with WTO regulations. Finally, the EU negotiated with the US through WTO to reach an agreement.\n\nIn tourism, after a decrease in volume following the 11 September attacks in the U.S., the number of tourists going to Jamaica eventually rebounded, with the island now receiving over a million tourists each year. Services now account for over 60 percent of Jamaica's GDP and one of every four workers in Jamaica works in tourism or services. However, according to the World Bank, around 80% of the money tourism makes in Jamaica does not stay on the island, but goes instead to the multinational resorts.\n\nThe 2007 Cricket World Cup was the first time the ICC Cricket World Cup had been held in the Caribbean. The Jamaican Government spent US$81 million for \"on the pitch\" expenses. This included refurbishing Sabina Park and constructing the new multi-purpose facility in Trelawny – through a loan from China. Another US$20 million is budgeted for 'off-the-pitch' expenses, putting the tally at more than US$100 million or JM$7 billion. This put the reconstruction cost of Sabina Park at US$46 million whilst the Trelawny Stadium will cost US$35 million. The total amount of money spent on stadiums was at least US$301 million. The 2007 World Cup organisers were criticised for restrictions on outside food, signs, replica kits and musical instruments, despite Caribbean cricketing customs, with authorities being accused of \"running [cricket and cricketing traditions] out of town, then sanitising it out of existence\". Sir Viv Richards echoed the concerns. The ICC were also condemned for high prices for tickets and concessions, which were considered unaffordable for the local population in many of the locations. In a tragic turn of events, Pakistan coach Bob Woolmer was found dead on 18 March 2007, one day after his team's defeat to Ireland put them out of the running for the World Cup. Jamaican police performed an autopsy which was deemed inconclusive. The following day police announced that the death was suspicious and ordered a full investigation. Further investigation revealed the cause of death was \"manual strangulation\", and that the investigation would be handled as a murder. After a lengthy investigation the Jamaican police rescinded the comments that he was not murdered, and confirmed that he died from natural causes.\n\nIn sprinting, Jamaicans had begun their domination of the 100 metres world record in 2005. Jamaica's Asafa Powell set the record in June 2005 and held it until May 2008, with times of 9.77 and 9.74 seconds respectively. However, at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing, Jamaica's athletes reached heights by nearly doubling the country's total gold medal count and breaking the nation's record for number of medals earned in a single games. Usain Bolt won three of Jamaica's six gold medals at Beijing, breaking an Olympic and world record in all three of the events in which he participated. Shelly-Ann Fraser led an unprecedented Jamaican sweep of the medals in the Women's 100 m.\n\nAlthough Jamaican dancehall music originated in the late 1970s, it greatly increased in popularity in the late 1980s and 1990s. Initially dancehall was a more sparse version of reggae than the roots style, which had dominated much of the 1970s. Two of the biggest stars of the early dancehall era were Yellowman and Eek-a-Mouse. Dancehall brought a new generation of producers, including Linval Thompson, Gussie Clarke and Jah Thomas. In the mid-1980s, digital instrumentation became more prevalent, changing the sound considerably, with digital dancehall (or \"ragga\") becoming increasingly characterised by faster rhythms.\n\nIn the early 1990s songs by Dawn Penn, Shabba Ranks, Patra and Chaka Demus and Pliers were the first dancehall megahits in the US and abroad. Other varieties of dancehall achieved crossover success outside of Jamaica during the mid-to-late 1990s. In the 1990s, dancehall came under increasing criticism for anti-gay lyrics such as those found in Buju Banton's 1988 hit \"Boom Bye Bye,\" which is about shooting a gay man in the head: \"It's like boom bye bye / Inna batty boy head / Rude boy nah promote no nasty man / Dem haffi dead.\" \n\nThe early 2000s saw the success of newer charting acts such as Elephant Man, Tanya Stephens, and Sean Paul. Dancehall made a resurgence within the pop market in the late 2000s, with songs by Konshens, Mr. Vegas, Popcaan, Mavado, Vybz Kartel, Beenie Man among others. In 2011, Vybz Kartel—at the time, one of dancehall's biggest stars—was arrested for the murder of Clive \"Lizard\" William. In 2014 he was sentenced to life in prison after a 65-day trial, the longest in Jamaican history.\n\nPolitically and socially, the 2010s in Jamaica have been shaped by the Tivoli Incursion—a 2010 gun-battle between police and the gang of Christopher \"Dudus\" Coke. Over seventy Jamaicans were killed during the gun battle and the inquiry into police actions during the incursion continues today.\n\nCoke took over the \"Shower Posse\" gang of Tivoli Gardens from his father, Lester “Jim Brown” Coke, in the 1990s. Under Christopher Coke's leadership, the gang trafficked drugs and dabbled in visa fraud (using a high-school athletics team) and extortion, charging small traders in the nearby market for “protection money”. The gang had close political ties. Tivoli Gardens is part of the Kingston Western parliamentary district, a seat was held for years by Edward Seaga, long-time leader of the JLP. That helped Coke expand into construction, with his company winning numerous government contracts. Within Tivoli Gardens, the gang operated as a government unto itself.\n\nOn 23 May 2010, Jamaica security forces began searching for Coke after the United States requested his extradition, and the leader of the criminal gang that attacked several police stations. The violence, which largely took place over 24–25 May, killed at least 73 civilians and wounded at least 35 others. Four soldiers/police were also killed and more than 500 arrests were made, as Jamaican police and soldiers fought gunmen in the Tivoli Gardens district of Kingston.\n\nCoke was eventually captured on 23 June, after initial rumours that he was attempting to surrender to the United States. Kingston police arrested Coke on the outskirts of the city, apparently while a local reverend, Reverend Al Miller, was helping negotiate his surrender to the United States Embassy. In 2011, Coke pleaded guilty to racketeering and drug-related charges in a New York Federal court, and was sentenced to 23 years in prison on 8 June 2012.\n\nIn the four years following Coke's capture, Jamaica's murder rate decreased by nearly half. However, the murder rate remains one of the highest in the world and Jamaica's morgues have not been able to keep up. The lack of facilities to store and study murder victims has been one of the reasons that few murders are solved, with the conviction rate for homicides standing at around five percent. In 2007, following the botched investigation into the death of Pakistan cricket coach Bob Woolmer, who died unexpectedly while the island hosted the sport's world cup, Jamaican politicians debated the need for a modern public morgue.\n\nThe Tivoli Incursion and LGBT rights were both major issues in the 2011 election.\n\nAlthough the JLP survived an election called shortly after the 2010 Tivoli Gardens incident, the following year the date of the 2011 election was set as 29 December, and major local media outlets viewed the election as \"too close to call\", though as Simpson-Miller campaigned in key constituencies the gap widened to favour the PNP. Days before the election, Simpson-Miller came out fully in favor of LGBT rights in a televised debate, saying that she \"has no problem giving certain positions of authority to a homosexual as long as they show the necessary level of competence for the post.\" However, since taking power her government has not attempted to repeal the laws which criminalise homosexuality.\n\nIn 2012, Dane Lewis launched a legal challenge to Jamaica's Offenses Against Persons Act of 1864, commonly known as the \"buggery\" laws, on the grounds that they are unconstitutional and promote homophobia throughout the Caribbean. The legal challenge was taken to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. The Offenses Against Persons Act does not formally ban homosexuality, but clause 76 provides for up to 10 years' imprisonment, with or without hard labour, for anyone convicted of the \"abominable crime of buggery committed either with mankind or any animal\". Two further clauses outlaw attempted buggery and gross indecency between two men.\n\nLGBT rights returned to Jamaican headlines the next year, following the violent murder in July 2013 of a 16-year-old boy who showed up at a party in women's clothing. Advocates called for the repeal of a nearly 150-year-old anti-sodomy law that bans anal sex, legislation which is accused of helping spur anti-LGBT violence.\n\nIn 2013, the International Monetary Fund announced a $1 billion loan to help Jamaica meet large debt payments. The loan required the Jamaican government to institute a pay freeze amounting to a 20% real-terms cut in wages. Jamaica is one of the most indebted countries and spends around half of its annual federal budget on debt repayments.\n\nThe 2010s look to be a bad time for Jamaica's sugarcane industry. After a brief increase sugar prices, the outlook for Jamaican sugar took a hit in 2015 when the EU began moving towards ending a cap on European sugar beet production. Jamaica exports 25% of the sugar it produces to Britain and prices for Jamaican sugar are expected to fall in the wake of the end of the cap on the EU's subsidised sugar beet industry.\n\nHowever, marijuana may become a new cash crop and tourist-draw for Jamaica, depending on future legislation. On 25 February 2015, the Jamaican House of Representatives passed a law decriminalising possession of up to 2 ounces of cannabis. The new law includes provisions legalising the cultivation for personal use of up to five plants, as well as setting up regulations for the cultivation and distribution of cannabis for medical and religious purposes\n\nBULLET::::- Colony of Jamaica\nBULLET::::- Colony of Santiago\nBULLET::::- Tacky's War\n\nBULLET::::- Bahadur, Gaiutra. \"Coolie Woman: The Odyssey of Indenture\". The University of Chicago (2014)\nBULLET::::- Barringer, Tim., Forrester, Gillian, and Martinez-Ruiz, Barbaro. 2007. \"Art and Empancipation in Jamaica: Isaac Mendes Belisario and His Worlds\". New Haven and London: Yale University Press. .\nBULLET::::- Black, Clinton V. 1983. \"History of Jamaica\". London: Collins Educational.\nBULLET::::- Henke, Holger. 2000. \"Between Self-Determination and Dependency. Jamaica's Foreign Relations 1972–1989\", Kingston: University of the West Indies Press. .\nBULLET::::- Kurlansky, Mark. 1992. \"A Continent of Islands: Searching for the Caribbean Destiny\". Addison-Wesley Publishing. .\nBULLET::::- Ledgister, F. S. J. 1998. \"Class Alliances and the Liberal-Authoritarian State: The Roots of Post-Colonial Democracy in Jamaica, Trinidad and Tobago, and Surinam\". Trenton: Africa World Press.\nBULLET::::- Lewes, Diana, \"A Year in Jamaica: Memoirs of a girl in Arcadia in 1889\" (Eland 2013)\nBULLET::::- Michener, James, A. 1989. \"Caribbean\" (especially Chap. XI. \"Martial Law in Jamaica\", pp. 403–442. Semi-fictional but mainly accurate). London: Secker & Warburg. .\nBULLET::::- Morales Padrón, Francisco. 1953 2003. \"Spanish Jamaica\". Kingston: Ian Randle Publishers.\nBULLET::::- Sawh, Gobin, ed. 1992. \"The Canadian Caribbean Connection: Bridging North and South: History, Influences, Lifestyles\". Halifax: Carindo Cultural Assoc.\nBULLET::::- Williams, Eric. 1964. \"British Historians and the West Indies\". Port of Spain: P.N.M. Publishing Company.\n\nBULLET::::- Jamaica – Entry from the 1907 \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" on Jamaica.\nBULLET::::- Historic Jamaica A pictorial guide to historic Jamaica\n"}
{"id": "15662", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15662", "title": "Geography of Jamaica", "text": "Geography of Jamaica\n\nJamaica lies south of Cuba and west of Haiti. At its greatest extent, Jamaica is long, and its width varies between . Jamaica has a small area of . However, Jamaica is the largest island of the Commonwealth Caribbean and the third largest of the Greater Antilles, after Cuba and Hispaniola. Many small islands are located along the south coast of Jamaica, such as the Port Royal Cays. Southwest of mainland Jamaica lies Pedro Bank, an area of shallow seas, with a number of cays (low islands or reefs), extending generally east to west for over . To the southeast lies Morant Bank, with the Morant Cays, from Morant Point, the easternmost point of mainland Jamaica. Alice Shoal, southwest of the main island of Jamaica, falls within the Jamaica–Colombia Joint Regime. It has an Exclusive Economic Zone of .\n\nJamaica and the other islands of the Antilles evolved from an arc of ancient volcanoes that rose from the sea millions of years ago. During periods of submersion, thick layers of limestone were laid down over the old igneous and metamorphic rock. In many places, the limestone is thousands of feet thick. The country can be divided into three landform regions: the central mountain chain formed by igneous and metamorphic rocks; the karst limestone hills in the Cockpit area; the low-lying coastal plains and interior valleys.\n\nThe highest area is the Blue Mountains range. These eastern mountains are formed by a central ridge of metamorphic rock running northwest to southeast from which many long spurs jut to the north and south. For a distance of over , the crest of the ridge exceeds . The highest point is Blue Mountain Peak at . The Blue Mountains rise to these elevations from the coastal plain in the space of about , thus producing one of the steepest general gradients in the world. In this part of the country, the old metamorphic rock reveals itself through the surrounding limestone. To the north of the Blue Mountains lies the strongly tilted limestone plateau forming the John Crow Mountains. This range rises to elevations of over . To the west, in the central part of the country, are two high rolling plateaus: the Dry Harbour Mountains to the north and the Manchester Plateau to the south. Between the two, the land is rugged and here, also, the limestone layers are broken by the older rocks. Streams that rise in the region flow outward and sink soon after reaching the limestone layers.\n\nThe limestone plateau covers two-thirds of the country, so that karst formations dominate the island. Karst is formed by the erosion of the limestone in solution. Sinkholes, caves and caverns, disappearing streams, hummocky hills, and terra rosa (residual red) soils in the valleys are distinguishing features of a karst landscape; all these are present in Jamaica. To the west of the mountains is the rugged terrain of the Cockpit Country, one of the world's most dramatic examples of karst topography.\n\nThe Cockpit Country is pockmarked with steep-sided hollows, as much as deep in places, which are separated by conical hills and ridges. On the north, the main defining feature is the fault-based \"Escarpment\", a long ridge that extends from Flagstaff in the west, through Windsor in the centre, to Campbells and the start of the Barbecue Bottom Road (B10). The Barbecue Bottom Road, which runs north-south, high along the side of a deep, fault-based valley in the east, is the only drivable route across the Cockpit Country. However, there are two old, historical trails that cross further west, the Troy Trail, and the Quick Step Trail, both of which are seldom used and difficult to find. In the southwest, near Quick Step, is the district known as the \"Land of Look Behind,\" so named because Spanish horsemen venturing into this region of hostile runaway slaves were said to have ridden two to a mount, one rider facing to the rear to keep a precautionary watch. Where the ridges between sinkholes in the plateau area have dissolved, flat-bottomed basins or valleys have been formed that are filled with terra rosa soils, some of the most productive on the island. The largest basin is the Vale of Clarendon, long and wide. Queen of Spains Valley, Nassau Valley, and Cave Valley were formed by the same process.\n\nThe coastline of Jamaica is one of many contrasts. The northeast shore is severely eroded by the ocean. There are many small inlets in the rugged coastline, but no coastal plain of any extent. A narrow strip of plains along the northern coast offers calm seas and white sand beaches. Behind the beaches is a flat raised plain of uplifted coral reef.\n\nThe southern coast has small stretches of plains lined by black sand beaches. These are backed by cliffs of limestone where the plateaus end. In many stretches with no coastal plain, the cliffs drop straight to the sea. In the southwest, broad plains stretch inland for a number of kilometres. The Black River courses through the largest of these plains. The swamplands of the Great Morass and the Upper Morass fill much of the plains. The western coastline contains the island's finest beaches.\n\nTwo types of climate are found in Jamaica. An upland tropical climate prevails on the windward side of the mountains, whereas a semiarid climate predominates on the leeward side. Warm trade winds from the east and northeast bring rainfall throughout the year. The rainfall is heaviest from May to October, with peaks in those two months. The average rainfall is per year. Rainfall is much greater in the mountain areas facing the north and east, however. Where the higher elevations of the John Crow Mountains and the Blue Mountains catch the rain from the moisture-laden winds, rainfall exceeds per year. Since the southwestern half of the island lies in the rain shadow of the mountains, it has a semiarid climate and receives fewer than of rainfall annually.\n\nTemperatures in Jamaica are fairly constant throughout the year, averaging in the lowlands and at higher elevations. Temperatures may dip to below at the peaks of the Blue Mountains. The island receives, in addition to the northeast trade winds, refreshing onshore breezes during the day and cooling offshore breezes at night. These are known on Jamaica as the \"Doctor Breeze\" and the \"Undertaker's Breeze,\" respectively.\n\nJamaica lies in the Atlantic hurricane belt; as a result, the island sometimes experiences significant storm damage. Powerful hurricanes which have hit the island directly causing death and destruction include Hurricane Charlie in 1951 and Hurricane Gilbert in 1988. Several other powerful hurricanes have passed near to the island with damaging effects. In 1980, for example, Hurricane Allen destroyed nearly all Jamaica's banana crop. Hurricane Ivan (2004) swept past the island causing heavy damage and a number of deaths; in 2005, Hurricanes Dennis and Emily brought heavy rains to the island. A Category 4 hurricane, Hurricane Dean, caused some deaths and heavy damage to Jamaica in August 2007.\n\nThe first recorded hurricane to hit Jamaica was in 1519. The island has been struck by tropical cyclones regularly. During two of the coldest periods in the last 250 years (1780s and 1810s), the frequency of hurricanes in the Jamaica region was unusually high. Another peak of activity occurred in the 1910s, the coldest decade of the 20th century. On the other hand, hurricane formation was greatly diminished from 1968 to 1994, which for some reason coincides with the great Sahel drought.\n\nAlthough most of Jamaica's native vegetation has been stripped in order to make room for cultivation, some areas have been left virtually undisturbed since the time of Columbus. Indigenous vegetation can be found along the northern coast from Rio Bueno to Discovery Bay, in the highest parts of the Blue Mountains, and in the heart of the Cockpit Country.\n\nAs in the case of vegetation, considerable loss of wildlife has occurred beginning with the settlement of native peoples in the region millennia ago. For example, the only pinniped ever known to the Caribbean, the Caribbean monk seal once occurred in Jamaican waters and has now been driven to extinction. Mongoose (Herpestes auropunctatus), introduced to Jamaica in 1872 to reduce rat populations that damaged commercial sugarcane (Saccharum officinarum) crops, prey on several Jamaican species, including the critically endangered, Jamaican iguana (Cyclura collei), and have been implicated in the historical population declines and extinctions of many others. Other wildlife species inhabiting the island include, the West Indian Manatee (Trichechus manatus), American crocodile (Crocodylus acutus), and the endemic Homerus Swallowtail (Papilio homerus),which is the largest butterfly species in the Western Hemisphere.\n\nBULLET::::- Northernmost point: Half Moon Point\nBULLET::::- Southernmost point: Portland Point\nBULLET::::- Westernmost point: South Negril Point, Westmoreland Parish\nBULLET::::- Easternmost point: Morant Point, Saint Thomas Parish\n\nBULLET::::- Jamaica\nBULLET::::- List of cities and towns in Jamaica\n\n"}
{"id": "15663", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15663", "title": "Demographics of Jamaica", "text": "Demographics of Jamaica\n\nThis article is about the demographic features of the population of Jamaica, including population density, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.\n\nAccording to the total population was in , compared to only 1,403,000 in 1950. The proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 29%, 63.1% was between 15 and 65 years of age, while 7.8% was 65 years or older\n!\n! style=\"width:70pt;\"Total population (x 1000)\n! style=\"width:70pt;\"Proportionaged 0–14(%)\n! style=\"width:70pt;\"Proportionaged 15–64(%)\n! style=\"width:70pt;\"Proportionaged 65+(%)\n1 40336.060.13.9\n1 54237.158.84.1\n1 62941.853.94.3\n1 76043.551.15.4\n1 86947.047.45.6\n2 01245.348.95.8\n2 13240.353.06.8\n2 29737.355.77.1\n2 36535.157.57.4\n2 46233.858.77.5\n2 58232.559.67.9\n2 68230.461.58.1\n2 74127.164.58.4\n2 79323.667.39.1\n2 84022.767.210.1\n\nStructure of the population (04.04.2011) (Census):\n! style=\"width:80pt;\"Age Group\n! style=\"width:80pt;\"Male\n! style=\"width:80pt;\"Female\n! style=\"width:80pt;\"Total\n! style=\"width:80pt;\"%\n! style=\"width:50px;\"Age group \n! style=\"width:80pt;\"Male\n! style=\"width:80px;\"Female\n! style=\"width:80px;\"Total\n! style=\"width:50px;\"Percent\n\n!\n! style=\"width:70pt;\"Average population (x 1000)\n! style=\"width:70pt;\"Live births\n! style=\"width:70pt;\"Deaths\n! style=\"width:70pt;\"Natural change\n! style=\"width:70pt;\"Crude birth rate (per 1000)\n! style=\"width:70pt;\"Crude death rate (per 1000)\n! style=\"width:70pt;\"Natural change (per 1000)\n! style=\"width:70pt;\"TFR\n26 80016 20010 600\n35.721.614.1\n32 10017 20014 900\n42.522.819.7\n29 90015 00014 900\n39.319.819.5\n30 90019 10011 800\n40.124.815.3\n28 50019 4009 100\n36.524.911.6\n31 10017 50013 600\n39.422.217.2\n30 70021 2009 500\n38.926.812.1\n28 80023 4005 400\n36.029.26.8\n31 30018 70012 600\n38.723.115.6\n32 30018 60013 700\n39.422.716.7\n31 60018 90012 700\n38.523.115.4\n32 50018 50014 000\n39.122.316.8\n32 50021 10011 400\n39.225.413.8\n30 20018 60011 600\n36.022.113.9\n33 40018 40015 000\n39.821.917.9\n29 80018 60011 200\n35.522.113.4\n28 70019 4009 300\n34.223.111.1\n29 90023 6006 300\n35.227.87.4\n30 10029 1001 000\n35.434.21.2\n29 70019 50010 200\n34.922.912.0\n36 20022 50013 700\n42.126.215.9\n29 90024 3005 600\n34.928.36.6\n32 50020 00012 500\n37.423.014.4\n34 40020 50013 900\n38.723.015.7\n33 70019 90013 800\n37.021.915.1\n32 50020 10012 400\n34.921.613.3\n36 50019 50017 000\n38.420.517.9\n33 30020 30013 000\n34.721.113.6\n35 10019 30015 800\n35.819.716.1\n1 000\n34 20018 40015 800\n34.218.415.8\n1 020\n38 30017 60020 700\n37.517.320.2\n1 030\n36 40019 50016 900\n35.318.916.4\n1 047\n34 20018 20016 000\n32.717.415.3\n1 067\n35 60021 00014 600\n33.419.713.7\n1 081\n34 24718 73115 516\n31.717.314.4\n1 096\n37 37919 70617 673\n34.118.016.1\n1 111\n36 56119 62916 932\n32.917.715.2\n1 123\n35 35217 48117 871\n31.515.615.9\n1 142\n37 97019 12418 846\n33.316.816.5\n1 162\n37 47417 53619 938\n32.315.117.2\n1 183\n36 46218 24318 219\n30.815.415.4\n1 205\n37 82917 31720 512\n31.414.417.0\n1 227\n40 16517 54522 620\n32.714.318.4\n1 248\n39 37117 55821 813\n31.514.117.4\n1 260\n41 77218 97622 796\n33.215.118.1\n1 266\n37 95418 87419 080\n30.014.915.1\n1 292\n39 91817 27222 646\n30.913.417.5\n1 321\n43 26718 77024 497\n32.814.218.5\n1 345\n41 46317 86923 594\n30.813.317.5\n1 365\n44 37716 85927 518\n32.512.420.2\n1 403\n46 45916 67729 782\n33.111.921.2\n1 437\n48 56117 25031 311\n34.012.121.9\n1 468\n48 90216 69532 207\n33.611.522.1\n1 496\n51 13115 44235 689\n34.410.424.0\n1 521\n53 63016 30237 328\n36.511.125.4\n1 542\n55 76715 32840 439\n37.510.327.2\n1 560\n58 17714 67043 507\n38.59.728.8\n1 576\n60 44514 12946 316\n39.49.230.2\n1 592\n63 51714 81348 704\n40.69.531.1\n1 609\n63 87416 54947 325\n39.910.329.6\n1 629\n68 41314 32154 092\n42.58.933.6\n1 652\n66 12814 19351 935\n40.58.731.8\n1 679\n64 91314 16750 746\n39.18.530.6\n1 707\n66 18915 15951 030\n39.08.930.1\n1 735\n68 35913 26755 092\n39.37.631.7\n1 760\n69 76814 08455 684\n39.68.031.6\n1 783\n71 36414 28857 076\n40.08.032.0\n1 804\n67 43813 29554 143\n37.47.430.0\n1 824\n65 40214 55750 845\n35.98.027.9\n1 845\n64 66814 09450 574\n35.17.627.4\n1 869\n64 37514 35250 023\n34.47.726.8\n1 896\n66 27714 07852 199\n34.97.427.5\n1 925\n66 21913 97052 249\n34.37.227.1\n1 955\n61 85714 15747 700\n31.67.224.3\n1 984\n61 50614 37447 132\n30.97.223.7\n2 012\n61 46214 00447 458\n30.36.923.4\n2 037\n60 65814 67145 987\n29.67.222.4\n2 059\n60 42314 24546 178\n29.16.922.3\n2 081\n58 18912 14846 041\n27.95.822.1\n2 105\n59 12613 29745 829\n28.06.321.7\n2 132\n58 58912 70645 883\n27.56.021.5\nstyle=\"color: blue\" 3.56\n2 165\n59 43513 31546 120\n27.56.221.3\nstyle=\"color: blue\" 3.50\n2 200\n61 47712 69848 779\n27.95.822.2\nstyle=\"color: blue\" 3.40\n2 237\n61 41712 58848 829\n27.45.621.8\nstyle=\"color: blue\" 3.21\n2 270\n57 53313 40544 128\n25.25.919.4\nstyle=\"color: blue\" 2.73\n2 297\n56 21013 91842 292\n24.36.018.3\nstyle=\"color: blue\" 2.56\n2 317\n54 06713 34140 726\n23.15.717.4\nstyle=\"color: blue\" 2.40\n2 332\n52 27012 35239 918\n22.25.317.0\nstyle=\"color: blue\" 2.27\n2 342\n53 62312 16741 456\n22.75.217.6\nstyle=\"color: blue\" 2.31\n2 353\n59 10414 31544 789\n24.76.018.7\nstyle=\"color: blue\" 2.43\n2 365\n59 60612 17447 432\n25.25.120.1\nstyle=\"color: blue\" 2.45\n2 381\n59 87913 31946 560\n25.25.619.6\nstyle=\"color: blue\" 2.44\n2 399\n56 27613 22543 051\n23.55.517.9\nstyle=\"color: blue\" 2.34\n2 419\n58 62713 92744 700\n24.25.818.5\nstyle=\"color: blue\" 2.44\n2 440\n57 40413 50343 901\n23.55.518.0\nstyle=\"color: blue\" 2.38\n2 462\n57 60712 77644 831\n23.45.218.2\nstyle=\"color: blue\" 2.37\n2 485\n57 37014 85442 516\n23.16.017.1\nstyle=\"color: blue\" 2.33\n2 509\n59 38515 96743 418\n23.76.417.3\nstyle=\"color: blue\" 2.42\n2 534\n56 93716 15040 787\n22.56.416.1\nstyle=\"color: blue\" 2.29\n2 559\n56 91117 55039 361\n22.26.915.4\nstyle=\"color: blue\" 2.29\n2 582\n54 03516 40037 635\n20.96.414.6\nstyle=\"color: blue\" 2.13\n2 605\n49 29116 61532 676\n18.96.412.5\n1.92\n2 620\n47 46416 72830 736\n18.26.411.8\n1.84\n2 629\n45 55917 26728 292\n17.46.610.8\n1.77\n2 639\n44 84316 33228 511\n17.06.210.8\n1.73\n2 644\n46 37017 41328 957\n17.56.611.0\n1.81\n2 653\n43 24318 96024 283\n16.37.29.2\n1.70\n2 662\n43 38520 55022 835\n16.37.78.6\n1.71\n2 672\n43 11219 96623 146\n16.17.58.71.70\n2 681\n42 78218 55524 227\n16.07.08.9\n1.68\n2 691\n40 50821 50319 005\n15.18.07.1\n1.57\n2 700\n39 67316 92622 747\n14.76.38.4\n1.54\n2 708\n39 55316 99822 555\n14.56.38.3\n1.55\n2 715\n36 74615 42721 319\n13.55.77.8\n1.52\n2 721\n36 99618 32018 676\n13.66.76.9\n1.51\n2 723\n37 55617 61919 937\n13.86.57.3\n1.53\n2016\n2 727\n35 989\n17 867\n18 122\n13.3\n6.6\n6.7\n1.50\n2017\n2 728\n34 169\n18 879\n15 290\n12.5\n6.9\n5.6\nstyle=\"color: red\"1.46\n2018\n33 092\n18 859\n14 233\n12.1\n6.9\n5.2\nstyle=\"color: red\"\n\n!Period\n!Life expectancy in\nYears\n!Period\n!Life expectancy in\nYears\n1950–1955\n58.6\n1985–1990\n72.1\n1955–1960\n62.7\n1990–1995\n72.0\n1960–1965\n65.7\n1995–2000\n72.1\n1965–1970\n67.2\n2000–2005\n72.8\n1970–1975\n69.0\n2005–2010\n74.2\n1975–1980\n70.7\n2010–2015\n75.5\n1980–1985\n72.0\n\nSource: \"UN World Population Prospects\"\n\nThe following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook unless otherwise referenced.\n\nBULLET::::- English (official)\nBULLET::::- Jamaican patois\n\nBULLET::::- Protestant 64.8%\nBULLET::::- Seventh Day Adventist 12.0%\nBULLET::::- Pentecostal 11.0%\nBULLET::::- Church of God 9.2%\nBULLET::::- New Testament Church of God 7.2%\nBULLET::::- Baptist 6.7%\nBULLET::::- Church of God in Jamaica 4.8%\nBULLET::::- Church of God of Prophecy 4.5%\nBULLET::::- Anglican 2.8%\nBULLET::::- United Church 2.1%\nBULLET::::- Methodist 1.6%\nBULLET::::- Revived 1.4%\nBULLET::::- Brethren 0.9%\nBULLET::::- Moravian 0.7%\nBULLET::::- Roman Catholic 2.2%\nBULLET::::- Jehovah's Witness 1.9%\nBULLET::::- Rastafarian 1.1%\nBULLET::::- Other 6.5%\nBULLET::::- None 21.3%\nBULLET::::- Unspecified 2.3%\n\nBULLET::::- Black 92.1%\nBULLET::::- Mixed race consisting of Mulattoes/Coloureds and other Mixtures 6.1%\nBULLET::::- East Indian 0.8%\nBULLET::::- Other 0.4%\nBULLET::::- Unspecified 0.7%\n\nBULLET::::- 2,990,561 (July 2017)\n\nBULLET::::- 0.68% (2017)\n\nBULLET::::- -4.3 migrant(s)/1,000 population\n\nBULLET::::- Urban population: 55.7% of total population\nBULLET::::- Rate of urbanization: 0.82% annual rate of change\n\nBULLET::::- Total: 13.37 deaths/1,000 live births\nBULLET::::- Male: 13.93 deaths/1,000 live births\nBULLET::::- Female: 12.78 deaths/1,000 live births (2015 est.)\n\nBULLET::::- Noun: Jamaican(s)\nBULLET::::- Adjective: Jamaican\n\nBULLET::::- 5.4% of GDP\n\nBULLET::::- Total population:88.7%\nBULLET::::- Male: 84%\nBULLET::::- Female: 93.1% (2015 est.)\n\nBULLET::::- Afro-Jamaican\nBULLET::::- List of cities and towns in Jamaica\n\nBULLET::::- CIA World Factbook -- Jamaica\nBULLET::::- Statistics Institute of Jamaica - Government agency responsible for census and statistical mapping\n"}
{"id": "15664", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15664", "title": "Politics of Jamaica", "text": "Politics of Jamaica\n\nPolitics in Jamaica takes place in the framework of a representative parliamentary democratic constitutional monarchy. The 1962 Constitution of Jamaica established a parliamentary system whose political and legal traditions closely follow those of the United Kingdom. As the head of state, Queen Elizabeth II - on the advice of the Prime Minister of Jamaica - appoints a governor-general as her representative in Jamaica. The governor-general has a largely ceremonial role. Jamaica constitutes an independent Commonwealth realm.\n\nThe Constitution vests executive power in the cabinet, led by the Prime Minister. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested both in the government and in the Parliament of Jamaica.\n\nA bipartisan joint committee of the Jamaican legislature drafted Jamaica's current Constitution in 1962. That Constitution came into force with the Jamaica Independence Act, 1962 of the Parliament of the United Kingdom, which gave Jamaica political independence.\nConstitutional safeguards include freedom of speech, freedom of the press, freedom of worship, freedom of movement, and freedom of association.\n\nThe judiciary operates independently of the executive and the legislature, with jurisprudence based on English common law.\n\nParliament is composed of an appointed Senate and an elected House of Representatives. Thirteen Senators are nominated on the advice of the prime minister and eight on the advice of the leader of the opposition; a two-thirds super-majority of both chambers is needed for major constitutional amendments. General elections must be held within five years of the forming of a new government.\n\nThe prime minister may ask the governor-general to call elections sooner, however. The Senate may submit bills, and it also reviews legislation submitted by the House. It may not delay budget bills for more than one month or other bills for more than seven months. The prime minister and the Cabinet are selected from the Parliament. No fewer than two nor more than four members of the Cabinet must be selected from the Senate.\n\nMonarch\nQueen Elizabeth II\n6 February 1952\nGovernor-General\nPatrick Allen\n26 February 2009\nPrime Minister\nAndrew Holness\nJLP\n3 March 2016\nLeader of the Opposition\nPeter Phillips\nPNP\n2 April 2016\n\nThe 1962 Constitution established a parliamentary system based on the United Kingdom model. As head of state, Queen Elizabeth II appoints a governor-general, on the advice of the prime minister, as her representative in Jamaica. The governor-general's role is largely ceremonial. Executive power is vested in the Queen, but exercised mostly by the Cabinet of Jamaica; led by the Prime Minister, currently Andrew Holness.\n\nGeneral Elections February 25, 2016\n!Party\n!Votes\n!Seats\n\nalign=leftJamaica Labour Party437,17849.532+11\nalign=leftPeople's National Party433,62949.131–11\nalign=leftMarcus Garvey People's Progressive Party2600.0300\nalign=leftNational Democratic Movement2230.0300\nalign=leftPeople's Progressive Party910.010New\nalign=leftIndependents A2120.0100\nalign=leftIndependents B1,0210.1300\nalign=leftInvalid/Rejected Ballots9,875–––\nalign=leftTotal882,489100630\nalign=leftRegistered voters/turnout1,824,412 48.37%––\nalign=left colspan=5Source: Electoral Commission (100% of vote counted)\n\nThe judiciary also is modelled on the British system. The Court of Appeal is the highest appellate court in Jamaica. Under certain circumstances, cases may be appealed to Britain's Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. Jamaica's parishes have elected councils that exercise limited powers of local government.\n\nFirearms offences, including possession of unlicensed guns and ammunition, are tried before a dedicated Gun Court established in 1974. The Gun Court hears cases \"in camera\" and practices jury trial only for cases of treason or murder. All other cases are tried by resident magistrates or justices of the Supreme Court of Jamaica.\n\nJamaica is divided in 14 parishes: Clarendon, Hanover, Kingston, Manchester, Portland, Saint Andrew, Saint Ann, Saint Catherine, Saint Elizabeth, Saint James, Saint Mary, Saint Thomas, Trelawny, Westmoreland.\n\nJamaica has diplomatic relations with most nations and is a member of the United Nations, The Commonwealth and the Organization of American States. Historically, Jamaica has had close ties with the UK. Trade, financial, and cultural relations with the United States are now predominant. Jamaica is linked with the other countries of the English-speaking Caribbean through the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), and more broadly through the Association of Caribbean States (ACS).\n\nBULLET::::- List of Jamaican Ministers of State\nBULLET::::- Republicanism in Jamaica\n"}
{"id": "15665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15665", "title": "Economy of Jamaica", "text": "Economy of Jamaica\n\nThe economy of Jamaica is heavily reliant on services, accounting for 70% of the country's GDP. Jamaica has natural resources, primarily bauxite, and an ideal climate conducive to agriculture and also tourism. The discovery of bauxite in the 1940s and the subsequent establishment of the bauxite-alumina industry shifted Jamaica's economy from sugar and bananas. By the 1970s, Jamaica had emerged as a world leader in export of these minerals as foreign investment increased.\n\nWeakness in the financial sector, speculation, and lower levels of investment erode confidence in the productive sector. The government continues its efforts to raise new sovereign debt in local and international financial markets in order to meet its U.S. dollar debt obligations, to mop up liquidity to maintain the exchange rate and to help fund the current budget deficit.\n\nJamaican Government economic policies encourage foreign investment in areas that earn or save foreign exchange, generate employment, and use local raw materials. The government also provides a wide range of incentives to investors.\n\nFree trade zones have stimulated investment in garment assembly, light manufacturing, and data entry by foreign firms. However, over the last 5 years, the garment industry has suffered from reduced export earnings, continued factory closures, and rising unemployment. The Government of Jamaica hopes to encourage economic activity through a combination of privatization, financial sector restructuring, reduced interest rates, and by boosting tourism and related productive activities.\n\nIn April 2014, the Governments of Jamaica and China signed the preliminary agreements for the first phase of the Jamaican Logistics Hub (JLH) - the initiative that aims to position Kingston as the fourth node in the global logistics chain, joining Rotterdam, Dubai and Singapore, and serving the Americas. The Project, when completed, is expected to provide many jobs for Jamaicans, Economic Zones for multinational companies and much needed economic growth to alleviate the country's heavy debt-to-GDP ratio. Strict adherence to the IMF's refinancing programme and preparations for the JLH has favourably affected Jamaica's credit rating and outlook from the three biggest rating agencies.\n\nBefore independence, Jamaica's economy was largely focused on agriculture with the vast majority of the labour force engaged in the production of sugar, bananas, and tobacco. According to one study, 18th century Jamaica had the highest wealth inequality in the world, as a very small, slave-owning elite was extremely wealthy while the rest of the population lived on the edge of subsistence.\n\nThese products were mainly exported to the United Kingdom, Canada, and the United States of America. Jamaica's trade relationships expanded substantially from 1938 to 1946, with total imports almost doubling from £6,485,000 to £12,452,000. After 1962, the Jamaican government pushed for ibauxite/alumina, energy, and tourism shrank in 1998 and 1999. In 2000, Jamaica experienced its first year of positive growth since 1995.\n\nInflation fell from 25% in 1995 to single digits in 2000, reaching a multidecade low of 4.3% in 2004. Through periodic intervention in the market, the central bank also has prevented any abrupt drop in the exchange rate. The Jamaican dollar has been slipping, despite intervention, resulting in an average exchange rate of J$73.40 per US$1.00 and J136.2 per €1.00 (February 2011). In addition, inflation has been trending upward since 2004 and is projected to once again reach a double digit rate of 12-13% through the year 2008 due to a combination of unfavorable weather damaging crops and increasing agricultural imports and high energy prices.\n\nOver the last 30 years, real per capita GDP increased at an average of just one percent per year, making Jamaica one of the slowest growing developing countries in the world.\n\nTo reverse this trajectory, the Government of Jamaica embarked on a comprehensive and ambitious program of reforms for which it has garnered national and international support: a four-year Extended Fund Facility (EFF) by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) providing a support package of US$932 million; World Bank Group and the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) programs providing US$510 million each to facilitate the GoJ's economic reform agenda to stabilize the economy, reduce debt and create the conditions for growth and resilience.. In addition, the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) will continue to support private sector development.\n\nThe reform program is beginning to bear fruit: Institutional reforms and measures to improve the environment for the private sector have started to restore confidence in the Jamaican economy. Jamaica jumped 27 places to 58 among 189 economies worldwide in the 2015 Doing Business ranking, the country's credit rating has improved and the Government has successfully raised more than US$2 billion in the international capital in the markets in 2014 and 2015..\n\nDespite some revival, economic growth is still low: the Jamaican Government is forecasting real gross domestic product (GDP) growth of 1.9 per cent for the fiscal year 2015/2016 and the country continues to be confronted by serious social issues that predominantly affect youth, such as high levels of crime and violence and high unemployment. Jamaica, which had seen its poverty rate drop almost 20 percent over two decades, saw it increase by eight percent in a few years.\n\nThe unemployment rate in Jamaica is about 13.2% (April 2015, Statistical Institute of Jamaica ), with youth unemployment more than twice the national rate (38%). However, among Jamaica's assets are its skilled labor force and strong social and governance indicators.\n\nAgricultural production is an important contributor to Jamaica's economy. However, it is vulnerable to extreme weather, such as hurricanes and to competition from neighbouring countries such as the USA. Other difficulties faced by farmers include thefts from the farm, known as praedial larceny. Agricultural production accounted for 7.4% of GDP in 1997, providing employment for nearly a quarter of the country. Jamaica's agriculture, together with forestry and fishing, accounted for about 6.6% of GDP in 1999. Sugar has been produced in Jamaica for centuries, it is the nation's dominant agricultural export. Sugar is produced in nearly every parish. The production of raw sugar in the year 2000 was estimated at 175,000 tons, a decrease from 290,000 tons in 1978.\nJamaican agriculture has been less prominent in GDP in the 2000s than other industries, hitting an all-time low between 2004 and 2008. This may have been due to a reaction to increased competition as international trade policies were enacted. For example, as NAFTA was enacted in 1993, a significant amount of Caribbean exports to the United States diminished, being out competed by Latin American exports. Another example is the Banana Import Regime's 3rd phase, in which EU nations had first given priority in banana imports to previously colonized nations. Under pressure by the World Trade Organization, the EU policy was altered to provide a non-discriminatory trade agreement. Jamaica's banana industry was easily outpriced by American companies exporting Latin American goods. Jamaica's agriculture industry is now bouncing back, growing from being 6.6% of GDP to 7.2%.\n\nSugar formed 7.1% of the exports in 1999 and Jamaica made up about 4.8% of the total production of sugar in the Caribbean. Sugar is also used for the production of by-products such as molasses, rum and some wallboard is made from bagasse.\n\nBanana production in 1999 was 130,000 tons. Bananas formed 2.4% of the exports in 1999 and Jamaica formed around 7.5% of the total production of banana in the Caribbean. Jamaica stopped exporting banana in 2008 after suffering from several years of hurricanes that devastated the plantations.\n\nCoffee is mainly grown around the Blue Mountains and in hilly areas. One type in particular, Jamaican Blue Mountain Coffee, is considered among the best in the world because at those heights in the Blue Mountains, the cooler climate causes the berries to take longer to ripen and the beans develop more of the substances which on roasting give coffee its flavor. Coffee formed 1.9% of exports in 1999. The picking season lasts from August to March. The coffee is exported from Kingston.\n\nCocoa is grown throughout Jamaica and local sales absorb about 1/3 of the output to be made into instant drinks and confectionery. Citrus fruit is mainly grown in the central parts of Jamaica, particularly between the elevations of 1,000-2,500 feet. The picking season lasts from November to April. Two factories in Bog Walk produce fruit juices, canned fruit, essential oils and marmalade. Coconuts are grown on the northern and eastern coasts, which provide enough copra to supply factories to make butterine, margarine, lard, edible oil & laundry soap.\n\nOther export crops are pimento, ginger, tobacco, sisal and other fruit are exported. Rice is grown around swampy areas around the Black River & around Long Bay in Hanover and Westmoreland parishes for local consumption.\n\nAs tastes have changed in Jamaica in favor of more meat and packaged food the national food import bill has grown to the point that it threatens the health of the economy. The government has responded by encouraging gardening and farming, a response which has had limited success. For example, the percentage of potatoes grown locally has increased, but imports of french fries have continued at a high level.\n\nPastures form a good percentage of the land in Jamaica. Many properties specialize in cattle rearing. Livestock holdings were 400,000 head of cattle, 440,000 goats, 180,000 hogs & 30,\nrs of livestock are increasing, this isn't enough for local requirements for a growing population. Dairying has increased since the erection of a condensed milk factory at Bog Walk in 1940. Even so, the supply of dairy products is not enough for local requirements and there are large imports of powdered milk, butter and cheese.\n\nThe fishing industry grew during the 1900s, primarily from the focus on inland fishing. Several thousand fishermen make a living from fishing. The shallow waters and cays off the south coast are richer than the northern waters. Other fishermen live on the Pedro Cays, to the south of Jamaica.\n\nJamaica supplies about half of its fish requirements; major imports of frozen and salted fish are imported from the USA & Canada.\n\nThe total catch in 2000 was 5,676 tons, a decrease from 11,458 tons in 1997; the catch was mainly marine, with freshwater carp, barbel, etc., crustaceans & molluscs.\n\nBy the late 1890, only of Jamaica's original of forest remained. Roundwood production was 881,000 cu m (31.1 million cu ft) in 2000. About 68% of the timber cut in 2000 was used as fuel wood while 32% was used for industrial use. The forests that once covered Jamaica now exist only in mountainous areas. They only supply 20% of the island timber requirements. The remaining forest is protected from further exploitation. Other accessible mountain areas are being reforested, mainly with pines, mahoe and mahogany.\n\nJamaica was the third-leading producer of bauxite and alumina in 1998, producing 12.6 million tons of bauxite, accounting for 10.4% of world production, and 3.46 million tons of alumina, accounting for 7.4% of world production. 8,540 million tons of bauxite was mined in 2012 and 10,200 million tons of bauxite in 2011. \n\nMining and quarrying made up 4.1% of the nation's gross domestic product in 1999. Bauxite and alumina formed 55.2% of exports in 1999 and are the second-leading money earner after tourism. Jamaica has reserves of over 2 billion tonnes, which are expected to last 100 years. Bauxite is found in the central parishes of St. Elizabeth, Manchester, Clarendon, St. Catherine, St. Ann, and Trelawny. There are four alumina plants and six mines.\n\nJamaica has deposits of several million tons of gypsum on the southern slopes of the Blue Mountains. Jamaica produced 330,441 tons of gypsum in the year 2000, some of which was used in the local cement industry and in the manufacturing of building materials.\n\nOther minerals present in Jamaica include marble, limestone, and silica, as well as ores of copper, lead, zinc, manganese and iron. Some of these are worked in small quantities. Petroleum has been sought, but so far none has been found.\n\nThe manufacturing sector is an essential contributor to the Jamaican economy. Though manufacturing accounted for 13.9% of GDP in 1999. Jamaican companies contribute many manufactures such as food processing; oil refining; produced chemicals, construction materials, plastic goods, paints, pharmaceuticals, cartons, leather goods and cigars & assembled electronics, textiles and apparel. The garment industry is a major job employer for thousands of hundreds of locals and they formed 12.9% of exports in 1999 earning US$159 million. Chemicals formed 3.3% of the exports in 1999 earning US$40 million.\n\nAn oil refinery is located near Kingston converts crude petroleum obtained from Venezuela into gasoline and other products. These are mainly for local use. The construction industry is growing due to new hotels and attractions being built for tourism. Construction and installation formed 10.4% of the GDP in 1999.\n\nManufactured goods were imported and formed 30.3% of the imports and cost US$877 million in 1999.\n\nSince the launch of the Jamaican Logistics Hub initiative, various economic zones have been proposed throughout the country to assemble goods from other parts of the world for distribution to the Americas.\n\nTourism is tied with remittances as Jamaica's top source of revenue. The tourism industry earns over 50 percent of the country's total foreign exchange earnings and provides about one-fourth of all jobs in Jamaica. Most tourist activity is centered on the island's northern coast, including the communities of Montego Bay, Ocho Rios, and Port Antonio, as well as in Negril on the island's western tip.\n\nSome destinations include Ocho Rios, Green Grotto Caves, Y.S. Falls and Appleton Estate. Most of the tourist sites are landmarks as well as homes for many Jamaicans. Many of the most frequented tourist sites are located mainly by water such as rivers and beaches where fishermen make a living from seafood. One of the most famous beach towns in Jamaica is Ocho Rios, a located in the parish of Saint Ann on the north coast of Jamaica. It was once a fishing village but now attracts millions of tourists yearly. The site is popular today because of the food and culture that can be found there.\n\nAnother famous location in Jamaica that attracts millions yearly is Dunn's River Falls, located in Ocho Rios; this waterfall is approximately 600 feet long and runs off into the sea. Around the location many hotels and restaurants are available and many street vendors sell food around the clock. Another well-known beach town is Negril, the party capital of the country. This beach town has many different factors to add to the night life.\n\nRising to join Singapore, Dubai and Rotterdam as the fourth node in global logistics, the Jamaican Government has embarked on a restructuring of the economy, deciding to utilise its location at the centre of North-South and East-West shipping lanes to become the choice of global logistics companies to be the Hub of the Western Hemisphere, serving a market of 800 million, and becoming the gateway to Europe and Africa. With the establishment of the Logistics Hub, Jamaica is set to become an important part of the global value chain. Preliminary agreements with the Chinese government were signed in April 2014, marking the first step in the restructuring of the Jamaican economy.\n\nOver the course of the last decade, Jamaica has made immense strides in developing its Information and Communications Technology (ICT) infrastructure. Today, the island is a highly competitive and attractive business destination and a regional leader in Information Technology Export Services (ITES).\n\nAs the largest English speaking territory in the Caribbean, Jamaica is the region's leading contact centre location with over 30 information communications technology/business process outsourcing (ICT/BPO) companies operating in the country employing 11,500 full-time agents.\n\nJamaican tax rates are extremely favourable in world standards, the brackets are as follows:\n\n! Band !! Personal Allowance (J$) !! Tax Rate\n\nSeparate Tax Rates apply for foreign nationals.\n\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2018. Inflation below 5% is in green.\n!Year\n!GDP \n!GDP per capita \n!GDP growth \n!Inflation rate \n!Unemployment \n!Government debt \n1980\n6.1\n2,897\n−4.0 %\n18.0 %\n27.3 %\nn/a\n1981\n7.0\n3,253\n4.4 %\n9.2 %\n25.9 %\nn/a\n1982\n7.7\n3,501\n3.1 %\n6.8 %\n27.6 %\nn/a\n1983\n8.3\n3,715\n4.2 %\n16.7 %\n26.4 %\nn/a\n1984\n8.7\n3,877\n1.0 %\n31.3 %\n25.5 %\nn/a\n1985\n8.9\n3,904\n−0.9 %\n29.7 %\n25.0 %\nn/a\n1986\n9.7\n4,224\n7.0 %\n24.4 %\n23.7 %\nn/a\n1987\n10.7\n4,628\n7.7 %\n11.2 %\n21.0 %\nn/a\n1988\n10.6\n4,573\n−4.0 %\n8.2 %\n19.1 %\nn/a\n1989\n11.5\n4,966\n4.7 %\n16.1 %\n15.2 %\nn/a\n1990\n12.6\n5,309\n4.9 %\n24.8 %\n15.7 %\nn/a\n1991\n13.1\n5,498\n0.8 %\n51.1 %\n15.4 %\nn/a\n1992\n13.8\n5,737\n2.8 %\n77.3 %\n15.7 %\nn/a\n1993\n14.4\n5,953\n2.2 %\n22.1 %\n16.3 %\nn/a\n1994\n15.0\n6,140\n1.9 %\n35.1 %\n15.4 %\nn/a\n1995\n15.7\n6,369\n2.5 %\n19.9 %\n16.2 %\nn/a\n1996\n16.0\n6,440\n0.2 %\n26.4 %\n16.0 %\nn/a\n1997\n16.0 \n6,381\n−1.6 %\n9.7 %\n16.5 %\nn/a\n1998\n16.0 \n6,313\n−1.2 %\n8.6 %\n15.5 %\nn/a\n1999\n16.4\n6,406\n1.0 %\n6.0 %\n15.7 %\n82.7 %\n2000\n16.9\n6,539\n0.8 %\n4.6 %\n15.5 %\n91.8 %\n2001\n17.5\n6,709\n1.3 %\n9.5 %\n15.0 %\n108.0 %\n2002\n17.9\n6,804\n0.7 %\n8.2 %\n14.2 %\n118.4 %\n2003\n18.8\n7,130\n3.7 %\n9.9 %\n11.8 %\n123.2 %\n2004\n19.6\n7,367\n1.3 %\n14.8 %\n12.2 %\n119.8 %\n2005\n20.4\n7,617\n0.9 %\n13.4 %\n11.2 %\n124.7 %\n2006\n21.7\n8,033\n2.9 %\n8.9 %\n10.3 %\n117.1 %\n2007\n22.6\n8,331\n1.4 %\n9.2 %\n9.9 %\n114.5 %\n2008\n22.8\n8,390\n−0.8 %\n22.0 %\n10.6 %\n127.0 %\n2009\n22.2\n8,135\n−3.4 %\n9.6 %\n11.4 %\n141.9 %\n2010\n22.1\n8,076\n−1.4 %\n12.6 %\n12.4 %\n141.9 % \n2011\n22.9\n8,322\n1.4 %\n7.5 %\n13.0 %\n140.5 %\n2012\n23.2\n8,395\n−0.5 %\n6.9 %\n13.9 %\n145.1 %\n2013\n23.7\n8,515\n0.2 %\n9.4 %\n15.3 %\n138.7 %\n2014\n24.3\n8,679\n0.6 %\n8.3 %\n14.2 %\n137.9 %\n2015\n24.8\n8,798\n0.9 %\n3.7 %\n13.5 %\n121.3 %\n2016\n25.4\n8,980\n1.5 %\n2.3 %\n12.8 %\n113.6 %\n2017\n26.1\n9,161\n0.7 %\n4.4 %\n12.2 %\n101.1 %\n2018\n27.0\n9,447\n1.4 %\n3.7 %\n11.6 %\n99.4 %\n\nBULLET::::- Bahl, R., & Wallace, S. (2007). From income tax to consumption tax? The case of Jamaica. \"FinanzArchiv/Public Finance Analysis\", 396-414.\n\nBULLET::::- World Bank Trade Summary Statistics Jamaica 2012\nBULLET::::- Partners in Austerity: Jamaica, the United States and the International Monetary Fund, from the Center for Economic and Policy Research, April 2015\n"}
{"id": "15666", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15666", "title": "Telecommunications in Jamaica", "text": "Telecommunications in Jamaica\n\nTelecommunications in Jamaica include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.\n\nBULLET::::- Radio stations: Privately owned Radio Jamaica Limited and its subsidiaries operate multiple radio stations; there are roughly 70 other privately owned radio stations (2007).\nBULLET::::- Radios: 1.215 million (1997).\nBULLET::::- Television stations: Privately owned Radio Jamaica Limited and its subsidiaries operate multiple TV stations as well as subscription cable services; there are 2 other privately owned television stations (2007).\nBULLET::::- Television sets: 460,000 (1997).\n\nCountry Code: +1-876, +1-658<br>\nInternational Call Prefix: 011 (outside NANP)\n\nCalls from Jamaica to the US, Canada, and other NANP Caribbean nations, are dialed as 1 + NANP area code + 7-digit number. Calls from Jamaica to non-NANP countries are dialed as 011 + country code + phone number with local area code.\n\nNumber Format: nxx-xxxx\n\nBULLET::::- Main lines: 265,000 lines in use, 123rd in the world (2011).\nBULLET::::- Mobile cellular: 2.7 million, 135th in the world (2012).\nBULLET::::- Telephone system: Fully automatic domestic telephone network; the 1999 agreement to open the market for telecommunications services resulted in rapid growth in mobile-cellular telephone usage while the number of fixed-lines in use declined (2011).\nBULLET::::- Teledensity: 110 per 100 persons (combined) (2011).\nBULLET::::- Satellite earth stations: 2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean) (2010).\nBULLET::::- Communication cables: Fibralink submarine cable links to the Americas Region Caribbean Ring System (ARCOS-1) submarine cable in the Dominican Republic and on to the US, parts of the Caribbean, Central and South America; the ALBA-1 fiber-optic submarine cable links Jamaica, Cuba, and Venezuela (2010).\n\nJamaica has a fully digital telephone communication system.\n\nThe country's three mobile operators – Cable and Wireless (once marketed as LIME – Landline, Internet, Mobile and Entertainment now named FLOW), Digicel, and at one point Oceanic Digital (operating as MiPhone and now known as Claro since late 2008) until the carrier was acquired and the relevant spectrum sold to Digicel – have spent millions in network upgrade and expansion. Both Digicel and Oceanic Digital were granted licences in 2001 to operate mobile services in the newly liberalised telecom market that had once been the sole domain of the incumbent Cable and Wireless monopoly. Digicel opted for the more widely used GSM wireless system, while Oceanic opted for the CDMA standard. Cable and Wireless, which had begun with TDMA standard, subsequently upgraded to GSM, and currently utilises both standards on its network.\n\nWith wireless usage increasing, landlines supplied by Cable and Wireless have declined from just over half a million to roughly about three hundred thousand as of 2006. In a bid to grab more market share, Cable and Wireless recently launched a new land line service called HomeFone Prepaid that would allow customers to pay for minutes they use rather than pay a set monthly fee for service, much like prepaid wireless service.\n\nTwo more licenses were auctioned by the Jamaican government to provide mobile services on the island, including one that was previously owned by AT&T Wireless but never utilized, and one new license.\n\nAnother entrant to the Jamaican communications market, FLOW, laid a new submarine cable connecting Jamaica to the United States. This new cable increases the total number of submarine cables connecting Jamaica to the rest of the world to four. The company's parent was acquired by Cable and Wireless Communications in November 2014 and finalized in March 2015. The new FLOW was re-launched as a successor to LIME and the old Flow on August 31, 2015; offering mobile, fixed voice, fixed broadband and TV services to the market. It has now become the first quad-play provider in Jamaica. The company runs a vast copper network (inherited from LIME) islandwide as well as a Hybrid Fiber and Coaxial network (from the old Flow) in the metropolitan areas of Kingston and Montego Bay. They also have small Fiber-to-the-home operations in certain sections of St. James that began in 2011 (under LIME). On the mobile side, the company had completed its 4G HSPA+ rollout (capable of speeds up to 21 Mbit/s) across the island in November 2015 and has announced plans to move to LTE within the year 2016. However, Digicel has become the first LTE network operator in Jamaica, going live with their network on June 9, 2016.\n\nBULLET::::- Internet top-level domain: .jm, registration of .jm domains is handled by MITS at the University of the West Indies, registration is free, although there has been some discussion about MITS making the service commercial in the coming years.\nBULLET::::- Internet users: 1.3 million users, 108th in the world; 46.5% of the population, 94th in the world (2012).\nBULLET::::- Fixed broadband: 125,188 subscriptions, 96th in the world; 4.3% of population, 109th in the world (2012).\nBULLET::::- Wireless broadband: 45,505 subscriptions, 127th in the world; 1.6% of the population, 128th in the world (2012).\nBULLET::::- Internet hosts: 3,906 hosts, 149th in the world (2012).\nBULLET::::- IPv4: 202,752 addresses allocated, less than 0.05% of the world total, 70.1 addresses per 1000 people (2012).\n\nThere are no government restrictions on access to the Internet or credible reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without judicial oversight.\n\nThe law provides for freedom of speech and press, and the government generally respects these rights in practice. An independent press, generally effective judicial protection, and a functioning democratic political system combine to ensure freedom of speech and press. The independent media are active and express a wide variety of views without restriction. Broadcast media were largely state owned, but open to pluralistic points of view. Although the constitution prohibits arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, in practice the police conduct searches without warrants.\n\nA law decriminalizing defamation was passed by the Jamaican House of Representatives in November 2013 after being approved unanimously by the Senate the previous July. It took six years to amend the libel and slander laws, which – although little used – made media offences punishable by imprisonment.\n\nBULLET::::- Area codes in the Caribbean\nBULLET::::- Jamaica Broadcasting Corporation, former public broadcaster of Jamaica.\nBULLET::::- List of television stations in the Caribbean\nBULLET::::- Television Jamaica, commercial television station.\n\nBULLET::::- Mona Information Technology Services (MITS), University of the West Indies, Jamaica domain names registrar.\nBULLET::::- Television Jamaica\n"}
{"id": "15667", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15667", "title": "Transport in Jamaica", "text": "Transport in Jamaica\n\nTransport in Jamaica consists of roadways, railways, ship and air transport, with roadways forming the backbone of the island's internal transport system.\n\nThe Jamaican road network consists of almost 21,000 kilometres of roads, of which over 15,000 kilometres is paved. The Jamaican Government has, since the late 1990s and in cooperation with private investors, embarked on a campaign of infrastructural improvement projects, one of which includes the creation of a system of freeways, the first such access-controlled roadways of their kind on the island, connecting the main population centres of the island. This project has so far seen the completion of 33 kilometres of freeway. \n\nThe Highway 2000 project, which seeks ultimately to link Kingston with Montego Bay and the north coast, is currently undergoing a series of phases/legs. Phase 1 is the highway network between Kingston and Mandeville which itself has been divided into sub-phases: Phase 1a (Kingston-Bushy Park (in actuality, Kingston-Sandy Bay) highway and the upgrade of the Portmore Causeway) which was completed June 2006, and Phase 1b (Sandy Bay-Williamsfield). Phase 2a is the highway between Old Harbour and Ocho Rios, and Phase 2b is the highway between Mandeville and Montego Bay.\n\n<br>\"total:\" .\n<br>\"paved:\" .\n<br>\"unpaved:\" (1997 est.).\n\nRailways in Jamaica, as in many other countries, no longer enjoy the prominent position they once did, having been largely replaced by roadways as the primary means of transport. Of the 272 kilometres of railway found in Jamaica, only 57 kilometres remain in operation, currently used to transport bauxite.\n\nIn 2008, with increasing traffic congestion, moves are being made to reconstruct old railway lines.\n\n<br>\"total:\" 370 km\n<br>\"standard gauge:\" 370 km gauge. Of these, 207 km belong to the Jamaica Railway Corporation in common carrier service but are no longer operational. The other 163 km is privately owned and used to transport bauxite.\n\nThere are two international airports in Jamaica with modern terminals, long runways, and the navigational equipment required to accommodate the large jet aircraft used in modern air travel: Norman Manley International Airport in the capital, Kingston and Sangster International Airport in the resort city of Montego Bay. Both airports are home to the country's national airline, Air Jamaica. In addition there are local commuter airports at Tinson Pen (Kingston), Port Antonio, Ocho Rios, Mandeville, and Negril which cater to internal flights only. The Ian Fleming International Airport opened in February 2011 to serve the Ocho Rios - Port Antonio area. Many other small, rural centres are served by private fields on sugar estates or bauxite mines.\n\nOwing to its location in the Caribbean Sea in the shipping lane to the Panama Canal and relative proximity to large markets in North America and emerging markets in Latin America, Jamaica receives high container traffic. The container terminal at the Port of Kingston has undergone large expansion in capacity in recent years to handle growth both already realised as well as that which is projected in coming years.\nThere are several other ports positioned around the island, including the alumina ports, Port Esquivel in St. Catherine (WINDALCO), Rocky Point in Clarendon and Port Kaiser in St. Elizabeth. Port Rhoades in Discovery Bay is responsible for transporting bauxite dried at the adjacent Kaiser plant. Reynolds Pier in Ocho Rios is responsible for exporting sugar. Montego Freeport in Montego Bay also handles a variety of cargo like (though more limited than) the Port of Kingston, mainly agricultural products. Boundbrook Port in Port Antonio exports bananas. There are also three cruise ship piers along the island, in Ocho Rios, Montego Bay and Port Antonio.\n\nThe Kingston port is situated in the Kingston Harbour which is the 7th largest natural (i.e. not man made) harbour in the world.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Total:\" 1 ship of over 1,000 GT: /.\nBULLET::::- \"Ships by type:\" petroleum tanker 1 (1999 est.).\n\nAs the island is a large exporter of bauxite, there is considerable freighter traffic. To aid navigation, Jamaica operates nine lighthouses\nBULLET::::- \"Onshore:\" 7.\nBULLET::::- \"Offshore:\" 2.\n\nPetroleum products: .\n\nBULLET::::- Annual Transport Statistics Report: Jamaica in Figures 2003-2004, Ministry of Transport and Works, July 2005.\n"}
{"id": "15669", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15669", "title": "Foreign relations of Jamaica", "text": "Foreign relations of Jamaica\n\nJamaica has diplomatic relations with most nations and is a member of the United Nations and the Organization of American States. Jamaica chairs the Working Group on smaller Economies.\n\nJamaica is an active member of the Commonwealth of Nations and the Non-Aligned Movement (G-77). Jamaica is a beneficiary of the Lome Conventions, through which the European Union (EU) grants trade preferences to selected states in Asia, the Caribbean, and the Pacific, and has played a leading role in the negotiations of the successor agreement in Fiji in 2000.\n\nDisputes - international:\nnone\n\nIllicit drugs:\nTransshipment point for cocaine from Central and South America to North America and Europe; illicit cultivation of cannabis; government has an active manual cannabis eradication program\n\nThe Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade is the government ministry responsible for handling the Jamaica's external relations and foreign trade.\n\nHistorically, Jamaica has had close ties with the UK. Trade, financial, and cultural relations with the United States are now predominant. Jamaica is linked with the other countries of the English-speaking Caribbean through the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), and more broadly through the Association of Caribbean States (ACS). Jamaica has served two 2-year terms on the United Nations Security Council, in 1979-80 and in 2000-2001.\n\nIn the follow-on meetings to the December 1994 Summit of the Americas, Jamaica—together with Uruguay—was given the responsibility of coordinating discussions on invigorating society.\n\n Country\n!Notes\n1 December 1995\nBoth countries established diplomatic relations on 1 December 1995.\n3 November 1982\nBULLET::::- Both countries established diplomatic relations on November 3, 1982.\nBULLET::::- Both countries are full members of the Organization of American States and of the Caribbean Community.\n valign=\"top\"\n14 October 1962See Jamaica–Brazil relations\n\nJamaica and Brazil established diplomatic relations on October 14, 1962. Both countries are full members of the Group of 15.\n1962See Canada–Jamaica relations\n\nBoth countries established diplomatic relations in 1962. Since March 4, 1963, Canada has a high commission in Kingston. Jamaica has a high commission in Ottawa. On April 15, 2009, Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper became the first Canadian head of government to address the Jamaican parliament. There are 231,000 people of Jamaican descent living in Canada. Jamaican-Canadians celebrate their island heritage through festivals held in major cities across Canada, the most recognized of which is Caribana. Caribana is held in Toronto, Ontario every year and attracts over one million visitors to the region, many of whom fly all the way from Jamaica.\n\nBULLET::::- See also Jamaican Canadian\nBULLET::::- Canadian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Trade about relations with Jamaica\nBULLET::::- Canadian high commission in Kingston\nBULLET::::- Jamaican high commission in Ottawa\n valign=\"top\"\n\nPrime Minister Percival James Patterson visited Cuba at the end of May 1997. In the fall of 1997, Jamaica upgraded its consulate in Havana to an embassy, and the nonresident Jamaican ambassador to Cuba was replaced by a resident ambassador.\n21 November 1972See China–Jamaica relations\n\nRelations from November 21, 1972. China has an embassy in Kingston, Jamaica. Jamaica has an embassy in Beijing.\n\nSee Ghana-Jamaica relations\nGhana, as the former Gold Coast, and Jamaica share historical links through the slave trade and forced Ashanti/Akan emigration to the Caribbean. Ghana and Jamaica have a Joint Permanent Commission, and there are plans for Ghanaian investment in Jamaica.\n\n26 May 1966\nBULLET::::- Both countries established diplomatic relations on May 26, 1966.\nBULLET::::- Both countries are full members of the Organization of American States, of the Caribbean Community and of the Commonwealth of Nations.\n\nHaiti has an embassy in Kingston and Jamaica has an honorary consul in Port-au-Prince, Haiti.\n\nIn January, 2007, Haitian President René Préval, made a four-day working visit to Jamaica. At a press conference, Jamaican Prime Minister Portia Simpson Miller announced that a Joint Jamaica/Haiti Commission would be convened later that year.\nSee India–Jamaica relations\n\nBoth nations inherited many cultural and political connections from British colonisation, such as membership in the Commonwealth of Nations, parliamentary democracy, the English language and cricket.\n\nIndia has a High Commission in Kingston, whilst Jamaica has a consulate in New Delhi.\nSee Jamaica-Japan relations\n\nBULLET::::- Japan has an embassy in Kingston.\nBULLET::::- Jamaica has an embassy in Tokyo.\n valign=\"top\"\n\nBULLET::::- Jamaica is accredited to Kenya from its high commission in Pretoria, South Africa.\nBULLET::::- Kenya is accredited to Jamaica from its embassy in Havana, Cuba.\n valign=\"top\"\nSee Jamaica–Malaysia relations\n18 March 1966See Jamaica–Mexico relations\n\nBoth nation established diplomatic relations on 18 March 1966.\n\nBULLET::::- Jamaica has an embassy in Mexico City.\nBULLET::::- Mexico has an embassy in Kingston.\n valign=\"top\"\n\nNicaragua has an embassy in Kingston. Jamaica is represented through its embassy in Mexico City.\n\nBULLET::::- Jamaica and Nicaragua are members of the United Nations, PetroCaribe, Organization of American States and Community of Latin American and Caribbean States\nBULLET::::- In 1730 the Mosquito Coast came to depend on the British government of Jamaica.\n valign=\"top\"\n\nVarious discussions of aspects of Pakistan-Jamaica relations and the possible ways and means to further strengthen these relations. The potential for enhancing cooperation between the two countries. Pakistan emphasized that the excellent bilateral relationship which existed between Pakistan and Jamaica since the establishment season diplomatic relations in 1962 needed to be translated into mutually beneficial cooperation in tourism, trade, investment, education, health, science and technology and improved people to people contacts.\n13 October 1962\n\nThe establishment of diplomatic relations between the Republic of Korea and the Jamaica started on October 13, 1962 .\nBULLET::::- Jamaica has an embassy in Seoul, South Korea.\nBULLET::::- South Korea has an embassy in Kingston Jamaica.\n valign=\"top\"\n\nJamaica is the UK's third largest export market in the Caribbean after Puerto Rico and Trinidad & Tobago.\nIn 2010, British exports were valued at £68.4 million—an increase of 48% over the previous year and imports at £47.8 million. The UK’s main exports to Jamaica are chemicals, manufactured goods, machinery, pharmaceuticals and food products. There are opportunities for UK companies in the following sectors: Education, Information Communications Technology, Agriculture, Health, Water and Renewable Energy.\nSee Jamaica–United States relations\n\nThe United States maintains close and productive relations with the Government of Jamaica. Former Prime Minister Patterson visited Washington, DC, several times after assuming office in 1992. In April 2001, Prime Minister Patterson and other Caribbean leaders met with President George W. Bush during the Summit of the Americas in Quebec, Canada, at which a \"Third Border Initiative\" was launched to deepen U.S. cooperation with Caribbean nations and enhance economic development and integration of the Caribbean nations. Then-Prime Minister Portia Simpson Miller attended the \"Conference on the Caribbean--A 20/20 Vision\" in Washington in June 2007.\n\nPresident Barack Obama visited the island on April 9. 2015. President Obama managed to squeeze in some fun in between meetings with Jamaican and Caribbean leaders on his trip to Jamaica this week—from paying homage to reggae star Bob Marley to practicing his own Jamaican accent.\n\nThe United States is Jamaica's most important trading partner: bilateral trade in goods in 2005 was over $2 billion. Jamaica is a popular destination for American tourists; more than 1.2 million Americans visited in 2006. In addition, some 10,000 American citizens, including many dual-nationals born on the island, permanently reside in Jamaica.\n\nJamaica maintains economic and cultural relations with Taiwan via Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Canada.\n\nJamaica has been a member state of the Commonwealth of Nations since 1962, when it became an independent Commonwealth realm.\n\nAfrican, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States,\nCaricom, \nCCC, \nCaribbean Development Bank, \nUnited Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, \nFood and Agriculture Organization, \nG-15, \nG-33, \nG-77, \nInter-American Development Bank, \nInternational Atomic Energy Agency, \nInternational Bank for Reconstruction and Development, \nInternational Civil Aviation Organization, \nInternational Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, \nInternational Fund for Agricultural Development, \nInternational Finance Corporation, \nInternational Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, \nInternational Hydrographic Organization (pending member), \nInternational Labour Organization, \nInternational Monetary Fund, \nInternational Telecommunication Union, \nIntelsat, \nInterpol, \nInternational Olympic Committee, \nInternational Organization for Migration, \nInternational Organization for Standardization, \nInternational Telecommunication Union, \nLatin American Economic System, \nNon-Aligned Movement, \nOrganization of American States, \nOPANAL, \nOrganisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, \nUnited Nations, \nUN Security Council (temporary), \nUnited Nations Conference on Trade and Development, \nUNESCO, \nUnited Nations Industrial Development Organization, \nUniversal Postal Union, \nWorld Health Organization, \nWorld Intellectual Property Organization, \nWorld Meteorological Organization, \nWorld Tourism Organization, \nWorld Trade Organization\n\nBULLET::::- List of diplomatic missions in Jamaica\nBULLET::::- List of diplomatic missions of Jamaica\n"}
{"id": "15670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15670", "title": "Science and technology in Jamaica", "text": "Science and technology in Jamaica\n\nSince the late 3477, the Jamaican government has set an agenda to push the development of technology in Jamaica. The goal is to make Jamaica a significant player in the arena of information technology.\n\nJamaica was among the earliest developing countries to craft a scientific law to guide the use of Science & Technology for the exploitation of domestic natural resources. In fact, the island was among the first in the American hemisphere to gain electricity, build a railway and to use research results to boost sugar cane production. The Jamaican Science and Technology Policy have two missions; 1) to improve science, technology and engineering and 2) to leverage its use to enhance societal needs. \nEfforts to develop its Science and Technology educative system, through institutions such as The University of Technology, has been successful but it has been difficult to translate the results into domestic technologies, products and services because of national budgetary constraints.\n\nBULLET::::- National Commission on Science and Technology\n"}
{"id": "15673", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15673", "title": "Jan Mayen", "text": "Jan Mayen\n\nJan Mayen () is a Norwegian volcanic island in the Arctic Ocean. It is long (southwest-northeast) and in area, partly covered by glaciers (an area of around the Beerenberg volcano). It has two parts: larger northeast Nord-Jan and smaller Sør-Jan, linked by a wide isthmus. It lies northeast of Iceland (495 km (305 mi) NE of Kolbeinsey), east of central Greenland and west of the North Cape, Norway. The island is mountainous, the highest summit being the Beerenberg volcano in the north. The isthmus is the location of the two largest lakes of the island, Sørlaguna (South Lagoon), and Nordlaguna (North Lagoon). A third lake is called Ullerenglaguna (Ullereng Lagoon). Jan Mayen was formed by the Jan Mayen hotspot.\n\nAlthough administered separately, in the ISO 3166-1 standard Jan Mayen and Svalbard are collectively designated as \"Svalbard and Jan Mayen\", with the two-letter country code \"SJ\".\n\nJan Mayen Island has one exploitable natural resource, gravel, from the site at Trongskaret. Other than this, economic activity is limited to providing services for employees of Norway's radio communications and meteorological stations located on the island. Jan Mayen has one unpaved airstrip, Jan Mayensfield, which is about long. The coast has no ports or harbours, only offshore anchorages.\n\nThere are important fishing resources, and the existence of Jan Mayen establishes a large exclusive economic zone around it. A dispute between Norway and Denmark regarding the fishing exclusion zone between Jan Mayen and Greenland was settled in 1988 granting Denmark the greater area of sovereignty. Geologists suspect significant deposits of petroleum and natural gas lie below Jan Mayen's surrounding seafloors.\n\nJan Mayen Island is an integral part of the Kingdom of Norway. Since 1995, Jan Mayen has been administered by the County Governor (\"fylkesmann\") of the northern Norwegian county of Nordland, to which it is closest. However, some authority over Jan Mayen has been assigned to the station commander of the Norwegian Defence Logistics Organisation, a branch of the Norwegian Armed Forces.\n\nThe only inhabitants on the island are personnel working for the Norwegian Armed Forces and the Norwegian Meteorological Institute. Eighteen people spend the winter on the island, but the population may roughly double (35) during the summer, when heavy maintenance is performed. Personnel serve either six months or one year, and are exchanged twice a year in April and October. The support crew, including mechanics, cooks, and a nurse, are among the military personnel. The military personnel operated a Loran-C base, until it closed at the end of 2015. Both the LORAN transmitter and the meteorological station are located a few kilometres away from the settlement Olonkinbyen (Olonkin City), where all personnel live.\n\nTransport to the island is provided by C-130 Hercules military transport planes operated by the Royal Norwegian Air Force that land at Jan Mayensfield's gravel runway. The planes fly in from Bodø Main Air Station eight times a year. Since the airport does not have any instrument landing capabilities, good visibility is required, and it is not uncommon for the planes to have to return to Bodø, two hours away, without landing. For heavy goods, freight ships visit during the summer, but since there are no harbours, the ships must anchor.\n\nThe island has no indigenous population, but is assigned the ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 country code SJ (together with Svalbard). It uses the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) .no (.sj is allocated but not used) and data code JN. Jan Mayen has telephone and internet connection over satellite, using Norwegian telephone numbers (country code 47). Its amateur radio call sign prefix is JX. It has a postal code, NO-8099 JAN MAYEN, but delivery time varies, especially during the winter.\n\nBetween the fifth and ninth centuries (400–900 AD), numerous communities of monks originating in Ireland (Papar) navigated throughout the north Atlantic in leather boats, exploring and sometimes settling in distant islands where their monastic communities could be separated from close contact with others. Strong indicators exist of their presence in the Faroe Islands and Iceland before the arrival of the Vikings, and medieval chronicles such as the famous \"Voyage of Saint Brendan the Abbot\" testify to the extensive interest in exploration at the time. A modern-day trans-Atlantic journey proved the ability of the early navigators to reach all lands of the north Atlantic even further from Ireland than Jan Mayen – and, given favorable winds, at a speed roughly equal to that of modern yachts. Though quite feasible, there is nevertheless no direct physical trace of medieval landings or settlement on Jan Mayen.\n\nThe land named \"Svalbarð\" (\"cold coast\") by the Vikings in the early medieval book Landnámabók may have been Jan Mayen (instead of Spitsbergen, renamed Svalbard by the Norwegians in modern times); the distance from Iceland to \"Svalbarð\" mentioned in this book is two days' sailing (with favorable winds), consistent with the approximate to Jan Mayen and not with the minimum to Spitsbergen. However much Jan Mayen may have been known in Europe at that time, it was subsequently forgotten for some centuries.\n\nIn the 17th century, many claims of the island's rediscovery were made, spurred by the rivalry on the Arctic whaling grounds, and the island received many names. According to Thomas Edge, an early 17th-century whaling captain who was often inaccurate, \"William Hudson\" discovered the island in 1608 and named it \"Hudson's Touches\" (or \"Tutches\"). However, Henry Hudson could only have come by on his voyage in 1607 (if he had made an illogical detour) and he made no mention of it in his journal. Douglas Hunter, in \"Half Moon\" (2009), believes Hudson may not have mentioned his supposed discovery of the island because he was \"loath to address a crew insurrection that might well have erupted at that time, when the men realized where he was trying to take them.\" This is, however, merely speculation on Hunter's part. There is absolutely no evidence to support such a claim.\n\nAccording to William Scoresby (1820: p.154), referring to the mistaken belief that the Dutch had discovered the island in 1611, Hull whalers discovered the island \"about the same time\" and named it \"Trinity Island\". Muller (1874: pp.190–191) took this to mean they had come upon Jan Mayen in 1611 or 1612, which was repeated by many subsequent authors. There were, in fact, no Hull whalers in either of these years, the first Hull whaling expedition having been sent to the island only in 1616 (see below). As with the previous claim made by Edge, there is no cartographical or written proof for this supposed discovery.\n\nThe first verified discoveries of Jan Mayen, by three separate expeditions, occurred in the summer of 1614, probably within one month of each other. The Dutchman Fopp Gerritsz, whilst in command of a whaling expedition sent out by the Englishman John Clarke, of Dunkirk, claimed (in 1631) to have discovered the island on June 28 and named it \"Isabella\". In January the \"Noordsche Compagnie\" (Northern Company), modelled on the Dutch East India Company, had been established to support Dutch whaling in the Arctic. Two of its ships, financed by merchants from Amsterdam and Enkhuizen, reached Jan Mayen in July 1614. The captains of these ships—Jan Jacobszoon May van Schellinkhout on the \"Gouden Cath\" (Golden Cat), and Jacob de Gouwenaer on the \"Orangienboom\" (Orange Tree)—named it \"Mr. Joris Eylant\" after the Dutch cartographer Joris Carolus who was on board and mapped the island. The captains acknowledged that a third Dutch ship, the \"Cleyn Swaentgen\" (Little Swan) captained by Jan Jansz Kerckhoff and financed by \"Noordsche Compagnie\" shareholders from Delft, had already been at the island when they arrived. They had assumed the latter, who named the island \"Maurits Eylandt\" (or Mauritius) after Maurice of Nassau, Prince of Orange, would report their discovery to the States General. However, the Delft merchants had decided to keep the discovery secret and returned in 1615 to hunt for their own profit. The ensuing dispute was only settled in 1617, though both companies were allowed to whale at Jan Mayen in the meantime.\n\nIn 1615, the English whaler Robert Fotherby went ashore. Apparently thinking he had made a new discovery, he named the island \"Sir Thomas Smith's Island\" and the volcano \"Mount Hakluyt\". On a map of c. 1634, Jean Vrolicq renamed the island \"Île de Richelieu\".\n\nJan Mayen first appeared on Willem Jansz Blaeu's 1620 edition map of Europe, originally published by Cornelis Doedz in 1606. Blaeu, who lived in Amsterdam, named it \"Jan Mayen\" after captain Jan Jacobszoon May of the Amsterdam-financed \"Gouden Cath\". Blaeu made the first detailed map of the island in his famous \"Zeespiegel\" atlas of 1623, establishing its current name.\n\nFrom 1615 to 1638, Jan Mayen was used as a whaling base by the Dutch \"Noordsche Compagnie\", which had been given a monopoly on whaling in the Arctic regions by the States General in 1614. Only two ships, one from the \"Noordsche Compagnie\", and the other from the Delft merchants, were off Jan Mayen in 1615. The following year a score of vessels were sent to the island. The \"Noordsche Compagnie\" sent eight ships escorted by three warships under Jan Jacobsz. Schrobop; while the Delft merchants sent up five ships under Adriaen Dircksz. Leversteyn, son of one of the above merchants. There were also two ships from Dunkirk sent by John Clarke, as well as a ship each from London and Hull.\n\nHeertje Jansz, master of the \"Hope\", of Enkhuizen, wrote a day-by-day account of the season. The ships took two weeks to reach Jan Mayen, arriving early in June. On 15 June they met the two English ships, which Schrobop allowed to remain, on condition they gave half their catch to the Dutch. The ships from Dunkirk were given the same conditions. By late July the first ship had left with a full cargo of whale oil; the rest left early in August, several filled with oil.\n\nThat year 200 men were seasonally living and working on the island at six temporary whaling stations (spread along the northwest coast). During the first decade of whaling more than ten ships visited Jan Mayen each year, while in the second period (1624 and later) five to ten ships were sent. With the exception of a few ships from Dunkirk, which came to the island in 1617 and were either driven away or forced to give a third of their catch to the Dutch, only the Dutch and merchants from Hull sent up ships to Jan Mayen from 1616 onward. In 1624 ten wooden houses were built in South Bay. About this time the Dutch appear to have abandoned the temporary stations consisting of tents of sail and crude furnaces, replacing them with two semi-permanent stations with wooden storehouses and dwellings and large brick furnaces, one in the above-mentioned South Bay and the other in the North Bay. In 1628 two forts were built to protect the stations. Among the sailors active at Jan Mayen was the later admiral Michiel Adriaensz de Ruyter. In 1633, at the age of 26, he was for the first time listed as an officer aboard \"de Groene Leeuw\" (The Green Lion). He again went to Jan Mayen in 1635, aboard the same ship.\nIn 1632 the \"Noordsche Compagnie\" expelled the Danish-employed Basque whalers from Spitsbergen. In revenge, the latter sailed to Jan Mayen, where the Dutch had left for the winter, to plunder the Dutch equipment and burn down the settlements and factories. Captain Outger Jacobsz of Grootebroek was asked to stay the next winter (1633/34) on Jan Mayen with six shipmates to defend the island. While a group with the same task survived the winter on Spitsbergen, all seven on Jan Mayen died of scurvy or trichinosis (from eating raw polar bear meat) combined with the harsh conditions.\n\nDuring the first phase of whaling the hauls were generally good, some exceptional. For example, Mathijs Jansz. Hoepstock caught 44 whales in Hoepstockbukta in 1619, which produced 2,300 casks of whale oil. During the second phase the hauls were much lower. While 1631 turned out to be a very good season, the following year, due to the weather and ice, only eight whales were caught. In 1633 eleven ships managed to catch just 47 whales; while a meager 42 were caught by the same number in 1635. The bowhead whale was locally hunted to near-extinction around 1640 (approximately 1000 had been killed and processed on the island), at which time Jan Mayen was abandoned and stayed uninhabited for two and a half centuries.\n\nDuring the International Polar Year 1882–1883 the Austro-Hungarian North Pole Expedition stayed one year at Jan Mayen. The expedition performed extensive mapping of the area, their maps being of such quality that they were used until the 1950s. The Austrian polar station on Jan Mayen Island was built and equipped in 1882 fully at Count Wilczek's own expense.\n\nPolar bears appear on Jan Mayen, although in diminished numbers compared with earlier times. Between 1900 and 1920, there were a number of Norwegian trappers spending winters on Jan Mayen, hunting Arctic foxes in addition to some polar bears. But the exploitation soon made the profits decline, and the hunting ended. Polar bears are genetically distinguishable in this region of the Arctic from those living elsewhere.\n\nThe League of Nations gave Norway jurisdiction over the island, and in 1921 Norway opened the first meteorological station. The Norwegian Meteorological Institute annexed the island for Norway in 1922 and the whole island in 1926 when Hallvard Devold was head of the weather observations base on the island. On 27 February 1930, the island was made \"de jure\" a part of the Kingdom of Norway.\n\nDuring World War II, continental Norway was invaded and occupied by Germany in spring 1940. The four-man team on Jan Mayen stayed at their posts and in an act of defiance began sending their weather reports to the United Kingdom instead of Norway. The British codenamed Jan Mayen 'Island X' and attempted to reinforce it with troops to counteract any German attack. The Norwegian patrol boat ran aground on Nansenflua, one of the islands' many uncharted lava reefs and the 68-man crew abandoned ship and joined the Norwegian team on shore. The British expedition commander, prompted by the loss of the gunboat, decided to abandon Jan Mayen until the following spring and radioed for a rescue ship. Within a few days a ship arrived and evacuated the four Norwegians and their would-be reinforcements after demolishing the weather station to prevent it from falling into German hands. The Germans attempted to land a weather team on the island on 16 November 1940. The German naval trawler carrying the team crashed on the rocks just off Jan Mayen after a patrolling British destroyer had picked them up on radar. This was not a coincidence as the German plan had been compromised from the beginning with British wireless interceptors of the Radio Security Service following the communications of the Abwehr (the German Intelligence service) concerning the operation and the destroyer had been waiting. Most of the crew struggled ashore and were taken prisoner by a landing party from the destroyer.\nThe Allies returned to the island on 10 March 1941, when the Norwegian ship \"Veslekari\", escorted by the patrol boat \"Honningsvaag\", dropped 12 Norwegian weathermen on the island. The team's radio transmissions soon betrayed its presence to the Axis, and German planes from Norway began to bomb and strafe Jan Mayen whenever weather would permit it, though they did little damage. Soon supplies and reinforcements arrived and even some anti-aircraft guns, giving the island a garrison of a few dozen weathermen and soldiers. By 1941, Germany had given up hope of evicting the Allies from the island and the constant air raids stopped.\n\nOn 7 August 1942, a German Focke-Wulf Fw 200 \"Condor\", probably on a mission to bomb the station, smashed into the nearby mountainside of Danielssenkrateret in fog, killing all nine crew members. In 1950, the wreck of another German plane with four crew members was discovered on the southwest side of the island. In 1943, the Americans established a radio locating station named Atlantic City in the north to try to locate German radio bases in Greenland.\n\nAfter the war, the meteorological station was located at Atlantic City, but moved in 1949 to a new location. Radio Jan Mayen also served as an important radio station for ship traffic in the Arctic Ocean. In 1959, NATO decided to build the LORAN-C network in the Atlantic Ocean, and one of the transmitters had to be on Jan Mayen. By 1961, the new military installations, including a new airfield, were operational.\n\nFor some time, scientists doubted if there could be any activity in the Beerenberg volcano, but in 1970 the volcano erupted, and added another of land mass to the island during the three-to-four weeks it lasted. It had more eruptions in 1973 and 1985. During an eruption, the sea temperature around the island may increase from just above freezing to about .\n\nHistoric stations and huts on the island are Hoyberg, Vera, Olsbu, Puppebu (cabin), Gamlemetten or Gamlestasjonen (the old weather station), Jan Mayen Radio, Helenehytta, Margarethhytta, and Ulla (a cabin at the foot of the Beerenberg).\n\nA regulation dating from 2010 renders the island a nature reserve under Norwegian jurisdiction. The aim of this regulation is to ensure the preservation of a pristine Arctic island and the marine life nearby, including the ocean floor. Landings at Jan Mayen can be done by boat. However, this is permitted only at a small part of the island, named Båtvika (Boat Bay). As there is no commercial airline operating at the island, one cannot get there by plane except by chartering one. Admission for landings by a charter plane has to be obtained in advance. Admission to stay on the island has to be obtained in advance, and is generally limited to a few days (or even hours). Putting up a tent or setting up camp is prohibited. There is a separate regulation for the stay of foreigners.\n\nJan Mayen consists of two geographically distinct parts. Nord-Jan has a round shape and is dominated by the high Beerenberg volcano with its large ice cap (), which can be divided into twenty individual outlet glaciers. The largest of those is Sørbreen, with an area of and a length of . South-Jan is narrow, comparatively flat and unglaciated. Its highest elevation is Rudolftoppen at . The station and living quarters are located on South-Jan. The island lies at the northern end of the Jan Mayen Microcontinent. The microcontinent was originally part of the Greenland Plate, but now forms part of the Eurasian Plate.\n\nThe island was identified as an Important Bird Area (IBA) by BirdLife International because it is a breeding site for large numbers of seabirds, supporting populations of northern fulmars (78,000–160,000 pairs), little auks (10,000–100,000 pairs), thick-billed guillemot (74,000–147,000 pairs) and black guillemots (100–1,000 pairs).\n\nJan Mayen has a hyperoceanic polar climate, similar to Greenland and Svalbard, with a Köppen classification of \"ET\". The Gulf Stream's powerful influence makes seasonal temperature variations extremely small considering the latitude of the island, with ranges from around in August to in February, but also makes the island extremely cloudy with little sunshine even during the continuous polar day. The deep snow cover prevents any permafrost from developing despite a mean annual temperature slightly below freezing.\n\nBULLET::::- Svalbard and Jan Mayen\nBULLET::::- Svalbard\nBULLET::::- List of islands of Norway\nBULLET::::- List of islands of Norway by area\n\nBULLET::::- Ledgard, J. M. (2011) \"Submergence\", Coffee House Press\nBULLET::::- Umbreit, Andreas (2005) \"Spitsbergen: Svalbard – Franz Josef Land – Jan Mayen\", 3rd ed., Chalfont St. Peter: Bradt Travel Guides,\n\nBULLET::::- www.jan-mayen.no\nBULLET::::- jan.mayen.no\nBULLET::::- Jan Mayen year round webcam\nBULLET::::- Jan Mayen at Norwegian Polar Institute\nBULLET::::- TopoJanMayen – Interactive map of Jan Mayen by the Norwegian Polar Institute\nBULLET::::- Photographs and information on Jan Mayen\nBULLET::::- Satellite Radar image of Jan Mayen\nBULLET::::- Glaciers of Jan Mayen\nBULLET::::- www.janmayen2011.org - a site about JX5O - international ham radio expedition to Jan Mayen island in 2011\nBULLET::::- Weather forecasts for Jan Mayen at yr.no (Norwegian Meteorological institute and NRK)\nBULLET::::- uscg spar 403 1966\n"}
{"id": "15683", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15683", "title": "Jarvis Island", "text": "Jarvis Island\n\nJarvis Island (; formerly known as Bunker Island or Bunker's Shoal) is an uninhabited coral island located in the South Pacific Ocean, about halfway between Hawaii and the Cook Islands. It is an unincorporated, unorganized territory of the United States, administered by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service of the United States Department of the Interior as part of the National Wildlife Refuge system. Unlike most coral atolls, the lagoon on Jarvis is wholly dry.\n\nJarvis is one of the Line Islands and for statistical purposes is also grouped as one of the United States Minor Outlying Islands. Jarvis Island is one of three U.S. equatorial possessions, along with Baker Island and Howland Island. The largest of these is Jarvis Island in the Line Islands archipelago.\n\nWhile a few offshore anchorage spots are marked on maps, Jarvis island has no ports or harbors, and swift currents are a hazard. There is a boat landing area in the middle of the western shoreline near a crumbling day beacon, and another near the southwest corner of the island. The center of Jarvis island is a dried lagoon where deep guano deposits accumulated, which were mined for about 20 years during the nineteenth century. The island has a tropical desert climate, with high daytime temperatures, constant wind, and strong sun. Nights, however, are quite cool. The ground is mostly sandy and reaches 23 feet (7 meters) at its highest point. Because of the island's distance from other large landmasses, the Jarvis Island high point is the 36th most isolated peak in the world. The low-lying coral island has long been noted as hard to sight from small ships and is surrounded by a narrow fringing reef.\n\nJarvis Island is one of two United States territories that are in the southern hemisphere (the other is American Samoa). Located only south of the equator, Jarvis has no known natural freshwater lens and scant rainfall. This creates a very bleak, flat landscape without any plants larger than shrubs. There is no evidence that the island has ever supported a self-sustaining human population. Its sparse bunch grass, prostrate vines and low-growing shrubs are primarily a nesting, roosting, and foraging habitat for seabirds, shorebirds, and marine wildlife.\n\nJarvis Island was once one of the largest breeding colonies in the tropical ocean, but guano mining and the introduction of rodents have ruined much of the island's native wildlife. Just eight breeding species were recorded in 1982, compared to thirteen in 1996, and fourteen species in 2004. The Polynesian storm petrel had made its return after over 40 years absent from Jarvis Island, and the number of Brown noddies multiplied from just a few birds in 1982 to nearly 10,000. Just twelve Gray-backed terns were recorded in 1982, but by 2004, over 200 nests were found on the island.\n\nJarvis Island was submerged underwater during the latest interglacial period, roughly 125,000 years ago, when sea levels were 5–10 meters higher than today. As the sea level declined, the horseshoe-shaped lagoon was formed in the center of Jarvis Island.\n\nJarvis Island is located in the Samoa Time Zone (UTC -11:00), the same time zone as American Samoa, Kingman Reef, Midway Atoll and Palmyra Atoll.\n\nThe island's first known sighting by Europeans was on August 21, 1821, by the British ship \"Eliza Francis\" (or \"Eliza Frances\") owned by Edward, Thomas and William Jarvis and commanded by Captain Brown. The island was visited by whaling vessels till the 1870s.\n\nThe US Exploring Expedition surveyed the island in 1841. In March 1857 the island was claimed for the United States under the Guano Islands Act and formally annexed on February 27, 1858.\n\nThe American Guano Company, which was incorporated in 1857, established claims in respect of Baker Island and Jarvis Island which was recognized under the U.S. Guano Islands Act of 1856. Beginning in 1858, several support structures were built on Jarvis Island, along with a two-story, eight-room \"superintendent's house\" featuring an observation cupola and wide verandahs. Tram tracks were laid down for bringing mined guano to the western shore. One of the first loads was taken by Samuel Gardner Wilder.\nFor the following twenty-one years, Jarvis was commercially mined for guano, sent to the United States as fertilizer, but the island was abruptly abandoned in 1879, leaving behind about a dozen buildings and 8,000 tonnes of mined guano.\nNew Zealand entrepreneurs, including photographer Henry Winkelmann, then made unsuccessful attempts to continue guano extraction on Jarvis, and the two-story house was sporadically inhabited during the early 1880s. Squire Flockton was left alone on the island as caretaker for several months and committed suicide there in 1883, apparently from gin-fueled despair. His wooden grave marker was a carved plank which could be seen in the island's tiny four-grave cemetery for decades.\n\nJohn T. Arundel & Co. resumed mining guano from 1886 to 1899. The United Kingdom annexed the island on June 3, 1889. Phosphate and copra entrepreneur John T. Arundel visited the island in 1909 on maiden voyage of the \"S.S. Ocean Queen\" and near the beach landing on the western shore members of the crew built a pyramidal day beacon made from slats of wood, which was painted white. The beacon was standing in 1935, and remained until at least 1942.\n\nOn August 30, 1913, the barquentine \"Amaranth\" (C. W. Nielson, captain) was carrying a cargo of coal from Newcastle, New South Wales, to San Francisco when it wrecked on Jarvis' southern shore. Ruins of ten wooden guano-mining buildings, the two-story house among them, could still be seen by the \"Amaranth\" crew, who left Jarvis aboard two lifeboats. One reached Pago Pago, American Samoa, and the other made Apia in Western Samoa. The ship's scattered remains were noted and scavenged for many years, and rounded fragments of coal from the \"Amaranth\"'s hold were still being found on the south beach in the late 1930s.\n\nJarvis Island was reclaimed by the United States government and colonized from March 26, 1935, onwards, under the American Equatorial Islands Colonization Project (see also Howland Island and Baker Island). President Franklin D. Roosevelt assigned administration of the island to the U.S. Department of the Interior on May 13, 1936. Starting out as a cluster of large, open tents pitched next to the still-standing white wooden day beacon, the Millersville settlement on the island's western shore was named after a bureaucrat with the United States Department of Air Commerce. The settlement grew into a group of shacks built mostly with wreckage from the \"Amaranth\" (lumber from which was also used by the young Hawaiian colonists to build surfboards), but later, stone and wood dwellings were built and equipped with refrigeration, radio equipment, and a weather station. A crude aircraft landing area was cleared on the northeast side of the island, and a T-shaped marker which was intended to be seen from the air was made from gathered stones, but no airplane is known to have ever landed there.\n\nAt the beginning of World War II, an Imperial Japanese Navy submarine surfaced off the west coast of the Island. Believing that it was a U.S. Navy submarine which had come to fetch them, the four young colonists rushed down the steep western beach in front of Millersville towards the shore. The submarine answered their waves with fire from its deck gun, but no one was hurt in the attack. On February 7, 1942, the USCGC \"Taney\" evacuated the colonists, then shelled and burned the dwellings. The roughly cleared landing area on the island's northeast end was later shelled by the Japanese, leaving crater holes.\nJarvis was visited by scientists during the International Geophysical Year from July 1957 until November 1958. In January 1958 all scattered building ruins from both the nineteenth century guano diggings and the 1935–1942 colonization attempt were swept away without a trace by a severe storm which lasted several days and was witnessed by the scientists. When the IGY research project ended the island was abandoned again. By the early 1960s a few sheds, a century of accumulated trash, the scientists' house from the late 1950s and a solid, short lighthouse-like day beacon built two decades before were the only signs of human habitation on Jarvis.\n\nOn June 27, 1974, Secretary of the Interior Rogers Morton created Jarvis Island National Wildlife Refuge which was expanded in 2009 to add submerged lands within of the island. The refuge now includes of land and of water. Along with six other islands, the island was administered by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service as part of the Pacific Remote Islands National Wildlife Refuge Complex. In January 2009, that entity was upgraded to the Pacific Remote Islands Marine National Monument by President George W. Bush.\n\nA feral cat population, descendants of cats likely brought by colonists in the 1930s, wrought disruption to the island's wildlife and vegetation. These cats were removed through efforts which began in the mid-1960s and lasted until 1990 when they were completely eradicated. Nineteenth-century tram track remains can be seen in the dried lagoon bed at the island's center and the late 1930s-era lighthouse-shaped day beacon still stands on the western shore at the site of Millersville.\n\nPublic entry to any one including US citizens on Jarvis Island requires a special-use permit and is generally restricted to scientists and educators. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the United States Coast Guard periodically visit Jarvis.\n\nThere is no airport on the island, nor does the island contain any large terminal or port. There is a day beacon near the middle of the west coast. Some offshore anchorage is available.\n\nAs a U.S. territory, the defense of Jarvis Island is the responsibility of the United States. All laws of the United States are applicable on the island.\n\nBULLET::::- Howland and Baker islands\nBULLET::::- List of Guano Island claims\nBULLET::::- \"Under a Jarvis Moon\", an 88-minute 2010 documentary\n\nBULLET::::- Jarvis Island Home Page Website with photos, weather, and more.\nBULLET::::- Jarvis Island information website Has several photos of the old Millersville settlement, together with more modern photos of the island.\nBULLET::::- WorldStatesmen Offers brief data on Jarvis island.\nBULLET::::- U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service Jarvis Island National Wildlife Refuge The Jarvis Island refuge site.\n"}
{"id": "15693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15693", "title": "Jersey", "text": "Jersey\n\nJersey ( , ; ), officially the Bailiwick of Jersey (; Jèrriais: \"Bailliage dé Jèrri\"), is a British Crown dependency located near the coast of Normandy, France. It is the second closest of the Channel Islands to France, after Alderney.\n\nJersey was part of the Duchy of Normandy, whose dukes went on to become kings of England from 1066. After Normandy was lost by the kings of England in the 13th century, and the ducal title surrendered to France, Jersey and the other Channel Islands remained attached to the English crown.\n\nThe bailiwick consists of the island of Jersey, the largest of the Channel Islands, along with surrounding uninhabited islands and rocks collectively named Les Dirouilles, Les Écréhous, Les Minquiers, Les Pierres de Lecq, and other reefs. Although the bailiwicks of Jersey and Guernsey are often referred to collectively as the Channel Islands, the \"Channel Islands\" are not a constitutional or political unit. Jersey has a separate relationship to the Crown from the other Crown dependencies of Guernsey and the Isle of Man, although all are held by the monarch of the United Kingdom.\n\nJersey is a self-governing parliamentary democracy under a constitutional monarchy, with its own financial, legal and judicial systems, and the power of self-determination. The Lieutenant Governor on the island is the personal representative of the Queen.\n\nJersey is not part of the United Kingdom, and has an international identity separate from that of the UK, but the UK is constitutionally responsible for the defence of Jersey. The definition of United Kingdom in the British Nationality Act 1981 is interpreted as including the UK and the Islands together. The European Commission have confirmed in a written reply to the European Parliament in 2003 that Jersey is within the Union as a European Territory for whose external relationships the UK is responsible. Jersey is not fully part of the European Union but has a special relationship with it, notably being treated as within the European Community for the purposes of free trade in goods.\n\nBritish cultural influence on the island is evident in its use of English as the main language and the British pound as its primary currency, even if some people still speak the Norman language. Additional cultural commonalities include driving on the left, access to the BBC and ITV regions, a school curriculum following that of England, and the popularity of British sports, including cricket.\n\nThe Channel Islands are mentioned in the Antonine Itinerary as the following: \"Sarnia\", \"Caesarea\", \"Barsa\", \"Silia\" and \"Andium\", but Jersey cannot be identified specifically because none corresponds directly to the present names. The name \"Caesarea\" has been used as the Latin name for Jersey (also in its French version \"Césarée\") since William Camden's \"Britannia\", and is used in titles of associations and institutions today. The Latin name \"Caesarea\" was also applied to the colony of New Jersey as \"Nova Caesarea\".\n\n\"Andium\", \"Agna\" and \"Augia\" were used in antiquity.\n\nScholars variously surmise that \"Jersey\" and \"Jèrri\" derive from \"jarð\" (Old Norse for \"earth\") or \"jarl\" (earl), or perhaps a personal name, \"Geirr\" (\"Geirr's Island\"). The ending \"-ey\" denotes an island (as in Guernsey or Surtsey).\n\nJersey history is influenced by its strategic location between the northern coast of France and the southern coast of England; the island's recorded history extends over a thousand years.\n\nLa Cotte de St Brelade is a Palaeolithic site inhabited before rising sea levels transformed Jersey into an island. Jersey was a centre of Neolithic activity, as demonstrated by the concentration of dolmens. Evidence of Bronze Age and early Iron Age settlements can be found in many locations around the island.\n\nAdditional archaeological evidence of Roman influence has been found, in particular at Les Landes, the coastal headland site at Le Pinacle, where remains of a primitive structure are attributed to Gallo-Roman temple worship (\"fanum\").\n\nJersey was part of Neustria with the same Gallo-Frankish population as the continental mainland. Jersey, the whole Channel Islands and the Cotentin peninsula (probably with the Avranchin) came formally under the control of the duke of Brittany during the Viking invasions, because the king of the Franks was unable to defend them, however they remained in the archbishopric of Rouen. Jersey was invaded by Vikings in the 9th century. In 933 it was annexed to the future Duchy of Normandy, together with the other Channel Islands, Cotentin and Avranchin, by William Longsword, count of Rouen and it became one of the Norman Islands. When William's descendant, William the Conqueror, conquered England in 1066, the Duchy of Normandy and the kingdom of England were governed under one monarch. The Dukes of Normandy owned considerable estates in the island, and Norman families living on their estates established many of the historical Norman-French Jersey family names. King John lost all his territories in mainland Normandy in 1204 to King Philip II Augustus, but retained possession of Jersey and the other Channel Islands.\n\nIn the Treaty of Paris (1259), the English king formally surrendered his claim to the duchy of Normandy and ducal title, and since then the islands have been internally self-governing territories of the English crown and latterly the British crown.\n\nOn 7 October 1406, 1,000 French men at arms led by Pero Niño invaded Jersey, landing at St Aubin's Bay and defeated the 3,000 defenders but failed to capture the island.\n\nIn the late 16th century, islanders travelled across the North Atlantic to participate in the Newfoundland fisheries. In recognition for help given to him during his exile in Jersey in the 1640s, King Charles II of England gave Vice Admiral Sir George Carteret, bailiff and governor, a large grant of land in the American colonies in between the Hudson and Delaware rivers, which he promptly named New Jersey. It is now a state in the United States.\nAware of the military importance of Jersey, the British government had ordered that the bailiwick be heavily fortified. On 6 January 1781, a French invasion force of 2,000 men set out to take over the island, but only half of the force arrived and landed. The Battle of Jersey lasted about half an hour, with the English successfully defending the island. There were about thirty casualties on each side, and the English took 600 French prisoners who were subsequently sent to England. The French commanders were slain.\n\nTrade laid the foundations of prosperity, aided by neutrality between England and France. The Jersey way of life involved agriculture, milling, fishing, shipbuilding and production of woollen goods. 19th-century improvements in transport links brought tourism to the island.\n\nDuring the Second World War, some citizens were evacuated to the UK but most remained. Jersey was occupied by Germany from 1 July 1940 until 9 May 1945, when Germany surrendered. During this time the Germans constructed many fortifications using Soviet slave labour. After 1944, supplies from mainland France were interrupted by the D-Day landings, and food on the island became scarce. The SS \"Vega\" was sent to the island carrying Red Cross supplies and news of the success of the Allied advance in Europe. The Channel Islands were one of the last places in Europe to be liberated. 9 May is celebrated as the island's Liberation Day, where there are celebrations in Liberation Square.\n\nJersey's unicameral legislature is the States Assembly. It includes 49 elected members: 8 senators (elected on an island-wide basis), 12 Connétables (often called 'constables', heads of parishes) and 29 deputies (representing constituencies), all elected for four-year terms as from the October 2011 elections. There are also five non-voting members appointed by the Crown: the Bailiff, the Lieutenant Governor of Jersey, the Dean of Jersey, the Attorney General and Solicitor General. Jersey has one of the lowest voter turnouts internationally, with just 33% of the electorate voting in 2005, putting it well below the 77% European average for that year.\n\nThe Council of Ministers, consisting of a Chief Minister and nine ministers, makes up part of the Government of Jersey. Each minister may appoint up to two assistant ministers. A Chief Executive is head of the civil service. Some government functions are carried out in the island's 12 parishes.\n\nThe Bailiff is President (presiding officer) of the States Assembly, head of the judiciary and as civic head of the island carries out various ceremonial roles.\n\nAs one of the Crown dependencies, Jersey is autonomous and self-governing, with its own independent legal, administrative and fiscal systems. In 1973, the Royal Commission on the Constitution set out the duties of the Crown as including: ultimate responsibility for the 'good government' of the Crown dependencies; ratification of island legislation by Order in Council (Royal Assent); international representation, subject to consultation with the island authorities before concluding any agreement which would apply to them; ensuring the islands meet their international obligations; and defence.\n\nQueen Elizabeth II reigns in Jersey as Queen of the United Kingdom and her other Realms and Territories.\n\"The Crown\" is defined by the Law Officers of the Crown as the \"Crown in right of Jersey\". The Queen's representative and adviser in the island is the Lieutenant Governor of Jersey. He is a point of contact between Jersey ministers and the United Kingdom government and carries out executive functions in relation to immigration control, deportation, naturalisation and the issue of passports. Since 13 March 2017, the incumbent Lieutenant Governor has been Sir Stephen Dalton.\n\nJersey is a distinct jurisdiction for the purposes of conflict of laws, separate from the other Channel Islands, England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.\n\nJersey law has been influenced by several different legal traditions, in particular Norman customary law, English common law and modern French civil law. Jersey's legal system is therefore described as 'mixed' or 'pluralistic', and sources of law are in French and English languages, although since the 1950s the main working language of the legal system is English.\n\nThe principal court is the Royal Court, with appeals to the Jersey Court of Appeal and, ultimately, to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. The Bailiff is head of the judiciary; the Bailiff and the Deputy Bailiff are appointed by the Crown. Other members of the island's judiciary are appointed by the Bailiff.\n\nAdministratively, Jersey is divided into 12 parishes. All border on the sea. They were named after the Christian saints to whom their ancient parish churches were dedicated:\nThe parishes of Jersey are further divided into \"vingtaines\" (or, in St. Ouen, \"cueillettes\"), divisions that are historic. Today they are used chiefly for purposes of local administration and electoral constituency.\n\nThe Connétable is the head of each parish, elected at a public election for a four-year term to run the parish and to represent the municipality in the States Assembly. The Procureur du Bien Public (two in each parish) is the legal and financial representative of the parish (elected at a public election since 2003 in accordance with the \"Public Elections (Amendment) (Jersey) Law 2003\"; formerly an Assembly of Electors of each parish elected the Procureurs in accordance with the \"Loi (1804) au sujet des assemblées paroissiales\"). A Procureur du Bien Public is elected for three years as a public trustee for the funds and property of the parish and may contract when authorised by a Parish Assembly. The Parish Assembly is the decision-making body of local government in each parish; it consists of all entitled voters of the parish.\n\nEach parish elects its own force of Honorary Police consisting of \"Centeniers\", \"Vingteniers\" and Constable's Officers. Centeniers are elected at a public election within each parish for a term of three years to undertake policing within the parish. The Centenier is the only officer authorised to charge and bail offenders. Formerly, the senior Centenier of each parish (entitled the \"Chef de Police\") deputised for the Connétable in the States of Jersey when the Connétable was unable to attend a sitting of the States. This function has now been abolished.\n\nAlthough diplomatic representation is reserved to the Crown, Jersey has been developing its own international identity over recent years. It negotiates directly with foreign governments on matters within the competence of the Government of Jersey. Jersey maintains the \"Bureau des Iles Anglo-Normandes\" in Caen, France, a permanent non-diplomatic representation. A similar office, the \"Maison de Normandie\" in St. Helier, represents the \"Conseil général\" of Manche and the \"Regional Council\" of Normandy. It also houses the Consulate of France. In July 2009, a Channel Islands Tunnel was proposed to connect Jersey with Lower Normandy.\n\nJersey is a member of the British-Irish Council, the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association and the Assemblée parlementaire de la Francophonie. Jersey wants to become a full member of the Commonwealth in its own right.\n\nIn 2007, the Chief Minister and the UK Lord Chancellor signed an agreement that established a framework for the development of the international identity of Jersey.\n\nIn January 2011, the Chief Minister designated one of his assistant ministers as having responsibility for external relations; he is now often described as the island's 'foreign minister'.\n\nTax information exchange agreements (TIEAs) have been signed directly by the island with several countries.\n\nJersey is neither a Member State of the European Union, nor does it have a European Union Association Agreement. It does, however, have a relationship with the EU governed by article 335(5)(c) TFEU giving effect to Protocol 3 to the UK's Treaty of Accession in 1972. However, Jersey does not appear on the list of European States and Territories outside the Union and the Communities prepared by the European Council and the Commission. This is a result of the manner of implementation of the Treaty arrangements under the Act of Accession in 1972. Jersey would have been fully within the European Communities like Gibraltar, being a European territory for whose external relations the United Kingdom was responsible, but that is limited to the Protocol 3 arrangements under article 355 TFEU to reflect the then existing relationship with the United Kingdom.\n\nUnder Protocol 3, Jersey is part of the European Union Customs Union of the European Community. The common customs tariff, levies and other agricultural import measures apply to trade between the island and non-Member States. There is free movement of goods and trade between the island and Member States. EU rules on freedom of movement for workers do not apply in Jersey. However, Article 4 of the Protocol requires the island's authorities to give the same treatment to all natural and legal persons of the Communities. In Pereira, the ECJ held that the scope of this article included any matter governed by the Treaties in a territory where the Treaties are fully applicable. The island is therefore within the scope of the Treaties to a limited extent, as a European Territory. To infer, as the French Ambassador and finance minister have attempted to argue, namely that the island is outside the European Union and Communities without qualification is therefore simplistic, in law false. The German blacklisting of the island had to be hastily revoked when this was pointed out. As a result, Jersey is not part of the single market in financial services. It is not required to implement EU Directives on such matters as the movement of capital, company law or money laundering. However, the island's close proximity (135 km south) and its close association with the financial sector of the U.K. has come under increasing scrutiny in recent years, with several mainline publications (e.g., \"The Wall Street Journal\") labelling the island a tax haven.\n\nBritish citizens who have only a connection to Jersey, and not with the United Kingdom or another member state of the European Union, are not considered by the Jersey States to be European Union citizens. They have 'Islander status' and their Jersey-issued British passports are endorsed with the words \"the holder is not entitled to benefit from EU provisions relating to employment or establishment\".\n\nHowever, it is not yet clear whether the citizenship rights in articles 18 and 21 TFEU are partly available to them as British Citizens, given the limited restriction of their rights under article 2 of the Protocol. That restriction on the exercise of certain freedoms does not apply to all Community or Union rights. The freedom of movement under the prior EC régime was and remains a separate set of rights from the Citizen rights under article 20 and 21 TFEU which include the right to move and reside. Those rights are primary citizenship rights, not a mere freedom. It might not need a Treaty change to perfect this, merely a preliminary ruling from the CJEU, and supplementary implementation measures from the Council, given the effective right of entrance and residence granted to EU nationals via Article 4 of the Protocol. Jersey residents presently do not have a right to vote in elections for the European Parliament. Jersey and Guernsey jointly opened an office in Brussels in 2010 to promote their common interests with European Union institutions.\n\nThe effect of the UK leaving the European Union is uncertain. The UK has confirmed that the Crown dependencies position will be argued in the Brexit negotiations.\n\nThe question of an independent Jersey has been discussed from time to time in the States Assembly. In 2005–08, a working group of the States Assembly examined the options for independence, concluding that Jersey 'is equipped to face the challenges of independence' but making no recommendations. Proposals for Jersey independence continue to be discussed outside the States.\n\nIn October 2012, the Council of Ministers issued a \"Common policy for external relations\" which noted \"that it is not Government policy to seek independence from the United Kingdom, but rather to ensure that Jersey is prepared if it were in the best interests of islanders to do so\". On the basis of the established principles the Council of Ministers decided to \"ensure that Jersey is prepared for external change that may affect the island's formal relationship with the United Kingdom and/or European Union\".\n\nJersey is an island measuring (or 66,436 vergées), including reclaimed land and intertidal zone. It lies in the English Channel, about from the Cotentin Peninsula in Normandy, France, and about south of Great Britain. It is the largest and southernmost of the Channel Islands, with a maximum land elevation of 143 m (469 ft) above sea level.\n\nThe central two parishes (St.John and St. Lawrence) occupy the centre of the island and offer many direct routes from north to south through a number of valleys including water works valley.\n\nThe climate is temperate with mild winters and mild to warm summers.\n\nThe Atlantic Ocean has a moderating effect on temperature in Jersey, as water has a much greater specific heat capacity than air and tends to heat and cool slowly throughout the year. This has a warming influence on coastal areas in winter and a cooling influence in summer. The highest temperature recorded was 36.0 °C (96.8 °F) on 9 August 2003 and again on 23 July 2019, and the lowest temperature recorded was −10.3 °C (13.5 °F) on 5 January 1894. By comparison, higher temperatures are found in mainland United Kingdom, which achieved 38.5 °C (101.3 °F) in Faversham, Kent on 10 August 2003. The impact of the Atlantic Ocean and coastal winds ensure that Jersey is slightly cooler than the southern and central parts of England during the summer months.\nSnow falls rarely in Jersey; some years will pass with no snow fall at all.\n\nThe terrain consists of a plateau sloping from long sandy bays in the south to rugged cliffs in the north. The plateau is cut by valleys running generally north-south.\n\nThe following table contains the official Met Office station averages for 1981–2010 for Jersey, being located from St. Helier.\n\nJersey's economy is based on financial services (40% of GVA in 2012), tourism and hospitality (hotels, restaurants, bars, transport and communications totalling 8.4% of GVA in 2012), retail and wholesale (7% of GVA in 2012), construction (6.2% of GVA in 2012) and agriculture (1.3% of GVA in 2012).\n\nThanks to specialisation in a few high-return sectors, at purchasing power parity Jersey has high economic output per capita, substantially ahead of all of the world's large developed economies. Gross national income in 2009 was £3.7 billion (approximately £40,000 per head of population). However, this is not indicative of each individual resident's purchasing power, and the actual standard of living in Jersey is comparable to that in the United Kingdom outside central London. The island is recognised as one of the leading offshore financial centres. The growth of this sector however has not been without its controversies as Jersey has been characterised by critics and detractors as a place in which the \"leadership has essentially been captured by global finance, and whose members will threaten and intimidate anyone who dissents.\" In June 2005 the States introduced the Competition (Jersey) Law 2005 to regulate competition and stimulate economic growth. This competition law was based on that of other jurisdictions.\n\nTourism supports not only hotels, but also retail and services: in 2015 there were 717,600 visitors spending £243 million. Duty-free goods are available for purchase on travel to and from the island.\nIn 2009 57% of the Island's area was agricultural land (an increase on 2008). Major agricultural products are potatoes and dairy produce; agriculture's share of GVA increased 5% in 2009, a fifth successive year of growth. Jersey cattle are a small breed of cow widely known for its rich milk and cream; the quality of its meat is also appreciated on a small scale. The herd total in 2009 was 5,090 animals. Fisheries and aquaculture make use of Jersey's marine resources to a total value of over £6 million in 2009.\n\nFarmers and growers often sell surplus food and flowers in boxes on the roadside, relying on the honesty of customers to drop the correct change into the money box and take what they want. In the 21st century, diversification of agriculture and amendments in planning strategy have led to farm shops replacing many of the roadside stalls.\n\n53,460 people were employed in Jersey : 24% in financial and legal services; 16% in wholesale and retail trades; 16% in the public sector; 10% in education, health and other private sector services; 10% in construction and quarrying; 9% in hotels, restaurants and bars.\n\nJersey along with Guernsey has its own lottery called the Channel Islands Lottery that was launched in 1975.\n\nOn 18 February 2005, Jersey was granted Fairtrade Island status.\n\nUntil the 20th century, the States relied on indirect taxation to finance the administration of Jersey. The levying of \"impôts\" (duties) different from those of the United Kingdom was granted by Charles II and remained in the hands of the Assembly of Governor, Bailiff and Jurats until 1921 when that body's tax raising powers were transferred to the Assembly of the States, leaving the Assembly of Governor, Bailiff and Jurats to serve simply as licensing bench for the sale of alcohol (this fiscal reform also stripped the Lieutenant-Governor of most of his effective remaining administrative functions). The Income Tax Law of 1928 introducing income tax was the first law drafted entirely in English. Income tax has been levied at a flat rate of 20% set by the occupying Germans during the Second World War.\n\nBecause value added tax (VAT) has not been levied in the island, luxury goods have often been cheaper than in the UK or in France, providing an incentive for tourism from neighbouring countries. The absence of VAT has also led to the growth of the fulfilment industry, whereby low-value luxury items, such as videos, lingerie and contact lenses are exported, avoiding VAT on arrival and thus undercutting local prices on the same products. In 2005, the Government of Jersey announced limits on licences granted to non-resident companies trading in this way. Low-value consignment relief provided the mechanism for VAT-free imports from the Channel Islands to the UK until 1 April 2012, at which time this policy of the UK government was binned.\n\nAlthough Jersey does not have VAT, the Government of Jersey introduced a goods and services tax (GST) on 6 May 2008, at a standard rate of 3%. The rate was amended to 5% on 1 June 2011. Although GST is at 5%, shopping in Jersey is still far more expensive than in the UK. Food is not exempt, unlike with VAT.\n\nJersey is not subject to European Union fiscal legislation, and its \"Zero/Ten\" corporate tax legislation will be compliant with the Code of Conduct in business taxation as from the removal of the deemed distribution and attribution anti-avoidance legislation , which was apparently criticised by certain unnamed members of the Code of Conduct Group, a subsidiary body of ECOFIN. The Code of Conduct Group, at least in theory, keeps most of its documentation and discussion confidential. The European Commission has confirmed that the Code is not a legal instrument, and therefore is not legally binding, only becoming of limited \"political\" authority once a unanimous report has been adopted by the Group at the end of the Presidency concerned.\n\nJersey is considered to be a tax haven by some organisations - for example the Financial Secrecy Index ranks Jersey as 18th . Jersey does not feature, however, in the March 2019 revised EU list of non-cooperative jurisdictions for tax purposes.\n\nJersey issues its own postage stamps and Jersey banknotes and coins that circulate with UK coinage, Bank of England notes, Scottish notes and Guernsey currency within the island. Jersey currency is not legal tender outside Jersey: However, in the United Kingdom it is \"acceptable tender\" and can be surrendered at banks within that country in exchange for Bank of England-issued currency on a like-for-like basis.\n\nDesigns on the reverse of Jersey coins:\nBULLET::::- 1p Le Hocq Tower (coastal defence)\nBULLET::::- 2p L'Hermitage, site where St. Helier lived\nBULLET::::- 5p Seymour Tower (offshore defence)\nBULLET::::- 10p La Pouquelaye de Faldouet (dolmen)\nBULLET::::- 20p La Corbière Lighthouse\nBULLET::::- 50p Grosnez Castle (ruins)\nThe main currency of Jersey is the pound, although in many places the euro is accepted because of the location of the island.\nPound coins are issued, but are much less widely used than pound notes. Designs on the reverse of Jersey pound coins include historic ships built in Jersey and a series of the twelve parishes' crests. The motto around the milled edge of Jersey pound coins is \"\" (\"Island of Jersey\"). Two pound coins are also issued, but in very small quantities.\n\nIn July 2014, the Jersey Financial Services Commission approved the establishment of the world's first regulated Bitcoin fund, at a time when the digital currency was being accepted by some local businesses.\n\nCensuses have been undertaken in Jersey since 1821. In the 2011 census, the total resident population was estimated to be 97,857, of whom 34% live in Saint Helier, the island's only town. Approximately half the island's population was born in Jersey; 31% of the population were born elsewhere in the British Isles, 7% in continental Portugal or Madeira, 8% in other European countries and 4% elsewhere.\n\nThe people of Jersey are often called Islanders or, in individual terms, Jerseyman or Jerseywoman. Some Jersey-born people identify as British.\nJersey belongs to the Common Travel Area and the definition of \"United Kingdom\" in the British Nationality Act 1981 is interpreted as including the UK and the Islands together.\n\nFor immigration and nationality purposes, the United Kingdom generally treats Jersey as though it were part of the UK. Jersey is constitutionally entitled to restrict immigration by non-Jersey residents, but control of immigration at the point\nof entry cannot be introduced for British, certain Commonwealth and EEA nationals\nwithout change to existing international law. Immigration is therefore controlled by a mixture of restrictions on those without \"residential status\" purchasing or renting property in the island and restrictions on employment. Migration policy is to move to a registration system to integrate residential and employment status. Jersey maintains its own immigration and border controls. United Kingdom immigration legislation may be extended to Jersey by order in council (subject to exceptions and adaptations) following consultation with Jersey and with Jersey's consent. Although Jersey citizens are full British citizens, an endorsement restricting the right of establishment in European Union states other than the UK is placed in the passports of British citizens connected solely with the Channel Islands and Isle of Man. Those who have a parent or grandparent born in the United Kingdom, or who have lived in the United Kingdom for five years, are not subject to this restriction.\n\nHistorical large-scale immigration was facilitated by the introduction of steamships (from 1823). By 1840, up to 5,000 English people, mostly half-pay officers and their families, had settled in Jersey. In the aftermath of 1848, Polish, Russian, Hungarian, Italian and French political refugees came to Jersey. Following Louis Napoléon's coup of 1851, more French \"proscrits\" arrived. By the end of the 19th century, well-to-do British families, attracted by the lack of income tax, were settling in Jersey in increasing numbers, establishing St Helier as a predominantly English-speaking town.\n\nSeasonal work in agriculture had depended mostly on Bretons and mainland Normans from the 19th century. The growth of tourism attracted staff from the United Kingdom. Following liberation in 1945, agricultural workers were mostly recruited from the United Kingdom – the demands of reconstruction in mainland Normandy and Brittany employed domestic labour.\n\nUntil the 1960s, the population had been relatively stable for decades at around 60,000 (excluding the Occupation years). Economic growth spurred immigration and a rise in population, which is, by 2013, about 100,000. From the 1960s Portuguese workers arrived, mostly working initially in seasonal industries in agriculture and tourism.\n\nImmigration has helped give aspects of Jersey a distinct urban character, particularly in and around the parish of St Helier, which contributes much to ongoing debates between development and sustainability throughout the island.\n\n+ Languages spoken \n! Language!! Main language !! Secondary language !! Total speakers\n\nReligion in Jersey has a complex history, drawn largely from different Christian denominations. In 2015, Jersey's first ever national survey of religion found that two fifths of Jersey people have no religion, with only small handfuls of Jersey people belonging to the non-Christian religions. In total, 54% said they had some form of religion, and 7% were not sure. Of those that specified a denomination of Christianity, equal proportions were 'Catholic' or 'Roman Catholic' (43%) as were 'Anglican' or 'Church of England' (44%). The remaining eighth (13%) gave another Christian denomination.\n\nThe established church is the Church of England, from 2015 under the See of Canterbury (previously under the Winchester diocese). In the countryside, Methodism found its traditional stronghold. A substantial minority of Roman Catholics can also be found in Jersey. There are two Catholic private combined primary and secondary schools: De La Salle College in Saint Saviour is an all-boys school, and Beaulieu Convent School in Saint Saviour is an all-girls school; and FCJ primary school in St. Saviour. A Catholic order of Sisters has a presence in school life.\n\nUntil the 19th century, indigenous Jèrriais – a variety of Norman – was the language of the island, though French was used for official business. During the 20th century, British cultural influence saw an intense language shift take place and Jersey today is predominantly English-speaking. Jèrriais nonetheless survives; around 2,600 islanders (three percent) are reckoned to be habitual speakers, and some 10,000 (12 percent) in all claim some knowledge of the language, particularly amongst the elderly in rural parishes. There have been efforts to revive Jèrriais in schools, and the highest number of declared Jèrriais speakers is in the capital.\nThe dialects of Jèrriais differ in phonology and, to a lesser extent, lexis between parishes, with the most marked differences to be heard between those of the west and east. Many place names are in Jèrriais, and French and English place names are also to be found. Anglicisation of the place names increased apace with the migration of English people to the island.\n\nSome Neolithic carvings are the earliest works of artistic character to be found in Jersey. Only fragmentary wall-paintings remain from the rich mediaeval artistic heritage, after the wholesale iconoclasm of the Calvinist Reformation of the 16th century.\n\nThe island is particularly famous for the Battle of Flowers, a carnival held annually since 1902. Other festivals include \"La Fête dé Noué\" (Christmas festival), \"La Faîs'sie d'Cidre\" (cidermaking festival), the Battle of Britain air display, Jersey Live Music Festival, Branchage Film Festival, food festivals, and parish events.\n\nThe island's patron saint is Saint Helier.\n\nBBC Radio Jersey provides a radio service, and BBC Channel Islands News with headquarters in Jersey provides a joint television news service with Guernsey. ITV Channel Television is a regional ITV franchise shared with the Bailiwick of Guernsey but with its headquarters in Jersey.\n\nChannel 103 is a commercial radio station. Bailiwick Radio broadcasts two music services, Classics and Hits, online at bailiwickradio.com, Apple & Android apps and on TuneIn. Radio Youth FM is an internet radio station run by young people.\n\nBailiwick Express is one of Jersey's digital online news sources.\n\nJersey has only one newspaper, the \"Jersey Evening Post\", which is printed six days a week, and has been in publication since 1890.\n\nThe traditional folk music of Jersey was common in country areas until the mid-20th century. It cannot be separated from the musical traditions of continental Europe, and the majority of songs and tunes that have been documented have close parallels or variants, particularly in France. Most of the surviving traditional songs are in French, with a minority in Jèrriais.\n\nIn contemporary music, Nerina Pallot has enjoyed international success. Music festivals include Jersey Live, Weekender, Rock in the Park, Avanchi presents Jazz in July, the music section of the Jersey Eisteddfod and the Liberation Jersey Music Festival.\n\nIn 1909, T. J. West established the first cinema in the Royal Hall in St. Helier, which became known as West's Cinema in 1923 (demolished 1977). The first talking picture, \"The Perfect Alibi\", was shown on 30 December 1929 at the Picture House in St. Helier. The Jersey Film Society was founded on 11 December 1947 at the Café Bleu, West's Cinema. The large Art Deco Forum Cinema was opened in 1935 – during the German occupation this was used for German propaganda films.\n\nThe Odeon Cinema was opened 2 June 1952 and, was later rebranded in the early 21st century as the Forum cinema. Its owners, however, struggled to meet tough competition from the Cineworld Cinemas group, which opened a 10 screen multiplex on the waterfront centre in St. Helier on reclaimed land in December 2002 and the Odeon closed its doors in late 2008. The Odeon is now a listed building.\n\nSince 1997, Kevin Lewis (formerly of the Cine Centre and the New Forum) has arranged the Jersey Film Festival, a charity event showing the latest and also classic films outdoors in 35 mm on a big screen. The festival is regularly held in Howard Davis Park, St Saviour.\n\nFirst held in 2008, the Branchage Jersey International Film Festival attracts filmmakers from all over the world.\n\nSeafood has traditionally been important to the cuisine of Jersey: mussels (called \"moules\" in the island), oysters, lobster and crabs – especially spider crabs – ormers and conger.\n\nJersey milk being very rich, cream and butter have played a large part in insular cooking. \"(See Channel Island milk)\" However, there is no indigenous tradition of cheese making, contrary to the custom of mainland Normandy, but some cheese is produced commercially. Jersey fudge, mostly imported and made with milk from overseas Jersey cattle herds, is a popular food product with tourists.\n\nJersey Royal potatoes are the local variety of new potato, and the island is famous for its early crop of Chats (small potatoes) from the south-facing côtils (steeply sloping fields). They were originally grown using vraic as a natural fertiliser giving them their own individual taste, only a small portion of those grown in the island still use this method. They are eaten in a variety of ways, often simply boiled and served with butter or when not as fresh fried in butter.\n\nApples historically were an important crop. \"Bourdélots\" are apple dumplings, but the most typical speciality is black butter (\"lé nièr beurre\"), a dark spicy spread prepared from apples, cider and spices. Cider used to be an important export. After decline and near-disappearance in the late 20th century, apple production is being increased and promoted. Besides cider, apple brandy is produced. Other production of alcohol drinks includes wine, and in 2013 the first commercial vodkas made from Jersey Royal potatoes were marketed.\n\nAmong other traditional dishes are cabbage loaf, Jersey wonders (\"les mèrvelles\"), fliottes, bean crock (\"les pais au fou\"), nettle (\"ortchie\") soup, vraic buns.\n\nIn its own right Jersey participates in the Commonwealth Games and in the biennial Island Games, which it first hosted in 1997 and more recently in 2015.\n\nIn sporting events in which Jersey does not have international representation, when the British Home Nations are competing separately, islanders that do have high athletic skill may choose to compete for any of the Home Nations – there are, however, restrictions on subsequent transfers to represent another Home Nation.\n\nJersey is an associate member of the International Cricket Council (ICC). The Jersey cricket team plays in the Inter-insular match among others. The Jersey cricket team competed in the World Division 4, held in Tanzania in October 2008, after recently finishing as runners-up and therefore being promoted from the World Division 5 held in Jersey. They also competed in the European Division 2, held in Guernsey during August 2008. The youth cricket teams have been promoted to play in the European Division 1 alongside Ireland, Scotland, Denmark, the Netherlands and Guernsey. In two tournaments at this level Jersey have finished 6th.\n\nFor Horse racing, Les Landes Racecourse can be found at Les Landes in St. Ouen next to the ruins of Grosnez Castle.\n\nThe Jersey Football Association supervises football in Jersey. The Jersey Football Combination has nine teams in its top division. Jersey national football team plays in the annual Muratti competition among others.\n\nRugby union in Jersey comes under the auspices of the Jersey Rugby Association (JRA), which is a member of the Rugby Football Union of England. Jersey Reds compete in the English rugby union system; after four promotions in five seasons, the last three of which were consecutive, they competed in the second-level RFU Championship in 2012–13.\n\nJersey has two public indoor swimming pools. Swimming in the sea, windsurfing and other marine sports are practised. Jersey Swimming Club have organised an annual swim from Elizabeth Castle to Saint Helier Harbour for over 50 years. A round-island swim is a major challenge that a select number of swimmers have achieved. The Royal Channel Island Yacht Club is based in Jersey.\n\nThere is one facility for extreme sports and some facilities for youth sports. Jersey has one un-roofed skateboarding park. Coastal cliffs provide opportunities for rock climbing.\n\nTwo professional golfers from Jersey have won the Open Championship seven times between them; Harry Vardon won six times and Ted Ray won once. Vardon and Ray also won the U.S. Open once each. Harry Vardon's brother, Tom Vardon, had wins on various European tours.\n\nAn independent body that promotes sports in Jersey and support clubs, 'Jersey Sport' was launched in 2017\n\nWace, a Norman poet of the 12th century, is Jersey's earliest known author. Printing arrived in Jersey only in the 1780s, but the island supported a multitude of regular publications in French (and Jèrriais) and English throughout the 19th century, in which poetry, most usually topical and satirical, flourished (see Jèrriais literature). The first Jèrriais book to be published was \"Rimes et Poésies Jersiaises de divers auteurs réunies et mises en ordre\", edited by Abraham Mourant in 1865. Writers born in Jersey include Elinor Glyn, John Lemprière, Philippe Le Sueur Mourant, Robert Pipon Marett and Augustus Asplet Le Gros. Frederick Tennyson and Gerald Durrell were among authors who made Jersey their home. Contemporary authors based in Jersey include Jack Higgins.\n\nThe Government of Jersey provides education through state schools (including a fee-paying option at secondary level) and also supports private schools. The Jersey curriculum follows that of England. It follows the National Curriculum although there are a few differences to adapt for the island, for example all Year 4 students study a six-week Jersey Studies course.\n\nJersey has a college of further education and university centre, Highlands College. As well as offering part-time and evening courses, Highlands is also a sixth form provider, working alongside Hautlieu School which offers the only non-fee-paying sixth form, and works collaboratively with a range of organisations including the Open University, University of Plymouth and London South Bank University. In particular students can study at Highlands for the two-year foundation degree in financial services and for a BSc in social sciences, both validated by the University of Plymouth.\n\nThe Institute of Law is Jersey's law school, providing a course for students seeking to qualify as Jersey advocates and solicitors. It also provides teaching for students enrolled on the University of London LLB degree programme, via the International Programmes. The Institute of Law also runs a 'double degree' course: students can obtain the LLB from the University of London and a \"Licence en droit M1\" from Toulouse 1 Capitol University; the two combine 4 years of studies in both English and French. The Open University supports students in Jersey, but they pay higher fees than UK students. Private sector higher education providers include the Jersey International Business School.\n\nThree areas of land are protected for their ecological or geological interest as Sites of Special Interest (SSI). Jersey has four designated Ramsar sites: Les Pierres de Lecq, Les Minquiers, Les Écréhous and Les Dirouilles and the south east coast of Jersey (a large area of intertidal zone).\n\nJersey is the home of the Jersey Zoo (formerly known as the Durrell Wildlife Park) founded by the naturalist, zookeeper and author Gerald Durrell.\n\nFour species of small mammal are considered native: the wood mouse (\"Apodemus sylvaticus\"), the Jersey bank vole (\"Myodes glareolus caesarius\"), the Lesser white-toothed shrew (\"Crocidura suaveolens\") and the French shrew (\"Sorex coronatus\"). Three wild mammals are well-established introductions: the rabbit (introduced in the mediaeval period), the red squirrel and the hedgehog (both introduced in the 19th century). The stoat (\"Mustela erminea\") became extinct in Jersey between 1976 and 2000. The Green lizard (Lacerta bilineata) is a protected species of reptile; Jersey is its only habitat in the British Isles.\n\nThe red-billed chough \"Pyrrhocorax pyrrhocorax\" became extinct in Jersey around 1900, when changes in farming and grazing practices led to a decline in the coastal slope habitat required by this species. Birds on the Edge, a project between the Government of Jersey, Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust and Jersey National Trust, is working to restore Jersey's coastal habitats and reinstate the red-billed chough (and other bird species) to the island\n\nJersey is the only place in the British Isles where the agile frog \"Rana dalmatina\" is found. The remaining population of agile frogs on Jersey is very small and is restricted to the south west of the island. The species is the subject of an ongoing programme to save it from extinction in Jersey via a collaboration between the Government of Jersey, Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust and Jersey Amphibian and Reptile Group (JARG), with support and sponsorship from several other organisations. The programme includes captive breeding and release, public awareness and habitat restoration activities.\n\nTrees generally considered native are the alder (\"Alnus glutinosa\"), silver birch (\"Betula pendula\"), sweet chestnut (\"Castanea sativa\"), hazel (\"Corylus avellana\"), hawthorn (\"Crataegus monogyna\"), beech (\"Fagus sylvatica\"), ash (\"Fraxinus excelsior\"), aspen (\"Populus tremula\"), wild cherry (\"Prunus avium\"), blackthorn (\"Prunus spinosa\"), holm oak (\"Quercus ilex\"), oak (\"Quercus robur\"), sallow (\"Salix cinerea\"), elder (\"Sambucus nigra\"), elm (\"Ulmus\" spp.) and medlar (\"Mespilus germanica\"). Among notable introduced species, the cabbage palm (\"Cordyline australis\") has been planted in coastal areas and may be seen in many gardens.\n\nNotable marine species include the ormer, conger, bass, undulate ray, grey mullet, ballan wrasse and garfish. Marine mammals include the bottlenosed dolphin and grey seal.\n\nHistorically the island has given its name to a variety of overly-large cabbage, the Jersey cabbage, also known as Jersey kale or cow cabbage.\n\nJapanese Knotweed \"Fallopia japonica\" is an invasive species that threatens Jersey's biodiversity. It is easily recognisable and has hollow stems with small white flowers that are produced in late summer. Other non-native species on the island include the Colorado beetle, burnet rose and oak processionary moth.\n\nEmergency services are provided by the States of Jersey Police with the support of the Honorary Police as necessary, States of Jersey Ambulance Service, Jersey Fire and Rescue Service and the Jersey Coastguard. The Jersey Fire and Rescue Service and the Royal National Lifeboat Institution operate an inshore rescue and lifeboat service; Channel Islands Air Search provides rapid response airborne search of the surrounding waters.\n\nThe States of Jersey Fire Service was formed in 1938 when the States took over the Saint Helier Fire Brigade, which had been formed in 1901. The first lifeboat was equipped, funded by the States, in 1830. The RNLI established a lifeboat station in 1884. Border security and customs controls are undertaken by the States of Jersey Customs and Immigration Service. Jersey has adopted the 112 emergency number alongside its existing 999 emergency number.\n\nBULLET::::- Balleine's History of Jersey, Marguerite Syvret and Joan Stevens (1998)\nBULLET::::- Jersey Through the Centuries, Leslie Sinel, Jersey 1984,\nBULLET::::- A Biographical Dictionary of Jersey, G.R. Balleine\n\nBULLET::::- The Archaeology of the Channel Islands. Vol. 2: The Bailiwick of Jersey by Jacquetta Hawkes (1939)\nBULLET::::- The Prehistoric Foundations of Europe to the Mycenean Age, 1940, C. F. C. Hawkes\nBULLET::::- Jersey in Prehistory, Mark Patton, 1987\nBULLET::::- The Archaeology and Early History of the Channel Islands, Heather Sebire, 2005.\nBULLET::::- Dolmens of Jersey: A Guide, James Hibbs (1988).\nBULLET::::- A Guide to The Dolmens of Jersey, Peter Hunt, Société Jersiaise, 1998.\nBULLET::::- Statements in Stone: Monuments and Society in Neolithic Brittany, Mark Patton, 1993\nBULLET::::- Hougue Bie, Mark Patton, Warwick Rodwell, Olga Finch, 1999\nBULLET::::- The Channel Islands, An Archaeological Guide, David Johnston, 1981\nBULLET::::- The Archaeology of the Channel Islands, Peter Johnston, 1986\n\nBULLET::::- One Hundred Years of the Royal Jersey Agricultural and Horticultural Society 1833–1933. Compiled from the Society's Records, by H.G. Shepard, Secretary. Eric J. Boston. Jersey Cattle, 1954\n\nBULLET::::- The Channel Islands under Tudor Government, A.J. Eagleston\nBULLET::::- Reformation and Society in Guernsey, D.M. Ogier\nBULLET::::- International Politics and the Establishment of Presbyterianism in the Channel Islands: The Coutances Connection, C.S.L. Davies\nBULLET::::- Religion, History and G.R. Balleine: The Reformation in Jersey, by J. St John Nicolle, The Pilot Magazine\nBULLET::::- The Reformation in Jersey: The Process of Change over Two centuries, J. St John Nicolle\nBULLET::::- The Chroniques de Jersey in the light of contemporary documents, BSJ, AJ Eagleston\nBULLET::::- The Portrait of Richard Mabon, BSJ, Joan Stevens\n\nBULLET::::- gov.je Official Government of Jersey website\nBULLET::::- Visit Jersey Government owned tourism website\nBULLET::::- Jerripedia Online history and family history encyclopedia\nBULLET::::- Vote.je Elections in Jersey\nBULLET::::- Locate Jersey\nBULLET::::- Jersey, from the BBC News\nBULLET::::- Jersey Evening Post\nBULLET::::- Prehistoric Jersey\nBULLET::::- JerseyShops.co.uk - local retailers\n"}
{"id": "15694", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15694", "title": "History of Jersey", "text": "History of Jersey\n\nThe island of Jersey and the other Channel Islands represent the last remnants of the medieval Duchy of Normandy that held sway in both France and England. Jersey lies in the Bay of Mont Saint-Michel and is the largest of the Channel Islands. It has enjoyed self-government since the division of the Duchy of Normandy in 1204.\n\nThe earliest evidence of human activity in Jersey dates to about 250,000 years ago (before Jersey became an island) when bands of nomadic hunters used the caves at La Cotte de St Brelade as a base for hunting mammoth and woolly rhinoceros.\n\nRising sea levels resulted in it has been an island for approximately 6,000 years and at its current extremes it measures 10 miles east to west and six miles north to south. Evidence dating from the Ice Age period of engravings dating from at least 12,000 BC have been found, showing occupation by Homo sapiens.\n\nEvidence also exists of settled communities in the Neolithic period, which is marked by the building of the ritual burial sites known as dolmens. The number, size, and visible locations of these megalithic monuments (especially La Hougue Bie) have suggested that social organisation over a wide area, including surrounding coasts, was required for the construction. Archaeological evidence also shows that trading links with Brittany and the south coast of England existed during this time.\n\nEvidence of occupation and wealth has been discovered in the form of hoards. In 1889, during construction of a house in Saint Helier, a 746-g gold torc of Irish origin was unearthed. A Bronze Age hoard consisting of 110 implements, mostly spears and swords, was discovered in Saint Lawrence in 1976 - probably a smith's stock. Hoards of coins were discovered at La Marquanderie, in Saint Brelade, Le Câtel, in Trinity, and Le Câtillon, in Grouville (1957).\n\nIn June 2012, two metal detectorists announced that they had uncovered what could be Europe's largest hoard of Iron Age Celtic coins. 70,000 late Iron Age and Roman coins. The hoard is thought to have belonged to a Curiosolitae tribe fleeing Julius Caesar's armies around 50 to 60 BC.\n\nIn October 2012, another metal detectorist reported an earlier Bronze Age find, the Trinity Hoard.\n\nAlthough Jersey was part of the Roman world, there is a lack of evidence to give a better understanding of the island during the Gallo-Roman and early Middle Ages. The tradition that the island was called \"Caesarea\" by the Romans appears to have no basis in fact. The Roman name for the Channel Islands was \"I. Lenuri\" (Lenur Islands) and were occupied by the Britons during their migration to Brittany (5th-6th century).\n\nVarious saints such as the Celts Samson of Dol and Branwalator (Brelade) were active in the region. Tradition has it that Saint Helier from Tongeren in modern-day Belgium first brought Christianity to the island in the 6th century, part of the walls of the Fishermen's Chapel dates from this period and Charlemagne sent his emissary to the island (at that time called \"Angia\", also spelt \"Agna\") in 803. A chapel built around 911, now forms part of the nave of the Parish Church of St Clement.\n\nThe island took the name Jersey as a result of Viking activity in the area between the 9th and 10th centuries. The Channel Islands remained politically linked to Brittany until 933, when William Longsword, Duke of Normandy seized the Cotentin and the islands and added them to his domain; in 1066, Duke William II of Normandy defeated Harold at Hastings to become king of England; however, he continued to rule his French possessions as a separate entity, as fealty was owed as a Duke, to the King of France.\n\nAccording to the Rolls of the Norman Exchequer, in 1180 Jersey was divided for administrative purposes into three ministeria: \"de Gorroic\", \"de Groceio\" and \"de Crapau Doit\" (possibly containing four parishes each). This was a time of building or extending churches with most parish churches in the island being built/rebuilt in a Norman style chosen by the abbey or priory to which each church had been granted. St Mary and St Martin being given to Cerisy Abbey.\n\nThe islands remained part of the Duchy of Normandy until 1204, when King Philip II Augustus of France conquered the duchy from King John of England; thanks to Pierre de Préaux who decided to support King John, the islands remained in the personal possession of the English king and were described as being a Peculiar of the Crown. The so-called \"Constitutions of King John\" are the foundation of modern self-government.\n\nFrom 1204 onwards, the Channel Islands ceased to be a peaceful backwater and became a potential flashpoint on the international stage between England and France. In the Treaty of Paris (1259), the King of France gave up claim to the Channel Islands. The claim was based upon his position as feudal overlord of the Duke of Normandy. The King of England gave up claim to mainland Normandy and appointed a Warden, a position now termed Lieutenant Governor of Jersey and a bailiff to govern in his stead. The Channel Islands were never absorbed into the Kingdom of England. However the churches in Jersey were left under the control of the Diocese of Coutances for another 300 years.\n\nThe existing Norman customs and laws were allowed to continue, with the exception that the ultimate head of the legal system was the King of England rather than the Duke of Normandy. There was no attempt to introduce English law. The law was conducted through 12 jurats, constables (\"connétable\") and a bailiff (\"Baillé\"). These titles have different meanings and duties to those in England.\n\nMont Orgueil castle was built at this time to serve as a royal fortress and military base. This was needed as the Island had few defences and had previously been suppressed by a fleet commanded by a French exile, Eustace the Monk working with the English King until in 1212 he changed sides and raided the Channel Islands on behalf of the French King. A \"warden\" was appointed to represent the King in the island, this title sometimes called \"Captain\" and later became \"Governor\" of the island, the duties were primarily military with the power to represent the King to appoint a bailiff who was normally an islander. Any oppression by a bailiff or a warden was to be resolved locally or failing that, by appeal to the King who appointed commissioners to report on disputes.\n\nDuring the Hundred Years' War, the island was attacked many times resulting in the formal creation of the Island Militia in 1337, which was compulsory for the next 600 years for all men of military age. In March 1338, a French force landed on Jersey, intent on capturing the island. Although the island was overrun, Mont Orgueil remained in English hands. The French remained until September, when they sailed off to conquer Guernsey, Alderney, and Sark. In 1339, the French returned, allegedly with 8,000 men in 17 Genoese galleys and 35 French ships. Again, they failed to take the castle and, after causing damage, withdrew.\n\nIt was 1348 when the Black Death reached the Island, ravaging the population. The change in England to a written language in \"English\" was not taken up in Jersey, where Norman-French continued until the 20th-century. In July 1373, Bertrand du Guesclin overran Jersey and besieged Mont Orgueil. His troops succeeded in breaching the outer defences, forcing the garrison back to the keep. The garrison came to an agreement that they would surrender if not relieved by Michaelmas and du Guesclin sailed back to Brittany, leaving a small force to carry on the siege. An English relief fleet arrived in time. On 7 October 1406, 1,000 French men at arms led by Pero Nino, a Castilian nobleman turned corsair, invaded Jersey, landing at St Aubin's Bay and defeated the 3,000 defenders but failed to capture the island.\n\nThe rise of Joan of Arc inspired France to evict the English from mainland France, with the exception of Calais, putting Jersey back in the front line. The French did not succeed in capturing Jersey during the Hundred Years' War, but by taking advantage of the split in England during the Wars of the Roses captured Mont Orgueil in the summer of 1461, allegedly as part of a secret deal between Margaret of Anjou and Pierre de Brézé to gain French support for the Lancastrian cause. The island was held by the French until 1468, when Yorkist forces and local militia were able to recapture the castle.\n\nDue to the island's strategic importance to the English crown, the islanders were able to negotiate, over a number of centuries, the right to retain privileges and improve on certain benefits, such as trade rights, from the King.\n\nDuring the 16th century, ideas of the reformation of the church coupled with the split with the Catholic Faith by Henry VIII of England, resulted in the islanders adopting the Protestant religion, in 1569 the churches moved under the control of the Diocese of Winchester. Calvinism in Jersey meant that life became very austere. Laws were strictly enforced, punishment for wrong doers was severe, but education was improved.\n\nThe excommunication of Elizabeth I of England by the Pope increased the military threat to the island and the increasing use of gunpowder on the battlefield meant that the fortifications on the island had to be adapted. A new fortress was built to defend St Aubin's Bay, the new Elizabeth Castle was named after the queen by Sir Walter Raleigh when he was governor. The island militia was reorganised on a parish basis and each parish had two cannon which were usually housed in the church - one of the St Peter cannon can still be seen at the bottom of Beaumont Hill.\nOne of the favourable trade deals with England was the ability to import wool (England needing an export market but was at war with most of Europe). The production of knitwear in the island reached such a scale that it threatened the island's ability to produce its own food, so laws were passed regulating who could knit with whom and when. The name \"Jersey\" synonymous for a sweater, shows its importance. The islanders also became involved with the Newfoundland fisheries at this time. The boats left the island in February/March following a church service in St Brelade's church and they did not return again until September/October. Colonies were established in Newfoundland.\n\nDuring the 1640s, England, Ireland and Scotland were embroiled in the War of the Three Kingdoms. The civil war also divided Jersey, and while the sympathy of islanders lay with Parliament, the de Carterets (see Sir George Carteret and Sir Philippe de Carteret II) held the island for the king.\n\nThe Prince of Wales, the future Charles II visited the island in 1646 and again in October 1649 following the trial and execution of his father, Charles I. In the Royal Square in St. Helier on 17 February 1649, Charles was publicly proclaimed king after his father's death (following the first public proclamation in Edinburgh on 5 February 1649). Parliamentarian forces eventually captured the island in 1651 and Elizabeth Castle seven weeks later. In recognition for all the help given to him during his exile, Charles II gave George Carteret, Bailiff and governor, a large grant of land in the American colonies, which he promptly named New Jersey, now part of the United States of America.\n\nTowards the end of the 17th century, Jersey strengthened its links with the Americas when many islanders emigrated to New England and north east Canada. The Jersey merchants built up a thriving business empire in the Newfoundland and Gaspé fisheries. Companies such as Robins and the Le Boutilliers set up thriving businesses.\n\nBy the 1720s, a discrepancy in coinage values between Jersey and France was threatening economic stability. The States of Jersey therefore resolved to devalue the liard to six to the sou. The legislation to that effect implemented in 1729 caused popular riots that shook the establishment. The devaluation was therefore cancelled.\n\nThe Chamber of Commerce founded 24 February 1768 is the oldest in the Commonwealth.\n\nThe \"Code\" of 1771 laid down for the first time in one place the extant laws of Jersey, and from this time, the functions of the Royal Court and the States of Jersey were delimited, with sole legislative power vested in the States.\n\nMethodism arrived in Jersey in 1774, brought by fishermen returning from Newfoundland. Conflict with the authorities ensued when men refused to attend militia drill when that coincided with chapel meetings. The Royal Court attempted to proscribe Methodist meetings, but King George III refused to countenance such interference with liberty of religion. The first Methodist minister in Jersey was appointed in 1783, and John Wesley preached in Jersey in August 1789, his words being interpreted into the vernacular for the benefit of those from the country parishes. The first building constructed specifically for Methodist worship was erected in St. Ouen in 1809.\n\nThe 18th century was a period of political tension between Britain and France, as the two nations clashed all over the world as their ambitions grew. Because of its position, Jersey was more or less on a continuous war footing.\n\nDuring the American Wars of Independence, two attempted invasions of the island were made. In 1779, the Prince of Orange William V was prevented from landing at St Ouen's Bay; on 6 January 1781, a force led by Baron de Rullecourt captured St Helier in a daring dawn raid, but was defeated by a British army led by Major Francis Peirson in the Battle of Jersey. A short-lived peace was followed by the French Revolutionary Wars and the Napoleonic Wars which, when they had ended, had changed Jersey forever. In 1799-1800, over 6000 Russian troops under the command of Charles du Houx de Vioménil were quartered in Jersey after an evacuation of Holland.\n\nThe first printing press was introduced to Jersey in 1784.\n\nThe number of English-speaking soldiers stationed on the island and the number of retired officers and English-speaking labourers who came to the islands in the 1820s led to the island gradually moving towards an English-speaking culture in the town.\n\nThe \"livre tournois\" had been used as the legal currency for centuries. However, it was abolished during the French Revolutionary period. Although the coins were no longer minted, they remained the legal currency in Jersey until 1837, when dwindling supplies and consequent difficulties in trade and payment obliged the adoption of the pound sterling as legal tender.\n\nThe military roads constructed (on occasion at gunpoint in the face of opposition from landowners) by the governor, General George Don, to link coastal fortifications with St. Helier harbour had an unexpected effect on agriculture once peace restored reliable trade links. Farmers in previously isolated valleys were able to swiftly transport crops grown in the island's microclimate to waiting ships and then on to the markets of London and Paris ahead of the competition. In conjunction with the introduction of steamships and the development of the French and British railway systems, Jersey's agriculture was no longer as isolated as before.\n\nThe population of Jersey rose rapidly, from 47,544 in 1841 to 56,078 20 years later, despite a 20% mortality rate amongst new born children. Life expectancy was 35 years. Both immigration and emigration increased.\n\nThe town expanded with many new streets and houses in a Georgian style, in 1843 it was agreed to erect street names. The Theatre Royal was built, as were Victoria College, Jersey in 1852 and extensions to the harbour, which were called Victoria Harbour. Jersey issued its first coins in 1841, and exhibited 34 items at The Great Exhibition in 1851, the world's first ever Pillar box was installed in 1852 and a paid police force was created in 1854.\nTwo railways, the Jersey Western Railway in 1870, and the Jersey Eastern Railway in 1874, were opened. The western railway from to La Corbière and the eastern railway from to Gorey Pier. The two railways have never been connected. Buses started running on the island in the 1920s, and the railways could not cope with the competition. The eastern railway closed in 1926 and the western railway in 1936 after a fire disaster that year.\n\nJersey was the fourth-largest shipbuilding area in the 19th-century British Isles, building over 900 vessels around the island. Shipbuilding declined with the coming of iron ships and steam. A number of banks on Jersey, guarantors of an industry both onshore and off, failed in 1873 and 1886, even causing strife and discord in far-flung societies. The population fell slightly in the 20 years to 1881.\n\nIn the late 19th century, as the former thriving cider and wool industries declined, island farmers benefited from the development of two luxury products - Jersey cattle and Jersey Royal potatoes. The former was the product of careful and selective breeding programmes; the latter was a total fluke.\n\nThe anarchist philosopher, Peter Kropotkin, who visited the Channel Islands in 1890, 1896, and 1903, described the agriculture of Jersey in \"The Conquest of Bread\".\n\nThe 19th century also saw the rise of tourism as an important industry (linked with the improvement in passenger ships) which reached its climax in the period from the end of the Second World War to the 1980s.\n\nElementary education became obligatory in 1899, and free in 1907. The years before the First World War saw the foundation of cultural institutions, the Battle of Flowers and the Jersey Eisteddfod. The first aeroplanes arrived in Jersey in 1912.\n\nIn 1914, the British garrison was withdrawn at the start of the war and the militia were mobilised. Jersey men served in the British and French armed forces. Numbers of German prisoners of war were interned in Jersey. The influenza epidemic of 1918 added to the toll of war.\n\nIn 1919, imperial measurements replaced, for the most part, the tradition Jersey system of weights and measures; women aged over 30 were given the vote; and the endowments of the ancient grammar schools were repurposed as scholarships for Victoria College.\n\nIn 1921, the visit of King George V was the occasion for the design of the parish crests.\n\nIn 1923, the British government asked Jersey to contribute an annual sum towards the costs of the Empire. The States of Jersey refused and offered instead a one-off contribution to war costs. After negotiations, Jersey's one-off contribution was accepted.\n\nThe first motor car had arrived in 1899, and by the 1930s, competition from motor buses had rendered the railways unprofitable, with final closure coming in 1935 (except for the later German reintroduction of rail during the military occupation). Jersey Airport was opened in 1937 to replace the use of the beach of Saint Aubin's bay as an airstrip at low tide.\n\nEnglish was first permitted in debates in the States of Jersey in 1901, and the first legislation to be drawn up primarily in English was the Income Tax Law of 1928.\n\nFollowing the withdrawal of defences by the British government and German bombardment, Jersey was occupied by German troops between 1940 and 1945. The Channel Islands were the only British soil occupied by German troops in World War II. This period of occupation had about 8,000 islanders evacuated, 1,200 islanders deported to camps in Germany, and over 300 islanders sentenced to the prison and concentration camps of mainland Europe. Twenty died as a result. The islanders endured near-starvation in the winter of 1944-45, after the Channel Islands had been cut off from German-occupied Europe by Allied forces advancing from the Normandy beachheads, avoided only by the arrival of the Red Cross supply ship \"Vega\" in December 1944. Liberation Day - 9 May is marked as a public holiday.\n\nThe event which has had the most far-reaching effect on Jersey in modern times is the growth of the finance industry in the island from the 1960s onwards. With the release of the Paradise Papers, it was learned that two non-U.S. subsidiaries of Apple were domiciled in Jersey for one year (2015).\n\nBULLET::::- Archaeology of the Channel Islands\nBULLET::::- Maritime history of the Channel Islands\nBULLET::::- Lieutenant Governor of Jersey\n\nBULLET::::- \"Balleine's History of Jersey\", Marguerite Syvret and Joan Stevens (1998)\n"}
{"id": "15695", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15695", "title": "Geography of Jersey", "text": "Geography of Jersey\n\nThis article describes the geography of Jersey, an island territory in the English Channel. The island of Jersey has an area of 119 square kilometres, with 70 kilometres of coastline. Jersey claims a territorial sea of and an exclusive fishing zone of .\n\nJersey is the largest and southernmost of the Channel Islands. It is located north of Brittany and west of the Cotentin Peninsula in Normandy. About 30% of the population of the island is concentrated in Saint Helier, which is a parish and the capital town of the island.\n\nBesides the main island, the bailiwick includes other islets and reefs with no permanent population: Les Écréhous, Les Minquiers, Les Pierres de Lecq, Les Dirouilles. \n\nThe highest point in the island is Les Platons on the north coast, at . Parts of the parish of St Clement in the south were previously below sea-level but the construction of a seawall and infilling of low land has probably left only a few pockets of land below mean sea level. The terrain is generally low-lying on the south coast, with some rocky headlands, rising gradually to rugged cliffs along the north coast. On the west coast there are sand dunes. Small valleys run north to south across the island. Very large tidal variation exposes large expanses of sand and rock to the southeast at low tide.\n\nSnow falls rarely in Jersey; some years will pass with no snow fall at all. \n\nThe main natural resource on this island is arable land. 66% of the island's land is used as such, and the remaining 34% is used for other purposes.\n\nCurrent environmental issues for Jersey include waste disposal, air pollution and traffic.\n\nBULLET::::- Jersey Meteorological Department\n"}
{"id": "15696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15696", "title": "Demographics of Jersey", "text": "Demographics of Jersey\n\nThis article is about the demographic features of the population of Jersey, including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.\n\nThe Bailiwick of Jersey is a British Crown dependency off the coast of Normandy, France.\n\nIn the 2011 census, the total resident population was estimated to be 97,857, of whom 34% live in Saint Helier, the island's only town. The total is increasing at the rate of approximately 1,000 per year on average, and the resident population is thought to have passed the 100,000 level during the course of 2013.\n\nThe following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.\n\n<br>0–14 years:\n16,1% (male 7,998; female 7,453)\n<br>15–24 years:\n14,9% (male 7,243; female 7,000)\n<br>25–54 years:\n41,5% (male 19,854; female 19,836)\n<br>55–64 years:\n12,1% (male 5,619; female 5,954)\n<br>65 years and over:\n15,4% (male 6,307; female 8,468) (2013 est.)\n\n<br>0–14 years:\n18% (male 8,140; female 7,563)\n<br>15–64 years:\n68% (male 30,036; female 30,329)\n<br>65 years and over:\n14% (male 5,454; female 7,393) (2000 est.)\n\n0.49% (average 1991–2005)\n\n11.0 births/1,000 population (2005)\n\n8.5 deaths/1,000 population (2005)\n\n2.81 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2000 est.)\n\n\"At birth:\"  1.11 male(s)/female\n\"under 15 years:\"  1.08 male(s)/female\n\"15–64 years:\"0.99 male(s)/female\n\"65 years and over:\"  0.74 male(s)/female\n\"total population:\"  0.96 male(s)/female (2000 est.)\n\n4 deaths/1,000 live births (2005)\n\n\"total population:\"\n78.48 years\n<br>\"male:\"\n76.07 years\n<br>\"female:\"\n81.07 years (2000 est.)\n\nBULLET::::- Men 72\nBULLET::::- Women 79\n\n1.56 children born/woman (2000 est.)\n\n\"noun:\"\nJerseyman, Jerseywoman\n<br>\"adjective:\"\nJersey\n\nBritish and Norman-French descent. Portuguese and Polish minorities.\n\nAnglican, Roman Catholic, Baptist, Methodist and Presbyterian.\n\nEnglish (official), French (official), Jèrriais (unofficial: spoken more commonly in country districts, used as a first language by around 2,600 people).\nPortuguese commonly found, e.g. notices in telephone boxes, through use by migrant workers.\n\n82% of children in state schools achieve their reading targets – the UK average is 90%.\n\nBULLET::::- List of people from Jersey\n"}
{"id": "15697", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15697", "title": "Politics of Jersey", "text": "Politics of Jersey\n\nPolitics of the Bailiwick of Jersey takes place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic constitution.\n\nAs one of the Crown Dependencies, Jersey is autonomous and self-governing, with its own independent legal, administrative and fiscal systems.\n\nThe legislature is the States Assembly.\n\nExecutive powers are mainly exercised by a Chief Minister and nine ministers, known collectively as the Council of Ministers, which is part of the Government of Jersey. Other executive powers are exercised by the Connétable and Parish Assembly in each of the twelve parishes.\n\nElizabeth II's traditional title as Head of State is Duke of Normandy. \"The Crown\" is defined by the Law Officers of the Crown as the \"Crown in right of Jersey\". The Queen's representative and adviser in the island is the Lieutenant Governor of Jersey. He is a point of contact between Jersey ministers and the United Kingdom government and carries out executive functions in relation to immigration control, deportation, naturalisation and the issue of passports. Since 2017, the incumbent Lieutenant Governor has been Sir Stephen Dalton.\n\nThe Crown (not the government or parliament of Jersey) appoints the Lieutenant Governor, the Bailiff, Deputy Bailiff, Attorney General and Solicitor General. In practice, the process of appointment involves a panel in Jersey which select a preferred candidate whose name is communicated to the UK Ministry of Justice for approval before a formal recommendation is made to the Queen.\n\nJersey has an unwritten constitution arising from the Treaty of Paris (1259). When Henry III and the King of France came to terms over the Duchy of Normandy, all lands except the Channel Islands recognised the suzerainty of the King of France. The Channel Islands however were never absorbed into the Kingdom of England by any Act of Union and exist as \"peculiars of the Crown\".\n\nCampaigns for constitutional reform during the 19th century successfully called for: the replacement of lay Jurats with professional judges in the Royal Court to decide questions of law; the establishment of a Police Court (later known as the Magistrate's Court); the creation of a Petty Debts Court; a professional, salaried police force for St Helier in addition to the Honorary Police; and the reform of \"archaic procedure of the Royal Court for criminal trials\". In 1845, the elected office of deputy was created though this did little to redress the disparity of representation between the rural and urban parishes: in 1854 St Helier contained over half of the island's population, yet was able to elect only three out of the 14 deputies.\n\nTwo significant constitutional reforms took place during the 20th century. In 1946, the States of Jersey drew up plans for change following the German Occupation, which were examined by a Committee of the Privy Council. No change was made to the functions of the Bailiff. The twelve Jurats were removed from the assembly of the States of Jersey and replaced by twelve senators elected on an island-wide basis who would have no judicial functions. The twelve Rectors also lost their place in the States assembly. No reforms were made to the role of the Deputies in the assembly. The second major reforms took place in December 2005, when the States of Jersey Law 2005 came into force. This created a system of ministerial government to replace the previous committee-based administration.\n\nLegislation relating to the organisation of government includes:\nBULLET::::- States of Jersey Law 2005\nBULLET::::- Administrative Decisions (Review)(Jersey) Law 1982\nBULLET::::- Loi (1804) au sujet des assemblées paroissiales\nBULLET::::- Loi (1905) au sujet des assemblées paroissiales\nBULLET::::- Bailiff of Jersey (Vacancy in Office) Law 1959\nBULLET::::- European Communities (Jersey) Law 1973\nBULLET::::- Loi (1853) au sujet des centeniers et officiers de police\nBULLET::::- Centeniers (Terms of Office) (Jersey) Law 2007\nBULLET::::- Human Rights (Jersey) Law 2000\nBULLET::::- Judicial and Legislative Functions (Separation) (Jersey) Law 1951\nBULLET::::- Parish of St. Helier (Qualifications for Office) (Jersey) Law 1976\nBULLET::::- Police Force (Jersey) Law 1974\nBULLET::::- Prison (Jersey) Law 1957\nBULLET::::- Public Elections (Jersey) Law 2002\nBULLET::::- Public Finances (Jersey) Law 2005\nBULLET::::- Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Jersey) Law 2005\nBULLET::::- Royal Court (Jersey) Law 1948\nBULLET::::- Règlements Provisoires\n\nConstitutional reforms continue to be debated in the island.\n\nIn 2009, the States assembly rejected proposals by the Privileges and Procedures Committee to simplify the electoral system by keeping the 12 Connétables and introducing 37 deputies elected to six \"super-constituencies\". In 2010, the States assembly agreed to holding elections for all seats on a single date and to cut the number of Senators from 12 to 8.\n\nIn December 2010, a committee chaired by Lord Carswell recommended changes to the role of the Bailiff—in particular that the Bailiff should cease to the presiding officer over the States assembly.\n\nFollowing widespread criticisms of the system of ministerial government introduced in December 2005, the States assembly agreed in March 2011 to establish an independent electoral commission to review the make-up of the assembly and government.\n\nIn April 2011, Deputy Le Claire lodged au Greffe a request for the Chief Minister to produce, for debate, a draft written \"Constitution for Jersey\";<ref name='P 52/2011'> </ref> the States assembly did not support this idea.\n\nWithin the United Kingdom government, responsibility for relations between Jersey (and the other Crown dependencies) and the United Kingdom lie in the Crown Dependencies Branch within the International Directorate of the Ministry of Justice, which has a core team of three officials, with four others and four lawyers available when required.\n\nIn 2010, the House of Commons Justice Committee, conducting an inquiry into the Crown dependencies, found that the Jersey government and those of the other islands were \"with some important caveats, content with their relationship with the Ministry of Justice\". Tensions have, however, arisen from time to time. In the 1980s, there were discussions about a financial contribution from Jersey towards the United Kingdom's costs in relation to defence and international representation. In March 2009, the House of Lords Constitution Committee criticised UK government proposals in the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Bill dealing with the Common Travel Area, concluding that \"the policy-making process ... has not been informed by any real appreciation of the constitutional status of the Crown dependencies or the rights of free movement of Islanders\". In 2009, the UK cancelled the reciprocal health agreement with Jersey, though a new one came into effect in April 2011. From 2005 to 2011, there were protracted dealings between Jersey and the United Kingdom over Jersey's \"zero-ten\" tax regime and whether it would be acceptable to the European Union.\n\nAlthough Jersey is for most day-to-day purposes entirely self-governing in relation to its internal affairs, the Crown retains residual responsibility for the \"good government\" of the island. The UK government has consistently adopted a \"non-interventionist policy\", and following the \"high degree of consensus amongst academics, legal advisers, politicians and officials\" would only intervene \"in the event of a fundamental breakdown in public order or the rule of law, endemic corruption in the government or other extreme circumstances\".\n\nThe 1973 Kilbrandon Report stated that \"In international law the United Kingdom Government is responsible for the Islands' international relations\" and \"also responsible for the defence of the Islands\". The United Kingdom is responsible for Jersey's international relations as an aspect of the island's status as a Crown dependency. It is now normal practice for the UK to consult the Jersey government and seek their consent before entering into treaty obligations affecting the island.\n\nSince 2000, Jersey's \"external personality\" has developed, recognised in the preamble to the States of Jersey Law 2005 which refers to \"an increasing need for Jersey to participate in matters of international affairs\". In 2007, the Chief Minister of Jersey and the UK government agreed an \"International Identity Framework\", setting out the modern relationship between the United Kingdom and Jersey. The United Kingdom now issues \"Letters of Entrustment\" to the Jersey government, which delegate power to Jersey to negotiate international agreements on its own behalf and sign treaties in Jersey's own name rather than through the United Kingdom. This development was \"strongly supported\" by the House of Commons Justice Committee in its March 2010 report on the Crown Dependencies. In January 2011 Senator Freddie Cohen was appointed as Assistant Chief Minister with responsibility for UK and International Relations (in effect, Jersey's first Foreign Minister). \nJersey is neither a Member State nor an Associate Member of European Union. It does, however, have a relationship with the EU governed by Protocol 3 to the UK’s Treaty of Accession in 1972.\n\nIn relation to the Council of Europe, Jersey – as a territory the United Kingdom is responsible for in international law– has been bound by the European Convention on Human Rights since the UK acceded to the treaty in 1951. The Human Rights (Jersey) Law 2000 makes Convention rights part of Jersey law and is based closely on the United Kingdom's Human Rights Act 1998.\n\nDuring the 1980s, the question of Jersey making an annual contribution towards the United Kingdom's costs of defence and international representation undertaken on behalf of Jersey was raised. In 1987, the States of Jersey made an interim payment of £8 million while the matter was discussed. The outcome of debates within the island was that the contribution should take the form of maintaining a Territorial Army unit in Jersey. The Jersey Field Squadron (Militia), attached to the Royal Monmouthshire Royal Engineers (Militia), deploys individuals on operations in support of British Forces.\n\nThe question of Jersey's independence has been discussed from time to time in the Assembly of the States of Jersey. In 1999, a member of the government said that 'Independence is an option open to the Island if the circumstances should justify this' but the government 'does not believe independence is appropriate in the present circumstances and does not see the circumstances arising in the foreseeable future when it would be appropriate'. In 2000, Senator Paul Le Claire called for a referendum on independence, a proposal which failed to win any significant support. The Policy and Resources Committee of the States of Jersey established the Constitutional Review Group in July 2005, chaired by Sir Philip Bailhache, with terms of reference 'to conduct a review and evaluation of the potential advantages and disadvantages for Jersey in seeking independence from the United Kingdom or other incremental change in the constitutional relationship, while retaining the Queen as Head of State'. The Group's \"Second Interim Report\" was presented to the States by the Council of Ministers in June 2008. The report concluded that 'Jersey is equipped to face the challenges of independence' but 'whether those steps should be taken is not within the remit of this paper'.\n\nProposals for Jersey independence have subsequently been discussed at an international conference held in Jersey, organised by the \"Jersey and Guernsey Law Review\". The former Bailiff, Sir Philip Bailhache has called for changes to the Channel Islands' relationship with the United Kingdom government, arguing that 'at the very least, we should be ready for independence if we are placed in a position where that course was the only sensible option'.\n\nIn October 2012 the Council of Ministers issued a \"Common policy for external relations\" that set out a number of principles for the conduct of external relations in accordance with existing undertakings and agreements. This document noted that Jersey \"is a self-governing, democratic country with the power of self-determination\" and \"that it is not Government policy to seek independence from the United Kingdom, but rather to ensure that Jersey is prepared if it were in the best interests of Islanders to do so\". On the basis of the established principles the Council of Ministers decided to \"ensure that Jersey is prepared for external change that may affect the Island’s formal relationship with the United Kingdom and/or European Union\".\n\n The parliamentary body responsible for adopting legislation and scrutinising the Council of Ministers is the States Assembly. Forty-Nine elected members (8 Senators, 29 Deputies and 12 Connétables) sit in the unicameral assembly. There are also five non-elected, non-voting members appointed by the Crown (the Bailiff, the Lieutenant Governor, the Dean of Jersey, the Attorney General and the Solicitor General).\n\nDecisions in the States are taken by majority vote of the elected members present and voting. The States of Jersey Law 2005 removed the Bailiff's a casting vote and the Lieutenant Governor's power of veto. Although formally organised party politics plays no role in the States of Jersey assembly, members often vote together in two main blocs – a minority of members, holding broadly progressive views and critical of the Council of Ministers versus a majority of members, of conservative ideology, who support the Council of Ministers.\n\nScrutiny panels of backbench members of the assembly have been established to examine (i) economic affairs, (ii) environment, (iii) corporate services, (iv) education and home affairs and (v) health, social security and housing. The real utility of the panels is said to be \"that of independent critique which holds ministers to account and constructively engages with policy which is deficient\".\n\nAccording to constitutional convention United Kingdom legislation may be extended to Jersey by Order in Council at the request of the Island's government. Whether an Act of the United Kingdom Parliament may expressly apply to the Island as regards matters of self-government, or whether this historic power is now in abeyance, is a matter of legal debate. The States of Jersey Law 2005 established that no United Kingdom Act or Order in Council may apply to the Bailiwick without being referred to the States of Jersey.\n\nHistorically, Jersey had a \"committee-based system of administration embracing all public service functions and guaranteeing extensive involvement in policy-making for most members\" of the States Assembly.\nThe report of a review committee chaired by Sir Cecil Clothier criticised this system of government, finding it incapable of developing high-level strategy, efficient policy-coordination or effective political leadership. The States of Jersey Law 2005 introduced a ministerial system of government. Executive powers are now exercised by a Chief Minister and nine ministers, known collectively as the Council of Ministers responsible to the States Assembly.\n\nThe Chief Minister is elected from amongst the elected members of the States. Ministers are then proposed both by the Chief Minister and any other elected member, the final decision being made by the States assembly.\n\nCabinet collective responsibility among members of the Council of Ministers is a feature of the 2015 \"Code of Conduct for Ministers\". However, ministers retain the right to present their own policy to the assembly of the States in their capacity as a member of the assembly in domains not concerning Council policy.\n\nThe overall direction of government as agreed by the Council of Ministers is published periodically as a \"strategic plan\", the current one being the \"Common Strategic Policy 2018 to 2022\". These plans are debated and approved by the assembly of the States of Jersey and translated into action by a series of business plans for each department.\n\nSeveral departments, each headed by a minister, are responsible for developing policy within the framework of the strategic plan and for implementing services. They include: the Chief Minister's Department; Economic Development; Education, Sport and Culture; Health and Social Services; Home Affairs; Housing; Environment; Social Security; Transport and Technical Services; and Treasury and Resources.\n\nIn 2000, the Clothier report noted that \"over the centuries Jersey has had many parties, by which one means only a coming together of like minds to achieve a particular objective. Once achieved, the binding purpose has disappeared and the group pursuing it has dissolved. Such a grouping is not a true political party because it lacks the cement of a common philosophy of government, having only a narrow objective to hold it together until the objective is either attained or lost\". Various parties have been formed over the years in Jersey, but since the 1950s the majority of candidates have stood for election unaffiliated to any political party.\n\nHistorically, two parties dominated Jersey politics. Originating in the 1770s, the \"Jeannot party\" formed around the radical lawyer and Connétable, Jean Dumaresq, who opposed the cabal of Jurats who surrounded Lieutenant-Bailiff Charles Lemprière (whose supporters became known as the \"Charlot party\"). The Jeannots rapidly adopted the nickname of \"Magots\" (cheese mites) after their opponents boasted of aiming to crush them like mites.\n\nThe Charlots and Magots contested power at elections until in 1819 the progressive Magots adopted the rose as their emblem, while the conservative Charlots wore laurel leaves. The symbolism soon became entrenched to the extent that gardens displayed their owners' allegiances, and pink or green paintwork also showed political sympathies. Still today in Jersey, the presence of established laurels or rose gardens in old houses gives a clue to the past party adherence of former owners, and the chair of the Constable of Saint Helier in the Assembly Room of the Parish Hall still sports the carved roses of a former incumbent.\n\nIn order to help control voting in Jersey, it was not unknown for citizens to find themselves taken and stranded on the Écréhous until after voting had taken place. By the time of the introduction of the secret ballot in 1891, party politics had waned.\n\n\"Blues\" and \"Reds\" contested local elections into the 1920s, but Islandwide party politics lay dormant until the post-Occupation elections under the new Constitution of 1948.\n\nThe first election under the new constitution saw a struggle for dominance between the Jersey Democratic Movement and the Jersey Progressive Party, led by Cyril Le Marquand. Having achieved the political reforms it advocated the Progressive Party soon folded as an organisation, while the Democratic Movement, incorporating the tiny Communist Party of Jersey, continued in existence as a campaigning social movement until the late 20th century.\n\nThe Jersey Green Party succeeded in having candidates elected in the 1980s. There were difficulties in maintaining a successful party structure in a consensus government system. Former Senator Stuart Syvret was often reported to be a Green and represents the Jersey Greens in the Green Islands Network.\n\nThe prospect of ministerial government and the creation of an executive and opposition, led to the formation of two political parties – the Jersey Democratic Alliance and the Centre Party – in preparation for the 2005 elections. A group called \"Elect Jersey 2005\" worked to assist some independent candidates prepare for the elections. None of the party-affiliated candidates was successful in the October senatorial elections; three JDA members standing as independents were elected as deputies in November 2005 along with two members of the Centre Party who had similarly stood as independents. The Centre Party was wound up in 2007.\n\nIn 2008, legislation was passed to require registration of political parties who wished to endorse candidates for election as a senator, deputy or Connétable.\n\nIn the 2008 elections for senators, the JDA fielded two candidates, two candidates stood as members of the campaign group \"Jersey 2020\" (focusing on environmental issues) and two for \"Time4Change/Reform\": none was successful. In the subsequent deputies' elections, four JDA candidates were successful, but three of them subsequently left the party and continued to sit as independents. In August 2011, the JDA announced that party members would stand only as independents in the October 2011 elections. A branch of the 'Liberal Democrats Abroad' was formed in the island in November 2011.\n\nOn 4 July 2014, Reform Jersey became Jersey's only political party when it was registered in the Royal Court. The party contested the 2014 general election where 3 of their 8 candidates were elected.\n\nJersey is divided into twelve administrative districts known as parishes. All have access to the sea and are named after the saints to whom their ancient parish churches are dedicated.\n\nThe parishes of Jersey are further divided into \"vingtaines\" (or, in St. Ouen, \"cueillettes\"), divisions which are historic and nowadays mostly used for purposes of electoral constituency in municipal elections. These elections are held to elect the members of the Parish municipality. Each parish has an Honorary Police force of elected, unpaid civilians who exercise police and prosecution powers.\n\nElections for Senators and Deputies occur at fixed four-yearly intervals, historically in October. From 2018, elections will be held in May every fourth year.\n\nAt a local level, the Connétables (or 'constables') are elected for four years. Other posts in parish municipalities vary in length from one to three years and elections take place at a Parish Assembly on a majority basis. It has been some time since parties contested elections at this level, other than for the position of Connétable who uniquely has a role in both the national assembly and in local government.\n\nJersey, as a polity predominated by independents has always had a number of pressure groups. Many ad-hoc lobby groups form in response to a single issue and then dissolve once the concerns have been dealt with. However, there are a number of pressure groups actively working to influence government decisions on a number of issues. For example, in 2012 the National Trust engaged in pressure campaign against development of the Plemont headland. The Trust was supported by the majority of the islands senior politicians, including the Chief Minister, but a proposition made in the States of Jersey for the States to compulsorily purchase the headland and sell it to the Trust was defeated in a vote on 13/12/12. The outcome of the vote was 24 in favour of acquisition, 25 against, with one absent and one declaring an interest.\n\nThe following groups are funded by their members.\n\nBULLET::::- Royal Jersey Agricultural and Horticultural Society\nBULLET::::- Institute of Directors, Jersey branch\nBULLET::::- Jersey Chamber of Commerce\nBULLET::::- Progress Jersey\nBULLET::::- Jersey Youth Reform Team\nBULLET::::- Jersey Rights Association\nBULLET::::- Same Difference\nBULLET::::- Save Jersey's Heritage\nBULLET::::- Société Jersiaise\nBULLET::::- Alliance Française, Jersey branch\nBULLET::::- Attac, Jersey Branch\nBULLET::::- National Trust for Jersey\nThe following groups are, at least, partially funded by government. Appointments are made by the States of Jersey\n\nBULLET::::- Jersey Finance\nBULLET::::- Community Relations Trust\nBULLET::::- Jersey Overseas Aid\nBULLET::::- Jersey Consumer Council\nBULLET::::- Jersey Legal Information Board\nBULLET::::- Jersey Development Company (formerly \"Jersey Waterfront Enterprise Board\")\n\nBULLET::::- Law of Jersey\n\nBULLET::::- \"Balleine's History of Jersey\", Marguerite Syvret and Joan Stevens (1998)\nBULLET::::- \"The Constitution of Jersey\", Roy Le Herissier\nBULLET::::- \"Constitutional History of Jersey\", F. de L. Bois, 1972\n\nBULLET::::- States of Jersey Assembly\nBULLET::::- States of Jersey government\nBULLET::::- States of Jersey Scrutiny\n"}
{"id": "15698", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15698", "title": "Economy of Jersey", "text": "Economy of Jersey\n\nThe economy of Jersey is largely driven by international financial services and legal services, which accounted for 40.5% of total GVA in 2010. Other sectors include construction, retail, agriculture, tourism and telecommunications.\n\nIn 2008 Jersey’s gross national income per capita was among the highest in the\nworld.\n\nIn 2011 the island's economy, as measured by GVA, declined by 1% to £3.6 billion.\n\nJersey based financial organisations provide services to customers worldwide. In June 2008 it was reported that 12,070 people were employed full-time, within this sector. The Royal Bank of Canada (RBC) is a major employer with some 900 staff employed in Jersey, as of March 2009.\n\nThe finance sector profits rose to about £1.5 billion in 2007,\nrepresenting a real-term increase of 12% on 2006.\n\nJersey is one of the top worldwide Offshore financial centers It is described by some as a tax haven. It attracts deposits from customers outside of the island, seeking the advantages such places offer, like reduced tax burdens. Its taxation laws have been widely criticised by various people and groups, however the former Chief Minister of Jersey, Terry Le Sueur, has countered these criticisms, saying that \"Jersey [is] among cooperative finance centres\". And in September 2013 the UK Prime Minister, David Cameron, said it was not fair any longer to refer to any of the overseas territories or Crown dependencies as tax havens, as they have taken action to make sure that they have fair and open tax systems.House of Commons Hansard 9 Sept 2013 Its information privacy law also provides exemptions that other European countries do not, for example in the way Trusts do not have to disclose as much information to Benficiaries about use of their personal data as is normally required under such laws.\n\nJersey's finance industry featured in a BBC Panorama documentary, titled \"Tax me if you can\", first broadcast on 2 February 2009.\n\nOn 4 February 2009 Jersey Finance officially announced its intention to open a new representative office in London.\n\nAt the end of 2008 deposits in Jersey banks totalled £206 billion, down £6.2 billion from £212.3 billion at the start of the year.\n\nThe first regulated Bitcoin fund was established in Jersey in July 2014, with the approval of the Jersey Financial Services Commission, after island leaders expressed a desire for Jersey to become a global center for digital currencies. At the time of the establishment of the fund by a Jersey-based hedge fund company, Bitcoin was already being accepted by some local businesses.\n\nConstruction represented 5.2% of GVA during 2007. In June 2008 it was reported that 4,980 people were employed full-time in the construction and quarrying sector.\n\nSt. Helier, and the Waterfront area in particular, has seen much redevelopment during the early 21st century, with several projects in planning or under-construction during 2009. Developments include a leisure complex, the Radisson hotel, and a new central bus station - Liberation Station. As of 2009 there are plans to sink the A1 road, to provide building sites above it for offices, possibly for financial companies.\n\nConstruction grew by 8% over the period 2006 to 2007.\n\nAs of June 2008 there were 6,610 persons in full-time employment within Jersey's wholesale and retail trades.\n\nRetail and wholesale grew by around 5% during 2007.\n\nSandpiper C.I. Limited operate a chain of stores in Jersey, their franchises include well-known names, such as Marks & Spencer, Iceland, and Costa Coffee.\n\nA number of online retailers, and fulfillment houses operate from the Channel Islands, including Jersey, supplying a variety of low-value goods such as CDs, DVDs, video games, and gadgets. Residents of the EU were choosing to order goods from Jersey, so as to benefit from a tax relief known as Low-value consignment relief (LVCR). UK residents, in particular, were taking advantage of this situation.\n\nA local company, play.com grew substantially during the time that LVCR applied to Jersey. Notably, Amazon UK also took advantage of this by dispatching some low-value items from Jersey.\n\nIn April 2012 the UK Government made law changes to prevent the Channel Islands continued exploitation of LVCR, meaning that UK residents would have to pay the full VAT amount on items imported from the Channel Islands. Some goods are still sold and distributed from Jersey, despite these changes.\n\nPotatoes, cauliflower, tomatoes, and flowers are important export crops, shipped mostly to the United Kingdom. The Jersey breed of dairy cattle is known worldwide and represents an important export income earner. Milk products go to the UK and other EU countries.\n\nAs of 2009 the Jersey Royal potato is the biggest crop export.\n\nJersey saw a boom in tourism during the post-World War II years. This boom has been winding down since the late-1980s. Many of the larger hotels, which were constructed during the boom, have now been demolished.\n\nVisitors to the island arrive either by sea at Saint Helier, or by air at Jersey Airport. These routes are subsidised by the States of Jersey. Exact figures for subsidies are not in the public domain.\n\nVisitor length of stays have reduced from an average of 5.7 nights, in 1997, to 4.3 nights, in 2010.\n\nMost tourist attractions are operated by private companies, including companies owned, or funded by the States of Jersey. Elizabeth Castle, for example, is controlled by Jersey Heritage. Some other attractions are owned by the National Trust for Jersey.\n\nIn 2011 visitor numbers rose by 0.6%, with a notable increase in visitors from Germany, and France. It was reported that tourist and business visitors spent a total of £242m while on the island.\n\nNotable hotels include:\nBULLET::::- the Pomme d'Or overlooking Liberation Square in St. Helier, which during the occupation served as the German Navy Headquarters and from whose balcony the Liberation force raised the Union Flag on Liberation Day, 9 May 1945;\nBULLET::::- the Hotel de France, formerly the Imperial and the Jesuit college, in St. Saviour overlooking the town of St. Helier;\nBULLET::::- Atlantic Hotel, St. Brelade\nBULLET::::- Château La Chaire, Rozel Bay\nBULLET::::- Longueville Manor, St. Saviour\nBULLET::::- Ommaroo Hotel, Saint Helier\nBULLET::::- Royal Yacht Hotel, Saint Helier\nBULLET::::- St. Brelade's Bay Hotel, St. Brelade\n\nThis sector accounted for 4% of GVA during 2007.\n\nMost of the telecoms infrastructure is owned by Jersey Telecom.\n\nIn 2008, most goods imported and exported were transported by Huelin-Renouf, Condor Logistics, and other smaller operators, via either Saint Helier harbour, or Jersey Airport.\n\nDuring the period 1984 to 1994, British Channel Island Ferries were responsible for much shipping to and from the United Kingdom.\n\nJersey shares The International Stock Exchange (TISE) with Guernsey, where it is based.\n\nThe workforce in Jersey tends to increase during the summer months, with around 3,500 more people employed in the summer of 2008 than in the winter of 2007. These seasonal workers are mostly employed in agriculture, hotels, restaurants and bars.\n\nUntil the 19th century, cider was the largest agricultural export with up to a quarter of the agricultural land given over to orchards. In 1839 for example, of cider were exported from Jersey to England alone, but by 1870 exports from Jersey had slumped to . Beer had replaced cider as a fashionable drink in the main export markets, and even the home market had switched to beer as the population became more urban. Potatoes overtook cider as the most important crop in Jersey in the 1840s. Small-scale cider production on farms for domestic consumption, particularly by seasonal workers from Brittany and mainland Normandy, was maintained, but by the mid-20th century production dwindled until only eight farms were producing cider for their own consumption in 1983. The number of orchards had been reduced to such a level that the destruction of trees in the Great Storm of 1987 demonstrated how close the Islands had come to losing many of its traditional cider apple varieties. A concerted effort was made to identify and preserve surviving varieties and new orchards were planted. As part of diversification, farmers have moved into commercial cider production, and the cider tradition is celebrated and marketed as a heritage experience.\n\nThe knitting of woollen garments was a thriving industry for Jersey during the 17th and 18th centuries.\n\nJersey was the 4th largest ship building area in the 19th century British Isles. See History of Jersey.\n\nJersey pounds per US dollar - 0.55 (2005), 0.6981 (January 2002), 0.6944 (2001), 0.6596 (2000), 0.6180 (1999), 0.6037 (1998), 0.6106 (1997); the Jersey pound is at par with the British pound.\n\nUntil the twentieth century, the States relied on indirect taxation to finance the administration of Jersey. The levying of \"impôts\" (duties) was in the hands of the Assembly of Governor, Bailiff and Jurats until 1921 when that body's tax raising powers were transferred to the Assembly of the States, leaving the Assembly of Governor, Bailiff and Jurats to serve simply as licensing bench for the sale of alcohol. The Income Tax Law of 1928 introducing income tax was the first law drafted entirely in English. Income tax has been levied at a flat rate of 20% for decades.\n\nHistorically, no VAT was levied in Jersey, with the result that luxury goods have often been cheaper than in the UK or in France. This provided an incentive for tourism from neighbouring countries. The absence of VAT also led to the growth of a fulfilment industry, whereby low-value luxury items, such as videos, lingerie and contact lenses are exported in a manner avoiding VAT on arrival, thus undercutting local prices on the same products. In 2005 the States of Jersey announced limits on licences granted to non-resident companies trading in this way. The States of Jersey introduced a goods and services tax (GST) in 2008. Although this is a form of VAT, it has been charged at a much lower rate than UK or French VAT, and as such Jersey's fulfilment industry continues.\n\nThe strategy for introducing the new GST tax was to fill a 'black hole' in the budget that was created by the introduction of a new 0/10 tax that replaced the old tax system that previously exempted foreign investors from corporation tax and levied a 20% rate on Jersey residents. The new 0/10 tax exempts all businesses except those in financial services from having to pay any corporation tax (0%), while leaving the financial services to pay a low tax rate (10%). The income generated from the new 0/10 tax proposal will not be equal to the revenue of the original tax system and this leaves Jersey with a deficit in its budget of several million pounds.\n\nTo fill the deficit created by the changes made to Jersey's tax structure, the States of Jersey introduced GST.\nGST is added to most goods and services, which has raised the cost of living. The people hit the hardest by the new GST will be the people on the lowest incomes, however, to try to prevent islanders living below the poverty line, the States of Jersey introduced an Income Support service in January 2008.\n\nIt is arguable that the people who benefit from Jersey's new tax structure are the owners of the large businesses that are separate or support the financial service based businesses. This is because they do not have to pay any corporation tax but will still benefit from the island's business.\n\nBULLET::::- Channel Islands Lottery\n\nBULLET::::- \"Jersey in Figures, 2005\", States of Jersey\n\nBULLET::::- Jersey Treasury and Resources\nBULLET::::- Jersey Finance\nBULLET::::- Jersey Development Company\n"}
{"id": "15699", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15699", "title": "Telecommunications in Jersey", "text": "Telecommunications in Jersey\n\nThe telecommunications in Jersey relate to communication systems in Bailiwick of Jersey, which is a British Crown Dependency off the coast of Normandy, France.\n\nJersey is incorporated into the UK National Telephone Numbering Plan, using the following area codes:\nBULLET::::- JT Global (formerly Jersey Telecom):\nBULLET::::- codice_1 for land-lines\nBULLET::::- codice_2 for mobiles\nBULLET::::- Sure (Batelco):\nBULLET::::- codice_3 for mobiles\nBULLET::::- Airtel-Vodafone:\nBULLET::::- codice_4 for mobiles\n\nGuernsey is incorporated into the UK National Telephone Numbering Plan, using the following area codes:\nBULLET::::- JT Global (formerly Wave):\nBULLET::::- codice_5 for land-lines\nBULLET::::- codice_6 for mobiles\nBULLET::::- Sure (Batelco):\nBULLET::::- codice_7 for Mobiles\nBULLET::::- Airtel-Vodafone:\nBULLET::::- codice_8 for mobiles.\n\nFixed PSTN lines in use; approx 57,700 (2009).\n\nBULLET::::- JT Group Limited\nBULLET::::- Sure\nBULLET::::- Airtel-Vodafone\n\nApprox 108,000 active SIMs.\n\nWith over 120 mobile phone masts, in 2012, spread across its area, the island has a phone mast density almost five times that of the United Kingdom as a whole but similar to any urban area.\n\nJersey Telecom:\nBULLET::::- System X supplied by Marconi Communications\nBULLET::::- Marconi Softswitch and UTStarcom SoftSwitch.\n\nBULLET::::- 4 submarine communication cables.\nBULLET::::- 2 microwave links.\n\nBULLET::::- BBC Radio Jersey 88·8MHz FM, 1026kHz MW AM, and bbc.co.uk/jersey.\nBULLET::::- Channel 103 103·7 MHz FM and channel103.com.\nBULLET::::- Radio Lions, a closed-circuit hospital radio station launched by the Jersey Lions Club in 1975.\nBULLET::::- Radio Force 7, a former Saint-Malo radio station, pioneered bilingual broadcasting aimed at the Channel Islands from January 1988 to the early 1990s.\nBULLET::::- Contact 94. Former radio station (5 September 1988 to 29 November 1991) broadcasting to the island from Normandy.\n\nNot available\n\nBULLET::::- Channel Television.\nBULLET::::- Sub Opt from BBC One of Spotlight Channel Islands.\n\nBULLET::::- Newtel Solutions\n\nBULLET::::- BSkyB\n\nNot available\n\nBULLET::::- JT Group Limited which owns most of the telecommunications infrastructure in Jersey\nBULLET::::- Newtel Solutions\nBULLET::::- Sure\nBULLET::::- Airtel-Vodafone (3G data only)\n\nBULLET::::- Jersey Post\n\nBULLET::::- Jersey Competition Regulatory Authority\n\nBULLET::::- Frémont Point Transmitter\n\nBULLET::::- A History of Radio and Television Relay Services in Jersey\n"}
{"id": "15700", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15700", "title": "Transport in Jersey", "text": "Transport in Jersey\n\nThis article details the variety of means of transport in Jersey, Channel Islands.\nAirports:\nBULLET::::- Jersey Airport\n\nHistorically there were public railway services in the island, provided by two railway companies:\nBULLET::::- The Jersey Railway (closed in 1936)\nBULLET::::- The Jersey Eastern Railway (closed in 1929).\n\nThe mostly coastal lines operated out of St Helier and ran across the southern part of the island, reaching Gorey Harbour in the east and la Corbière in the west. There were two stations in St Helier: (JR) and (JER).\n\nAfter closure, most of the infrastructure was removed and today little evidence remains of these railways. A small number of former station buildings are still standing, including St Helier Weighbridge, which is now in use as the Liberty Wharf shopping centre, and St Aubin railway station, which is used today as the Parish Hall of Saint Brélade. Part of the former Jersey Railway line from St Aubin to Corbière has been converted into a rail trail for cyclists and walkers.\n\nDuring the German military occupation 1940–1945, light railways were re-established by the Germans for the purpose of supplying coastal fortifications. A one-metre gauge line was laid down following the route of the former Jersey Railway from Saint Helier to La Corbière, with a branch line connecting the stone quarry at Ronez in Saint John. A 60 cm line ran along the west coast, and another was laid out heading east from Saint Helier to Gorey. The first line was opened in July 1942, the ceremony being disrupted by passively resisting Jersey spectators. The German railway infrastructure was dismantled after the Liberation in 1945.\n\nTwo railways operate at the Pallot Heritage Steam Museum; a standard gauge heritage steam railway, and a narrow gauge pleasure line operated by steam-outline diesel motive power.\n\nHighways:\n\"total:\"\n577 km (1995)\n\"paved:\"\nNA km\n\"unpaved:\"\nNA km\n\nBuses are operated by CT Plus Jersey, a local subsidiary of HCT Group. Bus service routes radiate from the Liberation Station in St Helier.\n\nIn 2012, it was announced that CT Plus would take over the operation of the bus service, commencing on 2 January 2013, ending 10 years of Connex service in Jersey. This new service is called LibertyBus.\n\nJersey has a well sign posted Island Cycle Network. A traffic-free route for cyclists and pedestrians links Saint Helier to La Corbière and a branch of this route ends up at St Peter's village passing Jersey Airport.\n\nDriving is on the left hand side. The maximum speed limit throughout the entire island is 40 mph (64 km/h), with slower limits on certain stretches of road, such as 20/30 mph (32/48 km/h) in built up areas and 15 mph (24 km/h) on roads designated as \"green lanes\".\n\nVisitors wishing to drive must possess a Certificate of Insurance or an International Green Card, a valid Driving Licence or International Driving Permit (UK International Driving Permits are not valid). Photocopies are not acceptable. A nationality plate must be displayed on the back of visiting vehicles.\n\nIt is an offence to hold a mobile phone whilst driving a moving vehicle. Where fitted, all passengers inside a vehicle must wear a seat belt at all times, regardless of whether they are sitting in the front or the rear.\n\nThe penalties for drinking and driving in Jersey are up to £2,000 fine or 6 months in prison for the first offence plus unlimited disqualification of driving licence. It is an offence to drive whilst under the influence of drugs. Since July 2014 it has also been illegal to smoke in any vehicle carrying passengers under the age of 18.\n\nSingle yellow lines indicate that parking is prohibited and is liable to a fine.\n\nMost parking, including streetside, operate using either Paycards or PaybyPhone (generally at the same car parks) and is indicated with the Paycard Symbol. Paycards are available to purchase at many stores across the island. Paycards are used by scratching the relevant information such as time of arrival.\n\nPaycards are sold in units. Car parks where Paycards are required have signs indicating how many units are required for a period of time. Paycards are sold in 1 unit, 2 units or 4 units.\n\nCertain car parks, such as the Waterfront, Sand Street and Ports of Jersey Car Parks use automatic number plate recognition or ticket technology with a pay upon exit system. \n\nThere are four main residents’ and business parking zones within St Helier.\n\nIn some roads on the outskirts of St Helier and in the harbours, and also in some car parks in St Brelade, parking is free but controlled by parking discs (time wheels) – obtainable from the Town Hall for a small charge.\n\nSeaports and harbours:\n\nSaint Helier is the island's main port, others include Gorey, Saint Aubin, La Rocque, and Bonne Nuit. It is distant from Granville, Manche, from Southampton, from Poole, and from St Malo.\n\nOn 20 August 2013, Huelin-Renouf, which had operated a \"lift-on lift-off\" container service for 80 years between the Port of Southampton and the Port of Jersey, ceased trading. Senator Alan Maclean, a Jersey politician had previously tried to save the 90-odd jobs furnished by the company to no avail. On 20 September, it was announced that Channel Island Lines would continue this service, and would purchase the MV \"Huelin Dispatch\" from Associated British Ports who in turn had purchased them from the receiver in the bankruptcy. The new operator was to be funded by Rockayne Limited, a closely held association of Jersey businesspeople.\n\nPassenger-only access to France is provided by ferry service, to either Barneville-Carteret, Granville or Dielette.\n\nA service to St Malo was provided by , but is now operated by its sister service, Condor Ferries, which runs \"Commodore Goodwill\", a large ro-ro vessel to Portsmouth, and has multiple ro-ro connections to Poole and St Malo.\n\nBULLET::::- Poole - Guernsey - Jersey (seasonal service normally operated by \"Condor Liberation\")\nBULLET::::- Portsmouth - Guernsey - Jersey (\"Commodore Clipper\", \"Commodore Goodwill\". \"Commodore Goodwill\" service is extended to St Malo at the weekends)\nBULLET::::- Saint-Malo - Jersey - Guernsey (\"Condor Rapide\")\n\nBULLET::::- Compagnie Corsaire - to St Malo (?)\nBULLET::::- Condor Ferries freight and passenger services: \"Commodore Goodwill\".\nBULLET::::- Huelin-Renouf Shipping Limited (ceased trading 20 August 2013)\nBULLET::::- Channel Island Lines, took up the Huelin-Renouf business from September 2013\nBULLET::::- Manche Îles Express\n\nBULLET::::- Bailiwick of Jersey\nBULLET::::- List of shipwrecks in the Channel Islands\n"}
{"id": "15704", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15704", "title": "Johnston Atoll", "text": "Johnston Atoll\n\nJohnston Atoll, also known as Kalama Atoll to Native Hawaiians, is an unincorporated territory of the United States currently administered by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service. Johnston Atoll is a National Wildlife Refuge and is closed to public entry. Limited access for management needs is only by Letter of Authorization from the U.S. Air Force and Special Use Permit from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.\n\nFor nearly 70 years, the atoll was under the control of the U.S. military. During that time, it was variously used as a naval refueling depot, an airbase, a nuclear and biological weapons testing site, a secret missile base, and a chemical weapon and Agent Orange storage and disposal site. These activities left the area environmentally contaminated and remediation and monitoring continue.\n\nJohnston Atoll is one of the world's most isolated atolls. It has been the most visited of the U.S. Pacific Marine Monuments as J.A. Continental Airlines previously made stopovers at Johnston. The island was annexed under the name Kalama by King Kamehameha IV of Hawai'i.\n\nThe Johnston Atoll is a deserted atoll in the North Pacific Ocean located about southwest of the island of Hawai'i and is grouped as one of the United States Minor Outlying Islands. The atoll, which is located on a coral reef platform, has four islands. Johnston (or Kalama) Island and Sand Island are both enlarged natural features, while \"Akau\" (North) and \"Hikina\" (East) are two artificial islands formed by coral dredging. By 1964, dredge and fill operations had increased the size of Johnston Island to from its original , also increased Sand Island from , and added two new islands, North and East, of .\n\nThe four islands compose a total land area of . Due to the atoll's tilt, much of the reef on the southeast portion has subsided. But even though it does not have an encircling reef crest, the reef crest on the northwest portion of the atoll does provide for a shallow lagoon, with depths ranging from .\nThe climate is tropical but generally dry. Northeast trade winds are consistent and there is little seasonal temperature variation. With elevation ranging from sea level to at Summit Peak, the islands contain some low-growing vegetation and palm trees on mostly flat terrain and no natural fresh water resources.\n\n!Island\n!Size in1942 (ha)\n!Final Size in1964 (ha)\nstyle=\"background: #FFF;\"\nstyle=\"text-align:left\"Johnston Island\nstyle=\"text-align:right\"19\nstyle=\"text-align:right\"241\nstyle=\"background: #FFF;\"\nstyle=\"text-align:left\"Sand Island\nstyle=\"text-align:right\"4\nstyle=\"text-align:right\"9\nstyle=\"background: #FFF;\"\nstyle=\"text-align:left\"North (\"Akau\") Island\nstyle=\"text-align:right\"\nstyle=\"text-align:right\"10\nstyle=\"background: #FFF;\"\nstyle=\"text-align:left\"East (\"Hikina\") Island\nstyle=\"text-align:right\"\nstyle=\"text-align:right\"7\nstyle=\"text-align:left\"Total land area\nstyle=\"text-align:right\"23\nstyle=\"text-align:right\"267\nstyle=\"text-align:left\"Johnston Atoll\nstyle=\"text-align:right\"13,000\nstyle=\"text-align:right\"13,000\n\nIt is a dry atoll with less than 20 inches of annual rainfall.\n\nThe first Western record of the atoll was on September 2, 1796, when the Boston-based American brig \"Sally\" accidentally grounded on a shoal near the islands. The ship's captain, Joseph Pierpont, published his experience in several American newspapers the following year giving an accurate position of Johnston and Sand Island along with part of the reef. However, he did not name or lay claim to the area, which the local tribes referred to as \"iwi poʻo mokupuni\". The islands were not officially named until Captain Charles J. Johnston of the Royal Naval ship sighted them on December 14, 1807. The ship's journal recorded: “on the 14th [December 1808] made a new discovery, viz. two very low islands, in lat. 16º 52´ N. long. 190º 26´ E., having a dangerous reef to the east of them, and the whole not exceeding four miles in extent”.\n\nThe Guano Islands Act, enacted on August 18, 1856, was federal legislation passed by the U.S. Congress that enabled citizens of the U.S. to take possession of islands containing guano deposits. In 1858, William Parker and R. F. Ryan chartered the schooner \"Palestine\" specifically to find Johnston Atoll. They located guano on the atoll in March 1858 and proceeded to claim the island. By 1858, Johnston Atoll was claimed by both the United States and the Kingdom of Hawaii. In June 1858, Samuel Allen, sailing on the \"Kalama\", tore down the U.S. flag and raised the Hawaiian flag, renaming the atoll Kalama. The larger island was renamed Kalama Island, and the nearby smaller island was called Cornwallis.\n\nReturning on July 27, 1858, the Captain of the \"Palestine\" again hoisted the American flag and reasserted the rights of the United States. The same day, the atoll was declared part of the domain of King Kamehameha IV. On this visit, however, the \"Palestine\" left two crew members on the island to gather phosphate. While \"Palestine\" was at the atoll and these two men were still on the island, a July 27, 1858 proclamation of Kamehameha IV declared the annexation of this island to Hawaii, stating that it was \"derelict and abandoned.\" However, later that year King Kamehameha revoked the lease granted to Samuel Allen when the King learned that the atoll had been claimed previously by the United States. However, this did not prevent the Hawaiian Territory from making use of the Atoll or asserting ownership.\n\nBy 1890, the atoll's guano deposits had been almost entirely depleted (mined out) by U.S. interests operating under the Guano Islands Act. In 1892, made a survey and map of the island, hoping that it might be suitable as a telegraph cable station. On January 16, 1893, the Hawaiian Legation at London reported a diplomatic conference over this temporary occupation of the island. However, the Kingdom of Hawaii was overthrown on January 17, 1893. When Hawaii was annexed by the United States in 1898, during the Spanish–American War, the name of Johnston Island was omitted from the list of Hawaiian Islands. On September 11, 1909, Johnston was leased by the Territory of Hawaii to a private citizen for fifteen years. A board shed was built on the southeast side of the larger island, and a small tramline run up onto the slope of the low hill, to facilitate the removal of guano. Apparently neither the quantity nor the quality of the guano was sufficient to pay for gathering it, so that the project was soon abandoned.\n\nThe Tanager Expedition was a joint expedition, sponsored by the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the Bishop Museum of Hawaii, which visited the Atoll in 1923. The expedition to the atoll consisted of two teams accompanied by destroyer convoys, with the first departing Honolulu on July 7, 1923 aboard the , which conducted the first survey of Johnston Island in the 20th century. Aerial survey and mapping flights over Johnston were conducted with a Douglas DT-2 floatplane carried on her fantail, which was hoisted into the water for takeoff. From July 10–22, 1923, the atoll was recorded in a pioneering aerial photography project. The left Honolulu on July 16 and joined up with the \"Whippoorwill\" to complete the survey and then traveled to Wake Island to complete surveys there. Tents were pitched on the southwest beach of fine white sand, and a rather thorough biological survey was made of the island. Hundreds of sea birds, of a dozen kinds, were the principal inhabitants, together with lizards, insects, and hermit crabs. The reefs and shallow water abounded with fish and other marine life.\nOn June 29, 1926, by , President Calvin Coolidge established Johnston Island Reservation as a federal bird refuge and placed it under the control of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, as a \"refuge and breeding ground for native birds.\" Johnston Atoll was added to the United States National Wildlife Refuge system in 1926, and renamed the Johnston Island National Wildlife Refuge in 1940. The Johnston Atoll National Wildlife Refuge was established to protect the tropical ecosystem and the wildlife that it harbors.\nHowever, the Department of Agriculture had no ships, and the Navy was interested in the Atoll for strategic reasons, so with on December 29, 1934, President Franklin D. Roosevelt placed the islands under the \"control and jurisdiction of the Secretary of the Navy for administrative purposes,\" but subject to use as a refuge and breeding ground for native birds, under the Department of Interior.\n\nOn February 14, 1941, President Franklin Roosevelt issued to create naval defense areas in the central Pacific territories. The proclamation established \"Johnston Island Naval Defensive Sea Area\" which encompassed the territorial waters between the extreme high-water marks and the three-mile marine boundaries surrounding the atoll. \"Johnston Island Naval Airspace Reservation\" was also established to restrict access to the airspace over the naval defense sea area. Only U.S. government ships and aircraft were permitted to enter the naval defense areas at Johnston unless authorized by the Secretary of the Navy.\n\nIn 1990, two full-time U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service personnel, a Refuge Manager and a biologist, were stationed on Johnston Atoll to handle the increase in biological, contaminant, and resource conflict activities.\nAfter the military mission on the island ended in 2004, the Atoll was administered by the Pacific Remote Islands National Wildlife Refuge Complex. The outer islets and water rights were managed cooperatively by the Fish and Wildlife Service, with some of the actual Johnston Island land mass remaining under control of the United States Air Force (USAF) for environmental remediation and the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) for plutonium cleanup purposes. However, on January 6, 2009, under authority of section 2 of the Antiquities Act, the Pacific Remote Islands Marine National Monument was established by President George W. Bush to administer and protect Johnston Island along with six other Pacific islands. The national monument includes Johnston Atoll National Wildlife Refuge within its boundaries and contains of land and over of water area. The Administration of President Barack Obama in 2014 extended the protected area to encompass the entire Exclusive Economic Zone, by banning all commercial fishing activities. Under a 2017 review of all national monuments extended since 1996, then-Secretary of the Interior Ryan Zinke recommended to permit fishing outside the 12-mile limit.\n\nOn December 29, 1934, President Franklin D. Roosevelt with transferred control of Johnston Atoll to the United States Navy under the 14th Naval District, Pearl Harbor, in order to establish an air station, and also to the Department of the Interior to administer the bird refuge. In 1948, the USAF assumed control of the Atoll.\n\nDuring the Operation Hardtack nuclear test series from April 22 to August 19, 1958, administration of Johnston Atoll was assigned to the Commander of Joint Task Force 7. After the tests were completed, the island reverted to the command of the US Air Force.\n\nFrom 1963 to 1970, the Navy's Joint Task force 8 and the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) held joint operational control of the island during high-altitude nuclear testing operations.\n\nIn 1970, operational control was handed back to the Air Force until July 1973, when Defense Special Weapons Agency was given host-management responsibility by the Secretary of Defense. Over the years, sequential descendant organizations have been the Defense Atomic Support Agency (DASA) from 1959 to 1971, the Defense Nuclear Agency (DNA) from 1971 to 1996, and the Defense Special Weapons Agency (DSWA) from 1996 to 1998. In 1998, Defense Special Weapons Agency, and selected elements of the Office of Secretary of Defense were combined to form the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA). In 1999, host-management responsibility transferred from the Defense Threat Reduction Agency once again to the Air Force until the Air Force mission ended in 2004 and the base was closed.\n\nIn 1935, personnel from the US Navy's Patrol Wing Two carried out some minor construction to develop the atoll for seaplane operation. In 1936, the Navy began the first of many changes to enlarge the atoll's land area. They erected some buildings and a boat landing on Sand Island and blasted coral to clear a seaplane landing. Several seaplanes made flights from Hawaii to Johnston, such as that of a squadron of six aircraft in November, 1935.\n\nIn November 1939, further work was commenced on Sand Island by civilian contractors to allow the operation of one squadron of patrol planes with tender support. Part of the lagoon was dredged and the excavated material was used to make a parking area connected by a causeway to Sand Island. Three seaplane landings were cleared, one by and two cross-landings each by and dredged to a depth of . Sand Island had barracks built for 400 men, a mess hall, underground hospital, radio station, water tanks and a steel control tower. In December 1943 an additional of parking was added to the seaplane base.\n\nOn May 26, 1942, a United States Navy Consolidated PBY-5 Catalina wrecked at Johnston Atoll. The Catalina pilot made a normal power landing and immediately applied throttle for take-off. At a speed of about fifty knots the plane swerved to the left and then continued into a violent waterloop. The hull of the plane was broken open and the Catalina sank immediately.\n\nAfter the war on March 27, 1949, a PBY-6A Catalina had to make a forced landing during flight from Kwajalein to Johnston Island. The plane was damaged beyond repair and the crew of 11 was rescued nine hours later by a Navy ship which sank the plane by gunfire.\n\nDuring 1958, a proposed support agreement for Navy Seaplane operations at Johnston Island was under discussion though it was never completed because a requirement for the operation failed to materialize.\n\nBy September 1941, construction of an airfield on Johnston Island commenced. A by runway was built together with two 400-man barracks, two mess halls, a cold-storage building, an underground hospital, a fresh-water plant, shop buildings, and fuel storage. The runway was complete by December 7, 1941, though in December 1943 the 99th Naval Construction Battalion arrived at the atoll and proceeded to lengthen the runway to . The runway was subsequently lengthened and improved as the island was enlarged.\n\nDuring WWII Johnston Atoll was used as a refueling base for submarines, and also as an aircraft refueling stop for American bombers transiting the Pacific Ocean, including the Boeing B-29 Enola Gay. By 1944, the atoll was one of the busiest air transport terminals in the Pacific. Air Transport Command aeromedical evacuation planes stopped at Johnston en route to Hawaii. Following V-J Day on August 14, 1945, Johnston Atoll saw the flow of men and aircraft that had been coming from the mainland into the Pacific turn around. By 1947, over 1,300 B-29 and B-24 bombers had passed through the Marianas, Kwajalein, Johnston Island, and Oahu en route to Mather Field and civilian life.\n\nFollowing WWII, Johnston Atoll Airport was used commercially by Continental Air Micronesia, touching down between Honolulu and Majuro. When an aircraft landed it was surrounded by armed soldiers and the passengers were not allowed to leave the aircraft. Aloha Airlines also made weekly scheduled flights to the island carrying civilian and military personnel; in the 1990s there were flights almost daily, and some days saw up to 3 arrivals. Just before movement of the chemical munitions to Johnston Atoll, the Surgeon General, Public Health Service, reviewed the shipment and the Johnston Atoll storage plans. His recommendations caused the Secretary of Defense in December 1970 to issue instructions suspending missile launches and all non-essential aircraft flights. As a result, Air Micronesia service was immediately discontinued, and missile firings were terminated with the exception of two 1975 satellite launches deemed critical to the island's mission.\nThere were many times when the runway was needed for emergency landings for both civil and military aircraft. When the runway was decommissioned, it could no longer be used as a potential emergency landing place when planning flight routes across the Pacific Ocean. As of 2003, the airfield at Johnston Atoll consisted of an unmaintained closed single asphalt/concrete runway 5/23, a parallel taxiway, and a large paved ramp along the southeast side of the runway.\n\n In February 1941 Johnston Atoll was designated as a Naval Defensive Sea Area and Airspace Reservation. On the day the Japanese struck Pearl Harbor, December 7, 1941, was out of her home port of Pearl Harbor, to make a simulated bombardment at Johnston Island. Japan's strike at Pearl Harbor occurred as the ship was unloading marines, civilians and stores on the atoll. On December 15, 1941, the atoll was shelled outside the reef by a Japanese submarine, which had been part of the attack on Pearl Harbor eight days earlier. Several buildings including the power station were hit, but no personnel were injured. Additional Japanese shelling occurred on December 22 and 23, 1941. On all occasions, Johnston Atoll's coastal artillery guns returned fire, driving off the sub.\n\nIn July 1942, the civilian contractors at the atoll were replaced by 500 men from the 5th and 10th Naval Construction Battalions, who expanded the fuel storage and water production at the base and built additional facilities. The 5th Battalion departed in January 1943. In December 1943 the 99th Naval Construction Battalion arrived at the atoll and proceeded to lengthen the runway to and add an additional of parking to the seaplane base.\n\nOn January 25, 1957, the Department of Treasury was granted a 5-year permit for the United States Coast Guard (USCG) to operate and maintain a Long Range Aid to Navigation (LORAN) transmitting station on Johnston Atoll. Two years later in December 1959, the Secretary of Defense approved the Secretary of the Treasury's request to use Sand Island for U.S. Coast Guard LORAN A and C station sites. The USCG was granted permission to install a LORAN A and C station on Sand Island to be staffed by U.S. Coast Guard personnel through June 30, 1992. The permit for a LORAN station to operate on Johnston Island was terminated in 1962. On November 1, 1957, a new United States Coast Guard LORAN-A station was commissioned. By 1958, the Coast Guard LORAN Station at Sand Island began transmitting on a 24-hour basis, thus establishing a new LORAN rate in the Central Pacific. The new rate between Johnston Island and French Frigate Shoals gave a higher order of accuracy for fixing positions in the steamship lanes from Oahu, Hawaii, to Midway Island. In the past, this was impossible in some areas along this important shipping route. The U.S. Coast Guard LORAN-A Station on Sand Island ceased transmitting on June 30, 1961 when the station began transmitting from the LORAN-C station, using a larger 625-foot antenna by 1979.\n\nThe LORAN-C station was disestablished on July 1, 1992, and all Coast Guard personnel, electronic equipment, and property departed the atoll that month. Buildings on Sand Island were transferred to other activities. LORAN whip antennas on Johnston and Sand Islands were removed, and the 625-foot LORAN tower and antenna were demolished on December 3, 1992. The LORAN A and C station and buildings on Sand Island were then dismantled and removed.\n\nBetween 1958 and 1975, Johnston Atoll was used as an American national nuclear test site for atmospheric and extremely high-altitude nuclear explosions in outer space. In 1958, Johnston Atoll was the location of the two \"Hardtack I\" nuclear tests firings. One conducted August 1, 1958 was codenamed \"Hardtack Teak\" and one conducted August 12, 1958 was codenamed \"Orange.\" Both tests detonated 3.8-megaton hydrogen bombs launched to high altitudes by rockets from Johnston Atoll.\n\nJohnston Island was also used as the launch site of 124 sounding rockets going up as high as . These carried scientific instruments and telemetry equipment, either in support of the nuclear bomb tests, or in experimental antisatellite technology.\n\nEight PGM-17 Thor missiles deployed by the U.S. Air Force (USAF) were launched from Johnston Island in 1962 as part of \"Operation Fishbowl,\" a part of \"Operation Dominic\" nuclear weapons tests in the Pacific. The first launch in \"Operation Fishbowl\" was a successful research and development launch with no warhead. In the end, \"Operation Fishbowl\" produced four successful high-altitude detonations: \"Starfish Prime,\" \"Checkmate,\" \"Bluegill Triple Prime,\" and \"Kingfish.\" In addition, it produced one atmospheric nuclear explosion, \"Tightrope.\"\n\nOn July 9, 1962, \"Starfish Prime\" had a 1.4-megaton explosion, using a W49 warhead at an altitude of about . It created a very brief fireball visible over a wide area, plus bright artificial auroras visible in Hawaii for several minutes. \"Starfish Prime\" also produced an electromagnetic pulse that disrupted some electric power and communication systems in Hawaii. It pumped enough radiation into the Van Allen belts to destroy or damage seven satellites in orbit.\n\nThe final Fishbowl launch that used a Thor missile carried the \"Kingfish\" 400-kiloton warhead up to its detonation altitude. Although it was officially one of the Operation Fishbowl tests, it is sometimes not listed among high-altitude nuclear tests because of its lower detonation altitude. \"Tightrope\" was the final test of Operation Fishbowl and detonated on November 3, 1962. It launched on a nuclear-armed Nike-Hercules missile and was detonated at a lower altitude than the other tests:\n\n\"At Johnston Island, there was an intense white flash. Even with high-density goggles, the burst was too bright to view, even for a few seconds. A distinct thermal pulse was felt on bare skin. A yellow-orange disc was formed, and transformed itself into a purple doughnut. A glowing purple cloud was faintly visible for a few minutes.\" The nuclear yield was reported in most official documents as “less than 20 kilotons.” One report by the U.S. government reported the yield of the \"Tightrope\" test as 10 kilotons. Seven sounding rockets were launched from Johnston Island in support of the \"Tightrope\" test, and this was the final American nuclear atmospheric test.\n\nThe \"Fishbowl\" series included four failures, all of which were deliberately disrupted by range safety officers when the missiles' systems failed during launch and were aborted. The second launch of the Fishbowl series, \"Bluegill\", carried an active warhead. Bluegill was \"lost\" by a defective range safety tracking radar and had to be destroyed 10 minutes after liftoff even though it probably ascended successfully. The subsequent nuclear weapon launch failures from Johnston Atoll caused serious contamination to the island and surrounding areas with weapons-grade plutonium and americium that remains an issue to this day.\n\nThe failure of the \"Bluegill\" launch created in effect a dirty bomb but did not release the nuclear warhead's plutonium debris onto Johnston Atoll as the missile fell into the ocean south of the island and was not recovered. However, the \"Starfish\", \"Bluegill Prime\", and \"Bluegill Double Prime\" test launch failures in 1962 scattered radioactive debris over Johnston Island contaminating it, the lagoon, and Sand Island with plutonium for decades.\n\n\"Starfish\", a high altitude Thor launched nuclear test scheduled for June 20, 1962, was the first to contaminate the atoll. The rocket with the 1.45-megaton Starfish device (W49 warhead and the MK-4 Re-entry vehicle) on its nose was launched that evening, but the Thor missile engine cut out only 59 seconds after launch. The range safety officer sent a destruct signal 65 seconds after launch, and the missile was destroyed at approximately altitude. The warhead high explosive detonated in 1-point safe fashion, destroying the warhead without producing nuclear yield. Large pieces of the plutonium contaminated missile including pieces of the warhead, booster rocket, engine, re-entry vehicle and missile parts fell back on Johnston Island. More wreckage along with plutonium contamination was found on nearby Sand Island.\n\n\"Bluegill Prime,\" the second attempt to launch the payload which failed last time was scheduled for 23:15 (local) on July 25, 1962. It too was a genuine disaster and caused the most serious plutonium contamination on the island. The Thor missile was carrying one pod, two re-entry vehicles and the W50 nuclear warhead. The missile engine malfunctioned immediately after ignition, and the range safety officer fired the destruct system while the missile was still on the launch pad. The Johnston Island launch complex was demolished in the subsequent explosions and fire which burned through the night. The launch emplacement and portions of the island were contaminated with radioactive plutonium spread by the explosion, fire and wind-blown smoke.\n\nAfterward, the Johnston Island launch complex was heavily damaged and contaminated with plutonium. Missile launches and nuclear testing halted until the radioactive debris was dumped and soils were recovered and the launch emplacement rebuilt. Three months of repairs, decontamination, and rebuilding the LE1 as well as the backup pad LE2 were necessary before tests could resume. In an effort to continue with the testing program, U.S. troops were sent in to do a rapid cleanup. The troops scrubbed down the revetments and launch pad, carted away debris and removed the top layer of coral around the contaminated launch pad. The plutonium-contaminated rubbish was dumped in the lagoon, polluting the surrounding marine environment. More than 550 drums of contaminated material were dumped in the ocean off Johnston from 1964–1965. At the time of the Bluegill Prime disaster, the top fill around the launch pad was scraped by a bulldozer and grader. It was then dumped into the lagoon to make a ramp, so the rest of the debris could be loaded onto landing craft to be dumped out into the ocean. An estimated 10 percent of the plutonium from the test device was in the fill used to make the ramp. Then the ramp was covered and placed into a landfill on the island during 1962 dredging to extend the island. The lagoon was again dredged in 1963–1964 and used to expand Johnston Island from to recontaminating additional portions of the island.\nOn October 15, 1962 the \"Bluegill Double Prime\" test also misfired. During the test, the rocket was destroyed at a height of 109,000 feet after it malfunctioned 90 seconds into the flight. U.S. Defense Department officials confirm that when the rocket was destroyed, it contributed to the radioactive pollution on the island.\n\nIn 1963, the U.S. Senate ratified the Limited Test Ban Treaty, which contained a provision known as \"Safeguard C\". Safeguard C was the basis for maintaining Johnston Atoll as a \"ready to test\" above-ground nuclear testing site should atmospheric nuclear testing ever be deemed to be necessary again. In 1993, Congress appropriated no funds for the Johnston Atoll \"Safeguard C\" mission, bringing it to an end.\n\nProgram 437 turned the PGM-17 Thor into an operational anti-satellite (ASAT) weapon system, a capability that was kept top secret even after it was deployed. The Program 437 mission was approved for development by U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara on November 20, 1962 and based at the Atoll. Program 437 used modified Thor missiles that had been returned from deployment in Great Britain and was the second deployed U.S. operational nuclear anti-satellite operation. Eighteen more suborbital Thor launches took place from Johnston Island during the 1964–1975 period in support of Program 437. In 1965–1966 four Program 437 Thors were launched with 'Alternate Payloads' for satellite inspection. This was evidently an elaboration of the system to allow visual verification of the target before destroying it. These flights may have been related to the late 1960s Program 922, a non-nuclear version of Thor with infrared homing and a high-explosive warhead. Thors were kept positioned and active near the two Johnston Island launch pads after 1964. However, partly because of the Vietnam War, in October 1970 the Department of Defense had transferred Program 437 to standby status as an economic measure. The Strategic Arms Limitation Talks led to Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty that prohibited 'interference with national means of verification', which meant that ASAT's were not allowed, by treaty, to attack Russian spy satellites. Thors were removed from Johnston Atoll and were stored in mothballed war-reserve condition at Vandenberg Air Force Base from 1970 until the anti-satellite mission of Johnston Island facilities was ceased on August 10, 1974, and the program was officially discontinued on April 1, 1975, when any possibility of restoring the ASAT program was finally terminated. Eighteen Thor launches in support of the Program 437 Alternate Payload (AP) mission took place from Johnston Atoll's Launch emplacements.\n\nThe Space Detection and Tracking System or SPADATS was operated by North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) along with the U.S. Air Force Spacetrack system, The Navy Space Surveillance System and Canadian Forces Air Defense Command Satellite Tracking Unit. The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory also operated a dozen 3.5 ton Baker-Nunn Camera systems (none at Johnston) for cataloging of man-made satellites. The U.S. Air Force had ten Baker-Nunn camera stations around the world mostly from 1960 to 1977 with a phase-out beginning in 1964.\n\nThe Baker-Nunn space camera station was constructed on Sand Island and was functioning by 1965. USAF 18th Surveillance Squadron operated the Baker-Nunn camera at a station built along the causeway on Sand Island until 1975 when a contract to operate the four remaining Air Force stations was awarded to Bendix Field Engineering Corporation. In about 1977, the camera at Sand Island was moved to Daegu, South Korea. Baker-Nunn were rendered obsolete with the IOC of 3 GEODSS optical tracking sites at Daegu, Korea; Mount Haleakala, Maui and White Sands Missile Range. A fourth site was operational in 1985 at Diego Garcia and a proposed fifth site in Portugal was cancelled. The Daegu, Korea site was closed due to encroaching city lights. GEODSS tracked satellites at night, though the MIT Lincoln Laboratory test site, co-located with Site 1 at White Sands did track asteroids in daytime as proof of concept in the early 1980s.\n\nSatellite and Missile Observation System Project (SAMOS-E) or \"E-6\" was a relatively short-lived series of United States visual reconnaissance satellites in the early 1960s. SAMOS was also known by the unclassified terms Program 101 and Program 201. The Air Force program was used as a cover for the initial development of the Central Intelligence Agency's Key Hole (including Corona and Gambit) reconnaissance satellites systems. Imaging was performed with film cameras and television surveillance from polar low Earth orbits with film canisters returning via capsule and parachute with mid-air retrieval. SAMOS was first launched in 1960, but not operational until 1963 with all of the missions being launched from Vandenberg AFB.\nDuring the early months of the SAMOS program it was essential not only to hide the Corona and GAMBIT technical efforts under a screen of SAMOS activity, but also to make the orbital vehicle portions of the two systems resemble one another in outward appearance. Thus, some of the configuration details of SAMOS were decided less by engineering logic than by the need to camouflage GAMBIT and thus, in theory, a GAMBIT could be launched without alerting many people to its real nature.\nProblems relative to tracking networks, communications, and recovery were resolved with the decision in late February 1961 to use Johnston Island as the film capsule descent and recovery zone for the program.\nOn July 10, 1961 work was initiated on four buildings of the Johnston Island Recovery Operations Center for the National Reconnaissance Office. Men from the Johnston Atoll facility would recover the parachuting film canister capsules with a radar equipped JC-130 aircraft by capturing them in the air with a specialized recovery apparatus.\nThe recovery center was also responsible for collecting the radioactive scientific data pods dropped from missiles following launch and nuclear detonation.\n\nIn the lead up to biological warfare testing in the Pacific under Project 112 and Project SHAD, a new virus was discovered during the Pacific Ocean Biological Survey Program by teams from the Smithsonian's Division of Birds aboard a U.S Army tugboat involved in the program. Initially, the name of that effort was to be called the Pacific Ornithological Observation Project but this was changed for obvious reasons. First isolated in 1964 the tick-borne virus was discovered in \"Ornithodoros capensis\" ticks, found in a nest of common noddy (\"Anous stolidus\") at Sand Island, Johnston Atoll. It was designated \"Johnston Atoll Virus\" and is related to influenza.\n\nIn February, March, and April 1965 Johnston Atoll was used to launch biological attacks against U.S. Army and Navy vessels south-west of Johnston island in vulnerability, defense and decontamination tests conducted by the Deseret Test Center during Project SHAD under Project 112. Test DTC 64-4 (Deseret Test Center) was originally called \"RED BEVA\" (Biological EVAluation) though the name was later changed to \"Shady Grove\", likely for operational security reasons. The biological agents released during this test included \"Francisella tularensis\" (formerly called \"Pasteurella tularensis\") (Agent UL), the causative agent of Tularemia; \"Coxiella burnetii\" (Agent OU), causative agent of Q fever; and \"Bacillus globigii\" (Agent BG). During Project SHAD, \"Bacillus globigii\" was used to simulate biological warfare agents (such as Anthrax), because it was then considered a contaminant with little health consequence to humans; however, it is now considered a human pathogen. Ships equipped with the E-2 multi-head disseminator and A-4C aircraft equipped with Aero 14B spray tanks released live pathogenic agents in nine aerial and four surface trials in phase B of the test series from February 12 to March 15, 1965 and in four aerial trials in phase D of the test series from March 22 to April 3, 1965.\nAccording to Project SHAD veteran Jack Alderson who commanded the Army tugs, area three at Johnston Atoll was located at the most downwind part of the island and consisted of an collapsible Nissen hut to be used for weapons preparation and some communications.\n\nIn 1970, Congress redefined the island's military mission as the storage and destruction of chemical weapons. The United States Army leased on the Atoll to store chemical weapons held in Okinawa, Japan. Johnston Atoll became a chemical weapons storage site in 1971 holding about 6.6 percent of the U.S. military chemical weapon arsenal. The chemical weapons were brought from Okinawa under with the re-deployment of the 267th Chemical Company and consisted of rockets, mines, artillery projectiles, and bulk 1-ton containers filled with Sarin, Agent VX, vomiting agent, and blister agent such as mustard gas. Chemical weapons from West Germany and World War II era weapons from the Solomon Islands were also stored on the island after 1990. Chemical agents were stored in the high security Red Hat Storage Area (RHSA) which included hardened igloos in the weapon storage area, the Red Hat building (#850), two Red Hat hazardous waste warehouses (#851 and #852), an open storage area, and security entrances and guard towers.\n\nSome of the other weapons stored at the site were shipped from U.S. stockpiles in West Germany in 1990. These shipments followed a 1986 agreement between the U.S. and West Germany to move the munitions. Merchant ships carrying the munitions left Germany under Operation Golden Python and Operation Steel Box in October 1990 and arrived at Johnston Island November 6, 1990. Although the ships were unloaded within nine days, the unpacking and storing of munitions continued into 1991. The remainder of the chemical weapons was a small number of World War II era weapons shipped from the Solomon Islands.\n\nAgent Orange was brought to Johnston Atoll from South Vietnam and Gulfport, Mississippi in 1972 under Operation Pacer IVY and stored on the northwest corner of the island known as the Herbicide Orange Storage site but dubbed the \"Agent Orange Yard\". The Agent Orange was eventually destroyed during Operation Pacer HO on the Dutch incineration ship MT \"Vulcanus\" in the Summer of 1977. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) reported that 1,800,000 gallons of Herbicide Orange were stored at Johnston Atoll and that an additional 480,000 gallons stored at Gulfport, Mississippi was brought to Johnston Atoll for destruction. Leaking barrels during the storage and spills during re-drumming operations contaminated both the storage area and the lagoon with herbicide residue and its toxic contaminant 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzodioxin.\n\nThe Army's Johnston Atoll Chemical Agent Disposal System (JACADS) was the first full-scale chemical weapons disposal facility. Built to incinerate chemical munitions on the island, planning started in 1981, construction began in 1985, and was completed five years later. Following completion of construction and facility characterization, JACADS began operational verification testing (OVT) in June 1990. From 1990 until 1993, the Army conducted four planned periods of Operational Verification Testing (OVT), required by Public Law 100-456. OVT was completed in March 1993, having demonstrated that the reverse assembly incineration technology was effective and that JACADS operations met all environmental parameters. The OVT process enabled the Army to gain critical insight into the factors that establish a safe and effective rate of destruction for all munitions and agent types. Only after this critical testing period did the Army proceed with full-scale disposal operations at JACADS. Transition to full-scale operations started in May 1993 but the facility did not begin full-scale operations until August 1993.\n\nAll of the chemical weapons once stored on Johnston Island were demilitarized and the agents incinerated at JACADS with the process completing in 2000 followed by the destruction of legacy hazardous waste material associated with chemical weapon storage and cleanup. JACADS was demolished by 2003 and the island was stripped of its remaining infrastructure and environmentally remediated.\nIn 2003, structures and facilities, including those used in JACADS, were removed, and the runway was marked closed. The last flight out for official personnel was June 15, 2004. After this date, the base was completely deserted, with the only structures left standing being the Joint Operations Center (JOC) building at the east end of the runway, chemical bunkers in the weapon storage area and at least one Quonset hut.\n\nBuilt in 1964, the JOC is a four-floor concrete and steel administration building for the island that has no windows and was built to withstand a category IV tropical cyclone as well as atmospheric nuclear tests. The building remains standing but was gutted entirely in 2004, during an asbestos abatement project. All doors of the JOC except one have been welded shut. The ground floor has a side building attached which served as a facility for decontamination that contained three long snaking corridors and 55 shower heads one could walk through during decontamination.\n\nRows of bunkers in the Red Hat Storage Area remain intact; however, an agreement was established between the U.S. Army and EPA Region IX on August 21, 2003, that the Munitions Demilitarization Building (MDB) at JACADS would be demolished and the bunkers in the RHSA used for disposal of construction rubble and debris. After placement of the debris inside the bunkers, they were secured and the entries blocked with a concrete block barrier (a.k.a. King Tut Block) to prevent access to the bunker interior.\n\nOver the years, leaks of Agent Orange as well as chemical weapon leaks in the weapon storage area occurred where caustic chemicals such as sodium hydroxide were used to mitigate toxic agents during cleanup. Larger spills of nerve and mustard agent within the MCD at JACADS also took place. Small releases of chemical weapon components from JACADS were cited by the EPA. Multiple studies of the Johnston Atoll environment and ecology have been conducted and the Atoll is likely the most studied island in the Pacific.\n\nDr. Lisa Lobel's work at the Atoll on the impact of PCB contamination in reef damselfish (\"Abudefduf sordidus\") demonstrated that embryonic abnormalities could be used as a metric for comparing contaminated and uncontaminated areas. Some PCB contamination in the lagoon was traced to Coast Guard disposal practices of PCB-laden electrical transformers.\n\nIn 1962, Plutonium pollution following three failed nuclear missile launches was heaviest near the destroyed launch emplacement, in the lagoon offshore of the launch pad, and near Sand Island. The contaminated launch site was stripped, the debris gathered and buried in the island's 1962 expansion. A comprehensive radiological survey was completed in 1980 to record transuranic contamination remaining from the 1962 THOR missile aborts. The Air Force also initiated research on methods to remove dioxin contamination from soil resulting from leakage of the stored Herbicide Orange. Since then, U.S. defense authorities have surveyed the island in a series of studies.\n\nContaminated structures were dismantled and isolated within the former THOR Launch Emplacement No. 1 (LE-1) as a start for the cleanup program. About 45,000 tons of soil contaminated with radioactive isotopes was collected and placed into a fenced area covering on the north of the island. The area was known as the Radiological Control Area, and heavily contaminated with highly radioactive Plutonium. The Pluto yard is on the site of the LE1 emplactment where the 1962 missile explosion occurred and also where a highly contaminated loading ramp was buried that was made for loading plutonium contaminated debris onto small boats that was dumped at sea. Remediation included a plutonium \"mining\" operation called the Johnston Atoll Plutonium Contaminated Soil Cleanup Project. The collected radioactive soil and other debris was buried in a landfill created within the former LE-1 area from June 2002 through November 11, 2002. Remediation at the Radiation Control Area included the construction of a 61-centimeter-thick cap of coral sealing the landfill. Permanent markers were placed at each corner of the landfill to identify the landfill area.\n\nThe atoll was placed up for auction via the U.S. General Services Administration (GSA) in 2005 before it was withdrawn. The stripped Johnston Island was briefly offered for sale with several deed restrictions in 2005 as a \"residence or vacation getaway,\" with potential usage for \"eco-tourism\" by the GSA's Office of Real Property Utilization and Disposal. The proposed sale included the unique postal zip code 96558, formerly assigned to the Armed Forces in the Pacific. The proposed sale did not include running water, electricity, or activation of the closed runway. The details of the offering were outlined on GSA's website and in a newsletter of the Center for Land Use Interpretation as unusual real estate listing # 6384, Johnston Island.\n\nOn August 22, 2006, Johnston Island was struck by Hurricane Ioke. The eastern eye-wall passed directly over the atoll, with winds exceeding . Twelve people were on the island when the hurricane struck, part of a crew sent to the island to deliver a USAF contractor who sampled groundwater contamination levels. All 12 survived and one wrote a first hand account of taking shelter from the storm in the JOC building.\n\nOn December 9, 2007, the United States Coast Guard swept the runway at Johnston Island of debris and used the runway in the removal and rescue of an ill Taiwanese fisherman to Oahu, Hawaii. The fisherman was transferred from the Taiwanese fishing vessel \"Sheng Yi Tsai No. 166\" to the Coast Guard buoy tender \"Kukui\" on December 6, 2007. The fisherman was transported to the island, and then picked up by a Coast Guard HC-130 Hercules rescue plane from Kodiak, Alaska.\n\nSince the base was closed, the atoll has been visited by many vessels crossing the Pacific, as the deserted atoll has a strong lure due to the activities once performed there. Visitors have blogged about stopping there during a trip, or have posted photos of their visits.\n\nIn 2010, a Fish and Wildlife survey team identified a swarm of Anoplolepis ants that had invaded the island. The crazy ants are particularly destructive to the native wildlife, and needed to be eradicated. The \"Crazy Ant Strike Team\" project was led by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, who achieved a 99% reduction in ant numbers by 2013 and who continue to work towards a full eradication of the species from the atoll. The team camped in a bunker that was previously used as a fallout shelter and office.\n\nJohnston Atoll has never had any indigenous inhabitants, although during the late part of the 20th century, there were averages of about 300 American military personnel and 1,000 civilian contractors present at any given time.\n\nThe primary means of transportation to this island was the airport which had a paved military runway or alternatively by ship via a pier and ship channel through the atoll's coral reef system. The islands were wired with 13 outgoing and 10 incoming commercial telephone lines, a 60-channel submarine cable, 22 DSN circuits by satellite, an Autodin with standard remote terminal, a digital telephone switch, the Military Affiliated Radio System (MARS station), a UHF/VHF air-ground radio, and a link to the Pacific Consolidated Telecommunications Network (PCTN) satellite. Amateur radio operators occasionally transmitted from the island, using the KH3 call-sign prefix. The United States Undersea Cable Corporation was awarded contracts to lay underwater cable in the Pacific. A cable known as \"Wet Wash C\" was laid in 1966 between Makua, Oahu, Hawaii and the Johnston Island Air Force Base. surveyed the route and laid of cable and 45 repeaters. These cables were manufactured by the Simplex Wire and Cable Company with the repeaters being supplied by Felten and Guilleaume. In 1993 a satellite communication ground station was added to augment the atoll's communications capability.\n\nJohnston Atoll's economic activity was limited to providing services to American military and contractor personnel residing on the island. The island was regularly resupplied by ship or barge, and all foodstuffs and manufactured goods were imported. The base had six 2.5-megawatt (MW) electrical generators using diesel engines. The runway was also available to commercial airlines for emergency landings (a fairly common event), and for many years it was a regular stop on Continental Micronesia airline's \"island hopper\" service between Hawaii and the Marshall Islands.\n\nThere were no official license plates issued for use on Johnston Atoll. U.S. government vehicles were issued U.S. government license plates and private vehicles retained the plates from which they were registered. According to reputable license plate collectors, a number of \"Johnston Atoll license plates\" were created as souvenirs, and have even been sold online to collectors, but they were not officially issued.\n\nAbout 300 species of fish have been recorded from the reefs and inshore waters of the atoll. It is also visited by green turtles and Hawaiian monk seals. Seabird species recorded as breeding on the atoll include Bulwer's petrel, wedge-tailed shearwater, Christmas shearwater, white-tailed tropicbird, red-tailed tropicbird, brown booby, red-footed booby, masked booby, great frigatebird, spectacled tern, sooty tern, brown noddy, black noddy and white tern. It is visited by migratory shorebirds, including the Pacific golden plover, wandering tattler, bristle-thighed curlew, ruddy turnstone and sanderling. Possibilities of humpback whales using the waters as breeding ground has been suggested albeit in small numbers and irregular occurrences so far. Many other cetaceans possibly migrate through the area, but the species being most notably confirmed is Cuvier's beaked whales.\n\n! Site\n! Location\n! Notes\nRed Hat Storage Area \na.k.a. the \"Red Hat Area\"\nRadiological Control Area\na.k.a. the \"Pluto' Yard\" (Plutonium Yard)\nSite Herbicide Orange Storage Site \na.k.a. Agent Orange Yard\nJoint Operations Center building (JOC)\na.k.a. JOC\nScientific Row\n\nRunway 5/23 (closed)\n\nNavy Pier\n\nWharf Area and Demilitarization Zone L\n\nHama Point\n\nBunker buildings 746 through 761\n\nSouthwest Area \n\nBoard on Army Science and Technology (BAST) building\n\n! Component\n! Location\n\nJohnston Island LC1 Redstone launch complex. Pad 1 \n\nJohnston Island LC2 Redstone launch complex. Pad 2 \n\nJohnston Island HAD23 Tomahawk Sandia launch complex. HAD Launcher 23\n\nJohnston Island UL6 Sandhawk launch complex. Universal Launcher 6\n\nJohnston Island LE1 Thor-Delta launch complex. Launch Emplacement 1 \n\nJohnston Island LE2 Thor-Delta launch complex. Launch Emplacement 2 \n\nJohnston Island S Johnston Island Operation Dominic south launchers \n\nBULLET::::- 267th Chemical Company\nBULLET::::- List of Guano Island claims\n\nBULLET::::- Video from 1923 USS Tanager Expedition Northwestern Hawaiian Islands Multi-Agency Education Project of the University of Hawaii\nBULLET::::- \"Cleaning up Johnston Atoll\" (2005), Plutonium contamination on the Island.\nBULLET::::- Johnston Island Memories Site – the personal website of an AFRTS serviceman stationed there in 1975 to 1976\nBULLET::::- Coast Guard Medevac from Johnston Island – photo from December 2007 medevac operation\nBULLET::::- JACADS – Johnston Atoll Chemical Agent Disposal System – history of nuclear testing, and JACADS Sarin and VX nerve agent disposal\nBULLET::::- CyberSarge – Pictorial evidence of chemical weapons disposal\nBULLET::::- U.S. Fish & Wildlife Johnston Island National Wildlife Refuge – Contains additional information on wildlife and clean-up efforts\nBULLET::::- Mark in the Pacific (archive version)– website about the end of Johnston Atoll\nBULLET::::- Flickr: Laysan at Johnston Island-Photographs of stop-over on abandoned Johnston Atoll in 2\n012\n"}
{"id": "15716", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15716", "title": "Geography of Jordan", "text": "Geography of Jordan\n\nJordan is situated geographically in Southwest Asia, south of Syria, west of Iraq, northwest of Saudi Arabia and east of Israel and the West Bank; politically, the area has also been referred to in the West as the Middle or Near East. The territory of Jordan now covers about .\n\nBetween 1950 and the Six-Day War in 1967, although not widely recognized, Jordan claimed and administered an additional encompassing the West Bank; in 1988 and with continuing Israeli occupation, King Hussein relinquished Jordan's claim to the West Bank in favor of the Palestinians.\n\nJordan is landlocked except at its southern extremity, where nearly of shoreline along the Gulf of Aqaba provide access to the Red Sea.\n\nGeographic coordinates:\n\nExcept for small sections of the borders with Israel and Syria, Jordan's international boundaries do not follow well-defined natural features of the terrain. The country's boundaries were established by various international agreements and with the exception of the border with Israel, none was in dispute in early 1989.\n\nJordan's boundaries with Syria, Iraq, and Saudi Arabia do not have the special significance that the border with Israel does; these borders have not always hampered tribal nomads in their movements, yet for a few groups borders did separate them from traditional grazing areas and delimited by a series of agreements between the United Kingdom and the government of what eventually became Saudi Arabia) was first formally defined in the Hadda Agreement of 1925.\nIn 1965 Jordan and Saudi Arabia concluded an agreement that realigned and delimited the boundary. Jordan gained 19 kilometers of land on the Gulf of Aqaba and 6,000 square kilometers of territory in the interior, and 7,000 square kilometers of Jordanian-administered, landlocked territory was ceded to Jordan. The new boundary enabled Jordan to expand its port facilities and established a zone in which the two parties agreed to share petroleum revenues equally if oil were discovered. The agreement also protected the pasturage and watering rights of nomadic tribes inside the exchanged territories.\n\nThe country consists mainly of a plateau between and meters high, divided into ridges by valleys and gorges, and a few mountainous areas. West of the plateau, land descents form the East Bank of the Jordan Rift Valley. The valley is part of the north-south Great Rift Valley, and its successive depressions are Lake Tiberias (Sea of Galilee; its bottom is about ), Jordan Valley, the Dead Sea (its bottom is about ), Arabah, and the Gulf of Aqaba at the Red Sea. Jordan's western border follows the bottom of the rift. Although an earthquake-prone region, no severe shocks had been recorded for several centuries.\n\nBy far the greatest part of the East Bank is desert, displaying the land forms and other features associated with great aridity. Most of this land is part of the Syrian Desert and northern Arabian Desert. There are broad expanses of sand and dunes, particularly in the south and southeast, together with salt flats. Occasional jumbles of sandstone hills or low mountains support only meager and stunted vegetation that thrives for a short period after the scanty winter rains. These areas support little life and are the least populated regions of Jordan.\n\nThe drainage network is coarse and incised. In many areas the relief provides no eventual outlet to the sea, so that sedimentary deposits accumulate in basins where moisture evaporates or is absorbed in the ground. Toward the depression in the western part of the East Bank, the desert rises gradually into the Jordanian Highlands—a steppe country of high, deeply cut limestone plateaus with an average elevation of about 900 meters. Occasional summits in this region reach 1,200 meters in the northern part and exceed 1,700 meters in the southern part; the highest peak is Jabal Ramm at 1,754 meters (though the highest peak in all of Jordan is Jabal Umm al Dami at 1854 meters. It is located in a remote part of southern Jordan). These highlands are an area of long-settled villages.\n\nThe western edge of this plateau country forms an escarpment along the eastern side of the Jordan River-Dead Sea depression and its continuation south of the Dead Sea. Most of the wadis that provide drainage from the plateau country into the depression carry water only during the short season of winter rains. Sharply incised with deep, canyon-like walls, whether flowing or dry the wadis can be formidable obstacles to travel.\n\nThe Jordan River is short, but from its mountain headwaters (approximately 160 kilometers north of the river's mouth at the Dead Sea) the riverbed drops from an elevation of about 3,000 meters above sea level to more than 400 meters below sea level. Before reaching Jordanian territory the river forms the Sea of Galilee, the surface of which is 212 meters below sea level. The Jordan River's principal tributary is the Yarmouk River. Near the junction of the two rivers, the Yarmouk forms the boundary between Israel on the northwest, Syria on the northeast, and Jordan on the south. The Zarqa River, the second main tributary of the Jordan River, flows and empties entirely within the East Bank.\n\nA 380-kilometer-long rift valley runs from the Yarmouk River in the north to Al Aqaba in the south. The northern part, from the Yarmouk River to the Dead Sea, is commonly known as the Jordan Valley. It is divided into eastern and western parts by the Jordan River. Bordered by a steep escarpment on both the eastern and the western side, the valley reaches a maximum width of twenty-two kilometers at some points. The valley is properly known as \"Al Ghawr\" or \"Al Ghor\" (the depression, or valley).\n\nThe Rift Valley on the southern side of the Dead Sea is known as the Southern \"Ghawr\" and the Wadi al Jayb (popularly known as the Wadi al Arabah). The Southern Ghawr runs from Wadi al Hammah, on the south side of the Dead Sea, to Ghawr Faya, about twenty-five kilometers south of the Dead Sea. Wadi al Jayb is 180 kilometers long, from the southern shore of the Dead Sea to Al Aqaba in the south. The valley floor varies in level. In the south, it reaches its lowest level at the Dead Sea (more than 400 meters below sea level), rising in the north to just above sea level. Evaporation from the sea is extreme due to year-round high temperatures. The water contains about 250 grams of dissolved salts per liter at the surface and reaches the saturation point at 110 meters.\n\nThe Dead Sea occupies the deepest depression on the land surface of the earth. The depth of the depression is accentuated by the surrounding mountains and highlands that rise to elevations of 800 to 1,200 meters above sea level. The sea's greatest depth is about 430 meters, and it thus reaches a point more than 825 meters below sea level. A drop in the level of the sea has caused the former Lisan Peninsula to become a land bridge dividing the sea into separate northern and southern basins.\n\nThe major characteristic of the climate is the contrast between a relatively rainy season from November to April and very dry weather for the rest of the year. With hot, dry, uniform summers and cool, variable winters during which practically all of the precipitation occurs, the country has a Mediterranean-style climate.\n\nIn general, the farther inland from the Mediterranean Sea a given part of the country lies, the greater are the seasonal contrasts in temperature and the less rainfall. Atmospheric pressures during the summer months are relatively uniform, whereas the winter months bring a succession of marked low pressure areas and accompanying cold fronts. These cyclonic disturbances generally move eastward from over the Mediterranean Sea several times a month and result in sporadic precipitation.\n\nMost of the East Bank receives less than of rain a year and may be classified as a dry desert or steppe region. Where the ground rises to form the highlands east of the Jordan Valley, precipitation increases to around in the south and or more in the north. The Jordan Valley, lying in the lee of high ground on the West Bank, forms a narrow climatic zone that annually receives up to of rain in the northern reaches; rain dwindles to less than at the head of the Dead Sea.\n\nThe country's long summer reaches a peak during August. January is usually the coolest month. The fairly wide ranges of temperature during a twenty-four-hour period are greatest during the summer months and have a tendency to increase with higher elevation and distance from the Mediterranean seacoast. Daytime temperatures during the summer months frequently exceed and average about . In contrast, the winter months—November to April—bring moderately cool and sometimes cold weather, averaging about . Except in the rift depression, frost is fairly common during the winter, it may take the form of snow at the higher elevations of the north western highlands. Usually it snows a couple of times a year in western Amman.\n\nFor a month or so before and after the summer dry season, hot, dry air from the desert, drawn by low pressure, produces strong winds from the south or southeast that sometimes reach gale force. Known in the Middle East by various names, including the khamsin, this dry, sirocco-style wind is usually accompanied by great dust clouds. Its onset is heralded by a hazy sky, a falling barometer, and a drop in relative humidity to about 10 percent. Within a few hours there may be a to rise in temperature. These windstorms ordinarily last a day or so, cause much discomfort, and destroy crops by desiccating them.\n\nThe shamal, another wind of some significance, comes from the north or northwest, generally at intervals between June and September. Remarkably steady during daytime hours but becoming a breeze at night, the shamal may blow for as long as nine days out of ten and then repeat the process. It originates as a dry continental mass of polar air that is warmed as it passes over the Eurasian landmass. The dryness allows intense heating of the Earth's surface by the sun, resulting in high daytime temperatures that moderate after sunset.\n\nArea:\n<br>\"total:\" 89,342 km²\n<br>\"land:\" 88,802 km²\n<br>\"water:\" 540 km²\n\nLand boundaries:\n<br>\"total:\" 1,744 km\n<br>\"border countries:\"\nIraq 179 km, Israel 307 km, Saudi Arabia 731 km, Syria 379 km, West Bank 148 km\n\nCoastline: 26 km\n\"note:\"\nJordan also borders the Dead Sea, for \n\nMaritime claims:\n<br>\"territorial sea:\"\nElevation extremes:\n<br>\"lowest point:\" Dead Sea −408 m\n<br>\"highest point:\" Jabal Umm ad Dami 1,854 m\n\nNatural resources: phosphates, potash, oil shale\n\nLand use:\n<br>\"arable land:\"\n2.41%\n<br>\"permanent crops:\"\n0.97%\n<br>\"other:\"\n96.62% (2012)\n\nIrrigated land:\n788.6 km² (2004)\n\nTotal renewable water resources:\n0.94 km (2011)\n\nFreshwater withdrawal (domestic/industrial/agricultural):\n<br>\"total:\"\n0.94 km/yr (31%/4%/65%)\n<br>\"per capita:\"\n166 m/yr (2005)\n\nDroughts; occasional minor earthquakes in areas close to the Jordan Rift Valley\n\nEnvironment – current issues:\nlimited natural fresh water resources and water stress; deforestation; overgrazing; soil erosion; desertification\n\nEnvironment – international agreements:\n<br>\"party to:\"\nBiodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands\n\nBULLET::::- Winston's Hiccup\nBULLET::::- Borders of Jordan\n\n"}
{"id": "15717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15717", "title": "Demographics of Jordan", "text": "Demographics of Jordan\n\nJordan has a population of approximately 9,531,712 inhabitants (Female: 47%; Males: 53%) as of 2015. Jordanians () are the citizens of Jordan, who share a common Levantine Semitic ancestry. Some 98% percent of Jordanians are Arabs, while the remaining 2% are other ethnic minorities. Around 2.9 million were non-citizens, a figure including refugees, legal and illegal immigrants. Jordan's annual population growth rate stood at 2.05% in 2017, with an average of three children per woman. There were 1,977,534 households in Jordan in 2015, with an average of 4.8 persons per household.\n\nThe official language is Arabic, while English is the second most widely spoken language by Jordanians. It is also widely used in commerce and government. In 2016, about 84% of Jordan's population live in urban towns and cities. Many Jordanians and people of Jordanian descent live across the world, mainly in the United States, United Arab Emirates, Canada, France, Sweden and Spain.\n\nIn 2016, Jordan was named as the largest refugee hosting country per capita in the world, followed by Turkey, Pakistan and Lebanon. The kingdom of Jordan hosts refugees mainly from Palestine, Syria, Iraq and many other countries. There are also hundreds of thousands of workers from Egypt, Indonesia and South Asia, who work as domestic and construction workers.\n\nThe territory of Jordan can be defined by the history of its creation after the end of World War I, the League of Nations and redrawing of the borders of the Eastern Mediterranean littoral. The ensuing decisions, most notably the Sykes–Picot Agreement, which created the Mandatory Palestine. In September 1922, Transjordan was formally identified as a subdivision of the Mandate Palestine after the League of Nations approved the British Transjordan memorandum which stated that the Mandate east of the Jordan River would be excluded from all the provisions dealing with Jewish settlement west of the Jordan River.\n\nArab Jordanians are either descended from families and clans who were living in the cities and towns in Transjordan prior to the 1948 war, most notably in the governorates of Jerash, Ajlun, Balqa, Irbid, Madaba, Al Karak, Aqaba, Amman and some other towns in the country. Most of the native Christian population in the country belongs to this ethnicity or to the Bedouin ethnicity. Or from the Palestinian families who sought refuge in Jordan in different times in the 20th century, mostly during and after the wars of 1948 and 1967. Along to some other Arab ethnicities, mostly from Syria and Iraq.\n\nThe Druze people are believed to constitute about 0.5% of the total population of Jordan, which is around 32,000. The Druze, who refer to themselves as al-Muwahhideen, or \"believers in one God,\" are concentrated in the rural, mountainous areas west and north of Amman.\n\nThe other group of Jordanians is descended from Bedouins (of which, less than 1% live a nomadic lifestyle). Bedouin settlements are concentrated in the wasteland south and east of the country.\n\nThere were an estimated 5,000 Armenians living within the country in 2009. An estimated 4,500 of these are members of the Armenian Apostolic Church, and predominantly speak the Western dialect of the Armenian language. This population makes up the majority of non-Arab Christians in the country.\n\nThere is an Assyrian refugee population in Jordan. Many Assyrians have arrived in Jordan as refugees since the invasion of Iraq, making up a large part of the Iraqi refugees.\n\nBy the end of the 19th century, the Ottoman Authorities directed the Circassian immigrants to settle in Jordan. The Circassians are Sunni Muslims and are estimated to number 20,000 to 80,000 persons.\n\nThere are about 10,000 Chechens estimated to reside in Jordan.\n\nJordan is a home to 2,175,491 registered Palestine refugees. Out of those 2,175,491 refugees, 634,182 have not been given Jordanian citizenship. Jordan also hosts around 1.4 million Syrian refugees who fled to the country due to the Syrian Civil War since 2011. About 31,163 Yemenis and 22,700 Libyan refugees live in Jordan as of January 2015. There are thousands of Lebanese refugees who came to Jordan when civil strife and war and the 2006 war broke out in their native country. Up to 1 million Iraqis came to Jordan following the Iraq War in 2003. In 2015, their number was 130,911. About 2,500 Iraqi Mandaean refugees have been resettled in Jordan.\n\nJordan prides itself on its health services, some of the best in the region. Qualified medics, favourable investment climate and Jordan's stability have contributed to the success of this sector.\n\nJordan has a very advanced education system. The school education system comprises 2 years of pre-school education, 10 years of compulsory basic education, and two years of secondary academic or vocational education, after which the students sit for the General Certificate of Secondary Education Exam (Tawjihi). Scholars may attend either private or public schools.\n\nAccess to higher education is open to holders of the General Secondary Education Certificate, who can then choose between private Community Colleges, public Community Colleges or universities (public and private). The credit-hour system, which entitles students to select courses according to a study plan, is implemented at universities. The number of public universities has reached (10), besides (17) universities that are private, and (51) community colleges. Numbers of universities accompanied by significant increase in number of students enrolled to study in these universities, where the number of enrolled students in both public and private universities is estimated at nearly (236) thousand; (28) thousand out of the total are from Arab or foreign nationalities.\n\n!Period\n!Life expectancy inYears\n!Period\n!Life expectancy inYears\n1950–1955\n46.5\n1985–1990\n69.2\n1955–1960\n50.7\n1990–1995\n70.4\n1960–1965\n54.6\n1995–2000\n71.3\n1965–1970\n58.4\n2000–2005\n72.2\n1970–1975\n61.9\n2005–2010\n73.0\n1975–1980\n64.9\n2010–2015\n73.8\n1980–1985\n67.2\n\nSource: \"UN World Population Prospects\"\n\nThe following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.\n\n10,086,876 \n\nStructure of the population \n\nStructure of the population (01.10.2004) (Census) \n! width=\"80pt\"Age Group\n! width=\"80pt\"Male\n! width=\"80pt\"Female\n! width=\"80pt\"Total\n! width=\"80pt\"%\n! width=\"50\"Age group \n! width=\"80pt\"Male\n! width=\"80\"Female\n! width=\"80\"Total\n! width=\"50\"Percent\n\nStructure of the population (31.12.2013) (Estimates) (Excluding foreigners, including registered Palestinian):\nrefugees. :\n! width=\"80pt\"Age Group\n! width=\"80pt\"Male\n! width=\"80pt\"Female\n! width=\"80pt\"Total\n! width=\"80pt\"%\n! width=\"50\"Age group \n! width=\"80pt\"Male\n! width=\"80\"Female\n! width=\"80\"Total\n! width=\"50\"Percent\n\nBirths and deaths\n!\n! width=\"80pt\"Average population\n! width=\"80pt\"Live births\n! width=\"80pt\"Deaths\n! width=\"80pt\"Natural change\n! width=\"80pt\"Crude birth rate (per 1000)\n! width=\"80pt\"Crude death rate (per 1000)\n! width=\"80pt\"Natural change (per 1000)\n! width=\"80pt\"Total fertility rate (TFR)\n2001\n2002\n2003\n2004\n2005\n2006\n2007\n2008\n2009\n2010 \n2011\n2012\n2013\n2014\n2015\n2016\n2017\n2018\n\nFertility Rate (The Demographic Health Survey) \nFertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and CBR (Crude Birth Rate):\n! style=\"width:50pt;\" Year\n! style=\"width:50pt;\" CBR (Total)\n! style=\"width:50pt;\" TFR (Total)\n! style=\"width:50pt;\" CBR (Urban)\n! style=\"width:50pt;\" TFR (Urban)\n! style=\"width:50pt;\" CBR (Rural)\n! style=\"width:50pt;\" TFR (Rural)\n\nFertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) by nationality\n\n! style=\"width:50pt;\" Year\n! style=\"width:50pt;\" Jordanian\n! style=\"width:50pt;\" Syrian\n! style=\"width:50pt;\" Other nationality\n\n15–24 years (in 2015):\nBULLET::::- Total: 99.23%\nBULLET::::- Male: 99.11%\nBULLET::::- Female: 99.37%\n15 years and older (in 2015):\nBULLET::::- Total: 98.01%\nBULLET::::- Male: 98.51%\nBULLET::::- Female: 97.49%\n\n! width=\"80pt\"Period\n! width=\"80pt\"Live births per year\n! width=\"80pt\"Deaths per year\n! width=\"80pt\"Natural change per year\n! width=\"80pt\"CBR\n! width=\"80pt\"CDR\n! width=\"80pt\"NC\n! width=\"80pt\"TFR\n! width=\"80pt\"IMR\n\nOne World Values Survey reported 51.4% of Jordanians responded that they would prefer not to have neighbors of a different race.\n"}
{"id": "15718", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15718", "title": "Politics of Jordan", "text": "Politics of Jordan\n\nThe politics of Jordan takes place in a framework of a parliamentary monarchy, whereby the Prime Minister of Jordan is head of government, and of a multi-party system. Jordan is a constitutional monarchy based on the constitution promulgated on January 8, 1952. The king exercises his power through the government he appoints which is responsible before the Parliament. \n\nKing Abdullah II of Jordan has been sovereign since the death of his father in 1999. Omar Razzaz has been Prime Minister since 4 June 2018.\n\nKing\nAbdullah II of Jordan\n7 February 1999\nPrime Minister\nOmar Razzaz\nIndependent\n4 June 2018\nThe Constitution of Jordan vests executive authority in the king and in his cabinet. The king signs and executes or vetoes all laws. The king may also suspend or dissolve parliament, and shorten or lengthen the term of session. A veto by the king may be overridden by a two-thirds vote of both houses of parliament at his discretion, most recently in November 2009. The king appoints and may dismiss all judges by decree, approves amendments to the constitution after passing by both parliaments, declares war and acts as the supreme leader of the armed forces. Cabinet decisions, court judgments, and the national currency are issued in his name. The Cabinet, led by a prime minister, was formerly appointed by the king, but following the 2011 Jordanian protests, King Abdullah agreed to an elected cabinet. The cabinet is responsible to the Chamber of Deputies on matters of general policy; a two-thirds vote of \"no confidence\" by the Chamber can force the cabinet to resign.\n\nLegislative power rests in the bicameral National Assembly. The National Assembly (\"Majlis al-Umma\") has two chambers. The Chamber of Deputies (\"Majlis al-Nuwaab\") has 130 members, elected for a four-year terms in single-seat constituencies with 15 seats reserved for women by a special electoral college, nine for Christians and three for Chechens/Circassians. While the Chamber of Deputies is elected by the people, its main legislative abilities are limited to approving, rejecting, or amending legislation with little power to initiate laws. The Assembly of Senators (\"Majlis al-Aayan\") has 65 members appointed by the King for a four-year term. The Assembly of Senators is responsible to the Chamber of Deputies and can be removed by a \"vote of no confidence\".\n\nPolitical factions or blocs in the Jordanian parliament change with each parliamentary election and typically involve one of the following affiliations; a democratic Marxist/Socialist faction, a mainstream liberal faction, a moderate-pragmatic faction, a mainstream conservative faction, and an extreme conservative faction (such as the Islamic Action Front).\n\nThe Jordanian Chamber of Deputies is known for brawls between its members, including acts of violence and the use of weapons. In September 2013 Representative Talal al-Sharif tried to shoot one of his colleagues with an assault rifle while at the parliamentary premises.\n\nThe judiciary is completely independent from the other two branches of the government. The constitution provides for three categories of courts—civil (in this case meaning \"regular\"), religious, and special. Regular courts consist of both civil and criminal varieties at the first level—First Instance or Conciliation Courts, second level—Appelette or Appeals Courts, and the Cassation Court which is the highest judicial authority in the kingdom. There are two types of religious courts: Sharia courts which enforce the provisions of Islamic law and civil status, and tribunals of other religious communities officially recognized in Jordan.\n\nKing Hussein ruled Jordan from 1953 to 1999, surviving a number of challenges to his rule, drawing on the loyalty of his military, and serving as a symbol of unity and stability for both the Jordanians and Palestinian communities in Jordan. King Hussein ended martial law in 1989 and ended suspension on political parties that was initiated following the loss of the West Bank to Israel and in order to preserve the status quo in Jordan. In 1989 and 1993, Jordan held free and fair parliamentary elections. Controversial changes in the election law led Islamist parties to boycott the 1997, 2011 and 2013 elections.\n\nKing Abdullah II succeeded his father Hussein following the latter's death in February 1999. Abdullah moved quickly to reaffirm Jordan's peace treaty with Israel and its relations with the United States. Abdullah, during the first year in power, refocused the government's agenda on economic reform.\n\nJordan's continuing structural economic difficulties, burgeoning population, and more open political environment led to the emergence of a variety of political parties. Moving toward greater independence, Jordan's parliament has investigated corruption charges against several regime figures and has become the major forum in which differing political views, including those of political Islamists, are expressed.\n\nOn February 1, 2012, it was announced that King Abdullah had dismissed his government. This has been interpreted as a pre-emptive move in the context of the Tunisian Jasmine Revolution and unfolding events in nearby Egypt.\n\nKing Abdullah II and the Jordanian Government began the process of decentralization, with the Madaba governorate as the pilot project, on the regional level dividing the nation into three regions: North, Central, and South. The Greater Amman Municipality will be excluded from the plan but it will set up a similar decentralization process. Each region will have an elected council that will handle the political, social, legal, and economic affairs of its area. This decentralization process is part of Jordan's Democratization Program.\n\nJordan ranked 47th out of 180 nations in the Corruption Perceptions Index. The Constitution of Jordan states that no member of Parliament can have any financial or business dealings with the government and no member of the royal family can be in the government. However, corruption remains a problem in Jordan despite progress. Corruption cases are examined by the Anti-Corruption Commission and then referred to the judiciary for legal action. Corruption in Jordan takes the form of nepotism, favouritism, and bribery.\n\nAdministratively, Jordan is divided into twelve governorates (\"muhafazat\", singular—\"muhafazah\"), each headed by a governor appointed by the king. They are the sole authorities for all government departments and development projects in their respective areas:\n\nBULLET::::1. Ajlun\nBULLET::::2. Aqaba\nBULLET::::3. Balqa\nBULLET::::4. Karak\nBULLET::::5. Mafraq\nBULLET::::6. Amman\nBULLET::::7. Tafilah\nBULLET::::8. Zarqa\nBULLET::::9. Irbid\nBULLET::::10. Jerash\nBULLET::::11. Ma'an\nBULLET::::12. Madaba\nABEDA, ACC, AFESD, AL, AMF, CAEU, CCC, CTBTO, EBRD, ESCWA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OIC, OPCW, OSCE (partner), PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNMIBH, UNMIK, UNMOP, UNMOT, UNOMIG, UNRWA, UNTAET, UNWTO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO, WTrO\n\nBULLET::::- Constitution of Jordan\n"}
{"id": "15719", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15719", "title": "Economy of Jordan", "text": "Economy of Jordan\n\nThe economy of Jordan is classified as an emerging market economy. Jordan's GDP per capita rose by 351% in the 1970s, declined 30% in the 1980s, and rose 36% in the 1990s. After king Abdullah II's accession to the throne in 1999, liberal economic policies were introduced that resulted in a boom that continued through 2009. Jordan's economy has been growing at an annual rate of 8% after King Abdullah II's accession to throne in 1999 and up to 2008. However, growth has slowed to just 2% after the Arab Spring erupted in 2011. Substantial increase of the population, coupled with slowed economic growth and rising public debt led to a worsening of poverty and unemployment in the country. As of 2015, Jordan boasts a GDP worth $37.6 USD bn, ranking it 89th worldwide.\n\nJordan has FTA's with the United States, Canada, Singapore, Malaysia, the European Union, Tunisia, Algeria, Libya, Turkey and Syria. More FTA's are planned with Iraq, the Palestinian Authority, the GCC, Lebanon, and Pakistan. Jordan is a member of the Greater Arab Free Trade Agreement, the Euro-Mediterranean free trade area, the Agadir Agreement, and also enjoys advanced status with the EU.\n\nJordan's economic resource base centers on phosphates, potash, and their fertilizer derivatives; tourism; overseas remittances; and foreign aid. These are its principal sources of hard currency earnings. Lacking coal reserves, hydroelectric power, large tracts of forest or commercially viable oil deposits, Jordan relies on natural gas for 93% of its domestic energy needs. Jordan used to depend on Iraq for oil until the American-led 2003 invasion of Iraq. Jordan also has a plethora of industrial zones producing goods in the textile, aerospace, defense, ICT, pharmaceutical, and cosmetic sectors. Jordan is an emerging knowledge economy. \n\nThe main obstacles to Jordan's economy are scarce water supplies, complete reliance on oil imports for energy, and regional instability. Just over 10% of its land is arable and the water supply is limited. Rainfall is low and highly variable, and much of Jordan's available ground water is not renewable. \n\nIn the last few years Jordan's economic growth has slowed, averaging around 2%. Jordan's total foreign debt in 2011 was $19 billion, representing 60% of its GDP. In 2016, the debt reached $35.1 billion representing 93.4% of its GDP. This substantial increase is attributed to effects of regional instability causing: decrease in tourist activity; decreased foreign investments; increased military expenditure; attacks on Egyptian pipeline supplying the Kingdom with gas; the collapse of trade with Iraq and Syria; expenses from hosting Syrian refugees and accumulated interests from loans. According to the World Bank, Syrian refugees have cost Jordan more than $2.5 billion a year, amounting to 6% of the GDP and 25% of the government's annual revenue. Due to the introduction of Syrian refugees in Jordan, wage growth went considerably down as there was a competition for jobs between refugees and Jordan citizens. The downfall that began in 2011, continued till 2018. The country's top five contributing sectors to GDP; government services, finance, manufacturing, transport, and tourism & hospitality were badly impacted by the Syrian civil war. Foreign aid covers only a small part of these costs, 63% of the total costs are covered by Jordan. An austerity programme was adopted by the government which aims to reduce Jordan's debt-to-GDP ratio to 77 percent by 2021. The programme succeeded in preventing the debt from rising above 95% in 2018.\n\nThis is a chart of trend of gross domestic product of Jordan at market prices by the International Monetary Fund with figures in millions of Jordanian Dinars.\n\n! Year  Gross Domestic Product  US Dollar Exchange  Inflation Index (2000=100)\n\nFor purchasing power parity comparisons, the Jordanian Dinar is exchanged per US dollar at 0.359.\nJordan's population is 6,342,948 and mean wages were $4.19 per man-hour in 2009.\n\nJordan is classified by the World Bank as an \"upper middle income country.\" According to the Heritage Foundation's Index of Economic Freedom, Jordan has the third freest economy in the Middle East and North Africa, behind only Bahrain and Qatar, and the 32nd freest in the world. Jordan ranked as having the 35th best infrastructure in the world, according to the World Economic Forum's Index of Economic Competitiveness. The Kingdom scored higher than many of its peers in the Persian Gulf and Europe like Kuwait, Israel. and Ireland. The 2010 AOF Index of Globalization ranked Jordan as the most globalized country in the Middle East and North Africa region. Jordan's banking sector is classified as \"highly developed\" by the IMF along with the GCC economies and Lebanon \n\nThe official currency in Jordan is the Jordanian dinar and divides into 100 qirsh (also called piastres) or 1000 fils. Since 23 October 1995, the dinar has been officially pegged to the IMF's special drawing rights (SDRs). In practice, it is fixed at 1 US$ = 0.709 dinar, which translates to approximately 1 dinar = 1.41044 dollars. The Central Bank buys US dollars at 0.708 dinar, and sell US dollars at 0.7125 dinar, Exchangers buys US dollars at 0.708 and sell US dollars at 0.709.\n\nThe Jordanian market is considered one of the most developed Arab market outside the Persian Gulf states. Jordan ranked 18th on the 2012 Global Retail Development Index which lists the 30 most attractive retail markets in the world. Jordan was ranked as the 19th most expensive country in the world to live in 2010 and the most expensive Arab country to live in.\n\nJordan has been a member of the World Trade Organization since 2000. In the 2009 Global Enabling Trade Report, Jordan ranked 4th in the Arab World behind the UAE, Bahrain, and Qatar. The Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with the United States that went into effect in December 2001 would phase out duties on nearly all goods and services by 2010.\n\nThe flows of remittance to Jordan had experienced rapid growth rates, particularly during the end of the 1970s and 1980s, where Jordan had started exporting high skilled labour to the Persian Gulf States. The money that migrants send home, remittances, represents today an important source of external funding for many developing countries, including Jordan. According to the World Bank data on remittances, with about 3000 million USD in 2010, Jordan ranks at 10th place among all developing countries. Jordan has ranked constantly among the top 20 remittances-recipient countries over the last decade. In addition, the Arab Monetary Fund (AMF) statistics in 2010 indicate that Jordan was the third biggest recipient of remittances among Arab countries after Egypt and Lebanon. The host countries that have absorbed most of the Jordanian expatriates are Saudi Arabia and the United Arab of Emirates (UAE), where the available recorded number of the Jordanian expatriates, working abroad, indicates that about 90% of these migrants are working in Persian Gulf countries.\nThe proportion of skilled workers in Jordan is among the highest in the region. Many of the world's major software and hardware IT companies are present in Jordan. The presence of such firms underlines Jordan's attractiveness as a stable base with high-calibre human resources from which to serve the wider region. According to a report published in January 2012 by the founder of venture capital firm Finaventures, Rachid Sefraoui, Amman is one of the top 10 best cities in the world to launch a tech start-up.\n\nJordan has high unemployment rates, 11.9% in the fourth quarter of 2010 but some estimate it to be as high as a quarter of the working-age population. An estimated 13.3% of citizens live under the poverty line. Since the mid-1970s, migrants’ remittances are Jordan's most important source of foreign exchange, and a decisive factor in the country's economic development and the rising standard of living of the population.\n\nAgriculture in Jordan constituted almost 40% of GNP in the early 1950s; on the eve of the June 1967 War, it was 17%. By the mid-1980s, agriculture's share of GNP in Jordan was only about 6%.\n\nJordan hosts SOFEX, the world's fastest growing and region's only special operations and homeland security exhibition and conference. Jordan is a regional and international provider of advanced military goods and services. The KADDB Industrial Park, specialized in defense manufacturing, was opened in September 2009 in Mafraq. By 2015, the park is expected to provide around 15,000 job opportunities whereas the investment volume is expected to reach JD500 million. A report by Strategic Foresight Group has calculated the opportunity cost of conflict for the Middle East from 1991 to 2010 at $12 trillion. Jordan's share in this is almost $84 billion.\n\nJordan has a 138% mobile phone penetration rate and a 63% internet penetration rate. 41.6% of all mobile phones in Jordan are smartphones, compared with 40% in the United States and 26% in the United Kingdom. 97% of Jordanian households own at least one television set while 90% have satellite reception.\nFurthermore, 61% of Jordanian households own at least one personal computer or laptop.\n\nAccording to an investment survey, Jordan ranked as the 9th best outsourcing destination worldwide. Amman is one of the top 10 cities in the world to launch a tech start-up in 2012 and is becoming referred to as the \"Silicon Valley of the Middle East\".\n\nJordan has hosted the World Economic Forum on the Middle East and North Africa six times and plans to hold it again at the Dead Sea for the seventh time in 2013. Amman also hosts the Mercedes Benz Fashion Week semiannually and is the only city in the region to hold such a prestigious event that is usually held by the likes of New York, Paris, and Milan.\n\nJordan is one of the most liberal countries in the Middle East allowing a debate to consider introducing a secular government. In the 2010 Human Development Index, Jordan was placed in the \"high human development\" bracket and came 7th among Arab countries, after the Persian Gulf states and Lebanon. The 2010 Quality of Life Index prepared by \"International Living\" magazine ranked Jordan second in the MENA with 55.0 points after Israel.\n\nDecades of political stability and security and strict law enforcement make Jordan one of the top 10 countries worldwide in security. In the 2010 Newsweek \"World's Best Countries\" list, Jordan ranked 53rd worldwide, and 3rd among Arab countries after Kuwait and the UAE. Jordan is also among the top ten countries whose citizens feel safest walking the streets at night.\n\nAs of 2011, 63% of working Jordanians are insured with the Social Security Corporation, as well as 120,000 foreigners, with plans to include the rest of Jordanian workers both inside and outside the kingdom as well as students, housewives, business owners, and the unemployed. Only 1.6% of Jordanians make less than $2 a day, one of the lowest in the developing world according to the Human Poverty Index.\n\nIn the 2010 Gallup Global Wellbeing Survey, 30% of Jordanians described their financial situation as \"thriving\", surpassed most of the Arab countries with the exception of Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia. In 2008, the Jordanian government launched the \"Decent Housing for a Decent Living\" project aimed at building 120,000 affordable housing units within the next 5 years, plus an additional 100,000 housing units if the need arises.\n\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2017.\n!Year\n!1980\n!1985\n!1990\n!1995\n!2000\n!2005\n!2006\n!2007\n!2008\n!2009\n!2010\n!2011\n!2012\n!2013\n!2014\n!2015\n!2016\n!2017\nGDP in $\n8.25 Bln.\n13.24 Bln.\n15.06 Bln.\n22.99 Bln.\n29.26 Bln.\n44.77 Bln.\n49.88 Bln.\n55.40 Bln.\n60.57 Bln.\n64.37 Bln.\n66.66 Bln.\n69.80 Bln.\n72.97 Bln.\n76.24 Bln.\n80.01 Bln.\n82.81 Bln.\n85.55 Bln.\n89.10 Bln.\nGDP per capita in $\n3,693\n4,903\n4,341\n5,391\n6,025\n8,180\n8,907\n9,679\n10,353\n10,634\n10,905\n11,169\n11,422\n11,676\n11,986\n12,135\n12,264\n12,494\nGDP growth\n11.2 %\n−2.7 %\n−0.3 %\n6.2 %\n4.3 %\n8.1 %\n8.1 %\n8.2 %\n7.2 %\n5.5 % \n2.3 %\n2.6 %\n2.7 %\n2.8 %\n3.1 %\n2.4 %\n2.0 %\n2.3 %\nInflation\n10.9 %\n2.8 %\n16.2 %\n2.4 %\n0.7 %\n3.5 %\n6.3 %\n4.7 %\n14.0 %\n−0.7 %\n4.8 %\n4.2 %\n4.5 %\n4.8 %\n2.9 %\n−0.9 %\n−0.8 %\n3.3 %\nGovernment debt\n220 %\n115 %\n100 %\n84 %\n76 %\n74 %\n60 %\n65 %\n67 %\n71 %\n81 %\n87 %\n89 %\n93 %\n95 %\n96 %\n\nDespite increases in production, the agriculture sector's share of the economy has declined steadily to just 2.4 percent of gross domestic product by 2004. About 4 percent of Jordan's labor force worked in the agricultural sector in 2002. The most profitable segment of Jordan's agriculture is fruit and vegetable production (including tomatoes, cucumbers, citrus fruit, and bananas) in the Jordan Valley. The rest of crop production, especially cereal production, remains volatile because of the lack of consistent rainfall. Fishing and forestry are negligible in terms of the overall domestic economy. The fishing industry is evenly divided between live capture and aquaculture; the live weight catch totaled just over 1,000 metric tons in 2002. The forestry industry is even smaller in economic terms; approximately 240,000 total cubic meters of roundwood were removed in 2002, the vast majority for fuelwood.\n\nPotash and phosphates are among the country's main economic exports. In 2003 approximately 2 million tons of potash salt production translated into US$192 million in export earnings, making it the second most lucrative exported good. Potash production totaled 1.9 million tons in 2004 and 1.8 million tons in 2005. In 2004 approximately 6.75 million tons of phosphate rock production generated US$135 million in export earnings, placing it fourth on Jordan's principal export list. With production totaling 6.4 million tons in 2005, Jordan was the world's third largest producer of raw phosphates. In addition to these two major minerals, smaller quantities of unrefined salt, copper ore, gypsum, manganese ore, and the mineral precursors to the production of ceramics (glass sand, clays, and feldspar) are also mined.\n\nThe industrial sector, which includes mining, manufacturing, construction, and power, accounted for approximately 26 percent of gross domestic product in 2004 (including manufacturing, 16.2 percent; construction, 4.6 percent; and mining, 3.1 percent). More than 21 percent of the country's labor force was reported to be employed in this sector in 2002. The main industrial products are potash, phosphates, pharmaceuticals, cement, clothes, and fertilizers. The most promising segment of this sector is construction. In the past several years, demand has increased rapidly for housing and offices of foreign enterprises based in Jordan to better access the Iraqi market. The manufacturing sector has grown as well (to nearly 20 percent of GDP by 2005), in large part as a result of the United States–Jordan Free Trade Agreement (ratified in 2001 by the U.S. Senate); the agreement has led to the establishment of approximately 13 Qualifying Industrial Zones (QIZs) throughout the country. The QIZs, which provide duty-free access to the U.S. market, produce mostly light industrial products, especially ready-made garments. By 2004 the QIZs accounted for nearly US$1.1 billion in exports according to the Jordanian government.\n\nJordan's free trade agreement (FTA) with the US – the first in the Arab world – has already made the US one of Jordan's most significant markets. By 2010, it would have barrier-free export access in almost all sectors. A number of trade agreements with countries in the Middle Eastern and North African regions and beyond should also reap increasing benefits, not in the least the Agadir Agreement, which is seen as a precursor to an FTA with the EU. Jordan also recently signed an FTA with Canada. Furthermore, Jordan's plethora of industrial zones offering tax incentives, low utility costs and improved infrastructure links are helping incubate new developments. The relatively high skills level is also a key factor in promoting investment and stimulating the economy, particularly in value-added sectors. Despite the fact that Jordan has few natural resources it does benefit from abundant reserves of potash and phosphates, which are widely used in the production of fertilisers. Exports by these industries are expected to have a combined worth of $1bn in 2008. Other important industries include pharmaceuticals, which exported around $435m in 2006 and $260m in the first half of 2008 alone, as well as textiles, which were worth $1.19bn in 2007. Although the value of Jordan's industrial sector is high, the kingdom faces a number of challenges. Because the country is dependent on importing raw materials, it is vulnerable to price volatility. Shortages in water and power also make consistent development difficult. Despite these challenges, Jordan's economic openness and long-standing fertiliser and pharmaceutical industries should continue to provide a solid source of foreign currency.\n\nJordan has a plethora of industrial zones and special economic zones aimed at increasing exports and making Jordan an industrial giant. The Mafraq SEZ is focused on industry and logistics hoping to become the regional logistics hub with air, road, and rail links to neighboring countries and eventually Europe and the Persian Gulf. The Ma'an SEZ is primarily industrial focusing on satisfying domestic demand and reducing reliance on imports. With a national rail system under construction, Jordan expects trade to grow significantly and Jordan will mostly become the trade hub of the Levant and even the Middle East region as a whole due to its geography and natural resources.\n\nTelecommunications is a billion-dollar industry with estimates showing that core markets of fixed-line, mobile and data service generate annual revenue of around JD836.5m ($1.18bn) per year, which is equivalent to 13.5% of GDP. Jordan's IT sector is the most developed and competitive in the region due to the 2001 telecom liberalization. Market share of the mobile sector, the most competitive telecoms market, is currently fairly evenly divided between the three operators, with Zain, owned by MTC Kuwait, maintaining the largest share (39%), followed by France Telecom's brand Orange (36%) and Umniah (25%), which is 96% owned by Bahrain's Batelco. End of year figures for 2007 show that the market trend is towards greater parity, with Zain's share falling in the space of a year from 47% in 2006 and the other two operators picking up subscribers. The increased competition has led to pricing that is more favourable to consumers. Mobile penetration is currently around 80%.\n\nAmbitious subsequent national strategies were formulated already since Y 2000 as a private sector initiative directly led by his majesty the king of Jordan. Information technology association in Jordan (int@j ) was established to kick off a private sector process that would focus on preparing Jordan for the new economy through IT and shall reflect the national objectives towards automation and modernization in co-operation with the ministry of information technology in Jordan the (MOICT). The latest strategy will take the sector through to 2011, aims to bring Jordan to precise objectives. The ICT sector currently accounts for over a 14% (indirect) of the kingdom's GDP. This figure includes foreign investment and total domestic revenue from the sector. Employment growth in the sector was progressive and reached up to 60.000 (indirect ) by 2008. The government is working to address employment issues and education related to sector by developing ICT training and opportunities to increase the overall penetration of ICT in Jordanian society. The policy outlines a number of objectives for the country to reach within the next three years, including almost doubling the size of the sector to $3bn, and pushing internet user penetration up to 50%.\n\nThe early founder of Int@j and its first chairman of the board is Karim Kawar and early activists who drove the national strategic objectives and helped formulate an action plan through the developing pillars were Marwan Juma Jordan's minister of ICT, Doha Abdelkhaleq on labour and education. Humam Mufti on advocacy and Nashat Masri on Capital and finance amongst others.\nSuch an infrastructure made Jordan a suitable location for IT startups that operate in the fields of web development, mobile application development, online services, and investment in IT businesses.\n\nThe IT industry in Jordan in the year 2000 and beyond got a very big boost after the Gulf War of 1991. This boost came from a large influx of immigrants from the Gulf countries to Jordan, mostly from Jordanian expatriates from Kuwait, totaling few hundred thousands. This large wave impacted Jordan in many ways, and one of them was on its IT industry.\n\nEnergy remains perhaps the biggest challenge for continued growth for Jordan's economy. Spurred by the surge in the price of oil to more than $145 a barrel at its peak, the Jordanian government has responded with an ambitious plan for the sector. The country's lack of domestic resources is being addressed via a $14bn investment programme in the sector. The programme aims to reduce reliance on imported products from the current level of 96%, with renewables meeting 10% of energy demand by 2020 and nuclear energy meeting 60% of energy needs by 2035. The government also announced in 2007 that it would scale back subsidies in several areas, including energy, where there have historically been regressive subsidies for fuel and electricity. In another new step, the government is opening up the sector to competition, and intends to offer all the planned new energy projects to international tender.\n\nUnlike most of its neighbors, Jordan has no significant petroleum resources of its own and is heavily dependent on oil imports to fulfill its domestic energy needs. In 2002 proved oil reserves totaled only . Jordan produced only in 2004 but consumed an estimated . According to U.S. government figures, oil imports had reached about in 2004. The Iraq invasion of 2003 disrupted Jordan's primary oil supply route from its eastern neighbor, which under Saddam Hussein had provided the kingdom with highly discounted crude oil via overland truck routes. Since late 2003, an alternative supply route by tanker through the Al Aqabah port has been established; Saudi Arabia is now Jordan's primary source of imported oil; Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates (UAE) are secondary sources. Although not so heavily discounted as Iraqi crude oil, supplies from Saudi Arabia and the UAE are subsidized to some extent.\n\nIn the face of continued high oil costs, interest has increased in the possibility of exploiting Jordan's vast oil shale resources, which are estimated to total approximately 40 billion tons, 4 billion tons of which are believed to be recoverable. Jordan's oil shale resources could produce of oil, enabling production of about . The oil shale in Jordan has the fourth largest in the world which currently, there are several companies who are negotiating with the Jordanian government about exploiting the oil shale like Royal Dutch Shell, Petrobras and Eesti Energia.\n\nNatural gas is increasingly being used to fulfill the country's domestic energy needs, especially with regard to electricity generation. Jordan was estimated to have only modest natural gas reserves (about 6 billion cubic meters in 2002), but new estimates suggest a much higher total. In 2003 the country produced and consumed an estimated 390 million cubic meters of natural gas. The primary source is located in the eastern portion of the country at the Risha gas field. Until the early 2010s, the country imported the bulk of its natural gas via the Arab Gas Pipeline that stretches from the Al Arish terminal in Egypt underwater to Al Aqabah and then to northern Jordan, where it links to two major power stations. This Egypt–Jordan pipeline supplied Jordan with approximately 1 billion cubic meters of natural gas per year. Gas supplies from Egypt were halted in 2013 due to insurgent activities in the Sinai and domestic gas shortages in Egypt. In light of this, a liquified natural gas terminal was built in the Port of Aqaba to facilitate gas imports. In 2017, a low-capacity gas pipeline from Israel was completed which supplies the Arab Potash factories near the Dead Sea. As of 2018, a large capacity pipeline from Israel is under construction in northern Jordan which is expected to begin operating by 2020 and will supply the kingdom with 3 BCM of gas per year, thereby satisfying most of Jordan's natural gas consumption needs.\n\nThe state-owned National Electric Power Company (NEPCO) produces most of Jordan's electricity (94%). Since mid-2000, privatization efforts have been undertaken to increase independent power generation facilities; a Belgian firm was set to begin operations at a new power plant near Amman with an estimated capacity of 450 megawatts. Power plants at Az Zarqa (400 megawatts) and Al Aqabah (650 MW) are Jordan's other primary electricity providers. As a whole, the country consumed nearly 8 billion kilowatt-hours of electricity in 2003 while producing only 7.5 billion kWh of electricity. Electricity production in 2004 rose to 8.7 billion kWh, but production must continue to increase in order to meet demand, which the government estimates would continue to grow by about 5% per year. About 99 percent of the population is reported to have access to electricity.\n\nThe transportation sector on average contributes some 10% to Jordan's GDP, with transportation and communications accounting for $2.14bn in 2007. Well aware of the sector's importance to the country's service and industry-oriented economy, in 2008 the government formulated a new national transport strategy with the aim to improve, modernise and further privatise the sector. With no imminent solution to the ongoing security crisis in Iraq in sight, prospects for the Jordanian transport sector as a whole look bright. The country will arguably remain one of the major transit points for both goods and people destined for Iraq, while the number of tourists visiting Jordan is set to continue to increase. The main events to follow in the near future are the relocation of Aqaba's main port, a national railway system, and the construction of a new terminal at QAIA. Volatility in fuel prices is almost certainly going to have negative effects on operational costs and as such may hamper the sector's average annual growth of around 6%. However, uncertain fuel prices also offer a great deal of incentive to boost private investments in alternative modes of transport such as public buses and improved trains.\n\nAlthough the state remains a major influence, Jordan's media sector has seen significant privatisation and liberalisation efforts in recent years. Based on official rack rates, research firm Ipsos estimated that the advertisement sector spent some $280m towards publicity in Jordan's media, 80% of which was spent on newspapers, followed by TV, radio and magazines. The biggest event of 2007 was the cancelled launch of ATV, the kingdom's first private broadcaster. As a result, the state-owned Jordan TV (JTV) remains the country's sole broadcaster. In recent years, Jordan has also seen a spectacular rise in the number of blogs, websites and news portals as sources of news information. The increasing diversification of Jordan's media is a good sign and should boost advertising revenues and private initiatives.\n\nRecording growth of 30%, 2007 turned out to be yet another outstanding year for Jordan's advertising industry. Following nearly a decade of double-digit growth, however, most publicity specialists expect to see a relative slowdown in 2008. Unlike 2007, no major campaigns were planned for the first part of 2008. Additionally, the Jordanian advertising had some catching up to do with the rest of the region in terms of average expenditure per capita. As the sector matures, it is only normal for growth figures to gradually decrease. Since 2000 total ad spend increased from $77m to $280m in 2007, an increase of 260%. The Jordanian telecoms sector was the biggest ad spender in 2007, accounting for around 20% of the market, followed by banking and finance sector (12%), services industry (11%), real estate (8%) and the automotive sector (5%). In the next year, particularly if there is a downturn, it would become increasingly important for the sector to develop good vocational training and to begin to take advantage of new media markets.\n\nServices accounted for more than 70 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2004. The sector employed nearly 75 percent of the labor force in 2002.\n\nThe banking sector is widely regarded as advanced by both regional and international terms. In 2007, total profits of the 15 listed banks rose 14.89% to JD640m ($909m). Jordan's strong growth of 6% in 2007 was reflected in a 20.57% expansion in net credit to JD17.9bn ($25.4bn) by the end of the year. Most improvement was in trade, construction and industry. Many banks suffered from the sharp correction in the Amman Stock Market in 2006, encouraging them to focus on core banking business in 2007, and this was reflected in a 16.65% rise in net interest and commission income to JD1.32bn ($1.87bn). The stock market also picked up in 2007 and total portfolio income losses decreased. Although Jordan's banking sector is small by global standards, it has attracted strong interest from regional investors in Lebanon and the GCC. New regulations introduced by the CBJ, in addition to political stability, have helped to create a favourable investment environment. Its conservative policies helped Jordan avoid the global financial crisis of 2009, Jordanian banks was one of the only countries that posted a profit in 2009.\n\nContributing an estimated JD477.5m ($678.05m), or 4.25% of Jordan's GDP, according to figures from the Central Bank, the construction sector performed strongly in 2007. The Great Amman Municipality (GAM) completed its master plan for the capital, which is expected to grow from 700 km today to 1700 km by 2025. Amman is changing from a predominantly horizontal to a largely vertical city due to various clusters of high-rises. Significant developments outside Amman include the rapid residential build-up of Zarqa, the transformation of Aqaba into a commercial and tourist centre, and the construction of a series of high-end hotels and tourist resorts along the Dead Sea. A new airport terminal, Amman ring road and a light rail between the capital and Zarqa are being constructed.\n\nDespite recording a relative slowdown compared to the expansion of recent years, Jordan's construction and real estate market continued to grow in 2007. Trading totaled JD5.6bn ($8bn), up from JD5.2bn ($7.4bn) in 2006, according to Jordan's Land and Survey Department. Although the years of astounding growth—some 75% in 2004 and 48% in 2005—seem to have passed, the future looks bright for real estate, as demand continues to outstrip supply, while Jordan remains a very attractive investment destination for foreign businesses, second-home buyers and Jordanians working abroad. With Jordan's continuing sharp population growth, as well as its strategic location at the heart of the Middle East, the kingdom's main market drivers indicate a bright future for years to come. Although a number of class-A office space developments are currently under construction, it would take a few years to close the gap between demand and supply. The Amman retail market may become more saturated in the short term. Consequently, developers may turn to other cities to build supermarkets and malls.\n\nJordan's insurance market, with 29 companies operating in a country of just 5.7 million people, is saturated, despite regulatory encouragements for mergers and acquisitions. In terms of market share based on premiums, motor coverage accounts for 42.4%, medical insurance 18.6%, fire and property damage 17%, life 9.8%, marine and transport 7.9% and other insurance the remaining 4.3%. The insurance sector made up 2.52% of GDP in 2006, up from 2.43% in 2005. Current plans call for increasing the sector's GDP contribution to 7% in the short term and 10% in the long term. The sector holds great potential but remains underdeveloped. Region-wide price increases and a lack of consumer understanding of products are two major challenges. In addition, cultural considerations, including religion, make improving market penetration difficult. The cost of living has also risen, and the IMF forecasts that the inflation rate would reach 9% in 2008. Salaries have remained unchanged, however, leaving consumers with less disposable income. Other than mandatory motor coverage, insurance products are considered a luxury by average Jordanians, who must often prioritise spending. There would likely only be a few changes to the market in the coming year. Members of the sector would like to see greater coordination among the regulators and those working for the kingdom's legal system in order to improve insurance laws.\n\nThe state of the tourism sector is widely regarded as below potential, especially given the country's rich history, ancient ruins, Mediterranean climate, and diverse geography. Despite personal appeals by the king and an increasingly sophisticated marketing campaign, the industry is still adversely affected by the political instability of the region. More than 5 million visitors entered Jordan in 2004, generating US$1.3 billion in earnings. Earnings from tourism rose to US$1.4 billion in 2005. The fact that the bulk of Jordan's tourist trade emanates from elsewhere in the Middle East should contribute to the industry's growth potential in the years ahead, as Jordan is relatively stable, open, and safe in comparison to many of its neighbors. The tourism sector remains an important element of the Jordanian economy, directly employing some 30,000 Jordanians and contributing 10% to the kingdom's GDP. Despite a decline in Arab and Gulf visitors, 2007 marked a year of steady growth for the tourism sector. Revenues jumped 13% to nearly $2.11bn during the first 11 months, up from $1.86bn for the same period in 2006. The sector is overseen by the government's National Tourism Strategy (NTS), which was established in 2004 to take the industry through 2010. NTS aimed to double tourism revenues during the period and to increase tourism-related jobs to 91,719. The first goal has already been met but the second one might be more of a challenge: between 2004 and 2007 the total number of people employed in the sector rose from 23,544 to 35,484. This is impressive growth, but less than half the 90,000-or-more goal. NTS hopes to place Jordan as a boutique destination for high-end tourists. The strategy identifies seven priorities or niche markets: cultural heritage (archaeology); religious; ecotourism; health and wellness; adventure; meetings, incentives, conventions and exhibitions (MICE); and cruises. The Jordan Tourism Board's (JTB) marketing budget has increased in the past year from JD6m ($8.52m) to JD11.5m ($16.3m). These are positive times for tourism in Jordan, with steady growth and major projects in the pipeline. The sector has to make improvements of infrastructure and marketing, but overall the industry has been improving for the past several years.\n\nSince 1995, economic growth has been low. Real GDP has grown at only about 1.5% annually, while the official unemployment has hovered at 14% (unofficial estimates are double this number). The budget deficit and public debt have remained high and continue to widen, yet during this period inflation has remained low due mainly to stable monetary policy and the continued peg to the United States Dollar. Exports of manufactured goods have risen at an annual rate of 9%. Monetary stability has been reinforced, even when tensions were renewed in the region during 1998, and during the illness and ultimate death of King Hussein in 1999.\n\nExpectations of increased trade and tourism as a consequence of Jordan's peace treaty with Israel have been disappointing. Security-related restrictions to trade with the West Bank and the Gaza Strip have led to a substantial decline in Jordan's exports there. Following his ascension, King Abdullah improved relations with Arabic states of the Persian Gulf and Syria, but this brought few real economic benefits. Most recently the Jordanians have focused on WTO membership and a Free Trade Agreement with the U.S. as means to encourage export-led growth.\n\nThe stock market capitalisation of listed companies in Jordan was valued at $37.639 billion in 2005 by the World Bank.\n\nAccording to the 2015 Middle East and North Africa Salary Survey conducted by Bayt.com, Respondents from GCC (49%) seem somewhat happier with the raise they received in 2014, as compared to respondents from Levant (42%):\n\nThough a town of only 100,000 people, Aqaba is setting an example of how to attract investment. In a decade, domestic and foreign investment into the Aqaba region has increased dramatically and the town's population is set to double over the next 10 years. Certainly, the town benefits from some natural advantages. Located at the southern tip of the country, between Saudi Arabia and Israel on the shores of the Red Sea, the city is close to the Suez Canal, with easy access to key trade centres in both the Middle East and Africa. Aqaba is also the kingdom's only deep-water port town, taking up most of Jordan's scant of coastline. The Aqaba Special Economic Zone (ASEZ) has been responsible for most of this development since it opened in 2001.\n\nIt covers 375 km and offers a basket of tax and tariff incentives, as well as full repatriation rights and more flexible operating regulations. There is a 5% flat tax on most economic activities, no tariffs on imported goods, no currency restrictions and no property taxes for corporate land. Additionally – and somewhat controversially, given Jordan's past issues with unemployment – companies based in ASEZ are allowed to employ up to 70% foreign workers in their operations. Jordan's investment profile has been growing nationally, but according to the Jordan Investment Board (JIB), the ASEZ has exceeded investment targets by 33%. By 2006 it had already brought in around $8bn in investment, some $2bn more than the original target of $6bn by 2020. ASEZ expects to attract a further $12bn spread across a number of sectors, including tourism, finance and industry. The Development Law of 2008 set in place a universal framework for special development areas based on the Aqaba model.\n\nBULLET::::- Jordan Investment Board\nBULLET::::- MENA ICT Forum\n\nBULLET::::- Brand, Laurie. \"Jordan’s Inter-Arab Relations: The Political Economy of Alliance Making\". New York: Columbia University Press, 1994.\nBULLET::::- \"Country Profile: Jordan 1995-96\". London: The Economist Intelligence Unit, 1995.\nBULLET::::- International Monetary Fund Jordan Page\nBULLET::::- Jeffreys, Andrew ed. \"Emerging Jordan 2003\". London: The Oxford Business Group, 2002.\nBULLET::::- Maciejewski, Edouard and Ahsan Mansur eds. \"Jordan: Strategy for Adjustment and Growth\". Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund, 1996.\nBULLET::::- Piro, Timothy. \"The Political Economy of Market Reform in Jordan\". Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 1998.\nBULLET::::- Prados, Alfred and Jeremy Sharp. Congressional Research Service. Report for Congress. \"Jordan: U.S. Relations and Bilateral Issues\". Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, 2006.\nBULLET::::- Robins, Philip. \"Jordan to 1990: Coping with Change\". London: The Economist Intelligence Unit, 1986.\nBULLET::::- Economy of Jordan extracted from the CIA Factbook & Worldbank data\nBULLET::::- ICT Association of Jordan - int@j\n"}
{"id": "15720", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15720", "title": "Telecommunications in Jordan", "text": "Telecommunications in Jordan\n\nJordan has a highly developed communications infrastructure. Jordan's telecom infrastructure is growing at a very rapid pace and continually being updated and expanded. Communications in Jordan occur across many media, including telephone, radio, television, and internet.\n\n50% of households have at least one main line telephone. 103% of the population has a cell phone; 15% have more than one.\nBULLET::::- Telephones - main lines in use: 622,600 ()\nBULLET::::- Telephones - mobile cellular: 6,250,000 ()\nBULLET::::- Digital Radio Trunking:100,000 (Unofficial, Nov'07)\n<br>In mid 2004, XPress Telecom was launched as the country's digital radio trunking operator.\n\nBULLET::::- Telephone system: The service has improved recently with the increased use of digital switching equipment, but better access to the telephone system is needed in some rural areas and easier access to pay telephones is needed by the urban public.\n\nBULLET::::- Radios: 1.66 million ()\n\nBULLET::::- Seagulls - www.seagullscommunications.com\n\n \nBULLET::::- Play 99.6\nBULLET::::- BBC Arabic\nBULLET::::- Beat FM 102.5\nBULLET::::- Mazaj FM 95.3 FM\nBULLET::::- Hala FM\nBULLET::::- HD FM (Hala Dounia FM)\nBULLET::::- Radio Jordan French\nBULLET::::- Amman FM\nBULLET::::- Watan FM\nBULLET::::- Sawt Ma'an\nBULLET::::- Sunny 105.1\nBULLET::::- Virgin Radio Jordan\nBULLET::::- Radio Rotana\nBULLET::::- Radio Panorama\nBULLET::::- Radio Monte Carlo\nBULLET::::- Mood 92.0 FM\nBULLET::::- Ammannet\nBULLET::::- Radio Jordan FM\nBULLET::::- Melody FM\nBULLET::::- Radio Sawa\nBULLET::::- Yarmouk FM\n\nBULLET::::- Television broadcast stations: 20 (plus 96 repeaters) ()\nBULLET::::- Televisions: 500,000 ()\n\n40% of Jordanian households have a PC. This is expected to double in the coming years when the government reduces the sales tax on PCs and internet service in an effort to make Jordan the high-tech capital of the Middle East. The Jordanian Government is also providing every university student with a laptop in partnership with the private sector. All Jordan's schools are connected with internet service and the Jordanian Government is heavily purchasing computers and smart technology to be equipped in Jordan's classrooms.\n\nAs of 2013, Internet penetration in Jordan was 63%. It was 50.5 per cent by the end of 2011. Internet usage more than doubled from 2007 to 2009 with the rapid growth expected to continue. Telecommunications Regulatory Commission (TRC) figures indicate that Internet penetration stood at 29 per cent by the end of 2009 and 38 per cent by the end of 2010.\n\nThe Jordanian government has announced that the sales tax on computers and internet connection would be removed in order to further stimulate the ICT industry in Jordan. King Abdullah II told the BBC in 2004 that he hoped to make his country the tech hub of the Middle East. Jordan has more internet start up companies than any other country in the Middle East, and thus was dubbed the Middle East's \"Silicon Valley\". Amman was ranked as the 10th-best city in the world to launch a tech startup, according to a 2012 list compiled by Finaventures, a California-based venture-capital firm. Tech entrepreneurs have praised the ability to access high speed internet connections in Jordan, comparing this to Dubai and Saudi Arabia. \"Al Jami'a Street\", in Jordan's northern city of Irbid, was ranked as the street with the highest number of internet cafes in the world by the Guinness World Records.\nBULLET::::- Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 3,160 ()\nBULLET::::- Internet users:: 3.163 million ()\nBULLET::::- Country code top-level domain (ccTLD): .JO\n\nThe IT industry in Jordan in the year 2000 and beyond got a very big boost after the Gulf War of 1991. This boost came from a large influx of immigrants from the Gulf countries to Jordan, mostly from Jordanian expatriates from Kuwait, totaling few hundred thousands. This large wave impacted Jordan in many ways, and one of them was on its IT industry.\n\nWhen King Abdullah II ascended to the throne in 1999, he stated his intentions to turn Jordan into the high-tech capital of the Middle East and to create a Silicon Valley-like venture in Jordan. All Jordanian schools are equipped with computers and internet connection and instituted an ICT curriculum into Jordan's education system. ICT faculties were established in Jordanian universities and these campuses have been churning out 15,000 ICT graduates every year. Information access centers were established across the Kingdom to allow rural areas access to the Internet.\n\nThe number of phone lines has decreased dramatically in the past three years to below 500K telephone lines, due to the introduction of WI-Max technology and 3G networks.\n\nBULLET::::- Jordan Radio and Television (JRTV)\nBULLET::::- ATV Jordan\nBULLET::::- Orange Jordan\nBULLET::::- Umniah\nBULLET::::- XPress\nBULLET::::- Zain Jordan\n"}
{"id": "15721", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15721", "title": "Transport in Jordan", "text": "Transport in Jordan\n\nWith the exception of a railway system, Jordan has a developed public and private transportation system. There are three international airports in Jordan. The Hedjaz Jordan Railway runs one passenger train a day each way.\n\nIn 2009, it was estimated that Jordan had of paved highways. Some of the major highways in Jordan are:\nBULLET::::- Highway 15 (Desert Highway): connects the Syrian border with Amman and to the port city of Aqaba on the Gulf of Aqaba. It is a four-lane, double carriageway road almost on its entirety, from the Syrian border until the junction with the road to Petra.\nBULLET::::- Highway 35 (King's Highway): connects Irbid in the northern region to Aqaba, it takes the name and route of the historic King's Highway. It has four lanes on double carriageway on its stretch from Irbid until Amman.\nBULLET::::- Highway 65 (Dead Sea Highway): connects Aqaba to the northwestern region of Jordan.\nBULLET::::- The first part of the highway (Safi-Aqaba) was constructed in 1978 as part of the Red Sea - Dead Sea Access. It connected Safi, the south end of Dead Sea to Aqaba, the north point of Red Sea.\nBULLET::::- Jordan Highway: encircles the city of Amman and connects it to Jerash and Irbid\n\n\"Total:\" 507 km - \"narrow gauge\" of (2008)\nRailway companies in Jordan are:\nBULLET::::- Hedjaz Jordan Railway: The only passenger railway currently operating in Jordan, connecting Amman to Damascus, in Syria, and passing through Zarqa and Mafraq. It is narrow gauge; the rest of the Syrian network uses .\nBULLET::::- Aqaba Railway Corporation\n\nThe Jordanian government has begun acquiring land for new rail routes. Following a study by BNP Paribas, three routes are planned, which are expected to be tendered later in 2010. The three routes are:\nBULLET::::1. From the Syrian border, via Zarqa, to the Saudi border; replacing part of the Hedjaz Railway;\nBULLET::::2. Connecting the first line to Aqaba, and from Mafraq to Irbid, replacing another part of the Hedjaz Railway;\nBULLET::::3. A link to the Iraqi border.\nHowever, in late 2010 the government announced an economic relief package and following the 2011 Jordanian protests it was decided to reduce the expected three year capital investment plan in the national railway network by 72 percent, partly to fund the relief package. Therefore, it is unclear when the ambitions railway expansion plan will be carried out.\n\nThere are also plans for a light rail system operating between Amman and Zarqa and metro line in Amman.\n\nCurrently, two connected but non-contiguously operated sections of the Hedjaz Railway exist:\nBULLET::::- from Amman in Jordan to Syria, as the \"Hedjaz Jordan Railway.\"\nBULLET::::- from phosphate mines near Ma'an to the Gulf of Aqaba as the \"Aqaba Railway.\"\n\nIn August 2011, Jordanian government approved the construction of the railway from Aqaba to the Iraqi border (near Trebil). The Iraqis in the meantime started the construction of the line from the border to their current railhead at Ramadi.\n\nBULLET::::- 2008- Proposals for international links.\nBULLET::::- 2007- China to rebuild Hejaz line\nBULLET::::- 2006- Various rail proposals.\n\nBULLET::::- 2005- 2005 in rail transport\n\nBULLET::::- - The Public Transport Regulatory Commission has entered into an agreement with a private sector consortium, following a competitive bidding process, to develop a light rail system between the Jordanian capital Amman and nearby industrial city of Zarqa. This light rail project, to be operational by 2011, will be the first urban rail public-private partnership (PPP) in the Middle East. The system will be operated using (standard gauge) electrically propelled light rail vehicles on a double track. The total length of the LRS system will be approximately 25 kilometres. The majority of the LRS route, between Al-Mahatta (in Amman) and New Zarqa will be constructed within the existing Hedjaz Railway right-of-way (22.2 kilometres). The Public Transport Regulatory Commission estimates that the new system will carry about 45,000 passengers a day in its first year. Canada's CPCS was the lead advisor to the PTRC in this PPP transaction.\nBULLET::::- CPCS is also advising the Government of Jordan in the privatization of the Aqaba Railway Corporation, running from Ma'an to Aqaba. This railway is used to transport phosphate from mines located in Ma'an. The commission plans to modernize the old narrow gauge railway and replace it with new track.\n\ngas 473 km; oil 49 km\n\nThe port of Aqaba on the Gulf of Aqaba is the only sea port in Jordan.\n\n\"total:\"\n7 ships (with a volume of or over) totaling /\n<br>\"ships by type (1999):\"\nbulk carrier 2, cargo ship 2, container ship 1, livestock carrier 1, roll-on/roll-off ship 1 \nThe governments of Jordan, Egypt, and Iraq own and operate the Arab Bridge Maritime company, which is the largest passenger transport company on the Red Sea.\n\n18 as of 2012\n\nAs of 2012, there was a total of 16 airports, the main airports being:\nBULLET::::- Queen Alia International Airport in Amman.\nBULLET::::- King Hussein International Airport in Aqaba\nBULLET::::- Amman Civil Airport in Amman\nBULLET::::- Muwaffaq Salti Air Base: A military airport in Azraq\n\n\"total (2012):\"\n16\n<br>\"over\" :\n8\n<br>:\n5\n<br>\"under\" :\n1\n\n\"total (2012):\"\n2\n\"under\" :\n2\n\n56\n\nBULLET::::- UNHCR Atlas Map - most stations unnamed\n\nBULLET::::- Jordan\nBULLET::::- Arab Mashreq International Railway\nBULLET::::- Red Sea–Dead Sea Access\n\nBULLET::::- Hejaz RR Map\n"}
{"id": "15723", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15723", "title": "Foreign relations of Jordan", "text": "Foreign relations of Jordan\n\nThe foreign relations of Jordan have consistently followed a pro-Western foreign policy and traditionally Jordan has had close relations with the United States and the United Kingdom. These relations were damaged when Jordan proclaimed its neutrality during the Gulf War and maintained relations with Iraq. In public, Jordan continued to call for the lifting of UN sanctions against Iraq within the context of implementing UNIC resolutions.\n\nSince the end of the war, Jordan has largely restored its relations with Western countries through its participation in the Middle East war process and enforcement of UN sanctions against Iraq.\n\nJordan signed a non-aggression pact with Israel (the Washington Declaration) in Washington, DC, on July 25, 1994. Jordan and Israel signed a historic peace treaty on October 26, 1994, witnessed by President Clinton, accompanied by Secretary of State Warren Christopher. The U.S. has participated with Jordan and Israel in trilateral development discussions during which key issues have been water-sharing and security; cooperation on Jordan Rift Valley development; infrastructure projects; and trade, finance, and banking issues.\nIn 12/09, the United States added Jordan to their major non-NATO ally agreement. Jordan was involved in the CIA–led Timber Sycamore covert operation to train and arm Syrian rebels.\n\nJordan also participates in the multilateral war talks, and recently Jordan has signed a free trade agreement with the United States. Jordan is an active member of the UN and several of its specialized and related agencies, including the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and World Health Organization (WHO). Jordan is a member of the World Bank, International Monetary Fund (IMF), Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), Non-Aligned Movement, and Arab League.\n\nWithin the context of the European Union's \"European Neighbourhood Policy\" the EU and Jordan have jointly adopted an Action plan to reinforce their political and economic interdependence, and further implement their current Association Agreement. This Action Plan covers a timeframe of three to five years and will encourage and support Jordan's national reform objectives and further integration into European economic and social structures.\n\nIsrael captured Jerusalem in 1967, which is located at the West Bank of Jordan. Since 1967 Pakistan has been demanding its vacation at the international level. Jordan together with Pakistan is playing an effective role in the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).\n\n Country\n!Notes\n18 June 1996\n\nBULLET::::- Both countries established diplomatic relations on 18 June 1996.\nBULLET::::- Armenia is represented by a consulate in the capital Amman.\n\n28 June 2006\nBoth countries established diplomatic relations on June 28, 2006. \n\nBULLET::::- Brazil has an embassy in Amman.\nBULLET::::- Jordan has an embassy in Brasília.\n valign=\"top\"\n\nIn May 2008, King Abdullah II visited Brunei, to bolster ties between Jordan and the southeast Asian nation, as well as discuss issues facing the Muslim world. Along with Sultan of Brunei Darussalam, Abdullah signed agreements devised to enhance cooperation in the economic, tourism and defense fields.\n\nBULLET::::- Chile has an embassy in Amman.\nBULLET::::- Jordan has an embassy in Santiago.\n valign=\"top\"\n\nBULLET::::- China has an embassy in Amman.\nBULLET::::- Jordan has an embassy in Beijing.\n valign=\"top\"\n\nBULLET::::- Denmark has an honorary consulate in Amman.\nBULLET::::- Jordan has an honorary consulate in Copenhagen\n valign=\"top\"\nSee Egypt–Jordan relations\n\nBULLET::::- Egypt has an embassy in Amman.\nBULLET::::- Jordan has an embassy in Cairo.\n valign=\"top\"\nSee Greece–Jordan relations\n\nBULLET::::- Greece has an embassy in Amman.\nBULLET::::- Jordan has an embassy in Athens.\n valign=\"top\"\nSee Holy See–Jordan relations\n\nBoth countries established diplomatic relations in 1994. The Holy See has a nunciature in Amman. Jordan has an embassy in Rome accredited to the Holy See. The Holy See has maintained comparatively good relations with Jordan. The name of the country comes from the Jordan River, which is significant to Christians because it was the place where Jesus was baptized by John the Baptist. Various Christian clerics in the Arab world have a Jordanian background, such as Maroun Lahham in Tunisia and Fouad Twal in Palestine.\n\nThe Republic of India and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan signed their first bilateral agreement for cooperation and friendly relations in 1947, which was formalised in 1950 when India became a sovereign democratic republic. The Ministry of External Affairs of the Government of India stated in August 2011 that, 'India and Jordan have very warm, cordial and cooperative relations; \nand it is our hope that the existing mutually beneficial relationship would be \nfurther deepened and strengthened in the days ahead.' Indian tourists visited Jordan in large numbers in 2010, with nearly 51,000 visitors. Apart from this, military, cultural and economic exchanges between the two nations is widespread. Quoting the Indian Foreign Ministry, 'India was the largest export partner and ninth largest import partner of Jordan in 2008. The trade turnover between the two countries stood at US$1.785 billion in 2008 i.e. Jordan's imports from India stood at about US$503 million in 2008 while its exports to India reached at US$1.283 billion in 2008. India's position in 2009 is third and fifteenth respectively as the trade turnover between the two countries stood at US$983 million in 2009 i.e. India's exports to Jordan in 2009 stood at US$297 million while imports were valued at US$686 million. In 2010, the India-Jordan trade volume stood at US$1.16 billion i.e. India's exports to Jordan stood at US$382 million in 2010 while imports were to the tune of US$783 million in 2010.' Jordan is also a member of the Non-Aligned Movement and has thus forged close relations with India.\nSee Iraq–Jordan relations\n\nDespite periodic crises of confidence and lingering Iraqi resentment over Jordan's close ties with Saddam Hussein, the two countries have managed to forge deep ties, in fact, Jordan has taken the lead among Arab states to do so. In the face of repeated attacks and threats, Jordan has maintained a strong diplomatic presence in Baghdad.\nThe economic impact of the Iraq crisis in Jordan has been mixed. Jordan has benefited greatly from serving as a \"gateway\" to Iraq for governments, aid workers, contractors, and businesspeople, the real estate and banking sectors are booming, and it stands to reap more benefits from increased trade and transport should the situation in Iraq improve. However, with the fall of Saddam Hussein, Jordan lost the sizable oil subsidies and customary shipments it received from Iraq.\n\nUnlike many of Iraq's other neighbors, Jordan can claim only modest influence over developments in Iraq. The kingdom does have notable intelligence capabilities vis-à-vis Iraq, and it reportedly helped the United States track down and kill Al-Qaeda in Iraq leader Abu Musab al-Zarqawi. Although some Jordanians highlight cross-border tribal and family connections with Iraqi Sunni Arabs, they pale in comparison to those of the West Bank, Lebanon, and Syria. Jordan's most significant means of influence is its hosting of a large and ever-changing Iraqi expatriate community, mostly of Sunni Arab origin.\n1994See Israel–Jordan relations\n\nJordan and Israel have had official relations since 1994, when their leaders signed a peace treaty. Historically, Jordan has had relatively warm relations with Israel compared to other Arab nations. Jordan and Egypt are the only two Arab nations to have signed a peace treaty with Israel.\n5 June 2013\n\nJordan recognised the independence of the Republic of Kosovo on 7 July 2009. Jordan supported Kosovo at the International Court of Justice's advisory opinion on Kosovo's declaration of independence in December 2009. Jordan and Kosovo established full diplomatic relations on 5 June 2013.\n\nKuwait's relations with Jordan weakened during the Gulf War because of Jordan's stand with Iraq. However, the two nations have apparently decided to bury the past. King Abdullah II and the Emir of Kuwait are working to restore good relations and further strengthen them.\n\nBULLET::::- Jordan has an embassy in Beirut.\nBULLET::::- Lebanon has an embassy in Amman.\n valign=\"top\"\nSee Jordan–Malaysia relations\n\nJordan has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has an embassy in Amman. Relations between the two countries are mainly in economic and Islamic affairs.\n9 July 1975See Jordan–Mexico relations\n\nDiplomatic relations between both nations were established on 9 July 1975.\nBULLET::::- Jordan has an embassy in Mexico City.\nBULLET::::- Mexico has an embassy in Amman.\n valign=\"top\"\nSee Jordan–Pakistan relations\n\nThe preliminary and initial forms of Pakistan-Jordan contact can date as early as up to the 1970s and 1980s, although associations have risen at firmer altitudes since the mid-1990s up to 2000. In 2001, some prominent Pakistani leaders completed a visit to Amman, where they discussed with leaders of Jordan about pledging full-scale cooperations. In the duration of the convention, the King of Jordan had lauded what he called \"deep, strong and historical relations\" between the two countries and affirmed Jordan's keenness on consolidating its ties with Pakistan for the benefit of the two peoples.\nSee Jordan–Palestine relations\n\nBULLET::::- Jordan has an embassy in Ramallah and a representative office in Gaza City.\nBULLET::::- Palestine has an embassy in Amman.\n valign=\"top\"\nSee Jordan–Qatar relations\n\nDuring the 2017 Qatar diplomatic crisis, Jordan downgraded diplomatic ties with Qatar.\n20 August 1963See Jordan–Russia relations\n\nRussia has an embassy in Amman, while Jordan has an embassy in Moscow. Both countries had established diplomatic relations on August 20, 1963.\nSee Jordan–Saudi Arabia relations\n\nBULLET::::- Jordan has an embassy in Riyadh and a consulate in Jeddah.\nBULLET::::- Saudi Arabia has an embassy in Amman.\n valign=\"top\"\n\nThe Republic of Korea and Jordan have had official relations since 26 July 1962.\nSee Jordan–Syria relations\n\nRelations between Jordan and Syria have fluctuated widely between normal diplomatic relations and full armed confrontation. At times, each side has attempted to subvert the other, and has supported and provided refuge to the other's internal opposition groups.\n\nThe royal family has close ties to Britain - King Abdullah's mother Princess Muna is British by birth and Queen Noor has a country house in Berkshire. Jordan has good relations with the British armed services, with regular visits and training events such as Exercise Pashtun Commando 2013.\nSee Jordan–United States relations\nU.S. policy seeks to reinforce Jordan's commitment to peace, stability, and moderation.\nBULLET::::- Jordan has an embassy in Washington, DC.\nBULLET::::- United States has an embassy in Amman.\n}\n\nBULLET::::- List of diplomatic missions in Jordan\nBULLET::::- List of diplomatic missions of Jordan\nBULLET::::- Visa requirements for Jordanian citizens\n\nBULLET::::- The Washington Declaration between Jordan and Israel\nBULLET::::- EU Neighbourhood Info Centre: Country profile of Jordan\n"}
{"id": "15724", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15724", "title": "Juan de Nova Island", "text": "Juan de Nova Island\n\nJuan de Nova Island (, ) is a French tropical island in the narrowest part of the Mozambique Channel, about one-third of the way between Madagascar and Mozambique. It is a low, flat island, in size.\n\nAnchorage is possible off the northeast of the island which also has a airstrip. Administratively, the island is one of the Scattered islands in the Indian Ocean, a district of the French Southern and Antarctic Lands. \nThe island is garrisoned by French troops from Réunion and has a weather station.\n\nJuan de Nova, about long and at its widest, is a nature reserve surrounded by reefs which enclose an area—not a true lagoon like in an atoll—of roughly . Forests, mainly of Casuarinaceae, cover about half the island. Sea turtles nest on the beaches around the island.\n\nThe island is named after the Spanish version of a Galician admiral in the service of Portugal, João da Nova, who came across the island in 1501. The island had never been inhabited when it became a possession of France in 1897.\n\nIn 1921, France decided to transfer the administration of Juan de Nova from Paris to Tananarive in its colony of Madagascar and Dependencies. Before the independence of Madagascar, France transferred the administration to Saint-Pierre on Réunion. Madagascar became independent in 1960, and claims sovereignty over the island since 1972. Guano deposits were exploited from the start of the 20th century until 1970.\n\nThe island was abandoned during World War II and was visited by German submariners. Installations, including a hangar, rail lines, houses and a jetty are in ruins.\n\nThe island lies on the sea route between South Africa and the northern tip of Madagascar. It is affected by strong currents and has become the site of numerous wrecks. Most visible are the remains of the which ran onto the southern fringing reef in 1911.\n\nThe island has been identified as an Important Bird Area by BirdLife International because it supports a very large colony of sooty terns, with up to 100,000 breeding pairs. It also has a much smaller colony of greater crested terns – with at least 50 breeding pairs recorded in 1994. Of at least seven species of land birds present, most are probably introduced.\n"}
{"id": "15736", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15736", "title": "Johannes Kepler", "text": "Johannes Kepler\n\nJohannes Kepler (; ; December 27, 1571 – November 15, 1630) was a German astronomer, mathematician, and astrologer. He is a key figure in the 17th-century scientific revolution, best known for his laws of planetary motion, and his books \"Astronomia nova\", \"Harmonices Mundi\", and \"Epitome Astronomiae Copernicanae\". These works also provided one of the foundations for Newton's theory of universal gravitation.\n\nKepler was a mathematics teacher at a seminary school in Graz, where he became an associate of Prince Hans Ulrich von Eggenberg. Later he became an assistant to the astronomer Tycho Brahe in Prague, and eventually the imperial mathematician to Emperor Rudolf II and his two successors Matthias and Ferdinand II. He also taught mathematics in Linz, and was an adviser to General Wallenstein.\nAdditionally, he did fundamental work in the field of optics, invented an improved version of the refracting (or Keplerian) telescope, and was mentioned in the telescopic discoveries of his contemporary Galileo Galilei. He was a corresponding member of the Accademia dei Lincei in Rome.\n\nKepler lived in an era when there was no clear distinction between astronomy and astrology, but there was a strong division between astronomy (a branch of mathematics within the liberal arts) and physics (a branch of natural philosophy). Kepler also incorporated religious arguments and reasoning into his work, motivated by the religious conviction and belief that God had created the world according to an intelligible plan that is accessible through the natural light of reason.\nKepler described his new astronomy as \"celestial physics\", as \"an excursion into Aristotle's \"Metaphysics\"\", and as \"a supplement to Aristotle's \"On the Heavens\"\", transforming the ancient tradition of physical cosmology by treating astronomy as part of a universal mathematical physics.\n\nKepler was born on December 27, the feast day of St John the Evangelist, 1571, in the Free Imperial City of Weil der Stadt (now part of the Stuttgart Region in the German state of Baden-Württemberg, 30 km west of Stuttgart's center). His grandfather, Sebald Kepler, had been Lord Mayor of the city. By the time Johannes was born, he had two brothers and one sister and the Kepler family fortune was in decline. His father, Heinrich Kepler, earned a precarious living as a mercenary, and he left the family when Johannes was five years old. He was believed to have died in the Eighty Years' War in the Netherlands. His mother, Katharina Guldenmann, an innkeeper's daughter, was a healer and herbalist. Born prematurely, Johannes claimed to have been weak and sickly as a child. Nevertheless, he often impressed travelers at his grandfather's inn with his phenomenal mathematical faculty.\n\nHe was introduced to astronomy at an early age, and developed a love for it that would span his entire life. At age six, he observed the Great Comet of 1577, writing that he \"was taken by [his] mother to a high place to look at it.\" In 1580, at age nine, he observed another astronomical event, a lunar eclipse, recording that he remembered being \"called outdoors\" to see it and that the moon \"appeared quite red\". However, childhood smallpox left him with weak vision and crippled hands, limiting his ability in the observational aspects of astronomy.\nIn 1589, after moving through grammar school, Latin school, and seminary at Maulbronn, Kepler attended Tübinger Stift at the University of Tübingen. There, he studied philosophy under Vitus Müller and theology under Jacob Heerbrand (a student of Philipp Melanchthon at Wittenberg), who also taught Michael Maestlin while he was a student, until he became Chancellor at Tübingen in 1590. He proved himself to be a superb mathematician and earned a reputation as a skilful astrologer, casting horoscopes for fellow students. Under the instruction of Michael Maestlin, Tübingen's professor of mathematics from 1583 to 1631, he learned both the Ptolemaic system and the Copernican system of planetary motion. He became a Copernican at that time. In a student disputation, he defended heliocentrism from both a theoretical and theological perspective, maintaining that the Sun was the principal source of motive power in the universe. Despite his desire to become a minister, near the end of his studies, Kepler was recommended for a position as teacher of mathematics and astronomy at the Protestant school in Graz. He accepted the position in April 1594, at the age of 23.\n\nKepler's first major astronomical work, \"Mysterium Cosmographicum\" (\"The Cosmographic Mystery\", 1596), was the first published defense of the Copernican system. Kepler claimed to have had an epiphany on July 19, 1595, while teaching in Graz, demonstrating the periodic conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in the zodiac: he realized that regular polygons bound one inscribed and one circumscribed circle at definite ratios, which, he reasoned, might be the geometrical basis of the universe. After failing to find a unique arrangement of polygons that fit known astronomical observations (even with extra planets added to the system), Kepler began experimenting with 3-dimensional polyhedra. He found that each of the five Platonic solids could be inscribed and circumscribed by spherical orbs; nesting these solids, each encased in a sphere, within one another would produce six layers, corresponding to the six known planets—Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. By ordering the solids selectively—octahedron, icosahedron, dodecahedron, tetrahedron, cube—Kepler found that the spheres could be placed at intervals corresponding to the relative sizes of each planet's path, assuming the planets circle the Sun. Kepler also found a formula relating the size of each planet's orb to the length of its orbital period: from inner to outer planets, the ratio of increase in orbital period is twice the difference in orb radius. However, Kepler later rejected this formula, because it was not precise enough.\n\nAs he indicated in the title, Kepler thought he had revealed God's geometrical plan for the universe. Much of Kepler's enthusiasm for the Copernican system stemmed from his theological convictions about the connection between the physical and the spiritual; the universe itself was an image of God, with the Sun corresponding to the Father, the stellar sphere to the Son, and the intervening space between to the Holy Spirit. His first manuscript of \"Mysterium\" contained an extensive chapter reconciling heliocentrism with biblical passages that seemed to support geocentrism.\nWith the support of his mentor Michael Maestlin, Kepler received permission from the Tübingen university senate to publish his manuscript, pending removal of the Bible exegesis and the addition of a simpler, more understandable description of the Copernican system as well as Kepler's new ideas. \"Mysterium\" was published late in 1596, and Kepler received his copies and began sending them to prominent astronomers and patrons early in 1597; it was not widely read, but it established Kepler's reputation as a highly skilled astronomer. The effusive dedication, to powerful patrons as well as to the men who controlled his position in Graz, also provided a crucial doorway into the patronage system.\n\nThough the details would be modified in light of his later work, Kepler never relinquished the Platonist polyhedral-spherist cosmology of \"Mysterium Cosmographicum\". His subsequent main astronomical works were in some sense only further developments of it, concerned with finding more precise inner and outer dimensions for the spheres by calculating the eccentricities of the planetary orbits within it. In 1621, Kepler published an expanded second edition of \"Mysterium\", half as long again as the first, detailing in footnotes the corrections and improvements he had achieved in the 25 years since its first publication.\n\nIn terms of the impact of \"Mysterium\", it can be seen as an important first step in modernizing the theory proposed by Nicolaus Copernicus in his \"De revolutionibus orbium coelestium\". Whilst Copernicus sought to advance a heliocentric system in this book, he resorted to Ptolemaic devices (viz., epicycles and eccentric circles) in order to explain the change in planets' orbital speed, and also continued to use as a point of reference the center of the Earth's orbit rather than that of the Sun \"as an aid to calculation and in order not to confuse the reader by diverging too much from Ptolemy.\" Modern astronomy owes much to \"Mysterium Cosmographicum\", despite flaws in its main thesis, \"since it represents the first step in cleansing the Copernican system of the remnants of the Ptolemaic theory still clinging to it.\"\nIn December 1595, Kepler was introduced to Barbara Müller, a 23-year-old widow (twice over) with a young daughter, Regina Lorenz, and he began courting her. Müller, an heiress to the estates of her late husbands, was also the daughter of a successful mill owner. Her father Jobst initially opposed a marriage. Even though Kepler had inherited his grandfather's nobility, Kepler's poverty made him an unacceptable match. Jobst relented after Kepler completed work on \"Mysterium\", but the engagement nearly fell apart while Kepler was away tending to the details of publication. However, Protestant officials—who had helped set up the match—pressured the Müllers to honor their agreement. Barbara and Johannes were married on April 27, 1597.\n\nIn the first years of their marriage, the Keplers had two children (Heinrich and Susanna), both of whom died in infancy. In 1602, they had a daughter (Susanna); in 1604, a son (Friedrich); and in 1607, another son (Ludwig).\n\nFollowing the publication of \"Mysterium\" and with the blessing of the Graz school inspectors, Kepler began an ambitious program to extend and elaborate his work. He planned four additional books: one on the stationary aspects of the universe (the Sun and the fixed stars); one on the planets and their motions; one on the physical nature of planets and the formation of geographical features (focused especially on Earth); and one on the effects of the heavens on the Earth, to include atmospheric optics, meteorology, and astrology.\n\nHe also sought the opinions of many of the astronomers to whom he had sent \"Mysterium\", among them Reimarus Ursus (Nicolaus Reimers Bär)—the imperial mathematician to Rudolph II and a bitter rival of Tycho Brahe. Ursus did not reply directly, but republished Kepler's flattering letter to pursue his priority dispute over (what is now called) the Tychonic system with Tycho. Despite this black mark, Tycho also began corresponding with Kepler, starting with a harsh but legitimate critique of Kepler's system; among a host of objections, Tycho took issue with the use of inaccurate numerical data taken from Copernicus. Through their letters, Tycho and Kepler discussed a broad range of astronomical problems, dwelling on lunar phenomena and Copernican theory (particularly its theological viability). But without the significantly more accurate data of Tycho's observatory, Kepler had no way to address many of these issues.\n\nInstead, he turned his attention to chronology and \"harmony,\" the numerological relationships among music, mathematics and the physical world, and their astrological consequences. By assuming the Earth to possess a soul (a property he would later invoke to explain how the sun causes the motion of planets), he established a speculative system connecting astrological aspects and astronomical distances to weather and other earthly phenomena. By 1599, however, he again felt his work limited by the inaccuracy of available data—just as growing religious tension was also threatening his continued employment in Graz. In December of that year, Tycho invited Kepler to visit him in Prague; on January 1, 1600 (before he even received the invitation), Kepler set off in the hopes that Tycho's patronage could solve his philosophical problems as well as his social and financial ones.\n\nOn February 4, 1600, Kepler met Tycho Brahe and his assistants Franz Tengnagel and Longomontanus at Benátky nad Jizerou (35 km from Prague), the site where Tycho's new observatory was being constructed. Over the next two months, he stayed as a guest, analyzing some of Tycho's observations of Mars; Tycho guarded his data closely, but was impressed by Kepler's theoretical ideas and soon allowed him more access. Kepler planned to test his theory from \"Mysterium Cosmographicum\" based on the Mars data, but he estimated that the work would take up to two years (since he was not allowed to simply copy the data for his own use). With the help of Johannes Jessenius, Kepler attempted to negotiate a more formal employment arrangement with Tycho, but negotiations broke down in an angry argument and Kepler left for Prague on April 6. Kepler and Tycho soon reconciled and eventually reached an agreement on salary and living arrangements, and in June, Kepler returned home to Graz to collect his family.\n\nPolitical and religious difficulties in Graz dashed his hopes of returning immediately to Brahe; in hopes of continuing his astronomical studies, Kepler sought an appointment as a mathematician to Archduke Ferdinand. To that end, Kepler composed an essay—dedicated to Ferdinand—in which he proposed a force-based theory of lunar motion: \"In Terra inest virtus, quae Lunam ciet\" (\"There is a force in the earth which causes the moon to move\"). Though the essay did not earn him a place in Ferdinand's court, it did detail a new method for measuring lunar eclipses, which he applied during the July 10 eclipse in Graz. These observations formed the basis of his explorations of the laws of optics that would culminate in \"Astronomiae Pars Optica\".\n\nOn August 2, 1600, after refusing to convert to Catholicism, Kepler and his family were banished from Graz. Several months later, Kepler returned, now with the rest of his household, to Prague. Through most of 1601, he was supported directly by Tycho, who assigned him to analyzing planetary observations and writing a tract against Tycho's (by then deceased) rival, Ursus. In September, Tycho secured him a commission as a collaborator on the new project he had proposed to the emperor: the \"Rudolphine Tables\" that should replace the \"Prutenic Tables\" of Erasmus Reinhold. Two days after Tycho's unexpected death on October 24, 1601, Kepler was appointed his successor as the imperial mathematician with the responsibility to complete his unfinished work. The next 11 years as imperial mathematician would be the most productive of his life.\n\nKepler's primary obligation as imperial mathematician was to provide astrological advice to the emperor. Though Kepler took a dim view of the attempts of contemporary astrologers to precisely predict the future or divine specific events, he had been casting well-received detailed horoscopes for friends, family, and patrons since his time as a student in Tübingen. In addition to horoscopes for allies and foreign leaders, the emperor sought Kepler's advice in times of political trouble. Rudolph was actively interested in the work of many of his court scholars (including numerous alchemists) and kept up with Kepler's work in physical astronomy as well.\n\nOfficially, the only acceptable religious doctrines in Prague were Catholic and Utraquist, but Kepler's position in the imperial court allowed him to practice his Lutheran faith unhindered. The emperor nominally provided an ample income for his family, but the difficulties of the over-extended imperial treasury meant that actually getting hold of enough money to meet financial obligations was a continual struggle. Partly because of financial troubles, his life at home with Barbara was unpleasant, marred with bickering and bouts of sickness. Court life, however, brought Kepler into contact with other prominent scholars (Johannes Matthäus Wackher von Wackhenfels, Jost Bürgi, David Fabricius, Martin Bachazek, and Johannes Brengger, among others) and astronomical work proceeded rapidly.\n\nAs Kepler slowly continued analyzing Tycho's Mars observations—now available to him in their entirety—and began the slow process of tabulating the \"Rudolphine Tables\", Kepler also picked up the investigation of the laws of optics from his lunar essay of 1600. Both lunar and solar eclipses presented unexplained phenomena, such as unexpected shadow sizes, the red color of a total lunar eclipse, and the reportedly unusual light surrounding a total solar eclipse. Related issues of atmospheric refraction applied to \"all\" astronomical observations. Through most of 1603, Kepler paused his other work to focus on optical theory; the resulting manuscript, presented to the emperor on January 1, 1604, was published as \"Astronomiae Pars Optica\" (The Optical Part of Astronomy). In it, Kepler described the inverse-square law governing the intensity of light, reflection by flat and curved mirrors, and principles of pinhole cameras, as well as the astronomical implications of optics such as parallax and the apparent sizes of heavenly bodies. He also extended his study of optics to the human eye, and is generally considered by neuroscientists to be the first to recognize that images are projected inverted and reversed by the eye's lens onto the retina. The solution to this dilemma was not of particular importance to Kepler as he did not see it as pertaining to optics, although he did suggest that the image was later corrected \"in the hollows of the brain\" due to the \"activity of the Soul.\" Today, \"Astronomiae Pars Optica\" is generally recognized as the foundation of modern optics (though the law of refraction is conspicuously absent). With respect to the beginnings of projective geometry, Kepler introduced the idea of continuous change of a mathematical entity in this work. He argued that if a focus of a conic section were allowed to move along the line joining the foci, the geometric form would morph or degenerate, one into another. In this way, an ellipse becomes a parabola when a focus moves toward infinity, and when two foci of an ellipse merge into one another, a circle is formed. As the foci of a hyperbola merge into one another, the hyperbola becomes a pair of straight lines. He also assumed that if a straight line is extended to infinity it will meet itself at a single point at infinity, thus having the properties of a large circle.\n\nIn October 1604, a bright new evening star (SN 1604) appeared, but Kepler did not believe the rumors until he saw it himself. Kepler began systematically observing the nova. Astrologically, the end of 1603 marked the beginning of a fiery trigon, the start of the about 800-year cycle of great conjunctions; astrologers associated the two previous such periods with the rise of Charlemagne (c. 800 years earlier) and the birth of Christ (c. 1600 years earlier), and thus expected events of great portent, especially regarding the emperor. It was in this context, as the imperial mathematician and astrologer to the emperor, that Kepler described the new star two years later in his \"De Stella Nova\". In it, Kepler addressed the star's astronomical properties while taking a skeptical approach to the many astrological interpretations then circulating. He noted its fading luminosity, speculated about its origin, and used the lack of observed parallax to argue that it was in the sphere of fixed stars, further undermining the doctrine of the immutability of the heavens (the idea accepted since Aristotle that the celestial spheres were perfect and unchanging). The birth of a new star implied the variability of the heavens. In an appendix, Kepler also discussed the recent chronology work of the Polish historian Laurentius Suslyga; he calculated that, if Suslyga was correct that accepted timelines were four years behind, then the Star of Bethlehem—analogous to the present new star—would have coincided with the first great conjunction of the earlier 800-year cycle.\nThe extended line of research that culminated in \"Astronomia nova\" (\"A New Astronomy\")—including the first two laws of planetary motion—began with the analysis, under Tycho's direction, of Mars' orbit. Kepler calculated and recalculated various approximations of Mars' orbit using an equant (the mathematical tool that Copernicus had eliminated with his system), eventually creating a model that generally agreed with Tycho's observations to within two arcminutes (the average measurement error). But he was not satisfied with the complex and still slightly inaccurate result; at certain points the model differed from the data by up to eight arcminutes. The wide array of traditional mathematical astronomy methods having failed him, Kepler set about trying to fit an ovoid orbit to the data.\n\nIn Kepler's religious view of the cosmos, the Sun (a symbol of God the Father) was the source of motive force in the Solar System. As a physical basis, Kepler drew by analogy on William Gilbert's theory of the magnetic soul of the Earth from \"De Magnete\" (1600) and on his own work on optics. Kepler supposed that the motive power (or motive \"species\") radiated by the Sun weakens with distance, causing faster or slower motion as planets move closer or farther from it. Perhaps this assumption entailed a mathematical relationship that would restore astronomical order. Based on measurements of the aphelion and perihelion of the Earth and Mars, he created a formula in which a planet's rate of motion is inversely proportional to its distance from the Sun. Verifying this relationship throughout the orbital cycle, however, required very extensive calculation; to simplify this task, by late 1602 Kepler reformulated the proportion in terms of geometry: \"planets sweep out equal areas in equal times\"—Kepler's second law of planetary motion.\n\nHe then set about calculating the entire orbit of Mars, using the geometrical rate law and assuming an egg-shaped ovoid orbit. After approximately 40 failed attempts, in early 1605 he at last hit upon the idea of an ellipse, which he had previously assumed to be too simple a solution for earlier astronomers to have overlooked. Finding that an elliptical orbit fit the Mars data, he immediately concluded that \"all planets move in ellipses, with the sun at one focus\"—Kepler's first law of planetary motion. Because he employed no calculating assistants, however, he did not extend the mathematical analysis beyond Mars. By the end of the year, he completed the manuscript for \"Astronomia nova\", though it would not be published until 1609 due to legal disputes over the use of Tycho's observations, the property of his heirs.\n\nIn the years following the completion of \"Astronomia Nova\", most of Kepler's research was focused on preparations for the \"Rudolphine Tables\" and a comprehensive set of ephemerides (specific predictions of planet and star positions) based on the table (though neither would be completed for many years). He also attempted (unsuccessfully) to begin a collaboration with Italian astronomer Giovanni Antonio Magini. Some of his other work dealt with chronology, especially the dating of events in the life of Jesus, and with astrology, especially criticism of dramatic predictions of catastrophe such as those of Helisaeus Roeslin.\n\nKepler and Roeslin engaged in a series of published attacks and counter-attacks, while physician Philip Feselius published a work dismissing astrology altogether (and Roeslin's work in particular). In response to what Kepler saw as the excesses of astrology on the one hand and overzealous rejection of it on the other, Kepler prepared \"Tertius Interveniens\" [Third-party Interventions]. Nominally this work—presented to the common patron of Roeslin and Feselius—was a neutral mediation between the feuding scholars, but it also set out Kepler's general views on the value of astrology, including some hypothesized mechanisms of interaction between planets and individual souls. While Kepler considered most traditional rules and methods of astrology to be the \"evil-smelling dung\" in which \"an industrious hen\" scrapes, there was an \"occasional grain-seed, indeed, even a pearl or a gold nugget\" to be found by the conscientious scientific astrologer. Conversely, Sir Oliver Lodge observed that Kepler was somewhat disdainful of astrology, as Kepler was \"continually attacking and throwing sarcasm at astrology, but it was the only thing for which people would pay him, and on it after a fashion he lived.\"\n\nIn the first months of 1610, Galileo Galilei—using his powerful new telescope—discovered four satellites orbiting Jupiter. Upon publishing his account as \"Sidereus Nuncius\" [Starry Messenger], Galileo sought the opinion of Kepler, in part to bolster the credibility of his observations. Kepler responded enthusiastically with a short published reply, \"Dissertatio cum Nuncio Sidereo\" [Conversation with the Starry Messenger]. He endorsed Galileo's observations and offered a range of speculations about the meaning and implications of Galileo's discoveries and telescopic methods, for astronomy and optics as well as cosmology and astrology. Later that year, Kepler published his own telescopic observations of the moons in \"Narratio de Jovis Satellitibus\", providing further support of Galileo. To Kepler's disappointment, however, Galileo never published his reactions (if any) to \"Astronomia Nova\".\n\nAfter hearing of Galileo's telescopic discoveries, Kepler also started a theoretical and experimental investigation of telescopic optics using a telescope borrowed from Duke Ernest of Cologne. The resulting manuscript was completed in September 1610 and published as \"Dioptrice\" in 1611. In it, Kepler set out the theoretical basis of double-convex converging lenses and double-concave diverging lenses—and how they are combined to produce a Galilean telescope—as well as the concepts of real vs. virtual images, upright vs. inverted images, and the effects of focal length on magnification and reduction. He also described an improved telescope—now known as the \"astronomical\" or \"Keplerian telescope\"—in which two convex lenses can produce higher magnification than Galileo's combination of convex and concave lenses.\n\nAround 1611, Kepler circulated a manuscript of what would eventually be published (posthumously) as \"Somnium\" [The Dream]. Part of the purpose of \"Somnium\" was to describe what practicing astronomy would be like from the perspective of another planet, to show the feasibility of a non-geocentric system. The manuscript, which disappeared after changing hands several times, described a fantastic trip to the Moon; it was part allegory, part autobiography, and part treatise on interplanetary travel (and is sometimes described as the first work of science fiction). Years later, a distorted version of the story may have instigated the witchcraft trial against his mother, as the mother of the narrator consults a demon to learn the means of space travel. Following her eventual acquittal, Kepler composed 223 footnotes to the story—several times longer than the actual text—which explained the allegorical aspects as well as the considerable scientific content (particularly regarding lunar geography) hidden within the text.\n\nAs a New Year's gift that year (1611), he also composed for his friend and some-time patron, Baron Wackher von Wackhenfels, a short pamphlet entitled \"Strena Seu de Nive Sexangula\" (\"A New Year's Gift of Hexagonal Snow\"). In this treatise, he published the first description of the hexagonal symmetry of snowflakes and, extending the discussion into a hypothetical atomistic physical basis for the symmetry, posed what later became known as the Kepler conjecture, a statement about the most efficient arrangement for packing spheres.\n\nIn 1611, the growing political-religious tension in Prague came to a head. Emperor Rudolph—whose health was failing—was forced to abdicate as King of Bohemia by his brother Matthias. Both sides sought Kepler's astrological advice, an opportunity he used to deliver conciliatory political advice (with little reference to the stars, except in general statements to discourage drastic action). However, it was clear that Kepler's future prospects in the court of Matthias were dim.\n\nAlso in that year, Barbara Kepler contracted Hungarian spotted fever, then began having seizures. As Barbara was recovering, Kepler's three children all fell sick with smallpox; Friedrich, 6, died. Following his son's death, Kepler sent letters to potential patrons in Württemberg and Padua. At the University of Tübingen in Württemberg, concerns over Kepler's perceived Calvinist heresies in violation of the Augsburg Confession and the Formula of Concord prevented his return. The University of Padua—on the recommendation of the departing Galileo—sought Kepler to fill the mathematics professorship, but Kepler, preferring to keep his family in German territory, instead travelled to Austria to arrange a position as teacher and district mathematician in Linz. However, Barbara relapsed into illness and died shortly after Kepler's return.\n\nKepler postponed the move to Linz and remained in Prague until Rudolph's death in early 1612, though between political upheaval, religious tension, and family tragedy (along with the legal dispute over his wife's estate), Kepler could do no research. Instead, he pieced together a chronology manuscript, \"Eclogae Chronicae\", from correspondence and earlier work. Upon succession as Holy Roman Emperor, Matthias re-affirmed Kepler's position (and salary) as imperial mathematician but allowed him to move to Linz.\n\nIn Linz, Kepler's primary responsibilities (beyond completing the \"Rudolphine Tables\") were teaching at the district school and providing astrological and astronomical services. In his first years there, he enjoyed financial security and religious freedom relative to his life in Prague—though he was excluded from Eucharist by his Lutheran church over his theological scruples. It was also during his time in Linz that Kepler had to deal with the accusation and ultimate verdict of witchcraft against his mother Katharina in the Protestant town of Leonberg. That blow, happening only a few years after Kepler's excommunication, is not seen as a coincidence but as a symptom of the full-fledged assault waged by the Lutherans against Kepler.\n\nHis first publication in Linz was \"De vero Anno\" (1613), an expanded treatise on the year of Christ's birth; he also participated in deliberations on whether to introduce Pope Gregory's reformed calendar to Protestant German lands; that year he also wrote the influential mathematical treatise \"Nova stereometria doliorum vinariorum\", on measuring the volume of containers such as wine barrels, published in 1615.\n\nOn October 30, 1613, Kepler married the 24-year-old Susanna Reuttinger. Following the death of his first wife Barbara, Kepler had considered 11 different matches over two years (a decision process formalized later as the marriage problem). He eventually returned to Reuttinger (the fifth match) who, he wrote, \"won me over with love, humble loyalty, economy of household, diligence, and the love she gave the stepchildren.\" The first three children of this marriage (Margareta Regina, Katharina, and Sebald) died in childhood. Three more survived into adulthood: Cordula (born 1621); Fridmar (born 1623); and Hildebert (born 1625). According to Kepler's biographers, this was a much happier marriage than his first.\n\nSince completing the \"Astronomia nova\", Kepler had intended to compose an astronomy textbook. In 1615, he completed the first of three volumes of \"Epitome astronomiae Copernicanae\" (\"Epitome of Copernican Astronomy\"); the first volume (books I–III) was printed in 1617, the second (book IV) in 1620, and the third (books V–VII) in 1621. Despite the title, which referred simply to heliocentrism, Kepler's textbook culminated in his own ellipse-based system. The \"Epitome\" became Kepler's most influential work. It contained all three laws of planetary motion and attempted to explain heavenly motions through physical causes. Though it explicitly extended the first two laws of planetary motion (applied to Mars in \"Astronomia nova\") to all the planets as well as the Moon and the Medicean satellites of Jupiter, it did not explain how elliptical orbits could be derived from observational data.\n\nAs a spin-off from the \"Rudolphine Tables\" and the related \"Ephemerides\", Kepler published astrological calendars, which were very popular and helped offset the costs of producing his other work—especially when support from the Imperial treasury was withheld. In his calendars—six between 1617 and 1624—Kepler forecast planetary positions and weather as well as political events; the latter were often cannily accurate, thanks to his keen grasp of contemporary political and theological tensions. By 1624, however, the escalation of those tensions and the ambiguity of the prophecies meant political trouble for Kepler himself; his final calendar was publicly burned in Graz.\n\nIn 1615, Ursula Reingold, a woman in a financial dispute with Kepler's brother Christoph, claimed Kepler's mother Katharina had made her sick with an evil brew. The dispute escalated, and in 1617 Katharina was accused of witchcraft; witchcraft trials were relatively common in central Europe at this time. Beginning in August 1620, she was imprisoned for fourteen months. She was released in October 1621, thanks in part to the extensive legal defense drawn up by Kepler. The accusers had no stronger evidence than rumors. Katharina was subjected to \"territio verbalis\", a graphic description of the torture awaiting her as a witch, in a final attempt to make her confess. Throughout the trial, Kepler postponed his other work to focus on his \"harmonic theory\". The result, published in 1619, was \"Harmonices Mundi\" (\"Harmony of the World\").\n\nKepler was convinced \"that the geometrical things have provided the Creator with the model for decorating the whole world\". In \"Harmony\", he attempted to explain the proportions of the natural world—particularly the astronomical and astrological aspects—in terms of music. The central set of \"harmonies\" was the \"musica universalis\" or \"music of the spheres\", which had been studied by Pythagoras, Ptolemy and many others before Kepler; in fact, soon after publishing \"Harmonices Mundi\", Kepler was embroiled in a priority dispute with Robert Fludd, who had recently published his own harmonic theory.\n\nKepler began by exploring regular polygons and regular solids, including the figures that would come to be known as Kepler's solids. From there, he extended his harmonic analysis to music, meteorology, and astrology; harmony resulted from the tones made by the souls of heavenly bodies—and in the case of astrology, the interaction between those tones and human souls. In the final portion of the work (Book V), Kepler dealt with planetary motions, especially relationships between orbital velocity and orbital distance from the Sun. Similar relationships had been used by other astronomers, but Kepler—with Tycho's data and his own astronomical theories—treated them much more precisely and attached new physical significance to them.\n\nAmong many other harmonies, Kepler articulated what came to be known as the third law of planetary motion. He then tried many combinations until he discovered that (approximately) \"\"The square of the periodic times are to each other as the cubes of the mean distances\".\" Although he gives the date of this epiphany (March 8, 1618), he does not give any details about how he arrived at this conclusion. However, the wider significance for planetary dynamics of this purely kinematical law was not realized until the 1660s. When conjoined with Christiaan Huygens' newly discovered law of centrifugal force, it enabled Isaac Newton, Edmund Halley, and perhaps Christopher Wren and Robert Hooke to demonstrate independently that the presumed gravitational attraction between the Sun and its planets decreased with the square of the distance between them. This refuted the traditional assumption of scholastic physics that the power of gravitational attraction remained constant with distance whenever it applied between two bodies, such as was assumed by Kepler and also by Galileo in his mistaken universal law that gravitational fall is uniformly accelerated, and also by Galileo's student Borrelli in his 1666 celestial mechanics.\n\nIn 1623, Kepler at last completed the \"Rudolphine Tables\", which at the time was considered his major work. However, due to the publishing requirements of the emperor and negotiations with Tycho Brahe's heir, it would not be printed until 1627. In the meantime, religious tension – the root of the ongoing Thirty Years' War – once again put Kepler and his family in jeopardy. In 1625, agents of the Catholic Counter-Reformation placed most of Kepler's library under seal, and in 1626 the city of Linz was besieged. Kepler moved to Ulm, where he arranged for the printing of the \"Tables\" at his own expense.\n\nIn 1628, following the military successes of the Emperor Ferdinand's armies under General Wallenstein, Kepler became an official advisor to Wallenstein. Though not the general's court astrologer per se, Kepler provided astronomical calculations for Wallenstein's astrologers and occasionally wrote horoscopes himself. In his final years, Kepler spent much of his time traveling, from the imperial court in Prague to Linz and Ulm to a temporary home in Sagan, and finally to Regensburg. Soon after arriving in Regensburg, Kepler fell ill. He died on November 15, 1630, and was buried there; his burial site was lost after the Swedish army destroyed the churchyard. Only Kepler's self-authored poetic epitaph survived the times:\n\nKepler's belief that God created the cosmos in an orderly fashion caused him to attempt to determine and comprehend the laws that govern the natural world, most profoundly in astronomy. The phrase \"I am merely thinking God's thoughts after Him\" has been attributed to him, although this is probably a capsulized version of a writing from his hand:\nThose laws [of nature] are within the grasp of the human mind; God wanted us to recognize them by creating us after his own image so that we could share in his own thoughts.\n\nKepler's laws of planetary motion were not immediately accepted. Several major figures such as Galileo and René Descartes completely ignored Kepler's \"Astronomia nova.\" Many astronomers, including Kepler's teacher, Michael Maestlin, objected to Kepler's introduction of physics into his astronomy. Some adopted compromise positions. Ismaël Bullialdus accepted elliptical orbits but replaced Kepler's area law with uniform motion in respect to the empty focus of the ellipse, while Seth Ward used an elliptical orbit with motions defined by an equant.\n\nSeveral astronomers tested Kepler's theory, and its various modifications, against astronomical observations. Two transits of Venus and Mercury across the face of the sun provided sensitive tests of the theory, under circumstances when these planets could not normally be observed. In the case of the transit of Mercury in 1631, Kepler had been extremely uncertain of the parameters for Mercury, and advised observers to look for the transit the day before and after the predicted date. Pierre Gassendi observed the transit on the date predicted, a confirmation of Kepler's prediction. This was the first observation of a transit of Mercury. However, his attempt to observe the transit of Venus just one month later was unsuccessful due to inaccuracies in the Rudolphine Tables. Gassendi did not realize that it was not visible from most of Europe, including Paris. Jeremiah Horrocks, who observed the 1639 Venus transit, had used his own observations to adjust the parameters of the Keplerian model, predicted the transit, and then built apparatus to observe the transit. He remained a firm advocate of the Keplerian model.\n\n\"Epitome of Copernican Astronomy\" was read by astronomers throughout Europe, and following Kepler's death, it was the main vehicle for spreading Kepler's ideas. In the period 1630 – 1650, this book was the most widely used astronomy textbook, winning many converts to ellipse-based astronomy. However, few adopted his ideas on the physical basis for celestial motions. In the late 17th century, a number of physical astronomy theories drawing from Kepler's work—notably those of Giovanni Alfonso Borelli and Robert Hooke—began to incorporate attractive forces (though not the quasi-spiritual motive species postulated by Kepler) and the Cartesian concept of inertia. This culminated in Isaac Newton's \"Principia Mathematica\" (1687), in which Newton derived Kepler's laws of planetary motion from a force-based theory of universal gravitation.\n\nBeyond his role in the historical development of astronomy and natural philosophy, Kepler has loomed large in the philosophy and historiography of science. Kepler and his laws of motion were central to early histories of astronomy such as Jean-Étienne Montucla's 1758 \"Histoire des mathématiques\" and Jean-Baptiste Delambre's 1821 \"Histoire de l'astronomie moderne\". These and other histories written from an Enlightenment perspective treated Kepler's metaphysical and religious arguments with skepticism and disapproval, but later Romantic-era natural philosophers viewed these elements as central to his success. \nWilliam Whewell, in his influential \"History of the Inductive Sciences\" of 1837, found Kepler to be the archetype of the inductive scientific genius; in his \"Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences\" of 1840, Whewell held Kepler up as the embodiment of the most advanced forms of scientific method. Similarly, Ernst Friedrich Apelt—the first to extensively study Kepler's manuscripts, after their purchase by Catherine the Great—identified Kepler as a key to the \"Revolution of the sciences\". \nApelt, who saw Kepler's mathematics, aesthetic sensibility, physical ideas, and theology as part of a unified system of thought, produced the first extended analysis of Kepler's life and work.\n\nAlexandre Koyré's work on Kepler was, after Apelt, the first major milestone in historical interpretations of Kepler's cosmology and its influence. In the 1930s and 1940s, Koyré, and a number of others in the first generation of professional historians of science, described the \"Scientific Revolution\" as the central event in the history of science, and Kepler as a (perhaps the) central figure in the revolution. Koyré placed Kepler's theorization, rather than his empirical work, at the center of the intellectual transformation from ancient to modern world-views. Since the 1960s, the volume of historical Kepler scholarship has expanded greatly, including studies of his astrology and meteorology, his geometrical methods, the role of his religious views in his work, his literary and rhetorical methods, his interaction with the broader cultural and philosophical currents of his time, and even his role as an historian of science.\n\nPhilosophers of science—such as Charles Sanders Peirce, Norwood Russell Hanson, Stephen Toulmin, and Karl Popper—have repeatedly turned to Kepler: examples of incommensurability, analogical reasoning, falsification, and many other philosophical concepts have been found in Kepler's work. Physicist Wolfgang Pauli even used Kepler's priority dispute with Robert Fludd to explore the implications of analytical psychology on scientific investigation.\n\nModern translations of a number of Kepler's books appeared in the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries, the systematic publication of his collected works began in 1937 (and is nearing completion in the early 21st century).\n\nAn edition in eight volumes, \" Kepleri Opera omnia,\" was prepared by Christian Frisch (1807–1881), during 1858 to 1871, on the occasion of Kepler's 300th birthday.\nFrisch's edition only included Kepler's Latin, with a Latin commentary.\n\nA new edition was planned beginning in 1914 by Walther von Dyck (1856–1934). Dyck compiled copies of Kepler's unedited manuscripts, using international diplomatic contacts to convince the Soviet authorities to lend him the manuscripts kept in Leningrad for photographic reproduction. These manuscripts contained several works by Kepler that had not been available to Frisch. Dyck's photographs remain the basis for the modern editions of Kepler's unpublished manuscripts.\n\nMax Caspar (1880–1956) published his German translation of Kepler's \"Mysterium Cosmographicum\" in 1923. \nBoth Dyck and Caspar were influenced in their interest in Kepler by mathematician Alexander von Brill (1842–1935). \nCaspar became Dyck's collaborator, succeeding him as project leader in 1934, establishing the \"Kepler-Kommission\" in the following year. Assisted by Martha List (1908–1992) and Franz Hammer (1898–1979), Caspar continued editorial work during World War II. \nMax Caspar also published a biography of Kepler in 1948. The commission was later chaired by Volker Bialas (during 1976–2003) and Ulrich Grigull (during 1984–1999) and Roland Bulirsch (1998–2014).\n\nKepler has acquired a popular image as an icon of scientific modernity and a man before his time; science popularizer Carl Sagan described him as \"the first astrophysicist and the last scientific astrologer\".\n\nThe debate over Kepler's place in the Scientific Revolution has produced a wide variety of philosophical and popular treatments. One of the most influential is Arthur Koestler's 1959 \"The Sleepwalkers\", in which Kepler is unambiguously the hero (morally and theologically as well as intellectually) of the revolution.\n\nA well-received, if fanciful, historical novel by John Banville, \"Kepler\" (1981), explored many of the themes developed in Koestler's non-fiction narrative and in the philosophy of science. \nSomewhat more fanciful is a recent work of nonfiction, \"Heavenly Intrigue\" (2004), suggesting that Kepler murdered Tycho Brahe to gain access to his data.\n\nIn Austria, Kepler left behind such a historical legacy that he was one of the motifs of a silver collector's coin: the 10-euro Johannes Kepler silver coin, minted on September 10, 2002. The reverse side of the coin has a portrait of Kepler, who spent some time teaching in Graz and the surrounding areas. Kepler was acquainted with Prince Hans Ulrich von Eggenberg personally, and he probably influenced the construction of Eggenberg Castle (the motif of the obverse of the coin). In front of him on the coin is the model of nested spheres and polyhedra from \"Mysterium Cosmographicum\".\n\nThe German composer Paul Hindemith wrote an opera about Kepler entitled \"Die Harmonie der Welt\", and a symphony of the same name was derived from music for the opera.\nPhilip Glass wrote an opera called \"Kepler\" based on Kepler's life (2009).\n\nKepler is honored together with Nicolaus Copernicus with a feast day on the liturgical calendar of the Episcopal Church (USA) on May 23.\nDirectly named for Kepler's contribution to science are Kepler's laws of planetary motion, Kepler's Supernova (Supernova 1604, which he observed and described) and the Kepler Solids, a set of geometrical constructions, two of which were described by him, and the Kepler conjecture on sphere packing.\nBULLET::::- In astronomy: The lunar crater Kepler (\"Keplerus\", named by Giovanni Riccioli, 1651), the asteroid 1134 Kepler (1929), Kepler (crater on Mars) (1973), Kepler Launch Site for model rockets (2001), the Kepler space telescope, a space photometer launched by NASA in 2009, \"Johannes Kepler\" ATV (Automated Transfer Vehicle launched to resupply the ISS in 2011).\nBULLET::::- Educational institutions: Johannes Kepler University Linz (1975), Kepler College (Seattle, Washington), besides several institutions of primary and secondary education, such as Johannes Kepler Grammar School, at the site where Kepler lived in Prague, and \"Kepler Gymnasium\", Tübingen\nBULLET::::- Streets or squares named after him: Keplerplatz Vienna (station of Vienna U-Bahn), Keplerstraße in Hanau near Frankfurt am Main, Keplerstraße in Munich, Germany, Keplerstraße and Keplerbrücke in Graz, Austria, Keplerova ulice in Prague, ulitsa Keplera in Verkhnetemernitsky near Rostov-on-Don, Russia.\nBULLET::::- The Kepler Mountains and Kepler Track in Fiordland National Park, South Island, New Zealand; Kepler Challenge (1988).\nBULLET::::- Kepler, a high end graphics processing microarchitecture introduced by Nvidia in 2012.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Mysterium Cosmographicum\" (\"The Sacred Mystery of the Cosmos\") (1596)\nBULLET::::- \"De Fundamentis Astrologiae Certioribus\" (\"On Firmer Fundaments of Astrology\"; 1601)\nBULLET::::- \"Astronomiae Pars Optica\" (\"The Optical Part of Astronomy\") (1604)\nBULLET::::- \"De Stella nova in pede Serpentarii\" (\"On the New Star in Ophiuchus's Foot\") (1606)\nBULLET::::- \"Astronomia nova\" (\"New Astronomy\") (1609)\nBULLET::::- \"Tertius Interveniens\" (\"Third-party Interventions\") (1610)\nBULLET::::- \"Dissertatio cum Nuncio Sidereo\" (\"Conversation with the Starry Messenger\") (1610)\nBULLET::::- \"Dioptrice\" (1611)\nBULLET::::- \"De nive sexangula\" (\"On the Six-Cornered Snowflake\") (1611) (English translation on Google Books preview)\nBULLET::::- \"De vero Anno, quo aeternus Dei Filius humanam naturam in Utero benedictae Virginis Mariae assumpsit\" (1614)\nBULLET::::- \"Eclogae Chronicae\" (1615, published with \"Dissertatio cum Nuncio Sidereo\")\nBULLET::::- \"Nova stereometria doliorum vinariorum\" (\"New Stereometry of Wine Barrels\") (1615)\nBULLET::::- \"Ephemerides nouae motuum coelestium\" (1617–30)\nBULLET::::- \"Epitome astronomiae Copernicanae\" (\"Epitome of Copernican Astronomy\") (published in three parts from 1618 to 1621)\nBULLET::::- \"Harmonices Mundi\" (\"Harmony of the Worlds\") (1619) (English translation on Google Books)\nBULLET::::- \"Mysterium cosmographicum\" (\"The Sacred Mystery of the Cosmos\"), 2nd edition (1621)\nBULLET::::- \"Tabulae Rudolphinae\" (\"Rudolphine Tables\") (1627)\nBULLET::::- \"Somnium\" (\"The Dream\") (1634) (English translation on Google Books preview)\n\nA critical edition of Kepler's collected works (\"Johannes Kepler Gesammelte Werke\", KGW) in 22 volumes is being edited by the \"Kepler-Kommission\" (founded 1935) on behalf of the Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften.\n\nBULLET::::- Vols. 13–18: Letters:\n\nThe Kepler-Kommission also publishes \"Bibliographia Kepleriana\" (2nd ed. List, 1968), a complete bibliography of editions of Kepler's works, with a supplementary volume to the second edition (ed. Hamel 1998).\n\nBULLET::::- Cavalieri's principle\nBULLET::::- History of astronomy\nBULLET::::- History of physics\nBULLET::::- Kepler orbit\nBULLET::::- Kepler problem\nBULLET::::- Kepler triangle\nBULLET::::- Kepler's laws of planetary motion\nBULLET::::- Kepler–Bouwkamp constant\nBULLET::::- List of things named after Johannes Kepler\nBULLET::::- Scientific revolution\nFootnotes\nCitations\n\nBULLET::::- Andersen, Hanne; Peter Barker; and Xiang Chen. \"The Cognitive Structure of Scientific Revolutions\", chapter 6: \"The Copernican Revolution.\" New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006.\nBULLET::::- Armitage, Angus. \"John Kepler\", Faber, 1966.\nBULLET::::- Banville, John. \"Kepler\", Martin, Secker and Warburg, London, 1981 (fictionalised biography)\nBULLET::::- Barker, Peter and Bernard R. Goldstein: \"Theological Foundations of Kepler's Astronomy\". \"Osiris\", Volume 16. \"Science in Theistic Contexts.\" University of Chicago Press, 2001, pp.  88–113\nBULLET::::- Caspar, Max. \"Kepler\"; transl. and ed. by C. Doris Hellman; with a new introduction and references by Owen Gingerich; bibliographic citations by Owen Gingerich and Alain Segonds. New York: Dover, 1993.\nBULLET::::- Connor, James A. \"Kepler's Witch: An Astronomer's Discovery of Cosmic Order Amid Religious War, Political Intrigue, and the Heresy Trial of His Mother\". HarperSanFrancisco, 2004.\nBULLET::::- De Gandt, Francois. \"Force and Geometry in Newton's\" Principia, Translated by Curtis Wilson, Princeton University Press 1995.\nBULLET::::- Dreyer, J. L. E. \"A History of Astronomy from Thales to Kepler\". Dover Publications Inc, 1967.\nBULLET::::- Ferguson, Kitty. \"The nobleman and his housedog: Tycho Brahe and Johannes Kepler: the strange partnership that revolutionized science.\" London: Review, 2002. – published in the US as: \"Tycho & Kepler: the unlikely partnership that forever changed our understanding of the heavens.\" New York: Walker, 2002.\nBULLET::::- Field, J. V.. \"Kepler's geometrical cosmology\". Chicago University Press, 1988.\nBULLET::::- Gilder, Joshua and Anne-Lee Gilder: \"Heavenly Intrigue: Johannes Kepler, Tycho Brahe, and the Murder Behind One of History's Greatest Scientific Discoveries\", Doubleday (May 18, 2004). Reviews bookpage.com, crisismagazine.com\nBULLET::::- Gingerich, Owen. \"The Eye of Heaven: Ptolemy, Copernicus, Kepler\". American Institute of Physics, 1993. (Masters of modern physics; v. 7)\nBULLET::::- Gingerich, Owen: \"Kepler, Johannes\" in \"Dictionary of Scientific Biography\", Volume VII. Charles Coulston Gillispie, editor. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1973\nBULLET::::- Greenbaum and Boockmann: \"Kepler's Astrology\", \"Culture and Cosmos\" Vol. 14. Special Double Issue, 2012.\nBULLET::::- Jardine, Nick: \"Koyré's Kepler/Kepler's Koyré,\" \"History of Science\", Vol. 38 (2000), pp.  363–376\nBULLET::::- Kepler, Johannes. \"Johannes Kepler New Astronomy\" trans. W. Donahue, forward by O. Gingerich, Cambridge University Press 1993.\nBULLET::::- Kepler, Johannes and Christian Frisch. \"Joannis Kepleri Astronomi Opera Omnia\" (\"John Kepler, Astronomer; Complete Works\"), 8 vols.(1858–1871). vol. 1, 1858, vol. 2, 1859, vol. 3, 1860, vol. 6, 1866, vol. 7, 1868, Frankfurt am Main and Erlangen, Heyder & Zimmer, – Google Books\nBULLET::::- Kepler, Johannes, et al. \"Great Books of the Western World. Volume 16: Ptolemy, Copernicus, Kepler\", Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., 1952. (contains English translations by of Kepler's \"Epitome\", Books IV & V and \"Harmonices\" Book 5)\nBULLET::::- Koestler, Arthur. \"The Sleepwalkers: A History of Man's Changing Vision of the Universe.\" (1959).\nBULLET::::- Koyré, Alexandre: \"Galilean Studies\" Harvester Press 1977.\nBULLET::::- Koyré, Alexandre: \"The Astronomical Revolution: Copernicus-Kepler-Borelli\" Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1973. ; Methuen, 1973. ; Hermann, 1973.\nBULLET::::- Kuhn, Thomas S. \"The Copernican Revolution: Planetary Astronomy in the Development of Western Thought\". Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1957.\nBULLET::::- Lindberg, David C.: \"The Genesis of Kepler's Theory of Light: Light Metaphysics from Plotinus to Kepler.\" \"Osiris\", N.S. 2. University of Chicago Press, 1986, pp.  5–42.\nBULLET::::- Lear, John. \"Kepler's Dream\". Berkeley: University of California Press, 1965\nBULLET::::- M.T.K Al-Tamimi. \"Great collapse Kepler's first law\", \"Natural Science\", 2 (2010),\nBULLET::::- North, John. \"The Fontana History of Astronomy and Cosmology,\" Fontana Press, 1994.\nBULLET::::- Pannekoek, Anton: \"A History of Astronomy\", Dover Publications Inc 1989.\nBULLET::::- Pauli, Wolfgang. \"Wolfgang Pauli – Writings on physics and philosophy\", translated by Robert Schlapp and edited by P. Enz and Karl von Meyenn (Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1994). See section 21, \"The influence of archetypical ideas on the scientific theories of Kepler\", concerning Johannes Kepler and Robert Fludd (1574–1637).\nBULLET::::- Schneer, Cecil: \"Kepler's New Year's Gift of a Snowflake.\" \"Isis\", Volume 51, No. 4. University of Chicago Press, 1960, pp.  531–545.\nBULLET::::- Shapin, Steven. \"The Scientific Revolution\". Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996.\nBULLET::::- Stephenson, Bruce. \"Kepler's physical astronomy\". New York: Springer, 1987. (Studies in the history of mathematics and physical sciences; 13); reprinted Princeton:Princeton Univ. Pr., 1994.\nBULLET::::- Stephenson, Bruce. \"The Music of the Heavens: Kepler's Harmonic Astronomy\", Princeton University Press, 1994.\nBULLET::::- Toulmin, Stephen and June Goodfield. \"The Fabric of the Heavens: The Development of Astronomy and Dynamics\". Pelican, 1963.\nBULLET::::- Voelkel, James R. \"The Composition of Kepler's Astronomia nova\", Princeton University Press, 2001.\nBULLET::::- Westfall, Richard S.. \"The Construction of Modern Science: Mechanism and Mechanics\". John Wiley and Sons, 1971. ; reprinted Cambridge University Press, 1978.\nBULLET::::- Westfall, Richard S. \"Never at Rest: A Biography of Isaac Newton\". Cambridge University Press, 1981.\nBULLET::::- Wolf, A. \"A History of Science, Technology and Philosophy in the 16th and 17th centuries\". George Allen & Unwin, 1950.\nBULLET::::- \"Herausgabe der Werke von Johannes Kepler\" (with links to digital scans of the published volumes)\n\nBULLET::::- The Correspondence of Johannes Kepler in EMLO\nBULLET::::- Full text of by Walter Bryant (public domain biography)\nBULLET::::- JohannesKepler.Info Kepler information and community website, launched on December 27, 2009\nBULLET::::- \"Harmonices mundi\" (\"The Harmony of the Worlds\") in fulltext facsimile; Carnegie-Mellon University\nBULLET::::- \"De Stella Nova in Pede Serpentarii\" (\"On the new star in Ophiuchus's foot\") in full text facsimile at Linda Hall Library\nBULLET::::- The Correspondence of Johannes Kepler in EMLO\nBULLET::::- (1920 book, part of \"Men of Science\" series)\nBULLET::::- Electronic facsimile-editions of the rare book collection at the Vienna Institute of Astronomy\nBULLET::::- Audio – Cain/Gay (2010) Astronomy Cast Johannes Kepler and His Laws of Planetary Motion\nBULLET::::- Christianson, Gale E., Kepler's Somnium: Science Fiction and the Renaissance Scientist\nBULLET::::- Kollerstrom, Nicholas, Kepler's Belief in Astrology\nBULLET::::- References for Johannes Kepler\nBULLET::::- Plant, David, Kepler and the \"Music of the Spheres\"\nBULLET::::- Kepler, Napier, and the Third Law at MathPages\nBULLET::::- Calderón Urreiztieta, Carlos. Harmonice Mundi • Animated and multimedia version of Book V\nBULLET::::- \"Reading the mind of God\" 1997 drama based on his life by Patrick Gabridge\nBULLET::::- \"Johannes Kepler\" 2010 drama based on his life by Robert Lalonde\nBULLET::::- Online Galleries, History of Science Collections, University of Oklahoma Libraries High resolution images of works by and/or portraits of Johannes Kepler in .jpg and .tiff format.\nFrom the Lessing J. Rosenwald Collection at the Library of Congress:\nBULLET::::- Tabvlæ Rudolphinæ qvibvs astronomicæ scientiæ  ... Typis J. Saurii, 1627.\nBULLET::::- Books by Johannes Kepler that are available in digital facsimile from the website of the Linda Hall Library:\nBULLET::::- (1604) \"Ad vitellionem paralipomena\"\nBULLET::::- (1606) \"De stella nova in pede Serpentarii\"\nBULLET::::- (1611) \"Dioptrice\"\nBULLET::::- (1618) \"Epitome astronomiae Copernicanæ\"\nBULLET::::- BBC Radio 4 – \"In Our Time\" – Johannes Kepler – 29 December 2016 Melvyn Bragg and guests discuss the German astronomer Johannes Kepler (1571–1630).\n"}
{"id": "15737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15737", "title": "John Bardeen", "text": "John Bardeen\n\nJohn Bardeen (; May 23, 1908 – January 30, 1991) was an American physicist and electrical engineer. He is the only person to be awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics twice: first in 1956 with William Shockley and Walter Brattain for the invention of the transistor; and again in 1972 with Leon N Cooper and John Robert Schrieffer for a fundamental theory of conventional superconductivity known as the BCS theory.\n\nThe transistor revolutionized the electronics industry, making possible the development of almost every modern electronic device, from telephones to computers, and ushering in the Information Age. Bardeen's developments in superconductivity—for which he was awarded his second Nobel Prize—are used in nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR) and medical magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).\n\nIn 1990, Bardeen appeared on \"LIFE Magazine\"'s list of \"100 Most Influential Americans of the Century.\"\n\nBardeen was born in Madison, Wisconsin, on May 23, 1908. He was the son of Charles Bardeen, the first dean of the University of Wisconsin Medical School.\n\nBardeen attended the University High School at Madison. He graduated from the school in 1923 at age 15. He could have graduated several years earlier, but this was postponed because he took courses at another high school and because of his mother's death. He entered the University of Wisconsin in 1923. While in college, he joined the Zeta Psi fraternity. He raised the needed membership fees partly by playing billiards. He was initiated as a member of Tau Beta Pi engineering honor society. He chose engineering because he did not want to be an academic like his father. He also felt that engineering had good job prospects.\n\nBardeen received his Bachelor of Science degree in electrical engineering in 1928 from the University of Wisconsin–Madison. He graduated in 1928 despite taking a year off to work in Chicago. He took all the graduate courses in physics and mathematics that had interested him, and he graduated in five years instead of the usual four. This allowed him time to complete his Master's thesis, which was supervised by Leo J. Peters. He received his Master of Science degree in electrical engineering in 1929 from Wisconsin.\n\nBardeen furthered his studies by staying on at Wisconsin, but he eventually went to work for Gulf Research Laboratories, the research arm of the Gulf Oil Corporation that was based in Pittsburgh. From 1930 to 1933, Bardeen worked there on the development of methods for the interpretation of magnetic and gravitational surveys. He worked as a geophysicist. After the work failed to keep his interest, he applied and was accepted to the graduate program in mathematics at Princeton University.\n\nAs a graduate student, Bardeen studied mathematics and physics. Under physicist Eugene Wigner, he ended up writing his thesis on a problem in solid-state physics. Before completing his thesis, he was offered a position as Junior Fellow of the Society of Fellows at Harvard University in 1935. He spent the next three years there, from 1935 to 1938, working with to-be Nobel laureates in physics John Hasbrouck van Vleck and Percy Williams Bridgman on problems in cohesion and electrical conduction in metals, and also did some work on level density of nuclei. He received his Ph.D. in mathematical physics from Princeton in 1936.\n\nFrom 1941 to 1944, Bardeen headed the group working on magnetic mines and torpedoes and mine and torpedo countermeasures at the Naval Ordnance Laboratory. During this period his wife Jane gave birth to a son (Bill, born in 1941) and a daughter (Betsy, born in 1944).\n\nIn October 1945, Bardeen began work at Bell Labs. He was a member of a solid-state physics group, led by William Shockley and chemist Stanley Morgan. Other personnel working in the group were Walter Brattain, physicist Gerald Pearson, chemist Robert Gibney, electronics expert Hilbert Moore and several technicians. He moved his family to Summit, New Jersey.\n\nThe assignment of the group was to seek a solid-state alternative to fragile glass vacuum tube amplifiers. Their first attempts were based on Shockley's ideas about using an external electrical field on a semiconductor to affect its conductivity. These experiments mysteriously failed every time in all sorts of configurations and materials. The group was at a standstill until Bardeen suggested a theory that invoked surface states that prevented the field from penetrating the semiconductor. The group changed its focus to study these surface states, and they met almost daily to discuss the work. The rapport of the group was excellent, and ideas were freely exchanged. By the winter of 1946 they had enough results that Bardeen submitted a paper on the surface states to \"Physical Review\". Brattain started experiments to study the surface states through observations made while shining a bright light on the semiconductor's surface. This led to several more papers (one of them co-authored with Shockley), which estimated the density of the surface states to be more than enough to account for their failed experiments. The pace of the work picked up significantly when they started to surround point contacts between the semiconductor and the conducting wires with electrolytes. Moore built a circuit that allowed them to vary the frequency of the input signal easily and suggested that they use glycol borate (gu), a viscous chemical that didn't evaporate. Finally they began to get some evidence of power amplification when Pearson, acting on a suggestion by Shockley, put a voltage on a droplet of gu placed across a p–n junction.\n\nOn December 23, 1947, Bardeen and Brattain were working without Shockley when they succeeded in creating a point-contact transistor that achieved amplification. By the next month, Bell Labs' patent attorneys started to work on the patent applications.\n\nBell Labs' attorneys soon discovered that Shockley's field effect principle had been anticipated and patented in 1930 by Julius Lilienfeld, who filed his MESFET-like patent in Canada on October 22, 1925.\n\nShockley publicly took the lion's share of the credit for the invention of transistor; this led to a deterioration of Bardeen's relationship with Shockley. Bell Labs management, however, consistently presented all three inventors as a team. Shockley eventually infuriated and alienated Bardeen and Brattain, and he essentially blocked the two from working on the junction transistor. Bardeen began pursuing a theory for superconductivity and left Bell Labs in 1951. Brattain refused to work with Shockley further and was assigned to another group. Neither Bardeen nor Brattain had much to do with the development of the transistor beyond the first year after its invention.\n\nThe \"transistor\" (a portmanteau of \"transconductance\" and \"resistor\") was 1/50 the size of the vacuum tubes it replaced in televisions and radios, used far less power, was far more reliable, and it allowed electrical devices to become more compact.\n\nBy 1951, Bardeen was looking for a new job. Fred Seitz, a friend of Bardeen, convinced the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign to make Bardeen an offer of $10,000 a year. Bardeen accepted the offer and left Bell Labs. He joined the engineering and physics faculties at the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign in 1951. He was Professor of Electrical Engineering and of Physics at Illinois. His Ph.D. student Nick Holonyak (1954), invented the LED in 1962.\n\nAt Illinois, he established two major research programs, one in the Electrical Engineering Department and one in the Physics Department. The research program in the Electrical Engineering Department dealt with both experimental and theoretical aspects of semiconductors, and the research program in the Physics Department dealt with theoretical aspects of macroscopic quantum systems, particularly superconductivity and quantum liquids.\n\nHe was an active professor at Illinois from 1951 to 1975 and then became Professor Emeritus. In his later life, Bardeen remained active in academic research, during which time he focused on understanding the flow of electrons in charge density waves (CDWs) through metallic linear chain compounds. His proposals that CDW electron transport is a collective quantum phenomenon (see Macroscopic quantum phenomena) were initially greeted with skepticism. However, experiments reported in 2012 show oscillations in CDW current versus magnetic flux through tantalum trisulfide rings, similar to the behavior of superconducting quantum interference devices (see SQUID and Aharonov–Bohm effect), lending credence to the idea that collective CDW electron transport is fundamentally quantum in nature. (See quantum mechanics.) Bardeen continued his research throughout the 1980s, and published articles in \"Physical Review Letters\" and \"Physics Today\" less than a year before he died.\n\nIn 1956, John Bardeen shared the Nobel Prize in Physics with William Shockley of Semiconductor Laboratory of Beckman Instruments and Walter Brattain of Bell Telephone Laboratories \"\"for their researches on semiconductors and their discovery of the transistor effect\"\".\n\nAt the Nobel Prize ceremony in Stockholm, Brattain and Shockley received their awards that night from King Gustaf VI Adolf. Bardeen brought only one of his three children to the Nobel Prize ceremony. King Gustav chided Bardeen because of this, and Bardeen assured the King that the next time he would bring all his children to the ceremony. He kept his promise.\n\nIn 1957, Bardeen, in collaboration with Leon Cooper and his doctoral student John Robert Schrieffer, proposed the standard theory of superconductivity known as the BCS theory (named for their initials).\n\nIn 1972, Bardeen shared the Nobel Prize in Physics with Leon N Cooper of Brown University and John Robert Schrieffer of the University of Pennsylvania \"for their jointly developed theory of superconductivity, usually called the BCS-theory\". This was Bardeen's second Nobel Prize in Physics. He became the first person to win two Nobel Prizes in the same field. Only three others have ever received more than one Nobel Prize.\n\nBardeen brought his three children to the Nobel Prize ceremony in Stockholm. Bardeen gave much of his Nobel Prize money to fund the Fritz London Memorial Lectures at Duke University.\n\nIn addition to being awarded the Nobel prize twice, Bardeen has numerous other awards including:\nBULLET::::- 1952 Franklin Institute's Stuart Ballantine Medal.\nBULLET::::- 1959 elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences\nBULLET::::- 1965 National Medal of Science.\nBULLET::::- 1971 IEEE Medal of Honor for \"his profound contributions to the understanding of the conductivity of solids, to the invention of the transistor, and to the microscopic theory of superconductivity.\"\nBULLET::::- Elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 1973.\nBULLET::::- 1975 Franklin Medal.\nBULLET::::- On January 10, 1977, John Bardeen was presented with the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President Gerald Ford. He was represented at the ceremony by his son, William Bardeen.\nBULLET::::- Bardeen was one of 11 recipients given the Third Century Award from President George H. W. Bush in 1990 for \"exceptional contributions to American society\" and was granted a gold medal from the Soviet Academy of Sciences in 1988.\n\nBardeen was also an important adviser to Xerox Corporation. Though quiet by nature, he took the uncharacteristic step of urging Xerox executives to keep their California research center, Xerox PARC, afloat when the parent company was suspicious that its research center would amount to little.\n\nBardeen married Jane Maxwell on July 18, 1938. While at Princeton, he met Jane during a visit to his old friends in Pittsburgh.\n\nBardeen was a scientist with a very unassuming personality. While he served as a professor for almost 40 years at the University of Illinois, he was best remembered by neighbors for hosting cookouts where he would prepare food for his friends, many of whom were unaware of his accomplishments at the university. He would always ask his guests if they liked the hamburger bun toasted (since he liked his that way). He enjoyed playing golf and going on picnics with his family. Lillian Hoddeson, a University of Illinois historian who wrote a book on Bardeen, said that because he \"differed radically from the popular stereotype of 'genius' and was uninterested in appearing other than ordinary, the public and the media often overlooked him.\"\n\nWhen Bardeen was asked about his beliefs during a 1988 interview, he responded: \"I am not a religious person, and so do not think about it very much\". However, he has also said: \"I feel that science cannot provide an answer to the ultimate questions about the meaning and purpose of life.\" Bardeen did believe in a code of moral values and behaviour. John Bardeen's children were taken to church by his wife, who taught Sunday school and was a church elder. Despite this, he and his wife made it clear that they did not have faith in an afterlife and other religious ideas.\n\nBardeen died of heart disease at age 82 at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, Massachusetts, on January 30, 1991. Although he lived in Champaign-Urbana, he had come to Boston for medical consultation. Bardeen and his wife Jane (1907–1997) are buried in Forest Hill Cemetery, Madison, Wisconsin. They were survived by three children, James, William and Elizabeth Bardeen Greytak, and six grandchildren.\n\nIn honor of Professor Bardeen, the engineering quadrangle at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign is named the Bardeen Quad.\n\nAlso in honor of Bardeen, Sony Corporation endowed a $3 million John Bardeen professorial chair at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, beginning in 1990. SONY Corporation owed much of its success to commercializing Bardeen's transistors in portable TVs and radios, and had worked with Illinois researchers. The current John Bardeen Professor is Nick Holonyak, Bardeen's doctoral student and protege.\n\nAt the time of Bardeen's death, then-University of Illinois chancellor Morton Weir said, \"It is a rare person whose work changes the life of every American; John's did.\"\n\nBardeen was honored on a March 6, 2008, United States postage stamp as part of the \"American Scientists\" series designed by artist Victor Stabin. The $0.41 stamp was unveiled in a ceremony at the University of Illinois. His citation reads: \"Theoretical physicist John Bardeen (1908–1991) shared the Nobel Prize in Physics twice — in 1956, as co-inventor of the transistor and in 1972, for the explanation of superconductivity. The transistor paved the way for all modern electronics, from computers to microchips. Diverse applications of superconductivity include infrared sensors and medical imaging systems.\" The other scientists on the \"American Scientists\" sheet include biochemist Gerty Cori, chemist Linus Pauling and astronomer Edwin Hubble.\n\nBULLET::::- The Bardeen Archives at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign\nBULLET::::- Biography from Nobel-Winners.com\nBULLET::::- Associated Press Obituary of John Bardeen as printed in The Boston Globe\nBULLET::::- Oral History interview transcript with John Bardeen 12, 16 May, 1, 22 December 1977 & 4 April 1978, American Institute of Physics, Niels Bohr Library and Archives\nBULLET::::- Oral History interview transcript with John Bardeen 13 February 1980, American Institute of Physics, Niels Bohr Library and Archives\nBULLET::::- Interview with Bardeen about his experience at Princeton\nBULLET::::- The American Presidency Project\nBULLET::::- IEEE History Center biography\nBULLET::::- IEEE 2nd Int. Conference on Computers, Communications and Control (ICCCC 2008), an event dedicated to the Centenary of John Bardeen (1908–1991)\nBULLET::::- – \"Three-Electrode Circuit Element Utilizing Semiconductive Materials\"\n"}
{"id": "15739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15739", "title": "Jewellery", "text": "Jewellery\n\nJewellery or jewelry (American English; see spelling differences) consists of decorative items worn for personal adornment, such as brooches, rings, necklaces, earrings, pendants, bracelets, and cufflinks. Jewellery may be attached to the body or the clothes. From a western perspective, the term is restricted to durable ornaments, excluding flowers for example. For many centuries metal, often combined with gemstones, has been the normal material for jewellery, but other materials such as shells and other plant materials may be used. It is one of the oldest type of archaeological artefact – with 100,000-year-old beads made from \"Nassarius\" shells thought to be the oldest known jewellery. The basic forms of jewellery vary between cultures but are often extremely long-lived; in European cultures the most common forms of jewellery listed above have persisted since ancient times, while other forms such as adornments for the nose or ankle, important in other cultures, are much less common.\n\nJewellery may be made from a wide range of materials. Gemstones and similar materials such as amber and coral, precious metals, beads, and shells have been widely used, and enamel has often been important. In most cultures jewellery can be understood as a status symbol, for its material properties, its patterns, or for meaningful symbols. Jewellery has been made to adorn nearly every body part, from hairpins to toe rings, and even genital jewellery. The patterns of wearing jewellery between the sexes, and by children and older people can vary greatly between cultures, but adult women have been the most consistent wearers of jewellery; in modern European culture the amount worn by adult males is relatively low compared with other cultures and other periods in European culture.\n\nThe word \"jewellery\" itself is derived from the word \"jewel\", which was anglicised from the Old French \"\"jouel\"\", and beyond that, to the Latin word \"\"jocale\"\", meaning plaything. In British English, Indian English, New Zealand English, Hiberno-English, Australian English, and South African English it is spelled \"jewellery,\" while the spelling is \"jewelry\" in American English. Both are used in Canadian English, though \"jewelry\" prevails by a two to one margin. In French and a few other European languages the equivalent term, \"joaillerie\", may also cover decorated metalwork in precious metal such as \"objets d'art\" and church items, not just objects worn on the person.\nHumans have used jewellery for a number of different reasons:\nBULLET::::- functional, generally to fix clothing or hair in place\nBULLET::::- as a marker of social status and personal status, as with a wedding ring\nBULLET::::- as a signifier of some form of affiliation, whether ethnic, religious or social\nBULLET::::- to provide talismanic protection (in the form of amulets)\nBULLET::::- as an artistic display\nBULLET::::- as a carrier or symbol of personal meaning – such as love, mourning, a personal milestone or even luck\n\nMost cultures at some point have had a practice of keeping large amounts of wealth stored in the form of jewellery. Numerous cultures store wedding dowries in the form of jewellery or make jewellery as a means to store or display coins. Alternatively, jewellery has been used as a currency or trade good; an example being the use of slave beads.\n\nMany items of jewellery, such as brooches and buckles, originated as purely functional items, but evolved into decorative items as their functional requirement diminished.\n\nJewellery can also symbolise group membership (as in the case, of the Christian crucifix or the Jewish Star of David) or status (as in the case of chains of office, or the Western practice of married people wearing wedding rings).\n\nWearing of amulets and devotional medals to provide protection or ward off evil is common in some cultures. These may take the form of symbols (such as the ankh), stones, plants, animals, body parts (such as the Khamsa), or glyphs (such as stylised versions of the Throne Verse in Islamic art).\n\nIn creating jewellery, gemstones, coins, or other precious items are often used, and they are typically set into precious metals. Platinum alloys range from 900 (90% pure) to 950 (95.0% pure). The silver used in jewellery is usually sterling silver, or 92.5% fine silver. In costume jewellery, stainless steel findings are sometimes used.\n\nOther commonly used materials include glass, such as fused-glass or enamel; wood, often carved or turned; shells and other natural animal substances such as bone and ivory; natural clay; polymer clay; Hemp and other twines have been used as well to create jewellery that has more of a natural feel. However, any inclusion of lead or lead solder will give a British Assay office (the body which gives U.K. jewellery its stamp of approval, the Hallmark) the right to destroy the piece, however it is very rare for the assay office to do so.\n\nBeads are frequently used in jewellery. These may be made of glass, gemstones, metal, wood, shells, clay and polymer clay. Beaded jewellery commonly encompasses necklaces, bracelets, earrings, belts and rings. Beads may be large or small; the smallest type of beads used are known as seed beads, these are the beads used for the \"woven\" style of beaded jewellery. Seed beads are also used in an embroidery technique where they are sewn onto fabric backings to create broad collar neck pieces and beaded bracelets. Bead embroidery, a popular type of handwork during the Victorian era, is enjoying a renaissance in modern jewellery making. Beading, or beadwork, is also very popular in many African and indigenous North American cultures.\n\nSilversmiths, goldsmiths, and lapidaries methods include forging, casting, soldering or welding, cutting, carving and \"cold-joining\" (using adhesives, staples and rivets to assemble parts).\n\nDiamonds were first mined in India. Pliny may have mentioned them, although there is some debate as to the exact nature of the stone he referred to as \"Adamas\"; In 2005, Australia, Botswana, Russia and Canada ranked among the primary sources of gemstone diamond production. There are negative consequences of the diamond trade in certain areas. Diamonds mined during the recent civil wars in Angola, Ivory Coast, Sierra Leone, and other nations have been labelled as blood diamonds when they are mined in a war zone and sold to finance an insurgency.\n\nThe British crown jewels contain the Cullinan Diamond, part of the largest gem-quality rough diamond ever found (1905), at 3,106.75 carats (621.35 g).\n\nNow popular in engagement rings, this usage dates back to the marriage of Maximilian I to Mary of Burgundy in 1477.\n\nMany precious and semiprecious stones are used for jewellery. Among them are:\n\nBULLET::::- Amber: Amber, an ancient organic gemstone, is composed of tree resin that has hardened over time. The stone must be at least one million years old to be classified as amber, and some amber can be up to 120 million years old.\nBULLET::::- Amethyst: Amethyst has historically been the most prized gemstone in the quartz family. It is treasured for its purple hue, which can range in tone from light to dark.\nBULLET::::- Emerald: Emeralds are one of the three main precious gemstones (along with rubies and sapphires) and are known for their fine green to bluish green colour. They have been treasured throughout history, and some historians report that the Egyptians mined emerald as early as 3500 BC.\nBULLET::::- Jade: Jade is most commonly associated with the colour green but can come in a number of other colours as well. Jade is closely linked to Asian culture, history, and tradition, and is sometimes referred to as the \"stone of heaven\".\nBULLET::::- Jasper: Jasper is a gemstone of the chalcedony family that comes in a variety of colours. Often, jasper will feature unique and interesting patterns within the coloured stone. Picture jasper is a type of jasper known for the colours (often beiges and browns) and swirls in the stone's pattern.\nBULLET::::- Quartz: Quartz refers to a family of crystalline gemstones of various colours and sizes. Among the well-known types of quartz are rose quartz (which has a delicate pink colour), and smoky quartz (which comes in a variety of shades of translucent brown). A number of other gemstones, such as Amethyst and Citrine, are also part of the quartz family. Rutilated quartz is a popular type of quartz containing needle-like inclusions.\nBULLET::::- Ruby: Rubies are known for their intense red colour and are among the most highly valued precious gemstones. Rubies have been treasured for millennia. In Sanskrit, the word for ruby is \"ratnaraj\", meaning \"king of precious stones\".\nBULLET::::- Sapphire: The most popular form of sapphire is blue sapphire, which is known for its medium to deep blue colour and strong saturation. Fancy sapphires of various colours are also available. In the United States, blue sapphire tends to be the most popular and most affordable of the three major precious gemstones (emerald, ruby, and sapphire).\nBULLET::::- Turquoise: Turquoise is found in only a few places on earth, and the world's largest turquoise-producing region is the southwest United States. Turquoise is prized for its attractive colour, most often an intense medium blue or a greenish blue, and its ancient heritage. Turquoise is used in a great variety of jewellery styles. It is perhaps most closely associated with southwest and Native American jewellery, but it is also used in many sleek, modern styles. Some turquoise contains a matrix of dark brown markings, which provides an interesting contrast to the gemstone's bright blue colour.\n\nSome gemstones (like pearls, coral, and amber) are classified as organic, meaning that they are produced by living organisms. Others are inorganic, meaning that they are generally composed of and arise from minerals.\n\nSome gems, for example, amethyst, have become less valued as methods of extracting and importing them have progressed. Some man-made gems can serve in place of natural gems, such as cubic zirconia, which can be used in place of diamond.\n\nFor platinum, gold, and silver jewellery, there are many techniques to create finishes. The most common are high-polish, satin/matte, brushed, and hammered. High-polished jewellery is the most common and gives the metal a highly reflective, shiny look. Satin, or matte finish reduces the shine and reflection of the jewellery, and this is commonly used to accentuate gemstones such as diamonds. Brushed finishes give the jewellery a textured look and are created by brushing a material (similar to sandpaper) against the metal, leaving \"brush strokes\". Hammered finishes are typically created by using a rounded steel hammer and hammering the jewellery to give it a wavy texture.\n\nSome jewellery is plated to give it a shiny, reflective look or to achieve a desired colour. Sterling silver jewellery may be plated with a thin layer of 0.999 fine silver (a process known as flashing) or may be plated with rhodium or gold. Base metal costume jewellery may also be plated with silver, gold, or rhodium for a more attractive finish.\n\nJewellery has been used to denote status. In ancient Rome, only certain ranks could wear rings; later, sumptuary laws dictated who could wear what type of jewellery. This was also based on rank of the citizens of that time. Cultural dictates have also played a significant role. For example, the wearing of earrings by Western men was considered effeminate in the 19th century and early 20th century. More recently, the display of body jewellery, such as piercings, has become a mark of acceptance or seen as a badge of courage within some groups but is completely rejected in others. Likewise, hip hop culture has popularised the slang term bling-bling, which refers to ostentatious display of jewellery by men or women.\n\nConversely, the jewellery industry in the early 20th century launched a campaign to popularise wedding rings for men, which caught on, as well as engagement rings for men, which did not, going so far as to create a false history and claim that the practice had medieval roots. By the mid-1940s, 85% of weddings in the U.S. featured a double-ring ceremony, up from 15% in the 1920s. Religion has also played a role in societies influence. Islam, for instance, considers the wearing of gold by men as a social taboo, and many religions have edicts against excessive display. In Christianity, the New Testament gives injunctions against the wearing of gold, in the writings of the apostles Paul and Peter. In Revelation 17, \"the great whore\" or false religious system, is depicted as being \"decked with gold and precious stones and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand.\" (Rev. 17:4) For Muslims it is considered haraam for a man to wear gold. Christian denominations forbidding the use of jewellery by both men and women include Amish-Mennonites and Holiness churches.\n\nThe history of jewellery is long and goes back many years, with many different uses among different cultures. It has endured for thousands of years and has provided various insights into how ancient cultures worked.\n\nThe earliest known Jewellery was actually created not by humans (\"Homo sapiens\") but by Neanderthal living in Europe. Specifically, perforated beads made from small sea shells have been found dating to 115,000 years ago in the Cueva de los Aviones, a cave along the southeast coast of Spain. Later in Kenya, at Enkapune Ya Muto, beads made from perforated ostrich egg shells have been dated to more than 40,000 years ago. In Russia, a stone bracelet and marble ring are attributed to a similar age.\n\nLater, the European early modern humans had crude necklaces and bracelets of bone, teeth, berries, and stone hung on pieces of string or animal sinew, or pieces of carved bone used to secure clothing together. In some cases, jewellery had shell or mother-of-pearl pieces.\nA decorated engraved pendant (the Star Carr Pendant) dating to around 11,000 BC, and thought to be the oldest Mesolithic art in Britain, was found at the site of Star Carr in North Yorkshire in 2015. In southern Russia, carved bracelets made of mammoth tusk have been found. The Venus of Hohle Fels features a perforation at the top, showing that it was intended to be worn as a pendant.\n\nAround seven-thousand years ago, the first sign of copper jewellery was seen. In October 2012 the Museum of Ancient History in Lower Austria revealed that they had found a grave of a female jewellery worker – forcing archaeologists to take a fresh look at prehistoric gender roles after it appeared to be that of a female fine metal worker – a profession that was previously thought to have been carried out exclusively by men.\n\nThe first signs of established jewellery making in Ancient Egypt was around 3,000–5,000 years ago. The Egyptians preferred the luxury, rarity, and workability of gold over other metals. In Predynastic Egypt jewellery soon began to symbolise political and religious power in the community. Although it was worn by wealthy Egyptians in life, it was also worn by them in death, with jewellery commonly placed among grave goods.\n\nIn conjunction with gold jewellery, Egyptians used coloured glass, along with semi-precious gems. The colour of the jewellery had significance. Green, for example, symbolised fertility. Lapis lazuli and silver had to be imported from beyond the country's borders.\n\nEgyptian designs were most common in Phoenician jewellery. Also, ancient Turkish designs found in Persian jewellery suggest that trade between the Middle East and Europe was not uncommon. Women wore elaborate gold and silver pieces that were used in ceremonies.\n\nBy approximately 5,000 years ago, jewellery-making had become a significant craft in the cities of Mesopotamia. The most significant archaeological evidence comes from the Royal Cemetery of Ur, where hundreds of burials dating 2900–2300 BC were unearthed; tombs such as that of Puabi contained a multitude of artefacts in gold, silver, and semi-precious stones, such as lapis lazuli crowns embellished with gold figurines, close-fitting collar necklaces, and jewel-headed pins. In Assyria, men and women both wore extensive amounts of jewellery, including amulets, ankle bracelets, heavy multi-strand necklaces, and cylinder seals.\n\nJewellery in Mesopotamia tended to be manufactured from thin metal leaf and was set with large numbers of brightly coloured stones (chiefly agate, lapis, carnelian, and jasper). Favoured shapes included leaves, spirals, cones, and bunches of grapes. Jewellers created works both for human use and for adorning statues and idols. They employed a wide variety of sophisticated metalworking techniques, such as cloisonné, engraving, fine granulation, and filigree.\n\nExtensive and meticulously maintained records pertaining to the trade and manufacture of jewellery have also been unearthed throughout Mesopotamian archaeological sites. One record in the Mari royal archives, for example, gives the composition of various items of jewellery: \n\nThe Greeks started using gold and gems in jewellery in 1600 BC, although beads shaped as shells and animals were produced widely in earlier times. Around 1500 BC, the main techniques of working gold in Greece included casting, twisting bars, and making wire. Many of these sophisticated techniques were popular in the Mycenaean period, but unfortunately this skill was lost at the end of the Bronze Age. The forms and shapes of jewellery in ancient Greece such as the armring (13th century BC), brooch (10th century BC) and pins (7th century BC), have varied widely since the Bronze Age as well. Other forms of jewellery include wreaths, earrings, necklace and bracelets. A good example of the high quality that gold working techniques could achieve in Greece is the ‘Gold Olive Wreath’ (4th century BC), which is modeled on the type of wreath given as a prize for winners in athletic competitions like the Olympic Games. Jewellery dating from 600 to 475 BC is not well represented in the archaeological record, but after the Persian wars the quantity of jewellery again became more plentiful. One particularly popular type of design at this time was a bracelet decorated with snake and animal-heads Because these bracelets used considerably more metal, many examples were made from bronze. By 300 BC, the Greeks had mastered making coloured jewellery and using amethysts, pearl, and emeralds. Also, the first signs of cameos appeared, with the Greeks creating them from Indian Sardonyx, a striped brown pink and cream agate stone. Greek jewellery was often simpler than in other cultures, with simple designs and workmanship. However, as time progressed, the designs grew in complexity and different materials were soon used.\n\nJewellery in Greece was hardly worn and was mostly used for public appearances or on special occasions. It was frequently given as a gift and was predominantly worn by women to show their wealth, social status, and beauty. The jewellery was often supposed to give the wearer protection from the \"Evil Eye\" or endowed the owner with supernatural powers, while others had a religious symbolism. Older pieces of jewellery that have been found were dedicated to the Gods.\n\nThey worked two styles of pieces: cast pieces and pieces hammered out of sheet metal. Fewer pieces of cast jewellery have been recovered. It was made by casting the metal onto two stone or clay moulds. The two halves were then joined together, and wax, followed by molten metal, was placed in the centre. This technique had been practised since the late Bronze Age. The more common form of jewellery was the hammered sheet type. Sheets of metal would be hammered to thickness and then soldered together. The inside of the two sheets would be filled with wax or another liquid to preserve the metal work. Different techniques, such as using a stamp or engraving, were then used to create motifs on the jewellery. Jewels may then be added to hollows or glass poured into special cavities on the surface.\n\nThe Greeks took much of their designs from outer origins, such as Asia, when Alexander the Great conquered part of it. In earlier designs, other European influences can also be detected. When Roman rule came to Greece, no change in jewellery designs was detected. However, by 27 BC, Greek designs were heavily influenced by the Roman culture. That is not to say that indigenous design did not thrive. Numerous polychrome butterfly pendants on silver foxtail chains, dating from the 1st century, have been found near Olbia, with only one example ever found anywhere else.\n\nGorgons, pomegranates, acorns, lotus flowers and palms were a clear indicator of Greek influence in Etruscan jewelry. The modelling of heads, which was a typical practice from the Greek severe period, was a technique that spread throughout the Etruscan territory. An even clearer evidence of new influences is the shape introduced in the Orientalizing era: The Bullae. A pear shaped vessel used to hold perfume. Its surface was usually decorated with repoussé and engraved symbolic figures. \n\nMuch of the jewelry found was not \"worn\" by Etruscans, but were made to accompany them in the after world. Most, if not all, techniques of Etruscan goldsmiths were not invented by them as they are dated to the third millennium BC. \n\nAlthough jewellery work was abundantly diverse in earlier times, especially among the barbarian tribes such as the Celts, when the Romans conquered most of Europe, jewellery was changed as smaller factions developed the Roman designs. The most common artefact of early Rome was the brooch, which was used to secure clothing together. The Romans used a diverse range of materials for their jewellery from their extensive resources across the continent. Although they used gold, they sometimes used bronze or bone, and in earlier times, glass beads & pearl. As early as 2,000 years ago, they imported Sri Lankan sapphires and Indian diamonds and used emeralds and amber in their jewellery. In Roman-ruled England, fossilised wood called jet from Northern England was often carved into pieces of jewellery. The early Italians worked in crude gold and created clasps, necklaces, earrings, and bracelets. They also produced larger pendants that could be filled with perfume.\n\nLike the Greeks, often the purpose of Roman jewellery was to ward off the \"Evil Eye\" given by other people. Although women wore a vast array of jewellery, men often only wore a finger ring. Although they were expected to wear at least one ring, some Roman men wore a ring on every finger, while others wore none. Roman men and women wore rings with an engraved gem on it that was used with wax to seal documents, a practice that continued into medieval times when kings and noblemen used the same method. After the fall of the Roman Empire, the jewellery designs were absorbed by neighbouring countries and tribes.\n\nPost-Roman Europe continued to develop jewellery making skills. The Celts and Merovingians in particular are noted for their jewellery, which in terms of quality matched or exceeded that of the Byzantine Empire. Clothing fasteners, amulets, and, to a lesser extent, signet rings, are the most common artefacts known to us. A particularly striking Celtic example is the Tara Brooch. The Torc was common throughout Europe as a symbol of status and power. By the 8th century, jewelled weaponry was common for men, while other jewellery (with the exception of signet rings) seemed to become the domain of women. Grave goods found in a 6th–7th century burial near Chalon-sur-Saône are illustrative. A young girl was buried with: 2 silver fibulae, a necklace (with coins), bracelet, gold earrings, a pair of hair-pins, comb, and buckle. The Celts specialised in continuous patterns and designs, while Merovingian designs are best known for stylised animal figures. They were not the only groups known for high quality work. Note the Visigoth work shown here, and the numerous decorative objects found at the Anglo-Saxon Ship burial at Sutton Hoo Suffolk, England are a particularly well-known example. On the continent, cloisonné and garnet were perhaps the quintessential method and gemstone of the period.\n\nThe Eastern successor of the Roman Empire, the Byzantine Empire, continued many of the methods of the Romans, though religious themes came to predominate. Unlike the Romans, the Franks, and the Celts, however, Byzantium used light-weight gold leaf rather than solid gold, and more emphasis was placed on stones and gems. As in the West, Byzantine jewellery was worn by wealthier females, with male jewellery apparently restricted to signet rings. Woman's jewellery had some peculiarities like kolts that decorated headband.\nLike other contemporary cultures, jewellery was commonly buried with its owner.\n\nThe Renaissance and exploration both had significant impacts on the development of jewellery in Europe. By the 17th century, increasing exploration and trade led to increased availability of a wide variety of gemstones as well as exposure to the art of other cultures. Whereas prior to this the working of gold and precious metal had been at the forefront of jewellery, this period saw increasing dominance of gemstones and their settings. An example of this is the Cheapside Hoard, the stock of a jeweller hidden in London during the Commonwealth period and not found again until 1912. It contained Colombian emerald, topaz, amazonite from Brazil, spinel, iolite, and chrysoberyl from Sri Lanka, ruby from India, Afghan lapis lazuli, Persian turquoise, Red Sea peridot, as well as Bohemian and Hungarian opal, garnet, and amethyst. Large stones were frequently set in box-bezels on enamelled rings. Notable among merchants of the period was Jean-Baptiste Tavernier, who brought the precursor stone of the Hope Diamond to France in the 1660s.\n\nWhen Napoleon Bonaparte was crowned as Emperor of the French in 1804, he revived the style and grandeur of jewellery and fashion in France. Under Napoleon's rule, jewellers introduced \"parures\", suites of matching jewellery, such as a diamond tiara, diamond earrings, diamond rings, a diamond brooch, and a diamond necklace. Both of Napoleon's wives had beautiful sets such as these and wore them regularly. Another fashion trend resurrected by Napoleon was the cameo. Soon after his cameo decorated crown was seen, cameos were highly sought. The period also saw the early stages of costume jewellery, with fish scale covered glass beads in place of pearls or conch shell cameos instead of stone cameos. New terms were coined to differentiate the arts: jewellers who worked in cheaper materials were called \"bijoutiers\", while jewellers who worked with expensive materials were called \"joailliers\", a practice which continues to this day.\n\nStarting in the late 18th century, Romanticism had a profound impact on the development of western jewellery. Perhaps the most significant influences were the public's fascination with the treasures being discovered through the birth of modern archaeology and a fascination with Medieval and Renaissance art. Changing social conditions and the onset of the Industrial Revolution also led to growth of a middle class that wanted and could afford jewellery. As a result, the use of industrial processes, cheaper alloys, and stone substitutes led to the development of paste or costume jewellery. Distinguished goldsmiths continued to flourish, however, as wealthier patrons sought to ensure that what they wore still stood apart from the jewellery of the masses, not only through use of precious metals and stones but also though superior artistic and technical work. One such artist was the French goldsmith François-Désiré Froment-Meurice. A category unique to this period and quite appropriate to the philosophy of romanticism was mourning jewellery. It originated in England, where Queen Victoria was often seen wearing jet jewellery after the death of Prince Albert, and it allowed the wearer to continue wearing jewellery while expressing a state of mourning at the death of a loved one.\n\nIn the United States, this period saw the founding in 1837 of Tiffany & Co. by Charles Lewis Tiffany. Tiffany's put the United States on the world map in terms of jewellery and gained fame creating dazzling commissions for people such as the wife of Abraham Lincoln. Later, it would gain popular notoriety as the setting of the film Breakfast at Tiffany's. In France, Pierre Cartier founded Cartier SA in 1847, while 1884 saw the founding of Bulgari in Italy. The modern production studio had been born and was a step away from the former dominance of individual craftsmen and patronage.\n\nThis period also saw the first major collaboration between East and West. Collaboration in Pforzheim between German and Japanese artists led to Shakudō plaques set into Filigree frames being created by the Stoeffler firm in 1885). Perhaps the grand finalé – and an appropriate transition to the following period – were the masterful creations of the Russian artist Peter Carl Fabergé, working for the Imperial Russian court, whose Fabergé eggs and jewellery pieces are still considered as the epitome of the goldsmith's art.\n\nMany whimsical fashions were introduced in the extravagant eighteenth century. Cameos that were used in connection with jewellery were the attractive trinkets along with many of the small objects such as brooches, ear-rings and scarf-pins. Some of the necklets were made of several pieces joined with the gold chains were in and bracelets were also made sometimes to match the necklet and the brooch. At the end of the Century the jewellery with cut steel intermixed with large crystals was introduced by an Englishman, Matthew Boulton of Birmingham.\n\nIn the 1890s, jewellers began to explore the potential of the growing Art Nouveau style and the closely related German Jugendstil, British (and to some extent American) Arts and Crafts Movement, Catalan Modernisme, Austro-Hungarian Sezession, Italian \"Liberty\", etc.\n\nArt Nouveau jewellery encompassed many distinct features including a focus on the female form and an emphasis on colour, most commonly rendered through the use of enamelling techniques including basse-taille, champleve, cloisonné, and plique-à-jour. Motifs included orchids, irises, pansies, vines, swans, peacocks, snakes, dragonflies, mythological creatures, and the female silhouette.\n\nRené Lalique, working for the Paris shop of Samuel Bing, was recognised by contemporaries as a leading figure in this trend. The Darmstadt Artists' Colony and Wiener Werkstätte provided perhaps the most significant input to the trend, while in Denmark Georg Jensen, though best known for his Silverware, also contributed significant pieces. In England, Liberty & Co., (notably through the Cymric designs of Archibald Knox) and the British arts & crafts movement of Charles Robert Ashbee contributed slightly more linear but still characteristic designs. The new style moved the focus of the jeweller's art from the setting of stones to the artistic design of the piece itself. Lalique's dragonfly design is one of the best examples of this. Enamels played a large role in technique, while sinuous organic lines are the most recognisable design feature.\n\nThe end of World War I once again changed public attitudes, and a more sober style developed.\n\nGrowing political tensions, the after-effects of the war, and a reaction against the perceived decadence of the turn of the 20th century led to simpler forms, combined with more effective manufacturing for mass production of high-quality jewellery. Covering the period of the 1920s and 1930s, the style has become popularly known as Art Deco. Walter Gropius and the German Bauhaus movement, with their philosophy of \"no barriers between artists and craftsmen\" led to some interesting and stylistically simplified forms. Modern materials were also introduced: plastics and aluminium were first used in jewellery, and of note are the chromed pendants of Russian-born Bauhaus master Naum Slutzky. Technical mastery became as valued as the material itself. In the West, this period saw the reinvention of granulation by the German Elizabeth Treskow, although development of the re-invention has continued into the 1990s. It is based on the basic shapes.\n\nIn Asia, the Indian subcontinent has the longest continuous legacy of jewellery making anywhere, with a history of over 5,000 years. One of the first to start jewellery making were the peoples of the Indus Valley Civilization, in what is now predominately modern-day Pakistan and part of northern and western India. Early jewellery making in China started around the same period, but it became widespread with the spread of Buddhism around 2,000 years ago.\n\nThe Chinese used silver in their jewellery more than gold. Blue kingfisher feathers were tied onto early Chinese jewellery and later, blue gems and glass were incorporated into designs. However, jade was preferred over any other stone. The Chinese revered jade because of the human-like qualities they assigned to it, such as its hardness, durability, and beauty. The first jade pieces were very simple, but as time progressed, more complex designs evolved. Jade rings from between the 4th and 7th centuries BC show evidence of having been worked with a compound milling machine, hundreds of years before the first mention of such equipment in the west.\n\nIn China, the most uncommon piece of jewellery is the earring, which was worn neither by men nor women. Amulets were common, often with a Chinese symbol or dragon. Dragons, Chinese symbols, and phoenixes were frequently depicted on jewellery designs.\n\nThe Chinese often placed their jewellery in their graves. Most Chinese graves found by archaeologists contain decorative jewellery.\n\nThe Indian subcontinent has a long jewellery history, which went through various changes through cultural influence and politics for more than 5,000–8,000 years. Because India had an abundant supply of precious metals and gems, it prospered financially through export and exchange with other countries. While European traditions were heavily influenced by waxing and waning empires, India enjoyed a continuous development of art forms for some 5,000 years. One of the first to start jewellery making were the peoples of the Indus Valley Civilization (encompassing present-day Pakistan and north and northwest India). By 1500 BC, the peoples of the Indus Valley were creating gold earrings and necklaces, bead necklaces, and metallic bangles. Before 2100 BC, prior to the period when metals were widely used, the largest jewellery trade in the Indus Valley region was the bead trade. Beads in the Indus Valley were made using simple techniques. First, a bead maker would need a rough stone, which would be bought from an eastern stone trader. The stone would then be placed into a hot oven where it would be heated until it turned deep red, a colour highly prized by people of the Indus Valley. The red stone would then be chipped to the right size and a hole bored through it with primitive drills. The beads were then polished. Some beads were also painted with designs. This art form was often passed down through the family. Children of bead makers often learned how to work beads from a young age. Persian style also played a big role in India's jewellery. Each stone had its own characteristics related to Hinduism.\n\nJewellery in the Indus Valley was worn predominantly by females, who wore numerous clay or shell bracelets on their wrists. They were often shaped like doughnuts and painted black. Over time, clay bangles were discarded for more durable ones. In present-day India, bangles are made out of metal or glass. Other pieces that women frequently wore were thin bands of gold that would be worn on the forehead, earrings, primitive brooches, chokers, and gold rings. Although women wore jewellery the most, some men in the Indus Valley wore beads. Small beads were often crafted to be placed in men and women's hair. The beads were about one millimetre long.\n\nA female skeleton (presently on display at the National Museum, New Delhi, India) wears a carlinean bangle (bracelet) on her left hand. \"Kada\" is a special kind of bracelet and is widely popular in Indian culture. They symbolize animals such as peacock, elephant, etc.\n\nAccording to Hindu belief, gold and silver are considered as sacred metals. Gold is symbolic of the warm sun, while silver suggests the cool moon. Both are the quintessential metals of Indian jewellery. Pure gold does not oxidise or corrode with time, which is why Hindu tradition associates gold with immortality. Gold imagery occurs frequently in ancient Indian literature. In the Vedic Hindu belief of cosmological creation, the source of physical and spiritual human life originated in and evolved from a golden womb (hiranyagarbha) or egg (hiranyanda), a metaphor of the sun, whose light rises from the primordial waters.\n\nJewellery had great status with India's royalty; it was so powerful that they established laws, limiting wearing of jewellery to royalty. Only royalty and a few others to whom they granted permission could wear gold ornaments on their feet. This would normally be considered breaking the appreciation of the sacred metals. Even though the majority of the Indian population wore jewellery, Maharajas and people related to royalty had a deeper connection with jewellery. The Maharaja's role was so important that the Hindu philosophers identified him as central to the smooth working of the world. He was considered as a divine being, a deity in human form, whose duty was to uphold and protect dharma, the moral order of the universe.\n\nNavaratna (nine gems) is a powerful jewel frequently worn by a Maharaja (Emperor). It is an amulet, which comprises diamond, pearl, ruby, sapphire, emerald, topaz, cat's eye, coral, and hyacinth (red zircon). Each of these stones is associated with a celestial deity, represented the totality of the Hindu universe when all nine gems are together. The diamond is the most powerful gem among the nine stones. There were various cuts for the gemstone. Indian Kings bought gemstones privately from the sellers. Maharaja and other royal family members value gem as Hindu God. They exchanged gems with people to whom they were very close, especially the royal family members and other intimate allies. \n\nIndia was the first country to mine diamonds, with some mines dating back to 296 BC. India traded the diamonds, realising their valuable qualities. Historically, diamonds have been given to retain or regain a lover's or ruler's lost favour, as symbols of tribute, or as an expression of fidelity in exchange for concessions and protection. Mughal emperors and Kings used the diamonds as a means of assuring their immortality by having their names and worldly titles inscribed upon them. Moreover, it has played and continues to play a pivotal role in Indian social, political, economic, and religious event, as it often has done elsewhere. In Indian history, diamonds have been used to acquire military equipment, finance wars, foment revolutions, and tempt defections. They have contributed to the abdication or the decapitation of potentates. They have been used to murder a representative of the dominating power by lacing his food with crushed diamond. Indian diamonds have been used as security to finance large loans needed to buttress politically or economically tottering regimes. Victorious military heroes have been honoured by rewards of diamonds and also have been used as ransom payment for release from imprisonment or abduction.\nToday, many of the jewellery designs and traditions are used, and jewellery is commonplace in Indian ceremonies and weddings.\n\nJewellery played a major role in the fate of the Americas when the Spanish established an empire to seize South American gold. Jewellery making developed in the Americas 5,000 years ago in Central and South America. Large amounts of gold was easily accessible, and the Aztecs, Mixtecs, Mayans, and numerous Andean cultures, such as the Mochica of Peru, created beautiful pieces of jewellery.\n\nWith the Mochica culture, goldwork flourished. The pieces are no longer simple metalwork, but are now masterful examples of jewellery making. Pieces are sophisticated in their design, and feature inlays of turquoise, mother of pearl, spondylus shell, and amethyst. The nose and ear ornaments, chest plates, small containers and whistles are considered masterpieces of ancient Peruvian culture.\nAmong the Aztecs, only nobility wore gold jewellery, as it showed their rank, power, and wealth. Gold jewellery was most common in the Aztec Empire and was often decorated with feathers from Quetzal birds and others. In general, the more jewellery an Aztec noble wore, the higher his status or prestige. The Emperor and his High Priests, for example, would be nearly completely covered in jewellery when making public appearances. Although gold was the most common and a popular material used in Aztec jewellery, jade, turquoise, and certain feathers were considered more valuable. In addition to adornment and status, the Aztecs also used jewellery in sacrifices to appease the gods. Priests also used gem-encrusted daggers to perform animal and human sacrifices.\n\nAnother ancient American civilization with expertise in jewellery making were the Maya. At the peak of their civilization, the Maya were making jewellery from jade, gold, silver, bronze, and copper. Maya designs were similar to those of the Aztecs, with lavish headdresses and jewellery. The Maya also traded in precious gems. However, in earlier times, the Maya had little access to metal, so they made the majority of their jewellery out of bone or stone. Merchants and nobility were the only few that wore expensive jewellery in the Maya region, much the same as with the Aztecs.\n\nIn North America, Native Americans used shells, wood, turquoise, and soapstone, almost unavailable in South and Central America. The turquoise was used in necklaces and to be placed in earrings. Native Americans with access to oyster shells, often located in only one location in America, traded the shells with other tribes, showing the great importance of the body adornment trade in Northern America.\n\nNative American jewellery is the personal adornment, often in the forms of necklaces, earrings, bracelets, rings, pins, brooches, labrets, and more, made by the Indigenous peoples of the United States. Native American jewellery reflects the cultural diversity and history of its makers. Native American tribes continue to develop distinct aesthetics rooted in their personal artistic visions and cultural traditions. Artists create jewellery for adornment, ceremonies, and trade. Lois Sherr Dubin writes, \"[i]n the absence of written languages, adornment became an important element of Indian [Native American] communication, conveying many levels of information.\" Later, jewellery and personal adornment \"...signaled resistance to assimilation. It remains a major statement of tribal and individual identity.\"\n\nMetalsmiths, beaders, carvers, and lapidaries combine a variety of metals, hardwoods, precious and semi-precious gemstones, beadwork, quillwork, teeth, bones, hide, vegetal fibres, and other materials to create jewellery. Contemporary Native American jewellery ranges from hand-quarried and processed stones and shells to computer-fabricated steel and titanium jewellery.\n\nJewellery making in the Pacific started later than in other areas because of recent human settlement. Early Pacific jewellery was made of bone, wood, and other natural materials, and thus has not survived. Most Pacific jewellery is worn above the waist, with headdresses, necklaces, hair pins, and arm and waist belts being the most common pieces.\n\nJewellery in the Pacific, with the exception of Australia, is worn to be a symbol of either fertility or power. Elaborate headdresses are worn by many Pacific cultures and some, such as the inhabitants of Papua New Guinea, wear certain headdresses once they have killed an enemy. Tribesman may wear boar bones through their noses.\n\nIsland jewellery is still very much primal because of the lack of communication with outside cultures. Some areas of Borneo and Papua New Guinea are yet to be explored by Western nations. However, the island nations that were flooded with Western missionaries have had drastic changes made to their jewellery designs. Missionaries saw any type of tribal jewellery as a sign of the wearer's devotion to paganism. Thus many tribal designs were lost forever in the mass conversion to Christianity.\n\nAustralia is now the number one supplier of opals in the world. Opals had already been mined in Europe and South America for many years prior, but in the late 19th century, the Australian opal market became predominant. Australian opals are only mined in a few select places around the country, making it one of the most profitable stones in the Pacific.\n\nThe New Zealand Māori traditionally had a strong culture of personal adornment, most famously the hei-tiki. Hei-tikis are traditionally carved by hand from bone, nephrite, or bowenite.\n\nNowadays a wide range of such traditionally inspired items such as bone carved pendants based on traditional fishhooks \"hei matau\" and other greenstone jewellery are popular with young New Zealanders of all backgrounds – for whom they relate to a generalized sense of New Zealand identity. These trends have contributed towards a worldwide interest in traditional Māori culture and arts.\n\nOther than jewellery created through Māori influence, modern jewellery in New Zealand is multicultural and varied.\n\nMost modern commercial jewellery continues traditional forms and styles, but designers such as Georg Jensen have widened the concept of wearable art. The advent of new materials, such as plastics, Precious Metal Clay (PMC), and colouring techniques, has led to increased variety in styles. Other advances, such as the development of improved pearl harvesting by people such as Mikimoto Kōkichi and the development of improved quality artificial gemstones such as moissanite (a diamond simulant), has placed jewellery within the economic grasp of a much larger segment of the population.\n\nThe \"jewellery as art\" movement was spearheaded by artisans such as Robert Lee Morris and continued by designers such as Gill Forsbrook in the UK. Influence from other cultural forms is also evident. One example of this is bling-bling style jewellery, popularised by hip-hop and rap artists in the early 21st century, e.g. grills, a type of jewellery worn over the teeth.\nThe late 20th century saw the blending of European design with oriental techniques such as Mokume-gane. The following are innovations in the decades straddling the year 2000: \"Mokume-gane, hydraulic die forming, anti-clastic raising, fold-forming, reactive metal anodising, shell forms, PMC, photoetching, and [use of] CAD/CAM.\"\n\nAlso, 3D printing as a production technique gains more and more importance. With a great variety of services offering this production method, jewellery design becomes accessible to a growing number of creatives. An important advantage of using 3d printing are the relatively low costs for prototypes, small batch series or unique and personalized designs. Shapes that are hard or impossible to create by hand can often be realized by 3D printing. Popular materials to print include polyamide, steel and wax (latter for further processing). Every printable material has its very own constraints that have to be considered while designing the piece of jewellery using 3D modelling software.\n\nArtisan jewellery continues to grow as both a hobby and a profession. With more than 17 United States periodicals about beading alone, resources, accessibility, and a low initial cost of entry continues to expand production of hand-made adornments. Some fine examples of artisan jewellery can be seen at The Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City.\nThe increase in numbers of students choosing to study jewellery design and production in Australia has grown in the past 20 years, and Australia now has a thriving contemporary jewellery community. Many of these jewellers have embraced modern materials and techniques, as well as incorporating traditional workmanship.\n\nMore expansive use of metal to adorn the wearer, where the piece is larger and more elaborate than what would normally be considered jewellery, has come to be referred to by designers and fashion writers as metal couture.\n\nFreemasons attach jewels to their detachable collars when in Lodge to signify a Brothers Office held with the Lodge. For example, the square represents the Master of the Lodge and the dove represents the Deacon.\n\nJewellery used in body modification can be simple and plain or dramatic and extreme. The use of simple silver studs, rings, and earrings predominates. Common jewellery pieces such as earrings are a form of body modification, as they are accommodated by creating a small hole in the ear.\n\nPadaung women in Myanmar place large golden rings around their necks. From as early as five years old, girls are introduced to their first neck ring. Over the years, more rings are added. In addition to the twenty-plus pounds of rings on her neck, a woman will also wear just as many rings on her calves. At their extent, some necks modified like this can reach long. The practice has health impacts and has in recent years declined from cultural norm to tourist curiosity. Tribes related to the Paduang, as well as other cultures throughout the world, use jewellery to stretch their earlobes or enlarge ear piercings. In the Americas, labrets have been worn since before first contact by Innu and First Nations peoples of the northwest coast. Lip plates are worn by the African Mursi and Sara people, as well as some South American peoples.\n\nIn the late twentieth century, the influence of modern primitivism led to many of these practices being incorporated into western subcultures. Many of these practices rely on a combination of body modification and decorative objects, thus keeping the distinction between these two types of decoration blurred.\n\nIn many cultures, jewellery is used as a temporary body modifier; in some cases, with hooks or other objects being placed into the recipient's skin. Although this procedure is often carried out by tribal or semi-tribal groups, often acting under a trance during religious ceremonies, this practice has seeped into western culture. Many extreme-jewellery shops now cater to people wanting large hooks or spikes set into their skin. Most often, these hooks are used in conjunction with pulleys to hoist the recipient into the air. This practice is said to give an erotic feeling to the person and some couples have even performed their marriage ceremony whilst being suspended by hooks.\n\nAccording to a 2007 KPMG study, the largest jewellery market is the United States with a market share of 30.8%, Japan, India, China, and the Middle East each with 8–9%, and Italy with 5%. The authors of the study predict a dramatic change in market shares by 2015, where the market share of the United States will have dropped to around 25%, and China and India will increase theirs to over 13%. The Middle East will remain more or less constant at 9%, whereas Europe's and Japan's marketshare will be halved and become less than 4% for Japan, and less than 3% for the biggest individual European countries, Italy and the UK.\n\nBULLET::::- Art jewelry\nBULLET::::- Estate jewelry\nBULLET::::- Heirloom\nBULLET::::- List of jewellery types\nBULLET::::- Live insect jewelry\nBULLET::::- Gemology\nBULLET::::- Jewellery cleaning\nBULLET::::- Wire sculpture\nBULLET::::- Jewelry Television\nBULLET::::- Jewellery Quarter\nBULLET::::- Bronze and brass ornamental work\nBULLET::::- List of topics characterized as pseudoscience (healing jewelry)\nBULLET::::- Suffrage jewellery\nBULLET::::- Borel, F. 1994. The Splendor of Ethnic Jewelry: from the Colette and Jean-Pierre Ghysels Collection. \"New York: H.N. Abrams\" ().\nBULLET::::- Evans, J. 1989. A History of Jewellery 1100–1870 ().\nBULLET::::- Nemet-Nejat, Karen Rhea 1998. Daily Life in Ancient Mesopotamia. \"Westport, CT: Greenwood Press\" ().\nBULLET::::- Tait, H. 1986. Seven Thousand Years of Jewellery. \"London: British Museum Publications\" ().\n\n"}
{"id": "15740", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15740", "title": "Jan Berglin", "text": "Jan Berglin\n\nJan Berglin (born March 24, 1960) is a Swedish cartoonist who made his debut in the Uppsala student newspaper \"Ergo\" in 1985. After completing his studies, Berglin has been living in Gävle where he works as a teacher of Swedish and religion. He published his early strips in the local social democratic newspaper \"Arbetarbladet\", but became known to a wider audience in 1995, when he started to draw for the Stockholm-based but nationally distributed conservative newspaper \"Svenska Dagbladet\". His strips have been collected and republished in several albums.\n\nBerglin's strips, usually in four panels, tend to find their humour in a sometimes absurd mix of everyday situations and literary and philosophical references or reflections. When he was awarded the Alf Henrikson Prize in 2004, the jury's motivation spoke of his renditions of the \"existence of the everyday human between ideals and matter\".\n\nIn later years Berglin has acknowledged the input of his wife Maria Berglin, an artist and literary critic, within his strips by signing them \"Berglins\".\n\nBULLET::::- \"Samlade serier\" (\"Collected comics\") (1992)\nBULLET::::- \"Avanti! - Serier för förryckta\" (1995)\nBULLET::::- \"Mitt i currykrysset - serier mot sekelslutsleda\" (1997)\nBULLET::::- \"Andra bullar!\" (1998)\nBULLET::::- \"Knektöppning - Ess i topp\" (1999)\nBULLET::::- \"Magnum Berglin: Samlade teckningar 1989-1999\" (\"Collected drawings 1989-1999\") (2001)\nBULLET::::- \"Lagom Berglin\" (2002)\nBULLET::::- \"Pytte Berglin\" (2003)\nBULLET::::- \"Berglinska Tider\" (2004)\nBULLET::::- \"Berglin nästa\" (2006)\nBULLET::::- \"Berglins Tolva\" (\"Berglin's Twelfth\") (2007)\nBULLET::::- \"Berglin den trettonde : samlade teckningar av Jan och Maria Berglin\" (\"Berglin the Thirteenth: drawings by Jan and Maria Berglin\") (2008)\nBULLET::::- \"Varje dag man inte köper pizza är en seger\" (\"Every day you don't get pizza is a victory\") (2009)\n\nBULLET::::- Berglin, comic strip, dynamic page on the website of Swedish daily paper \"Svenska Dagbladet\"\nBULLET::::- Jan Berglin, some comic strips by berglin\n"}
{"id": "15744", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15744", "title": "Jim Jarmusch", "text": "Jim Jarmusch\n\nJames Robert Jarmusch (; born January 22, 1953) is an American film director, screenwriter, actor, producer, editor, and composer. He has been a major proponent of independent cinema since the 1980s, directing films as \"Stranger Than Paradise\" (1984), \"Down by Law\" (1986), \"Mystery Train\" (1989), \"Dead Man\" (1995), \"\" (1999), \"Coffee and Cigarettes\" (2003), \"Broken Flowers\" (2005), \"Only Lovers Left Alive\" (2013), and \"Paterson\" (2016). \"Stranger Than Paradise\" was added to the National Film Registry in December 2002. As a musician, Jarmusch has composed music for his films and released two albums with Jozef van Wissem.\n\nJarmusch was born January 22, 1953, in Cuyahoga Falls, Ohio, the middle of three children of middle-class suburbanites. His mother, of German and Irish descent, had been a reviewer of film and theatre for the \"Akron Beacon Journal\" before marrying his father, a businessman of Czech and German descent who worked for the B.F. Goodrich Company. She introduced Jarmusch to cinema by leaving him at a local cinema to watch matinee double features such as \"Attack of the Crab Monsters\" and \"Creature From the Black Lagoon\" while she ran errands. The first adult film he recalls seeing was the 1958 cult classic \"Thunder Road\", the violence and darkness of which left an impression on the seven-year-old Jarmusch. Another B-movie influence from his childhood was \"Ghoulardi\", an eccentric Cleveland television show which featured horror films.\n\nDespite his enthusiasm for film, Jarmusch was an avid reader in his youth and had a greater interest in literature, which was encouraged by his grandmother. Though he refused to attend church with his Episcopalian parents (not being enthused by \"the idea of sitting in a stuffy room wearing a little tie\"), Jarmusch credits literature with shaping his metaphysical beliefs and leading him to reconsider theology in his mid-teens.\n\nFrom his peers he developed a taste for counterculture, and he and his friends would steal the records and books of their older siblings – this included works by William Burroughs, Jack Kerouac, and The Mothers of Invention. They made fake identity documents which allowed them to visit bars at the weekend but also the local art house cinema, which typically showed pornographic films but would occasionally feature underground films such as Robert Downey, Sr.'s \"Putney Swope\" and Andy Warhol's \"Chelsea Girls\". At one point, he took an apprenticeship with a commercial photographer. He later remarked, \"Growing up in Ohio was just planning to get out.\"\n\nAfter graduating from high school in 1971, Jarmusch moved to Chicago and enrolled in the Medill School of Journalism at Northwestern University. After being asked to leave due to neglecting to take any journalism courses – Jarmusch favored literature and art history – he transferred to Columbia University the following year, with the intention of becoming a poet. At Columbia, he studied English and American literature under professors including New York School avant garde poets Kenneth Koch and David Shapiro. At Columbia, he began to write short \"semi-narrative abstract pieces\" and edited the undergraduate literary journal \"The Columbia Review\".\n\nDuring his final year at Columbia, Jarmusch moved to Paris for what was initially a summer semester on an exchange program, but this turned into ten months. There, he worked as a delivery driver for an art gallery, and spent most of his time at the Cinémathèque Française.\n\nJarmusch graduated from Columbia University with a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1975. Broke and working as a musician in New York City after returning from Paris in 1976, he applied on a whim to the graduate film school of New York University's Tisch School of the Arts (then under the direction of Hollywood director László Benedek). Despite his lack of experience in filmmaking, his submission of a collection of photographs and an essay about film secured his acceptance into the program. He studied there for four years, meeting fellow students and future collaborators Sara Driver, Tom DiCillo, Howard Brookner, and Spike Lee in the process. During the late 1970s in New York City, Jarmusch and his contemporaries were part of an alternative culture scene centered on the CBGB music club.\n\nIn his final year at New York University, Jarmusch worked as an assistant to the film noir director Nicholas Ray, who was at that time teaching in the department. In an anecdote, Jarmusch recounted of the formative experience of showing his mentor his first script; Ray disapproved of its lack of action, to which Jarmusch responded after meditating on the critique by reworking the script to be even less eventful. On Jarmusch's return with the revised script, Ray reacted favourably to his student's dissent, citing approvingly the young student's obstinate independence. Jarmusch was the only person Ray brought to work – as his personal assistant – on \"Lightning Over Water\", a documentary about his dying years on which he was collaborating with Wim Wenders. Ray died in 1979 after a long fight with cancer. A few days afterwards, having been encouraged by Ray and New York underground filmmaker Amos Poe and using scholarship funds given by the Louis B. Mayer Foundation to pay for his school tuition, Jarmusch started work on a film for his final project. The university, unimpressed with Jarmusch's use of his funding as well as the project itself, promptly refused to award him a degree.\n\nJarmusch's final year university project was completed in 1980 as \"Permanent Vacation\", his first feature film. It had its premiere at the International Filmfestival Mannheim-Heidelberg (formerly known as Filmweek Mannheim) and won the Josef von Sternberg Award. It was made on a shoestring budget of around $12,000 in misdirected scholarship funds and shot by cinematographer Tom DiCillo on 16 mm film. The 75 minute quasi-autobiographical feature follows an adolescent drifter (Chris Parker) as he wanders around downtown Manhattan.\n\nThe film was not released theatrically, and did not attract the sort of adulation from critics that greeted his later work. \"The Washington Post\" staff writer Hal Hinson would disparagingly comment in an aside during a review of Jarmusch's \"Mystery Train\" (1989) that in the director's debut, \"the only talent he demonstrated was for collecting egregiously untalented actors\". The bleak and unrefined \"Permanent Vacation\" is nevertheless one of the director's most personal films, and established many of the hallmarks he would exhibit in his later work, including derelict urban settings, chance encounters, and a wry sensibility.\n\nJarmusch's first major film, \"Stranger Than Paradise\", was produced on a budget of approximately $125,000 and released in 1984 to much critical acclaim. A deadpan comedy recounting a strange journey of three disillusioned youths from New York through Cleveland to Florida, the film broke many conventions of traditional Hollywood filmmaking. It was awarded the Camera d'Or at the 1984 Cannes Film Festival as well as the 1985 National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Film, and became a landmark work in modern independent film.\n\nIn 1986, Jarmusch wrote and directed \"Down by Law\", starring musicians John Lurie and Tom Waits, and Italian comic actor Roberto Benigni (his introduction to American audiences) as three convicts who escape from a New Orleans jailhouse. Shot like the director's previous efforts in black and white, this constructivist neo-noir was Jarmusch's first collaboration with Dutch cinematographer Robby Müller, who had been known for his work with Wenders.\n\nHis next two films each experimented with parallel narratives: \"Mystery Train\" (1989) told three successive stories set on the same night in and around a small Memphis hotel, and \"Night on Earth\" (1991) involved five cab drivers and their passengers on rides in five different world cities, beginning at sundown in Los Angeles and ending at sunrise in Helsinki. Less bleak and somber than Jarmusch's earlier work, \"Mystery Train\" nevertheless retained the director's askance conception of America. He wrote \"Night on Earth\" in about a week, out of frustration at the collapse of the production of another film he had written and the desire to visit and collaborate with friends such as Benigni, Gena Rowlands, Winona Ryder and Isaach de Bankolé.\n\nAs a result of his early work, Jarmusch became an influential representative of the trend of the American road movie. Not intended to appeal to mainstream filmgoers, these early Jarmusch films were embraced by art house audiences, gaining a small but dedicated American following and cult status in Europe and Japan. Each of the four films had its premiere at the New York Film Festival, while \"Mystery Train\" was in competition at the 1989 Cannes Film Festival. Jarmusch's distinctive aesthetic and \"auteur\" status fomented a critical backlash at the close of this early period, however; though reviewers praised the charm and adroitness of \"Mystery Train\" and \"Night On Earth\", the director was increasingly charged with repetitiveness and risk-aversion.\n\nA film appearance in 1989 as a used car dealer in the cult comedy \"Leningrad Cowboys Go America\" further solidified his interest and participation in the road movie genre. In 1991 Jarmusch appeared as himself in Episode One of John Lurie's cult television series \"Fishing With John\".\n\nIn 1995, Jarmusch released \"Dead Man\", a period film set in the 19th century American West starring Johnny Depp and Gary Farmer. Produced at a cost of almost $9 million with a high-profile cast including John Hurt, Gabriel Byrne and, in his final role, Robert Mitchum, the film marked a significant departure for the director from his previous features. Earnest in tone in comparison to its self-consciously hip and ironic predecessors, \"Dead Man\" was thematically expansive and of an often violent and progressively more surreal character. The film was shot in black and white by Robby Müller, and features a score composed and performed by Neil Young, for whom Jarmusch subsequently filmed the tour documentary \"Year of the Horse\", released to tepid reviews in 1997.\n\nThough ill-received by mainstream American reviewers, \"Dead Man\" found much favor internationally and among critics, many of whom lauded it as a visionary masterpiece. It has been hailed as one of the few films made by a Caucasian that presents an authentic Native American culture and character, and Jarmusch stands by it as such, though it has attracted both praise and castigation for its portrayal of the American West, violence, and especially Native Americans.\n\nFollowing artistic success and critical acclaim in the American independent film community, he achieved mainstream recognition with his far-East philosophical crime film \"\", shot in Jersey City and starring Forest Whitaker as a young inner-city man who has found purpose for his life by unyieldingly conforming it to the \"Hagakure\", an 18th-century philosophy text and training manual for samurai, becoming, as directed, a terrifyingly deadly hit-man for a local mob boss to whom he may owe a debt, and who then betrays him. The soundtrack was supplied by RZA of the Wu-Tang Clan, which blends into the director's \"aesthetics of sampling\". The film was unique among other things for the number of books important to and discussed by its characters, most of them listed bibliographically as part of the end credits. The film is also considered to be a homage to \"Le Samourai\", a 1967 French New Wave film by auteur Jean-Pierre Melville, which starred renowned French actor Alain Delon in a strikingly similar role and narrative.\n\nA five-year gap followed the release of \"Ghost Dog\", which the director has attributed to a creative crisis he experienced in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks in New York City. 2004 saw the eventual release of \"Coffee and Cigarettes\", a collection of eleven short films of characters sitting around drinking coffee and smoking cigarettes that had been filmed by Jarmusch over the course of the previous two decades. The first vignette, \"Strange to Meet You\", had been shot for and aired on \"Saturday Night Live\" in 1986, and paired Roberto Benigni with comedian Steven Wright. This had been followed three years later by \"Twins\", a segment featuring actors Steve Buscemi and Joie and Cinqué Lee, and then in 1993 with the Short Film Palme d'Or-winning \"Somewhere in California\", starring musicians Tom Waits and Iggy Pop.\n\nHe followed \"Coffee and Cigarettes\" in 2005 with \"Broken Flowers\", which starred Bill Murray as an early retiree who goes in search of the mother of his unknown son in attempt to overcome a midlife crisis. Following the release of \"Broken Flowers\", Jarmusch signed a deal with Fortissimo Films, whereby the distributor would fund and have \"first-look\" rights to the director's future films, and cover some of the overhead costs of his production company, Exoskeleton.\n\nIn 2009, Jarmusch released \"The Limits of Control\", a sparse, meditative crime film set in Spain, it starred Isaach de Bankolé as a lone assassin with a secretive mission. A behind-the-scenes documentary, \"Behind Jim Jarmusch\", was filmed over three days on the set of the film in Seville by director Léa Rinaldi.\n\nIn October 2009, Jarmusch appeared as himself in an episode of the HBO series \"Bored to Death\", and the following September, Jarmusch helped to curate the All Tomorrow's Parties music festival in Monticello, New York.\n\nIn an August 2010 interview, Jarmusch revealed his forthcoming work schedule at that time:\n\nI'm working on a documentary about the Stooges [Iggy Pop-fronted band]. It's going to take a few years. There's no rush on it, but it's something that Iggy asked me to do. I'm co-writing an \"opera.\" It won't be a traditional opera, but it'll be about the inventor Nikola Tesla, with the composer Phil Klein. I have a new film project that's really foremost for me that I hope to shoot early next year with Tilda Swinton and Michael Fassbender and Mia Wasikowska, who was Alice in Wonderland in Tim Burton's film. I don't have that quite financed yet, so I'm working on that. I'm also making music and hoping to maybe score some silent films to put out. Our band will have an EP that we'll give out at ATP. We have enough music for three EPs or an album.\n\nJarmusch eventually attained funding for the aforementioned film project after a protracted period and, in July 2012, Jarmusch began shooting \"Only Lovers Left Alive\" with Tilda Swinton, Tom Hiddleston (who replaced Fassbender), Mia Wasikowska, Anton Yelchin, and John Hurt, while Jarmusch's musical project SQÜRL were the main contributors to the film's soundtrack. The film screened at the 2013 Cannes Film Festival and the 2013 Toronto International Film Festival (TIFF), with Jarmusch explaining the seven-year completion time frame at the former: \"The reason it took so long is that no one wanted to give us the money. It took years to put it together. Its getting more and more difficult for films that are a little unusual, or not predictable, or don't satisfy people's expectations of something.\" The film's budget was US$7 million and its UK release date was February 21, 2014.\n\nJarmusch wrote and directed \"Paterson\" in 2016. The film follows the daily experiences of an inner-city bus driver (Adam Driver) in Paterson, New Jersey, who shares the same name as the city. The film features the wry, minimalist style found in Jarmusch's other works, and earned 22 award nominations for Jarmusch, Driver and Nellie, the dog featured in the film. The story focuses on Paterson's poetry writing efforts, interspersed with his observations and experiences of the residents he encounters on his bus route and in his daily life.\n\nJarmusch wrote and directed his first horror film, the zombie comedy \"The Dead Don't Die\", which was presented at the 2019 Cannes Film Festival and received mixed reviews.\n\nIn 2014 Jarmusch shunned the \"auteur theory\" and likened the filmmaking process to human sexual reproduction:\n\nI put 'A film by' as a protection of my rights, but I don't really believe it. It's important for me to have a final cut, and I do for every film. So I'm in the editing room every day, I'm the navigator of the ship, but I'm not the captain, I can't do it without everyone's equally valuable input. For me it's phases where I'm very solitary, writing, and then I'm preparing, getting the money, and then I'm with the crew and on a ship and it's amazing and exhausting and exhilarating, and then I'm alone with the editor again ... I've said it before, it's like seduction, wild sex, and then pregnancy in the editing room. That's how it feels for me.\n\nJarmusch has been characterized as a minimalist filmmaker whose idiosyncratic films are unhurried. His films often eschew traditional narrative structure, lacking clear plot progression and focus more on mood and character development. In an interview early in his career, he stated that his goal was \"to approximate real time for the audience.\"\n\nJarmusch's early work is marked by a brooding, contemplative tone, featuring extended silent scenes and prolonged still shots. He has experimented with a vignette format in three films that were either released, or begun around, the early 1990s: \"Mystery Train,\" \"Night on Earth\" and \"Coffee and Cigarettes\". \"The Salt Lake Tribune\" critic Sean P. Means wrote that Jarmusch blends \"film styles and genres with sharp wit and dark humor\", while his style is also defined by a signature deadpan comedic tone.\n\nThe protagonists of Jarmusch's films are usually lone adventurers. The director's male characters have been described by critic Jennie Yabroff as \"three time losers, petty thiefs and inept con men, all ... eminently likeable, if not down right charming\"; while novelist Paul Auster described them as \"laconic, withdrawn, sorrowful mumblers\".\n\nJarmusch has revealed that his instinct is a greater influence during the filmmaking process than any cognitive processes. He explained: \"I feel like I have to listen to the film and let it tell me what it wants. Sometimes it mumbles and it isn't very clear.\" Films such as \"Dead Man\" and \"Limits of Control\" have polarized fans and general viewers alike, as Jarmusch's stylistic instinct is embedded in his strong sense of independence.\n\nThough his films are predominantly set in the United States, Jarmusch has advanced the notion that he looks at America \"through a foreigner's eyes\", with the intention of creating a form of world cinema that synthesizes European and Japanese film with that of Hollywood. His films have often included foreign actors and characters, and (at times substantial) non-English dialogue. In his two later-nineties films, he dwelt on different cultures' experiences of violence, and on textual appropriations between cultures: a wandering Native American's love of William Blake, a black hitman's passionate devotion to the \"Hagakure\". The interaction and syntheses between different cultures, the arbitrariness of national identity, and irreverence towards ethnocentric, patriotic or nationalistic sentiment are recurring themes in Jarmusch's work.\n\nJarmusch's fascination for music is another characteristic that is readily apparent in his work. Musicians appear frequently in key roles – John Lurie, Tom Waits, Gary Farmer, Youki Kudoh, RZA and Iggy Pop have featured in multiple Jarmusch films, while Joe Strummer and Screamin' Jay Hawkins appear in \"Mystery Train\" and GZA, Jack and Meg White feature in \"Coffee and Cigarettes\". Hawkins' song \"I Put a Spell on You\" was central to the plot of \"Stranger than Paradise\", while \"Mystery Train\" is inspired by and named after a song popularized by Elvis Presley, who is also the subject of a vignette in \"Coffee and Cigarettes\". In the words of critic Vincent Canby, \"Jarmusch's movies have the tempo and rhythm of blues and jazz, even in their use – or omission – of language. His films work on the senses much the way that some music does, unheard until it's too late to get it out of one's head.\"\n\nOn his narrative focus, Jarmusch remarked in a 1989 interview, \"I'd rather make a movie about a guy walking his dog than about the emperor of China.\"\n\nJarmusch is ascribed as having instigated the American independent film movement with \"Stranger Than Paradise\". In her description of the film in a 2005 profile of the director for \"The New York Times\", critic Lynn Hirschberg declared that \"Stranger than Paradise\" \"permanently upended the idea of independent film as an intrinsically inaccessible avant-garde form\". The success of the film accorded the director a certain iconic status within arthouse cinema, as an idiosyncratic and uncompromising auteur, exuding the aura of urban cool embodied by downtown Manhattan. Such perceptions were compounded with the release of his subsequent features in the late 1980s, establishing him as one of the generation's most prominent and influential independent filmmakers.\n\nNew York critic and festival director Kent Jones undermined the \"urban cool\" association that Jarmusch has garnered and was quoted in a February 2014 media article, following the release of his eleventh feature film:\n\nThere's been an overemphasis on the hipness factor – and a lack of emphasis on his incredible attachment to the idea of celebrating poetry and culture. You can complain about the preciousness of a lot of his movies, [but] they are unapologetically standing up for poetry. [His attitude is] 'if you want to call me an elitist, go ahead, I don't care'.\n\nJarmusch's staunch independence has been represented by his success in retaining the negatives for all of his films, an achievement that was described by the \"Guardian\"'s Jonathan Romney as \"extremely rare.\" British producer Jeremy Thomas, who was one of the eventual financiers of \"Only Lovers Left Alive\" called Jarmusch \"one of the great American independent film-makers\" who is \"the last of the line.\" Thomas believes that filmmakers like Jarmusch \"are not coming through ... any more.\"\n\nIn a 1989 review of his work, Vincent Canby of \"The New York Times\" called Jarmusch \"the most adventurous and arresting film maker to surface in the American cinema in this decade\". Jarmusch was recognized with the Filmmaker on the Edge award at the 2004 Provincetown International Film Festival. A retrospective of the director's films was hosted at the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis, Minnesota, during February 1994, and another, \"The Sad and Beautiful World of Jim Jarmusch\", by the American Film Institute in August 2005.\n\nWhile Swinton, who has worked with Jarmusch on numerous occasions, describes him as a \"rock star,\" the director admits that \"I don't know where I fit in. I don't feel tied to my time.\" Dutch lute player Jozef van Wissem, who worked on the score for \"Only Lovers Left Alive\" calls Jarmusch a \"cultural sponge\" who \"absorbs everything.\"\n\nIn the early 1980s, Jarmusch was part of a revolving lineup of musicians in Robin Crutchfield's Dark Day project, and later became the keyboardist and one of two vocalists for The Del-Byzanteens, a No Wave band who released the LP \"Lies to Live By\" in 1982.\n\nJarmusch is also featured on the album \"Wu-Tang Meets the Indie Culture\" (2005) in two interludes described by Sean Fennessy in a Pitchfork review of the album as both \"bizarrely pretentious\" and \"reason alone to give it a listen\". Jarmusch and Michel Gondry each contributed a remix to a limited edition release of the track \"Blue Orchid\" by The White Stripes in 2005.\n\nThe author of a series of essays on influential bands, Jarmusch has also had at least two poems published. He is a founding member of The Sons of Lee Marvin, a humorous \"semi-secret society\" of artists resembling the iconic actor, which issues communiqués and meets on occasion for the ostensible purpose of watching Marvin's films.\n\nHe released three collaborative albums with lutist Jozef van Wissem, \"Concerning the Entrance into Eternity\" (Important Records), \"The Mystery of Heaven\" (Sacred Bones Records), in 2012 and the 2019 release \"An Attempt to Draw Aside the Veil\" (Sacred Bones Records).\n\nJarmusch is a member of rock band SQÜRL with film associate Carter Logan and sound engineer Shane Stoneback. SQÜRL's version of Wanda Jackson's 1961 song \"Funnel of Love\", featuring Madeline Follin of Cults on vocals, opens Jarmusch's 2014 film \"Only Lovers Left Alive\".\n\nDutch lute composer Jozef van Wissem also collaborated with Jarmusch on the soundtrack for \"Only Lovers Left Alive\" and the pair also play in a duo. Jarmusch first met van Wissem on a street in New York City's SoHo area in 2007, at which time the lute player handed the director a CD—several months later, Jarmusch asked van Wissem to send his catalog of recordings and the two started playing together as part of their developing friendship. Van Wissem explained in early April 2014: \"I know the way [Jarmusch] makes his films is kind of like a musician. He has music in his head when he's writing a script so it's more informed by a tonal thing than it is by anything else.\"\n\nIn 1980 he won with his film Permanent Vacation the Josef von Sternberg Award at the International Filmfestival Mannheim-Heidelberg. In 1999, he was laureate of the Douglas Sirk Preis at Filmfest Hamburg, Germany.\n\nIn 1984 he won the Caméra d'Or at Cannes Film Festival for \"Stranger Than Paradise\".\n\nIn 2004 Jarmusch was honored with the Filmmaker on the Edge Award at the Provincetown International Film Festival.\n\nIn 2005 he won the Grand Prix of the 2005 Cannes Film Festival for his film \"Broken Flowers\".\n\nJarmusch rarely discusses his personal life in public. He divides his time between New York City and the Catskill Mountains. He stopped drinking coffee in 1986, the year of the first installment of \"Coffee and Cigarettes\", although he continues to smoke cigarettes.\n\nIn a February 2014 interview, Jarmusch stated that he is not interested in eternal life, as \"there's something about the cycle of life that's very important, and to have that removed would be a burden\".\n\nThe moving image collection of Jim Jarmusch is held at the Academy Film Archive.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Permanent Vacation\" (1980)\nBULLET::::- \"Stranger Than Paradise\" (1984)\nBULLET::::- \"Down by Law\" (1986)\nBULLET::::- \"Mystery Train\" (1989)\nBULLET::::- \"Night on Earth\" (1991)\nBULLET::::- \"Dead Man\" (1995)\nBULLET::::- \"Year of the Horse\" (1997)\nBULLET::::- \"\" (1999)\nBULLET::::- \"Coffee and Cigarettes\" (2003)\nBULLET::::- \"Broken Flowers\" (2005)\nBULLET::::- \"The Limits of Control\" (2009)\nBULLET::::- \"Only Lovers Left Alive\" (2013)\nBULLET::::- \"Paterson\" (2016)\nBULLET::::- \"Gimme Danger\" (2016)\nBULLET::::- \"The Dead Don't Die\" (2019)\n\nBULLET::::- Studio albums\nBULLET::::- \"Concerning the Entrance into Eternity\" (Important Records, 2012) (with Jozef van Wissem)\nBULLET::::- \"The Mystery of Heaven\" (Sacred Bones Records, 2012) (with Jozef van Wissem)\nBULLET::::- \" An Attempt to Draw Aside the Veil \" (Sacred Bones Records, 2019) (with Jozef van Wissem)\nBULLET::::- \" Ranaldo Jarmusch Urselli Pandi \" (Trost, 2019) (with Lee Ranaldo, Marc Urselli, Balazs Pandi)\n\nBULLET::::- Soundtracks\nBULLET::::- \"Only Lovers Left Alive\" (ATP Recordings, 2013) (as Sqürl, with Jozef van Wissem)\nBULLET::::- \" Some Music for Robby Müller \" (Soundtrack Living the Light - documentary) (Sacred Bones Records, 2020) (as Sqürl)\nBULLET::::- EPs\nBULLET::::- \"EP #1\" (ATP Recordings, 2013) (as Sqürl)\nBULLET::::- \"EP #2\" (ATP Recordings, 2013) (as Sqürl)\nBULLET::::- \"EP #3\" (ATP Recordings, 2014) (as Sqürl)\nLive albums\n\nBULLET::::- SQÜRL Live at Third Man Records (12\" vinyl, A Third Man Records, 2016) (as Sqürl)\nBULLET::::- Guest appearances\nBULLET::::- Jozef van Wissem – \"Concerning the Beautiful Human Form After Death\" from \"The Joy That Never Ends\" (2011)\nBULLET::::- Fucked Up – \"Year of the Tiger\" (2012)\n\nBULLET::::- Remixes\nBULLET::::- The White Stripes – \"Blue Orchid\" (First Nations Remix) (2005)\n\nBULLET::::- No Wave Cinema\n\nBULLET::::- Gonzalez, Éric, \"Jim Jarmusch's Aesthetics of Sampling in Ghost Dog–The Way of the Samurai\", \"Volume!\", vol. 3, n° 2, Nantes: Éditions Mélanie Seteun, 2004, pp. 109–21.\nBULLET::::- Ródenas, Gabri (2009), \"Guía para ver y analizar\" Noche en la Tierra \"de Jim Jarmusch\", Barcelona/Valencia: Octaedro/Nau Llibres. /978-84-7642-776-7\nBULLET::::- Ródenas, Gabri (2009), \"Jarmusch y Carver: Se ha roto el frigorífico\" in Fernández, P. (Ed.), \"Rompiendo moldes: Discursos, género e hibridación en el siglo XXI\". Zamora/Sevilla: Editorial Comunicación Social; . Available at Google Books.\nBULLET::::- Ródenas, Gabri (2009), \"Jarmusch Vs Reagan\" in \"Revista Odisea\". Almería: University of Almería. December 2009. .\nBULLET::::- Ródenas, Gabri (2010), \"Jim Jarmusch: Del insomnio americano al insomnio universal\", in \"Comunicación y sociedad\", Navarra: University of Navarra, June 2010; .\nBULLET::::- Ródenas, Gabri (2011), \"Jim Jarmusch: Lecturas sobre el insomnio americano (1980–1991)\", Spain/Germany: – Editorial Académica Española – LAP Lambert Academic Publishing GmbH & Co. KG; .\nBULLET::::- Mentana, Umberto (2016), \"Il cinema di Jim Jarmusch. Una filmografia per un'analisi della cultura e del cinema postmoderno\", Aracne Editrice;\n\nBULLET::::- Rice, Julian. (2012). \"The Jarmusch Way: Spirituality and Imagination in\" Dead Man, Ghost Dog, \"and\" The Limits of Control. Lanham, Maryland: Scarecrow Press. (hardcover); (ebook).\n\nBULLET::::- Jim Jarmusch at the \"Senses of Cinema\" Great Directors critical database\nBULLET::::- The Jim Jarmusch Resource Page, curated by Jarmusch scholar Ludvig Hertzberg\nBULLET::::- Limited Control, Hertzberg's companion blog\nBULLET::::- It's a sad and beautiful world\nBULLET::::- The films of Jim Jarmusch, \"Hell Is For Hyphenates\", May 31, 2014\n"}
{"id": "15745", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15745", "title": "Johannes Gutenberg", "text": "Johannes Gutenberg\n\nJohannes Gensfleisch zur Laden zum Gutenberg (; – February 3, 1468) was a German blacksmith, goldsmith, inventor, printer, and publisher who introduced printing to Europe with the printing press. His introduction of mechanical movable type printing to Europe started the Printing Revolution and is regarded as a milestone of the second millennium, ushering in the modern period of human history. It played a key role in the development of the Renaissance, Reformation, the Age of Enlightenment, and the scientific revolution and laid the material basis for the modern knowledge-based economy and the spread of learning to the masses.\n\nGutenberg in 1439 was the first European to use movable type. Among his many contributions to printing are: the invention of a process for mass-producing movable type; the use of oil-based ink for printing books; adjustable molds; mechanical movable type; and the use of a wooden printing press similar to the agricultural screw presses of the period. His truly epochal invention was the combination of these elements into a practical system that allowed the mass production of printed books and was economically viable for printers and readers alike. Gutenberg's method for making type is traditionally considered to have included a type metal alloy and a hand mould for casting type. The alloy was a mixture of lead, tin, and antimony that melted at a relatively low temperature for faster and more economical casting, cast well, and created a durable type.\n\nIn Renaissance Europe, the arrival of mechanical movable type printing introduced the era of mass communication which permanently altered the structure of society. The relatively unrestricted circulation of information—including revolutionary ideas—transcended borders, captured the masses in the Reformation and threatened the power of political and religious authorities; the sharp increase in literacy broke the monopoly of the literate elite on education and learning and bolstered the emerging middle class. Across Europe, the increasing cultural self-awareness of its people led to the rise of proto-nationalism, accelerated by the flowering of the European vernacular languages to the detriment of Latin's status as \"lingua franca\". In the 19th century, the replacement of the hand-operated Gutenberg-style press by steam-powered rotary presses allowed printing on an industrial scale, while Western-style printing was adopted all over the world, becoming practically the sole medium for modern bulk printing.\n\nThe use of movable type was a marked improvement on the handwritten manuscript, which was the existing method of book production in Europe, and upon woodblock printing, and revolutionized European book-making. Gutenberg's printing technology spread rapidly throughout Europe and later the world.\n\nHis major work, the Gutenberg Bible (also known as the 42-line Bible), was the first printed version of the Bible and has been acclaimed for its high aesthetic and technical quality.\n\nGutenberg was born in the German city of Mainz, the youngest son of the patrician merchant Friele Gensfleisch zur Laden, and his second wife, Else Wyrich, who was the daughter of a shopkeeper. It is assumed that he was baptized in the area close to his birthplace of St. Christoph. According to some accounts, Friele was a goldsmith for the bishop at Mainz, but most likely, he was involved in the cloth trade. Gutenberg's year of birth is not precisely known, but it was sometime between the years of 1394 and 1404. In the 1890s the city of Mainz declared his official and symbolic date of birth to be June 24, 1400.\n\nJohn Lienhard, technology historian, says \"Most of Gutenberg's early life is a mystery. His father worked with the ecclesiastic mint. Gutenberg grew up knowing the trade of goldsmithing.\" This is supported by historian Heinrich Wallau, who adds, \"In the 14th and 15th centuries his [ancestors] claimed a hereditary position as ... retainers of the household of the master of the archiepiscopal mint. In this capacity they doubtless acquired considerable knowledge and technical skill in metal working. They supplied the mint with the metal to be coined, changed the various species of coins, and had a seat at the assizes in forgery cases.\"\n\nWallau adds, \"His surname was derived from the house inhabited by his father and his paternal ancestors 'zu Laden, zu Gutenberg'. The house of Gänsfleisch was one of the patrician families of the town, tracing its lineage back to the thirteenth century.\" Patricians (the wealthy and political elite) in Mainz were often named after houses they owned. Around 1427, the name \"zu Gutenberg\", after the family house in Mainz, is documented to have been used for the first time.\n\nIn 1411, there was an uprising in Mainz against the patricians, and more than a hundred families were forced to leave. As a result, the Gutenbergs are thought to have moved to Eltville am Rhein (Alta Villa), where his mother had an inherited estate. According to historian Heinrich Wallau, \"All that is known of his youth is that he was not in Mainz in 1430. It is presumed that he migrated for political reasons to Strasbourg, where the family probably had connections.\" He is assumed to have studied at the University of Erfurt, where there is a record of the enrolment of a student called Johannes de Altavilla in 1418—Altavilla is the Latin form of Eltville am Rhein.\n\nNothing is now known of Gutenberg's life for the next fifteen years, but in March 1434, a letter by him indicates that he was living in Strasbourg, where he had some relatives on his mother's side. He also appears to have been a goldsmith member enrolled in the Strasbourg militia. In 1437, there is evidence that he was instructing a wealthy tradesman on polishing gems, but where he had acquired this knowledge is unknown. In 1436/37 his name also comes up in court in connection with a broken promise of marriage to a woman from Strasbourg, Ennelin. Whether the marriage actually took place is not recorded. Following his father's death in 1419, he is mentioned in the inheritance proceedings.\n\nAround 1439, Gutenberg was involved in a financial misadventure making polished metal mirrors (which were believed to capture holy light from religious relics) for sale to pilgrims to Aachen: in 1439 the city was planning to exhibit its collection of relics from Emperor Charlemagne but the event was delayed by one year due to a severe flood and the capital already spent could not be repaid. When the question of satisfying the investors came up, Gutenberg is said to have promised to share a \"secret\". It has been widely speculated that this secret may have been the idea of printing with movable type. Also around 1439–40, the Dutch Laurens Janszoon Coster came up with the idea of printing. Legend has it that the idea came to him \"like a ray of light\".\n\nUntil at least 1444 Gutenberg lived in Strasbourg, most likely in the St. Arbogast parish. It was in Strasbourg in 1440 that he is said to have perfected and unveiled the secret of printing based on his research, mysteriously entitled \"Aventur und Kunst\" (enterprise and art). It is not clear what work he was engaged in, or whether some early trials with printing from movable type may have been conducted there. After this, there is a gap of four years in the record. In 1448, he was back in Mainz, where he took out a loan from his brother-in-law Arnold Gelthus, quite possibly for a printing press or related paraphernalia. By this date, Gutenberg may have been familiar with intaglio printing; it is claimed that he had worked on copper engravings with an artist known as the Master of Playing Cards.\n\nBy 1450, the press was in operation, and a German poem had been printed, possibly the first item to be printed there. Gutenberg was able to convince the wealthy moneylender Johann Fust for a loan of 800 guilders. Peter Schöffer, who became Fust's son-in-law, also joined the enterprise. Schöffer had worked as a scribe in Paris and is believed to have designed some of the first typefaces.\n\nGutenberg's workshop was set up at Hof Humbrecht, a property belonging to a distant relative. It is not clear when Gutenberg conceived the Bible project, but for this he borrowed another 800 guilders from Fust, and work commenced in 1452. At the same time, the press was also printing other, more lucrative texts (possibly Latin grammars). There is also some speculation that there may have been two presses, one for the pedestrian texts, and one for the Bible. One of the profit-making enterprises of the new press was the printing of thousands of indulgences for the church, documented from 1454 to 1455.\n\nIn 1455 Gutenberg completed his \"42-line Bible\", known as the Gutenberg Bible. About 180 copies were printed, most on paper and some on vellum.\n\nSome time in 1456, there was a dispute between Gutenberg and Fust, and Fust demanded his money back, accusing Gutenberg of misusing the funds. Gutenberg's two rounds of financing from Fust, a total of 1,600 guilders at 6% interest, now amounted to 2,026 guilders. Fust sued at the archbishop's court. A November 1455 legal document records that there was a partnership for a \"project of the books,\" the funds for which Gutenberg had used for other purposes, according to Fust. The court decided in favor of Fust, giving him control over the Bible printing workshop and half of all printed Bibles.\n\nThus Gutenberg was effectively bankrupt, but it appears he retained (or restarted) a small printing shop, and participated in the printing of a Bible in the town of Bamberg around 1459, for which he seems at least to have supplied the type. But since his printed books never carry his name or a date, it is difficult to be certain, and there is consequently a considerable scholarly debate on this subject. It is also possible that the large \"Catholicon\" dictionary, 300 copies of 754 pages, printed in Mainz in 1460, was executed in his workshop.\n\nMeanwhile, the Fust–Schöffer shop was the first in Europe to bring out a book with the printer's name and date, the \"Mainz Psalter\" of August 1457, and while proudly proclaiming the mechanical process by which it had been produced, it made no mention of Gutenberg.\n\nIn 1462, during the devastating Mainz Diocesan Feud, Mainz was sacked by archbishop Adolph von Nassau, and Gutenberg was exiled. An old man by now, he moved to Eltville where he may have initiated and supervised a new printing press belonging to the brothers Bechtermünze.\n\nIn January 1465, Gutenberg's achievements were recognized and he was given the title \"Hofmann\" (gentleman of the court) by von Nassau. This honor included a stipend, an annual court outfit, as well as 2,180 litres of grain and 2,000 litres of wine tax-free. It is believed he may have moved back to Mainz around this time, but this is not certain.\n\nGutenberg died in 1468 and was buried in the Franciscan church at Mainz, his contributions largely unknown. This church and the cemetery were later destroyed, and Gutenberg's grave is now lost.\n\nIn 1504, he was mentioned as the inventor of typography in a book by Professor Ivo Wittig. It was not until 1567 that the first portrait of Gutenberg, almost certainly an imaginary reconstruction, appeared in Heinrich Pantaleon's biography of famous Germans.\n\nBetween 1450 and 1455, Gutenberg printed several texts, some of which remain unidentified; his texts did not bear the printer's name or date, so attribution is possible only from typographical evidence and external references. Certainly several church documents including a papal letter and two indulgences were printed, one of which was issued in Mainz. In view of the value of printing in quantity, seven editions in two styles were ordered, resulting in several thousand copies being printed. Some printed editions of \"Ars Minor\", a schoolbook on Latin grammar by Aelius Donatus may have been printed by Gutenberg; these have been dated either 1451–52 or 1455.\n\nIn 1455, Gutenberg completed copies of a beautifully executed folio Bible (\"Biblia Sacra\"), with 42 lines on each page. Copies sold for 30 florins each, which was roughly three years' wages for an average clerk. Nonetheless, it was significantly cheaper than a manuscript Bible that could take a single scribe over a year to prepare. After printing, some copies were rubricated or hand-illuminated in the same elegant way as manuscript Bibles from the same period.\n\n48 substantially complete copies are known to survive, including two at the British Library that can be viewed and compared online. The text lacks modern features such as page numbers, indentations, and paragraph breaks.\n\nAn undated 36-line edition of the Bible was printed, probably in Bamberg in 1458–60, possibly by Gutenberg. A large part of it was shown to have been set from a copy of Gutenberg's Bible, thus disproving earlier speculation that it was the earlier of the two.\n\nGutenberg's early printing process, and what texts he printed with movable type, are not known in great detail. His later Bibles were printed in such a way as to have required large quantities of type, some estimates suggesting as many as 100,000 individual sorts. Setting each page would take, perhaps, half a day, and considering all the work in loading the press, inking the type, pulling the impressions, hanging up the sheets, distributing the type, etc., it is thought that the Gutenberg–Fust shop might have employed as many as 25 craftsmen.\n\nGutenberg's technique of making movable type remains unclear. In the following decades, punches and copper matrices became standardized in the rapidly disseminating printing presses across Europe. Whether Gutenberg used this sophisticated technique or a somewhat primitive version has been the subject of considerable debate.\n\nIn the standard process of making type, a hard metal punch (made by punchcutting, with the letter carved back to front) is hammered into a softer copper bar, creating a \"matrix\". This is then placed into a hand-held mould and a piece of type, or \"sort\", is cast by filling the mould with molten type-metal; this cools almost at once, and the resulting piece of type can be removed from the mould. The matrix can be reused to create hundreds, or thousands, of identical sorts so that the same character appearing anywhere within the book will appear very uniform, giving rise, over time, to the development of distinct styles of typefaces or fonts. After casting, the sorts are arranged into type cases, and used to make up pages which are inked and printed, a procedure which can be repeated hundreds, or thousands, of times. The sorts can be reused in any combination, earning the process the name of \"movable type\". (For details, see Typography.)\n\nThe invention of the making of types with punch, matrix and mold has been widely attributed to Gutenberg. However, recent evidence suggests that Gutenberg's process was somewhat different. If he used the punch and matrix approach, all his letters should have been nearly identical, with some variation due to miscasting and inking. However, the type used in Gutenberg's earliest work shows other variations.\n\nIn 2001, the physicist Blaise Agüera y Arcas and Princeton librarian Paul Needham, used digital scans of a Papal bull in the Scheide Library, Princeton, to carefully compare the same letters (types) appearing in different parts of the printed text. The irregularities in Gutenberg's type, particularly in simple characters such as the hyphen, suggested that the variations could not have come either from ink smear or from wear and damage on the pieces of metal on the types themselves. Although some identical types are clearly used on other pages, other variations, subjected to detailed image analysis, suggested that they could not have been produced from the same matrix. Transmitted light pictures of the page also appeared to reveal substructures in the type that could not arise from traditional punchcutting techniques. They hypothesized that the method involved impressing simple shapes to create alphabets in \"cuneiform\" style in a matrix made of some soft material, perhaps sand. Casting the type would destroy the mould, and the matrix would need to be recreated to make each additional sort. This could explain the variations in the type, as well as the substructures observed in the printed images.\n\nThus, they speculated that \"the decisive factor for the birth of typography\", the use of reusable moulds for casting type, was a more progressive process than was previously thought. They suggested that the additional step of using the punch to create a mould that could be reused many times was not taken until twenty years later, in the 1470s. Others have not accepted some or all of their suggestions, and have interpreted the evidence in other ways, and the truth of the matter remains uncertain.\n\nA 1568 history by Hadrianus Junius of Holland claims that the basic idea of the movable type came to Gutenberg from Laurens Janszoon Coster via Fust, who was apprenticed to Coster in the 1430s and may have brought some of his equipment from Haarlem to Mainz. While Coster appears to have experimented with moulds and castable metal type, there is no evidence that he had actually printed anything with this technology. He was an inventor and a goldsmith. However, there is one indirect supporter of the claim that Coster might be the inventor. The author of the Cologne Chronicle of 1499 quotes Ulrich Zell, the first printer of Cologne, that printing was performed in Mainz in 1450, but that some type of printing of lower quality had previously occurred in the Netherlands. However, the chronicle does not mention the name of Coster, while it actually credits Gutenberg as the \"first inventor of printing\" in the very same passage (fol. 312). The first securely dated book by Dutch printers is from 1471, and the Coster connection is today regarded as a mere legend.\n\nThe 19th-century printer and typefounder Fournier Le Jeune suggested that Gutenberg was not using type cast with a reusable matrix, but wooden types that were carved individually. A similar suggestion was made by Nash in 2004. This remains possible, albeit entirely unproven.\n\nIt has also been questioned whether Gutenberg used movable types at all. In 2004, Italian professor Bruno Fabbiani claimed that examination of the 42-line Bible revealed an overlapping of letters, suggesting that Gutenberg did not in fact use movable type (individual cast characters) but rather used whole plates made from a system somewhat like a modern typewriter, whereby the letters were stamped successively into the plate and then printed. However, most specialists regard the occasional overlapping of type as caused by paper movement over pieces of type of slightly unequal height.\n\nAlthough Gutenberg was financially unsuccessful in his lifetime, the printing technologies spread quickly, and news and books began to travel across Europe much faster than before. It fed the growing Renaissance, and since it greatly facilitated scientific publishing, it was a major catalyst for the later scientific revolution.\n\nThe capital of printing in Europe shifted to Venice, where visionary printers like Aldus Manutius ensured widespread availability of the major Greek and Latin texts. The claims of an Italian origin for movable type have also focused on this rapid rise of Italy in movable-type printing. This may perhaps be explained by the prior eminence of Italy in the paper and printing trade. Additionally, Italy's economy was growing rapidly at the time, facilitating the spread of literacy. Christopher Columbus had a geography book (printed with movable type) bought by his father. That book is in a Spanish museum. Finally, the city of Mainz was sacked in 1462, driving many (including a number of printers and punch cutters) into exile.\n\nPrinting was also a factor in the Reformation. Martin Luther's 95 Theses were printed and circulated widely; subsequently he issued broadsheets outlining his anti-indulgences position (certificates of indulgences were one of the first items Gutenberg had printed). The broadsheet contributed to development of the newspaper.\n\nIn the decades after Gutenberg, many conservative patrons looked down on cheap printed books; books produced by hand were considered more desirable.\n\nToday there is a large antique market for the earliest printed objects. Books printed prior to 1500 are known as \"incunabula\".\n\nThere are many statues of Gutenberg in Germany, including the famous one by Bertel Thorvaldsen (1837) at Gutenbergplatz in Mainz, home to the eponymous Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz and the Gutenberg Museum on the history of early printing. The latter publishes the \"Gutenberg-Jahrbuch\", the leading periodical in the field.\n\nProject Gutenberg, the oldest digital library, commemorates Gutenberg's name. The Mainzer Johannisnacht commemorates the person Johannes Gutenberg in his native city since 1968.\n\nIn 1952, the United States Postal Service issued a five hundredth anniversary stamp commemorating Johannes Gutenberg invention of the movable-type printing press.\n\nIn 1961 the Canadian philosopher and scholar Marshall McLuhan entitled his pioneering study in the fields of print culture, cultural studies, and media ecology, \"The Gutenberg Galaxy: The Making of Typographic Man\".\n\nRegarded as one of the most influential people in human history, Gutenberg remains a towering figure in the popular image. In 1999, the A&E Network ranked Gutenberg the No. 1 most influential person of the second millennium on their \"Biographies of the Millennium\" countdown. In 1997, Time–Life magazine picked Gutenberg's invention as the most important of the second millennium.\n\nIn space, he is commemorated in the name of the asteroid 777 Gutemberga.\n\nTwo operas based on Gutenberg are \"G, Being the Confession and Last Testament of Johannes Gensfleisch, also known as Gutenberg, Master Printer, formerly of Strasbourg and Mainz\", from 2001 with music by Gavin Bryars; and \"La Nuit de Gutenberg\", with music by Philippe Manoury, premiered in 2011 in Strasbourg.\n\nIn 2018, WordPress, the open-source CMS platform, named its new editing system Gutenberg in tribute to him.\n\nBULLET::::- Laurens Janszoon Coster\nBULLET::::- History of books\n\n\nBULLET::::- Blake Morrison, \"The Justification of Johann Gutenberg\" (2000) [Novel, describing social and technical aspects of the invention of printing]\nBULLET::::- Albert Kapr, \"Johann Gutenberg: the Man and his Invention. \"Translated from the German by Douglas Martin, Scolar Press, 1996. \"Third ed., revised by the author for...the English translation.\nBULLET::::- [More recent, abridged version]\n\nBULLET::::- English homepage of the Gutenberg-Museum Mainz, Germany.\nBULLET::::- The Digital Gutenberg Project: the Gutenberg Bible in 1,300 digital images, every page of the University of Texas at Austin copy.\nBULLET::::- Treasures in Full – Gutenberg Bible View the British Library's Digital Versions Online\nBULLET::::- Giovanni Balbi. \"Catholicon.\" Mainz: Printed by Johann Gutenberg? 1460, at The Library of Congress.\n"}
{"id": "15746", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15746", "title": "Jacques Mayol", "text": "Jacques Mayol\n\nJacques Mayol (1 April 1927 – 22 December 2001) was a French diver and the holder of many world records in free diving. The 1988 film \"The Big Blue\", directed by Luc Besson was inspired by his life story and that of his friend, Enzo Maiorca. Mayol was one of the screenwriters and authored the book \"Homo Delphinus: the Dolphin Within Man\" of his philosophy about the aquatic origins of humans.\n\nJacques Mayol was a French national born in Shanghai, China. Mayol spent his summer vacations in Karatsu (Japan) every year as a child. When he was 7, he would skin dive with his older brother in seas around Nanatsugama ()(Karatsu,Japan), where he saw a dolphin for the first time. Mayol described the fateful encounter in his book, \"Homo Delphinus: The Dolphin Within Man\".\n\nAt 49, he was the first free diver to descend to 100 meters (330 ft) on 23 November 1976; and when he was 56, he managed to descend to 105 meters. During the scientific research phase of his career, Mayol tried to answer the question of whether man had a hidden aquatic potential that could be evoked by rigorous physiological and psychological training.\n\nMayol's lifelong passion for diving was based on his love for the ocean, his personal philosophy and his desire to explore his own limits. During his lifetime, he helped introduce the then elitist sport of free-diving into the mainstream. His diving philosophy was to reach a state of mind based on relaxation and yoga breathing, with which he could accomplish apnea. He also contributed to technological advances in the field of free-diving, particularly improving assemblies used by no-limits divers. He was also instrumental in the development of scuba diving's octopus regulator, which was invented by Dave Woodward at UNEXSO around 1965-6. Woodward believed that having the safety divers carry two second stages would be a safer and more practical approach than buddy breathing in the event of an emergency.\n\nMayol was already an experienced free diver when he met the Sicilian Enzo Maiorca who was the first to dive below 50m. Mayol reached 60m depth. A friendship, as well as rivalry between the two men ensued. Their most famous records were set in the no-limits category, in which the divers are permitted to use weighted sleds to descend and air balloons for a speedy ascent. Between 1966 and 1983, Mayol was eight times no-limits world champion. In 1981 he set a world record of 61m in the constant weight discipline, using fins. In 1976 Mayol broke the 100m barrier with a no-limits 101m dive off Elba, Italy. Tests showed that during this dive his heart beat decreased from 60 to 27 beats/min, an aspect of the mammalian diving reflex, a reflex more evident in whales, seals, and dolphins. Mayol’s last deep dive followed in 1983 when he reached the depth of 105m, at the age of 56.\n\nMayol’s fascination with dolphins started in 1955 when he was working as a commercial diver at an aquarium in Miami, Florida. There he met a female dolphin called Clown and formed a close bond with her. Imitating Clown, he learned how to hold his breath longer and how to behave and integrate himself underwater. It is the dolphins that became the foundation of Mayol’s life philosophy of \"Homo Delphinus\".\n\nThroughout his book \"L'Homo Delphinus\" (2000 published in English as \"Homo Delphinus: The Dolphin within Man\" by Idelson Gnocchi Publishers Ltd.) Mayol expounds his theories about man’s relationship with the sea where he explores the aquatic ape hypothesis of human origins. And how man could re-awaken his dormant mental and spiritual faculties and the physiological mechanisms from the depths of his psyche and genetic make-up to develop the potential of his aquatic origins, to become a \"Homo delphinus\".\n\nJacques Mayol predicted that, within a couple of generations, some people would be able to dive to 200 m and hold their breath for up to ten minutes. Today the no-limits record stands at 253 m (Herbert Nitsch, June 2012). Serbian Branko Petrović holds the record for Static Apnea at 11 minutes and 54 seconds (October 2014). Croatian Goran Čolak holds the record for static apnea on pure oxygen at 23 minutes 1 second (June 2014).\n\nThe film \"The Big Blue\", directed by Luc Besson in 1988, was inspired by his life story and the life story of the Italian diver Enzo Maiorca and their friendship. Mayol was one of the screenwriters.\n\nMayol was the subject of the 2017 documentary film \"Dolphin Man (L'Homme dauphin, sur les traces de Jacques Mayol)\", directed by Lefteris Charitos.\n\nOn 22 December 2001 at the age of 74, suffering depression, Mayol committed suicide by hanging himself at his villa in Elba, Italy. His ashes were spread over the Tuscany coast.\n\nBULLET::::- Current Freediving World Records\nBULLET::::- Profile from Historical Diving Association website\nBULLET::::- Article from divernet.com\nBULLET::::- Obituary from \"The Independent\"\nBULLET::::- Article by Le Monde\n"}
{"id": "15747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15747", "title": "Josef Terboven", "text": "Josef Terboven\n\nJosef Antonius Heinrich Terboven (23 May 1898 – 8 May 1945) was a Nazi leader, best known as the Reichskommissar for Norway during the German occupation of Norway and the Quisling regime.\n\nTerboven (from the Dutch \"ter Boven\") was born in Essen, Germany, as the son of minor landed gentry of Dutch descent. He served in the German field artillery and nascent air force in World War I and was awarded the Iron Cross, rising to the rank of lieutenant. He studied law and political science at the universities of Munich and Freiburg, where he first got involved in politics.\n\nDropping out of the university in 1923, Terboven joined the NSDAP with member number 25247 and participated in the abortive Beer Hall Putsch in Munich. When the NSDAP was subsequently outlawed, he found work at a bank for a few years before he was laid off in 1925.\n\nHe then went to work full-time for the Nazi party. Terboven helped establish the party in Essen and became Gauleiter there in 1928. From 1925 on he was part of the Sturmabteilung, in which he reached the rank of \"Obergruppenführer\" by 1936. On 29 June 1934, Terboven married Ilse Stahl, Joseph Goebbels' former secretary and mistress. Adolf Hitler was the guest of honour at the wedding. Terboven was made \"Oberpräsident der Rheinprovinz\" in 1935 and developed a reputation as a petty and ruthless tyrant.\n\nTerboven was made Reichskommissar for Norway on 24 April 1940, even before the military invasion was completed on 7 June 1940. He moved into the Norwegian crown prince's residence at Skaugum in September 1940 and made his headquarters in Stortinget (the Norwegian parliament buildings). Ilse and their daughter Inge did not accompany him to Norway, remaining in Germany.\n\nTerboven only had supervisory authority over the civilian administration in Norway. The German civilian administration did not rule Norway directly, however, and remained relatively small. Daily affairs were managed by the existing Norwegian state administration, headed by an acting cabinet and then by the Quisling cabinet. Terboven did not have authority over the 400,000 regular German Army forces stationed in Norway which were under the command of General Nikolaus von Falkenhorst, but he did command a personal force of around 6,000 men, of whom 800 were part of the secret police.\n\nIn contrast to the military forces commanded by Falkenhorst, which aimed to reach an understanding with the Norwegian people and were under orders by Falkenhorst to treat Norwegians with courtesy, Terboven behaved in the same petty and ruthless way he did as governor of the Rheinprovinz, and was widely disliked, not only by the Norwegians, but also by many Germans. From 1941, he increasingly focused on crushing the irregular military resistance against the Germans, declaring martial law in Trondheim in 1942, and ordering the destruction of Telavåg. Goebbels expressed annoyance in his diary about what he called Terboven's \"bullying tactics\" against the Norwegians, as they alienated the population against the Germans. Terboven nevertheless remained in ultimate charge of Norway until the end of the war in 1945, even after the proclamation of a Norwegian puppet regime under Vidkun Quisling, the Quisling government. On 18 December 1944, Falkenhorst was dismissed from his command for opposing certain radical policies of Terboven.\n\nAs the tide of the war turned against Germany, Terboven's personal aspiration was to organise a \"Fortress Norway\" (Festung Norwegen) for the Nazi regime's last stand. Hitler's successor, Admiral Dönitz, dismissed Terboven from his post as Reichskommissar on 7 May, transferring his powers to General Böhme.\n\nTerboven also planned concentration camps in Norway, establishing Falstad concentration camp near Levanger and Bredtvet concentration camp in Oslo in late 1941.\n\nOn 18 July 1942 the Beisfjord massacre occurred. Terboven ordered the massacre a few days earlier.\n\nIn July 1942 at least one German guard employed by the Korgen prison camp was killed. The commandant ordered retribution: execution by gunfire for \"39 prisoners at Korgen and 20 at Osen\"; in the days that followed, Terboven also ordered retribution: around 400 prisoners shot and killed in various camps.\n\nWith the announcement of Germany's surrender, Terboven committed suicide on 8 May 1945 by detonating 50 kg of dynamite in a bunker on the Skaugum compound. He died alongside the body of \"Obergruppenführer\" Wilhelm Rediess, SS and Police Leader and commander of all SS troops in Norway, who had shot himself earlier. His family survived him in West Germany, and Ilse died in 1972.\n\nIn the 1965 film \"The Heroes of Telemark\", Josef Terboven was played by English actor Eric Porter.\n\nHe is portrayed in the 1996 film \"Hamsun\" by Edgar Selge.\n\nBULLET::::- WorldStatesmen- here Norway\nBULLET::::- Biography from Deutsches Historisches Museum\nBULLET::::- Biography from Historisches Centrum Hagen\n"}
{"id": "15766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15766", "title": "James Brown", "text": "James Brown\n\nJames Joseph Brown (May 3, 1933 – December 25, 2006) was an American singer, songwriter, dancer, musician, record producer and bandleader. A progenitor of funk music and a major figure of 20th century music and dance, he is often referred to as the \"Godfather of Soul\" and \"Soul Brother No. 1\". In a career that lasted over 50 years, he influenced the development of several music genres.\n\nBrown began his career as a gospel singer in Toccoa, Georgia. He joined a rhythm and blues vocal group, the Gospel Starlighters (which later evolved into the Famous Flames) founded by Bobby Byrd, in which he was the lead singer. First coming to national public attention in the late 1950s as a member of the singing group The Famous Flames with the hit ballads \"Please, Please, Please\" and \"Try Me\", Brown built a reputation as a tireless live performer with the Famous Flames and his backing band, sometimes known as the James Brown Band or the James Brown Orchestra. His success peaked in the 1960s with the live album \"Live at the Apollo\" and hit singles such as \"Papa's Got a Brand New Bag\", \"I Got You (I Feel Good)\" and \"It's a Man's Man's Man's World\".\n\nDuring the late 1960s, Brown moved from a continuum of blues and gospel-based forms and styles to a profoundly \"Africanized\" approach to music-making that influenced the development of funk music. By the early 1970s, Brown had fully established the funk sound after the formation of the J.B.s with records such as \"Get Up (I Feel Like Being a) Sex Machine\" and \"The Payback\". He also became noted for songs of social commentary, including the 1968 hit \"Say It Loud – I'm Black and I'm Proud\". Brown continued to perform and record until his death from pneumonia in 2006. \n\nBrown recorded 17 singles that reached No. 1 on the \"Billboard\" R&B charts. He also holds the record for the most singles listed on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 chart which did not reach No. 1. Brown was inducted into 1st class of the Rhythm & Blues Music Hall of Fame in 2013 as an artist and then in 2017 as a songwriter. He also received honors from many other institutions, including inductions into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Songwriters Hall of Fame. In Joel Whitburn's analysis of the \"Billboard\" R&B charts from 1942 to 2010, Brown is ranked No. 1 in The Top 500 Artists. He is ranked No. 7 on \"Rolling Stone\" list of its 100 Greatest Artists of All Time. \"Rolling Stone\" has also cited Brown as the most sampled artist of all time.\nBrown was born on May 3, 1933, in Barnwell, South Carolina, to 16-year-old Susie (née Behling; 1917–2003), and 22-year-old Joseph Gardner Brown (1911–1993), in a small wooden shack. Brown's name was supposed to have been Joseph James Brown Jr., but his first and middle names were mistakenly reversed on his birth certificate. He later legally changed his name to remove \"Jr.\" In his autobiography, Brown stated that he also had Chinese and Native American ancestry, and that his father was of mixed African-American and Native American descent, whilst his mother was of mixed African-American and Asian descent. The Brown family lived in extreme poverty in Elko, South Carolina, which was an impoverished town at the time. They later moved to Augusta, Georgia, when James was four or five. His family first settled at one of his aunts' brothels. They later moved into a house shared with another aunt. Brown's mother eventually left the family after a contentious and abusive marriage and moved to New York. Brown spent long stretches of time on his own, hanging out in the streets and hustling to get by. He managed to stay in school until the sixth grade.\n\nHe began singing in talent shows as a young child, first appearing at Augusta's Lenox Theater in 1944, winning the show after singing the ballad \"So Long\". While in Augusta, Brown performed buck dances for change to entertain troops from Camp Gordon at the start of World War II as their convoys traveled over a canal bridge near his aunt's home. He learned to play the piano, guitar, and harmonica during this period. He became inspired to become an entertainer after hearing \"Caldonia\" by Louis Jordan and his Tympany Five. In his teen years, Brown briefly had a career as a boxer. At the age of 16, he was convicted of robbery and sent to a juvenile detention center in Toccoa. There, he formed a gospel quartet with four fellow cellmates, including Johnny Terry. Brown met singer Bobby Byrd when the two played against each other in a baseball game outside the detention center. Byrd also discovered that Brown could sing, after hearing of \"a guy called Music Box\", which was Brown's musical nickname at the prison. Byrd has since claimed he and his family helped to secure an early release, which led to Brown promising the court he would \"sing for the Lord\". Brown was paroled on June 14, 1952. Shortly thereafter, he joined the gospel group, the Ever-Ready Gospel Singers, featuring Byrd's sister Sarah.\n\nBrown eventually joined Byrd's group in 1954. The group had evolved from the Gospel Starlighters, an a cappella gospel group, to an R&B group with the name the Avons. He reputedly joined the band after one of its members, Troy Collins, died in a car crash. Along with Brown and Byrd, the group consisted of Sylvester Keels, Doyle Oglesby, Fred Pulliam, Nash Knox and Nafloyd Scott. Influenced by R&B groups such as Hank Ballard and the Midnighters, the Orioles and Billy Ward and His Dominoes, the group changed its name, first to the Toccoa Band and then to the Flames. Nafloyd's brother Baroy later joined the group on bass guitar, and Brown, Byrd and Keels switched lead positions and instruments, often playing drums and piano. Johnny Terry later joined, by which time Pulliam and Oglesby had long left.\n\nBerry Trimier became the group's first manager, booking them at parties near college campuses in Georgia and South Carolina. The group had already gained a reputation as a good live act when they renamed themselves the Famous Flames. In 1955, the group had contacted Little Richard while performing in Macon. Richard convinced the group to get in contact with his manager at the time, Clint Brantley, at his nightclub. Brantley agreed to manage them after seeing the group audition. He then sent them to a local radio station to record a demo session, where they performed their own composition \"Please, Please, Please\", which was inspired when Little Richard wrote the words of the title on a napkin and Brown was determined to make a song out of it. The Famous Flames eventually signed with King Records' Federal subsidiary in Cincinnati, Ohio, and issued a re-recorded version of \"Please, Please, Please\" in March 1956. The song became the group's first R&B hit, selling over a million copies. None of their follow-ups gained similar success. By 1957, Brown had replaced Clint Brantley as manager and hired Ben Bart, chief of Universal Attractions Agency. That year the original Flames broke up, after Bart changed the name of the group to \"James Brown and The Famous Flames\".\n\nIn October 1958, Brown released the ballad \"Try Me\", which hit number one on the R&B chart in the beginning of 1959, becoming the first of seventeen chart-topping R&B hits. Shortly afterwards, he recruited his first band, led by J. C. Davis, and reunited with Bobby Byrd who joined a revived Famous Flames lineup that included Eugene \"Baby\" Lloyd Stallworth and Bobby Bennett, with Johnny Terry sometimes coming in as the \"fifth Flame\". Brown, the Flames, and his entire band debuted at the Apollo Theater on April 24, 1959, opening for Brown's idol, Little Willie John. Federal Records issued two albums credited to Brown and the Famous Flames (both contained previously released singles). By 1960, Brown began multi-tasking in the recording studio involving himself, his singing group, the Famous Flames, and his band, a separate entity from The Flames, sometimes named the James Brown Orchestra or the James Brown Band. That year the band released the top ten R&B hit \"(Do the) Mashed Potatoes\" on Dade Records, owned by Henry Stone, billed under the pseudonym \"Nat Kendrick & the Swans\" due to label issues. As a result of its success, King president Syd Nathan shifted Brown's contract from Federal to the parent label, King, which according to Brown in his autobiography meant \"you got more support from the company\". While with King, Brown, under the Famous Flames lineup, released the hit-filled album \"Think!\" and the following year released two albums with the James Brown Band earning second billing. With the Famous Flames, Brown sang lead on several more hits, including \"I'll Go Crazy\" and \"Think\", songs that hinted at his emerging style.\n\nIn 1962, Brown and his band scored a hit with their cover of the instrumental \"Night Train\", becoming a top five R&B single. That same year, the ballads \"Lost Someone\" and \"Baby You're Right\", the latter a Joe Tex composition, added to his repertoire and increased his reputation with R&B audiences. On October 24, 1962, Brown financed a live recording of a performance at the Apollo and convinced Syd Nathan to release the album, despite Nathan's belief that no one would buy a live album due to the fact that Brown's singles had already been bought and that live albums were usually bad sellers. \"Live at the Apollo\" was released the following June and became an immediate hit, eventually reaching number two on the Top LPs chart and selling over a million copies, staying on the charts for 14 months. In 1963, Brown scored his first top 20 pop hit with his rendition of the standard \"Prisoner of Love\". He also launched his first label, Try Me Records, which included recordings by the likes of Tammy Montgomery (later to be famous as Tammi Terrell), Johnny & Bill (Famous Flames associates Johnny Terry and Bill Hollings) and the Poets, which was another name used for Brown's backing band. During this time Brown began an ill-fated two-year relationship with 17-year-old Tammi Terrell when she sang in his revue. Terrell ended their personal and professional relationship because of his abusive behavior.\n\nIn 1964, seeking bigger commercial success, Brown and Bobby Byrd formed the production company, Fair Deal, linking the operation to the Mercury imprint, Smash Records. King Records, however, fought against this and was granted an injunction preventing Brown from releasing any recordings for the label. Prior to the injunction, Brown had released three vocal singles, including the blues-oriented hit \"Out of Sight\", which further indicated the direction his music was going to take. Touring throughout the year, Brown and the Famous Flames grabbed more national attention after giving an explosive show-stopping performance on the live concert film \"The T.A.M.I. Show\". The Flames' dynamic gospel-tinged vocals, polished choreography and timing as well as Brown's energetic dance moves and high-octane singing upstaged the proposed closing act, the Rolling Stones. Having signed a new deal with King, Brown released his song \"Papa's Got a Brand New Bag\", which became his first top ten pop hit and won him his first Grammy Award. Later in 1965, he issued \"I Got You\", which became his second single in a row to reach number-one on the R&B chart and top ten on the pop chart. Brown followed that up with the ballad \"It's a Man's Man's Man's World\", a third Top 10 Pop hit (#1 R&B) which confirmed his stance as a top-ranking performer, especially with R&B audiences from that point on.\n\nBy 1967, Brown's emerging sound had begun to be defined as funk music. That year he released what some critics cited as the first true funk song, \"Cold Sweat\", which hit number-one on the R&B chart (Top 10 Pop) and became one of his first recordings to contain a drum break and also the first that featured a harmony that was reduced to a single chord. The instrumental arrangements on tracks such as \"Give It Up Or Turnit A Loose\" and \"Licking Stick-Licking Stick\" (both recorded in 1968) and \"Funky Drummer\" (recorded in 1969) featured a more developed version of Brown's mid-1960s style, with the horn section, guitars, bass and drums meshed together in intricate rhythmic patterns based on multiple interlocking riffs.\n\nChanges in Brown's style that started with \"Cold Sweat\" also established the musical foundation for Brown's later hits, such as \"I Got the Feelin'\" (1968) and \"Mother Popcorn\" (1969). By this time Brown's vocals frequently took the form of a kind of rhythmic declamation, not quite sung but not quite spoken, that only intermittently featured traces of pitch or melody. This would become a major influence on the techniques of rapping, which would come to maturity along with hip hop music in the coming decades. Brown's style of funk in the late 1960s was based on interlocking syncopated parts: strutting bass lines, syncopated drum patterns, and iconic percussive guitar riffs. The main guitar ostinatos for \"Ain't It Funky\" and \"Give It Up or Turn It Loose\" (both 1969), are examples of Brown's refinement of New Orleans funk; irresistibly danceable riffs, stripped down to their rhythmic essence. On both recordings the tonal structure is bare bones. The pattern of attack-points is the emphasis, not the pattern of pitches, as if the guitar were an African drum, or idiophone. Alexander Stewart states that this popular feel was passed along from \"New Orleans—through James Brown's music, to the popular music of the 1970s\". Those same tracks were later resurrected by countless hip-hop musicians from the 1970s onward. As a result, James Brown remains to this day the world's most sampled recording artist.\n\n\"Bring it Up\" has an Afro-Cuban guajeo-like structure. All three of these guitar riffs are based on an onbeat/offbeat structure. Stewart states: \"This model, it should be noted, is different from a time line (such as clave and tresillo) in that it is not an exact pattern, but more of a loose organizing principle.\"\n\nIt was around this time as the musician's popularity increased that he acquired the nickname \"Soul Brother No. 1\", after failing to win the title \"King of Soul\" from Solomon Burke during a Chicago gig two years prior. Brown's recordings during this period influenced musicians across the industry, most notably groups such as Sly and the Family Stone, Funkadelic, Charles Wright & the Watts 103rd Street Rhythm Band, Booker T. & the M.G.s as well as vocalists such as Edwin Starr, David Ruffin and Dennis Edwards from The Temptations, and Michael Jackson, who, throughout his career, cited Brown as his ultimate idol.\n\nBrown's band during this period employed musicians and arrangers who had come up through the jazz tradition. He was noted for his ability as a bandleader and songwriter to blend the simplicity and drive of R&B with the rhythmic complexity and precision of jazz. Trumpeter Lewis Hamlin and saxophonist/keyboardist Alfred \"Pee Wee\" Ellis (the successor to previous bandleader Nat Jones) led the band. Guitarist Jimmy Nolen provided percussive, deceptively simple riffs for each song, and Maceo Parker's prominent saxophone solos provided a focal point for many performances. Other members of Brown's band included stalwart Famous Flames singer and sideman Bobby Byrd, trombonist Fred Wesley, drummers John \"Jabo\" Starks, Clyde Stubblefield and Melvin Parker, saxophonist St. Clair Pinckney, guitarist Alphonso \"Country\" Kellum and bassist Bernard Odum.\n\nIn addition to a torrent of singles and studio albums, Brown's output during this period included two more successful live albums, \"Live at the Garden\" (1967) and \"Live at the Apollo, Volume II\" (1968), and a 1968 television special, \"\". His music empire expanded along with his influence on the music scene. As Brown's music empire grew, his desire for financial and artistic independence grew as well. Brown bought radio stations during the late 1960s, including WRDW in his native Augusta, where he shined shoes as a boy. In November 1967, James Brown purchased radio station WGYW in Knoxville, Tennessee, for a reported $75,000, according to the January 20, 1968 \"Record World\" magazine. The call letters were changed to WJBE reflecting his initials. WJBE began on January 15, 1968, and broadcast a Rhythm & Blues format. The station slogan was \"WJBE 1430 Raw Soul\". Brown also bought WEBB in Baltimore in 1970.\n\nBrown branched out to make several recordings with musicians outside his own band. In an attempt to appeal to the older, more affluent, and predominantly white adult contemporary audience, Brown recorded \"Gettin' Down To It\" (1969) and \"Soul on Top\" (1970)—two albums consisting mostly of romantic ballads, jazz standards, and homologous reinterpretations of his earlier hits—with the Dee Felice Trio and the Louie Bellson Orchestra. In 1968, he recorded a number of funk-oriented tracks with The Dapps, a white Cincinnati band, including the hit \"I Can't Stand Myself\". He also released three albums of Christmas music with his own band.\n\nIn March 1970, most of Brown's mid-to-late 1960s road band walked out on him due to money disputes, a development augured by the prior disbandment of The Famous Flames singing group for the same reason in 1968. Brown and erstwhile Famous Flames singer Bobby Byrd (who chose to remain in the band during this tumultuous period) subsequently recruited several members of the Cincinnati-based The Pacemakers, which included Bootsy Collins and his brother Phelps \"Catfish\" Collins; augmented by the remaining members of the 1960s road band (including Fred Wesley, who rejoined Brown's outfit in December 1970) and other newer musicians, they would form the nucleus of The J.B.'s, Brown's new backing ensemble. Shortly following their first performance together, the band entered the studio to record the Brown-Byrd composition, \"Get Up (I Feel Like Being a) Sex Machine\"; the song and other contemporaneous singles would further cement Brown's influence in the nascent genre of funk music. This iteration of the J.B.'s dissolved after a March 1971 European tour (documented on the 1991 archival release \"Love Power Peace\") due to additional money disputes and Bootsy Collins' use of LSD; the Collins brothers would soon become integral members of Parliament-Funkadelic, while a new lineup of the J.B.'s coalesced around Wesley, St. Clair Pinckney and drummer John Starks.\n\nIn 1971, Brown began recording for Polydor Records which also took over distribution of Brown's King Records catalog. Many of his sidemen and supporting players, including Fred Wesley & the J.B.'s, Bobby Byrd, Lyn Collins, Vicki Anderson and former rival Hank Ballard, released records on the People label, an imprint founded by Brown that was purchased by Polydor as part of Brown's new contract. The recordings on the People label, almost all of which were produced by Brown himself, exemplified his \"house style\". Several tracks thought by critics to be excessively sexual, were released at this time. He would later soften his vocal approach. Songs such as \"I Know You Got Soul\" by Bobby Byrd, \"Think\" by Lyn Collins and \"Doing It to Death\" by Fred Wesley & the J.B.'s are considered as much a part of Brown's recorded legacy as the recordings released under his own name. That year, he also began touring African countries and was received well by audiences there. During the 1972 presidential election, James Brown openly proclaimed his support of Richard Nixon for reelection to the presidency over Democratic candidate George McGovern. The decision led to a boycott of his performances and, according to Brown, cost him a big portion of his black audience. As a result, Brown's record sales and concerts in the United States reached a lull in 1973 as he failed to land a number-one R&B single that year. Brown relied more on touring outside the United States where he continued to perform for sold-out crowds in cities such as London, Paris and Lausanne. That year he also faced problems with the IRS for failure to pay back taxes, charging he hadn't paid upwards of $4.5 million; five years earlier, the IRS had claimed he owed nearly $2 million.\n\nIn 1973, Brown provided the score for the blaxploitation film \"Black Caesar\". He also recorded another soundtrack for the film, \"Slaughter's Big Rip-Off\". Following the release of these soundtracks, Brown acquired a self-styled nickname, \"The Godfather of Soul\", which remains his most popular nickname. In 1974 he returned to the No. 1 spot on the R&B charts with \"The Payback\", with the parent album reaching the same spot on the album charts; he would reach No. 1 two more times in 1974, with \"My Thang\" and \"Papa Don't Take No Mess\". Later that year, he returned to Africa and performed in Kinshasa as part of the buildup to The Rumble in the Jungle fight between Muhammad Ali and George Foreman. Admirers of Brown's music, including Miles Davis and other jazz musicians, began to cite him as a major influence on their own styles. However, Brown, like others who were influenced by his music, also \"borrowed\" from other musicians. His 1976 single, \"Hot (I Need To Be Loved, Loved, Loved, Loved)\" (R&B #31), interpolated the main riff from \"Fame\" by David Bowie while omitting any attribution to the latter song's composers (including Bowie, John Lennon and guitarist Carlos Alomar), not the other way around as was often believed. The riff was composed by Alomar, who had briefly been a member of Brown's band in the late 1960s.\n\n\"Papa Don't Take No Mess\" would prove to be his final single to reach the No. 1 spot on the R&B charts and his final Top 40 pop single of the 1970s, though he continued to occasionally have Top 10 R&B recordings. Among his top ten R&B hits during this latter period included \"Funky President\" and \"Get Up Offa That Thing\", the latter song released in 1976 and aimed at musical rivals such as Barry White, The Ohio Players and K.C. and the Sunshine Band. Brown credited his then-wife and two of their children as writers of the song to avoid concurrent tax problems with the IRS. Starting in October 1975, Brown produced, directed, and hosted \"Future Shock\", an Atlanta-based television variety show that ran for three years.\n\nAlthough his records were mainstays of the vanguard New York underground disco scene exemplified by DJs such as David Mancuso and Francis Grasso from 1969 onwards, Brown did not consciously yield to the trend until 1975's \"Sex Machine Today\". By 1977, he was no longer a dominant force in R&B. After \"Get Up Offa That Thing\", thirteen of Brown's late 1970s recordings for Polydor failed to reach the Top 10 of the R&B chart, with only \"Bodyheat\" in 1976 and the disco-oriented \"It's Too Funky in Here\" in 1979 reaching the R&B Top 15 and the ballad \"Kiss in '77\" reaching the Top 20. After 1976's \"Bodyheat\", he also failed to appear on the Billboard Hot 100. As a result, Brown's concert attendance began dropping and his reported disputes with the IRS caused his business empire to collapse. In addition, Brown's former bandmates, including Fred Wesley, Maceo Parker and the Collins brothers, had found bigger success as members of George Clinton's Parliament-Funkadelic collective. The emergence of disco also stopped Brown's success on the R&B charts because its slicker, more commercial style had superseded his more raw funk productions.\n\nBy the release of 1979's \"The Original Disco Man\", Brown was not providing much production or writing, leaving most of it to producer Brad Shapiro, resulting in the song \"It's Too Funky in Here\" becoming Brown's most successful single in this period. After two more albums failed to chart, Brown left Polydor in 1981. It was around this time that Brown changed the name of his band from the J.B.'s to the Soul Generals (or Soul G's). The band retained that name until his death. Despite the decline in his record sales Brown enjoyed something of a resurgence in this period, starting with appearances in the feature films \"The Blues Brothers\", \"Doctor Detroit\" and \"Rocky IV\", as well as guest-starring in the \"Miami Vice\" episode \"Missing Hours\" (1987). In 1984, he teamed with rap musician Afrika Bambaattaa on the song \"Unity\". A year later he signed with Scotti Brothers Records and issued the moderately successful album \"Gravity\" in 1986. It included Brown's final Top 10 pop hit, \"Living in America\", marking his first Top 40 entry since 1974 and his first Top 10 pop entry since 1968. Produced and written by Dan Hartman, it was also featured prominently on the \"Rocky IV\" film and soundtrack. Brown performed the song in the film at Apollo Creed's final fight, shot in the Ziegfeld Room at the MGM Grand in Las Vegas, and was credited in the film as \"The Godfather of Soul\". 1986 also saw the publication of his autobiography, \"James Brown: The Godfather of Soul\", co-written with Bruce Tucker. In 1987, Brown won the Grammy for Best Male R&B Vocal Performance for \"Living in America\".\n\nIn 1988, Brown worked with the production team Full Force on the new jack swing-influenced album \"I'm Real\". It spawned his final two Top 10 R&B hits, \"I'm Real\" and \"Static\", which peaked at No. 2 and No. 5, respectively, on the R&B charts. Meanwhile, the drum break from the second version of the original 1969 hit \"Give It Up Or Turnit A Loose\" (the recording included on the compilation album \"In the Jungle Groove\") became so popular at hip hop dance parties (especially for breakdance) during the early 1980s that hip hop pioneer Kurtis Blow called the song \"the national anthem of hip hop\".\n\nAfter his stint in prison during the late 1980s, Brown met Larry Fridie and Thomas Hart who produced the first James Brown biopic, entitled \"James Brown: The Man, the Message, the Music\", released in 1992. He returned to music with the album \"Love Over-Due\" in 1991. It included the single \"(So Tired of Standing Still We Got to) Move On\", which peaked at No. 48 on the R&B chart. His former record label Polydor also released the four-CD box set \"Star Time\", spanning Brown's career to date. Brown's release from prison also prompted his former record labels to reissue his albums on CD, featuring additional tracks and commentary by music critics and historians. That same year, Brown appeared on rapper MC Hammer's video for \"Too Legit to Quit\". Hammer had been noted, alongside Big Daddy Kane, for bringing Brown's unique stage shows and their own energetic dance moves to the hip-hop generation; both listed Brown as their idol. Both musicians also sampled his work, with Hammer having sampled the rhythms from \"Super Bad\" for his song \"Here Comes the Hammer\", from his best-selling album \"Please Hammer, Don't Hurt 'Em\". Big Daddy Kane sampled many times. Before the year was over, Brown–who had immediately returned to work with his band following his release–organized a pay-per-view concert following a show at Los Angeles' Wiltern Theatre, that was well received.\nOn June 10, 1991, James Brown and a star-filled line up performed before a crowd at the Wiltern Theatre for a live pay-per-view at-home audience. \"James Brown: Living in America – Live!\" was the brainchild of Indiana producer Danny Hubbard. It featured\nM.C. Hammer as well as Bell Biv Devoe, Heavy D & the Boys, En Vogue, C+C Music Factory, Quincy Jones, Sherman Hemsley and Keenen Ivory Wayans. Ice-T, Tone Loc and Kool Moe Dee performed paying homage to Brown. This was Brown's first public performance since his parole from the South Carolina prison system in February. He had served two-and-a-half years of two concurrent six-year sentences for aggravated assault and other felonies.\n\nBrown continued making recordings. In 1993 his album \"Universal James\" was released. It included his final \"Billboard\" charting single, \"Can't Get Any Harder\", which peaked at No. 76 on the US R&B chart and reached No. 59 on the UK chart. Its brief charting in the UK was probably due to the success of a remixed version of \"I Feel Good\" featuring Dakeyne. Brown also released the singles \"How Long\" and \"Georgia-Lina\", which failed to chart. In 1995, Brown returned to the Apollo and recorded \"Live at the Apollo 1995\". It included a studio track titled \"Respect Me\", which was released as a single; again it failed to chart. Brown's final studio albums, \"I'm Back\" and \"The Next Step\", were released in 1998 and 2002 respectively. \"I'm Back\" featured the song \"Funk on Ah Roll\", which peaked at No. 40 in the UK but did not chart in his native US. \"The Next Step\" included Brown's final single, \"Killing Is Out, School Is In\". Both albums were produced by Derrick Monk. Brown's concert success, however, remained unabated and he kept up with a grueling schedule throughout the remainder of his life, living up to his previous nickname, \"The Hardest Working Man in Show Business\", in spite of his advanced age. In 2003, Brown participated in the PBS \"American Masters\" television documentary \"James Brown: Soul Survivor\", which was directed by Jeremy Marre.\n\nBrown celebrated his status as an icon by appearing in a variety of entertainment and sports events, including an appearance on the WCW pay-per-view event, SuperBrawl X, where he danced alongside wrestler Ernest \"The Cat\" Miller, who based his character on Brown, during his in-ring skit with The Maestro. Brown then appeared in Tony Scott's short film \"\" in 2001. He was featured alongside Clive Owen, Gary Oldman, Danny Trejo and Marilyn Manson. Brown also made a cameo appearance in the 2002 Jackie Chan film \"The Tuxedo\", in which Chan was required to finish Brown's act after having accidentally knocked out the singer. In 2002, Brown appeared in \"Undercover Brother\", playing himself.\n\nIn 2004, Brown performed in Hyde Park, London as a support act for Red Hot Chili Peppers concerts. The beginning of 2005 saw the publication of Brown's second book, \"I Feel Good: A Memoir of a Life of Soul\", written with Marc Eliot. In February and March, he participated in recording sessions for an intended studio album with Fred Wesley, Pee Wee Ellis, and other longtime collaborators. Though he lost interest in the album, which remains unreleased, a track from the sessions, \"Gut Bucket\", appeared on a compilation CD included with the August 2006 issue of \"MOJO\". He appeared at Edinburgh 50,000 – The Final Push, the final Live 8 concert on July 6, 2005, where he performed a duet with British pop star Will Young on \"Papa's Got A Brand New Bag\". The previous week he had performed a duet with another British pop star, Joss Stone, on the United Kingdom chat show \"Friday Night with Jonathan Ross\". In 2006, Brown continued his \"Seven Decades of Funk World Tour\", his last concert tour where he performed all over the world. His final U.S. performances were in San Francisco on August 20, 2006, as headliner at the Festival of the Golden Gate (Foggfest) on the Great Meadow at Fort Mason. The following day, August 21, he performed at Humboldt State University in Arcata, CA, at a small theatre (800 seats) on campus. His last shows were greeted with positive reviews, and one of his final concert appearances at the Irish Oxegen festival in Punchestown in 2006 was performed for a record crowd of 80,000 people. He played a full concert as part of the BBC's Electric Proms on October 27, 2006, at The Roundhouse, supported by The Zutons, with special appearances from Max Beasley and The Sugababes.\n\nBrown's last televised appearance was at his induction into the UK Music Hall of Fame in November 2006, before his death the following month. Before his death, Brown had been scheduled to perform a duet with singer Annie Lennox on the song \"Vengeance\" for her new album \"Venus\", which was released in 2007.\n\nOn December 23, 2006, Brown became very ill and arrived at his dentist's office in Atlanta, Georgia, several hours late. His appointment was for dental implant work. During that visit, Brown's dentist observed that he looked \"very bad ... weak and dazed\". Instead of performing the work, the dentist advised Brown to see a doctor right away about his medical condition.\n\nBrown went to the Emory Crawford Long Memorial Hospital the next day for medical evaluation and was admitted for observation and treatment. According to Charles Bobbit, his longtime personal manager and friend, Brown had been struggling with a noisy cough since returning from a November trip to Europe. Yet, Bobbit said, the singer had a history of never complaining about being sick and often performed while ill. Although Brown had to cancel upcoming concerts in Waterbury, Connecticut, and Englewood, New Jersey, he was confident that the doctor would discharge him from the hospital in time for his scheduled New Year's Eve shows at the Count Basie Theatre in New Jersey and the B. B. King Blues Club in New York, in addition to performing a song live on CNN for the Anderson Cooper New Year's Eve special. Brown remained hospitalized, however, and his condition worsened throughout the day.\n\nOn Christmas Day, 2006, Brown died at approximately 1:45 am EST (06:45 UTC), at age 73, from congestive heart failure, resulting from complications of pneumonia. Bobbit was at his bedside and later reported that Brown stuttered, \"I'm going away tonight,\" then took three long, quiet breaths and fell asleep before dying.\n\nIn 2019, an investigation by CNN and other journalists led to suggestions that Brown had been murdered.\n\nAfter Brown's death, his relatives, a host of celebrities, and thousands of fans gathered, on December 28, 2006, for a public memorial service at the Apollo Theater in New York City and, on December 30, 2006, at the James Brown Arena in Augusta, Georgia. A separate, private ceremony was held in North Augusta, South Carolina, on December 29, 2006, with Brown's family in attendance. Celebrities at these various memorial events included Michael Jackson, Jimmy Cliff, Joe Frazier, Buddy Guy, Ice Cube, Ludacris, Dr. Dre, Little Richard, Dick Gregory, MC Hammer, Prince, Jesse Jackson, Ice-T, Jerry Lee Lewis, Bootsy Collins, LL Cool J, Lil Wayne, Lenny Kravitz, 50 Cent, Stevie Wonder, Charlottesville's Todd Williams and Don King. Rev. Al Sharpton officiated at all of Brown's public and private memorial services.\n\nBrown's memorial ceremonies were all elaborate, complete with costume changes for the deceased and videos featuring him in concert. His body, placed in a Promethean casket—bronze polished to a golden shine—was driven through the streets of New York to the Apollo Theater in a white, glass-encased horse-drawn carriage. In Augusta, Georgia, his memorial procession stopped to pay respects at his statue, en route to the James Brown Arena. During the public memorial there, a video showed Brown's last performance in Augusta, Georgia, with the Ray Charles version of \"Georgia on My Mind\" playing soulfully in the background. His last backup band, The Soul Generals, also played some of his hits during that tribute at the arena. The group was joined by Bootsy Collins on bass, with MC Hammer performing a dance in James Brown style. Former Temptations lead singer Ali-Ollie Woodson performed \"Walk Around Heaven All Day\" at the memorial services.\n\nBrown signed his last will and testament on August 1, 2000, before J. Strom Thurmond Jr., an attorney for the estate. The irrevocable trust, separate and apart from Brown's will, was created on his behalf, that same year, by his attorney, Albert \"Buddy\" Dallas, one of three personal representatives of Brown's estate. His will covered the disposition of his personal assets, such as clothing, cars, and jewelry, while the irrevocable trust covered the disposition of the music rights, business assets of James Brown Enterprises, and his Beech Island estate in South Carolina.\n\nDuring the reading of the will on January 11, 2007, Thurmond revealed that Brown's six adult living children (Terry Brown, Larry Brown, Daryl Brown, Yamma Brown Lumar, Deanna Brown Thomas and Venisha Brown) were named in the document, while Hynie and James II were not mentioned as heirs. Brown's will had been signed 10 months before James II was born and more than a year before Brown's marriage to Tomi Rae Hynie. Like Brown's will, his irrevocable trust omitted Hynie and James II as recipients of Brown's property. The irrevocable trust had also been established before, and not amended since, the birth of James II.\n\nOn January 24, 2007, Brown's children filed a lawsuit, petitioning the court to remove the personal representatives from the estate (including Brown's attorney, as well as trustee Albert \"Buddy\" Dallas) and appoint a special administrator because of perceived impropriety and alleged mismanagement of Brown's assets. On January 31, 2007, Hynie also filed a lawsuit against Brown's estate, challenging the validity of the will and the irrevocable trust. Hynie's suit asked the court both to recognize her as Brown's widow and to appoint a special administrator for the estate.\n\nOn January 27, 2015, Judge Doyet Early III ruled that Tommie Rae Hynie Brown was officially the widow of James Brown. The decision was based on the grounds that Hynie's previous marriage was invalid and that James Brown had abandoned his efforts to annul his own marriage to Hynie.\n\nOn February 19, 2015, the South Carolina Supreme Court intervened, halting all lower court actions in the estate and undertaking to review previous actions itself. The South Carolina Court of Appeals in July 2018 ruled that Tommie Rae was, in fact, Mr. Brown's wife.\n\nFor many years, Brown's touring show was one of the most extravagant productions in American popular music. At the time of Brown's death, his band included three guitarists, two bass guitar players, two drummers, three horns and a percussionist. The bands that he maintained during the late 1960s and 1970s were of comparable size, and the bands also included a three-piece amplified string section that played during the ballads. Brown employed between 40 and 50 people for the James Brown Revue, and members of the revue traveled with him in a bus to cities and towns all over the country, performing upwards of 330 shows a year with almost all of the shows as one-nighters.\n\nBefore James Brown appeared on stage, his personal MC gave him an elaborate introduction accompanied by drumrolls, as the MC worked in Brown's various sobriquets along with the names of many of his hit songs. The introduction by Fats Gonder, captured on Brown's 1963 album \"Live at the Apollo\" is a representative example:\n\nJames Brown's performances were famous for their intensity and length. His own stated goal was to \"give people more than what they came for — make them tired, 'cause \"that's\" what they came for.'\" Brown's concert repertoire consisted mostly of his own hits and recent songs, with a few R&B covers mixed in. Brown danced vigorously as he sang, working popular dance steps such as the Mashed Potato into his routine along with dramatic leaps, splits and slides. In addition, his horn players and singing group (The Famous Flames) typically performed choreographed dance routines, and later incarnations of the Revue included backup dancers. Male performers in the Revue were required to wear tuxedoes and cummerbunds long after more casual concert wear became the norm among the younger musical acts. Brown's own extravagant outfits and his elaborate processed hairdo completed the visual impression. A James Brown concert typically included a performance by a featured vocalist, such as Vicki Anderson or Marva Whitney, and an instrumental feature for the band, which sometimes served as the opening act for the show.\n\nA trademark feature of Brown's stage shows, usually during the song \"Please, Please, Please\", involved Brown dropping to his knees while clutching the microphone stand in his hands, prompting the show's longtime MC, Danny Ray, to come out, drape a cape over Brown's shoulders and escort him off the stage after he had worked himself to exhaustion during his performance. As Brown was escorted off the stage by the MC, Brown's vocal group, the Famous Flames, (Bobby Byrd, Lloyd Stallworth, and Bobby Bennett ), continued singing the background vocals \"Please, please don't go-oh\". Brown would then shake off the cape and stagger back to the microphone to perform an encore. Brown's routine was inspired by a similar one used by the professional wrestler Gorgeous George, as well as Little Richard.\n\nBrown performs a version of the cape routine over the closing credits of the film \"Blues Brothers 2000\" and in the film of the \"T.A.M.I. Show\" (1964) in which he and The Famous Flames upstaged the Rolling Stones. The Police refer to \"James Brown on the \"T.A.M.I. Show\"\" in their 1980 song \"When the World Is Running Down, You Make the Best of What's Still Around\".\n\nBrown demanded extreme discipline, perfection and precision from his musicians and dancers – performers in his Revue showed up for rehearsals and members wore the right \"uniform\" or \"costume\" for concert performances. During an interview conducted by Terri Gross during the NPR segment \"Fresh Air\" with Maceo Parker, a former saxophonist in Brown's band for most of the 1960s and part of the 1970s and 1980s, Parker offered his experience with the discipline that Brown demanded of the band:\n\nBrown also had a practice of directing, correcting and assessing fines on members of his band who broke his rules, such as wearing unshined shoes, dancing out of sync or showing up late on stage. During some of his concert performances, Brown danced in front of his band with his back to the audience as he slid across the floor, flashing hand signals and splaying his pulsating fingers to the beat of the music. Although audiences thought Brown's dance routine was part of his act, this practice was actually his way of pointing to the offending member of his troupe who played or sang the wrong note or committed some other infraction. Brown used his splayed fingers and hand signals to alert the offending person of the fine that person must pay to him for breaking his rules.\n\nBrown's demands of his support acts were, meanwhile, quite the reverse. As Fred Wesley recalled of his time as musical director of the JBs, if Brown felt intimidated by a support act he would try to \"undermine their performances by shortening their sets without notice, demanding that they not do certain showstopping songs, and even insisting on doing the unthinkable, playing drums on some of their songs. A sure set killer.\"\n\nBrown's main social activism was in preserving the need for education among youths, influenced by his own troubled childhood and his being forced to drop out of the seventh grade for wearing \"insufficient clothes\". Due to heavy dropout rates in the 1960s, Brown released the pro-education song, \"Don't Be a Drop-Out\". Royalties of the song were donated to dropout-prevention charity programs. The success of this led to Brown meeting with President Lyndon B. Johnson at the White House. Johnson cited Brown for being a positive role model to the youth. A lifelong Republican, Brown gained the confidence of President Richard Nixon, to whom he found he had to explain the plight of Black Americans. \n\nThroughout the remainder of his life, Brown made public speeches in schools and continued to advocate the importance of education in school. Upon filing his will in 2002, Brown advised that most of the money in his estate go into creating the I Feel Good, Inc. Trust to benefit disadvantaged children and provide scholarships for his grandchildren. His final single, \"Killing Is Out, School Is In\", advocated against murders of young children in the streets. Brown often gave out money and other items to children while traveling to his childhood hometown of Augusta. A week before his death, while looking gravely ill, Brown gave out toys and turkeys to kids at an Atlanta orphanage, something he had done several times over the years.\n\nThough Brown performed at benefit rallies for civil rights organizations in the mid-1960s, Brown often shied away from discussing civil rights in his songs in fear of alienating his crossover audience. In 1968, in response to a growing urge of anti-war advocacy during the Vietnam War, Brown recorded the song, \"America Is My Home\". In the song, Brown performed a rap, advocating patriotism and exhorting listeners to \"stop pitying yoursel[ves] and get up and fight\". At the time of the song's release, Brown had been participating in performing for troops stationed in Vietnam.\n\nOn April 5, 1968, a day after the assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr. in Memphis, Tennessee, Brown provided a free citywide televised concert at the Boston Garden to maintain public order and calm concerned Boston relatives (over the objections of the police chief, who wanted to call off the concert, which he thought would incite violence). The show was later released on DVD as \"\". According to the documentary, \"The Night James Brown Saved Boston\", then-mayor Kevin White had strongly restrained the Boston police from cracking down on minor violence and protests after the assassination, while religious and community leaders worked to keep tempers from flaring. White arranged to have Brown's performance broadcast multiple times on Boston's public television station, WGBH, thus keeping potential rioters off the streets, watching the concert for free. Angered by not being told of this, Brown demanded $60,000 for \"gate\" fees (money he thought would be lost from ticket sales on account of the concert being broadcast for free) and then threatened to go public about the secret arrangement when the city balked at paying up afterwards, news of which would have been a political death blow to White and spark riots of its own. White eventually lobbied the behind-the-scenes power-brokering group known as \"The Vault\" to come up with money for Brown's gate fee and other social programs, contributing $100,000. Brown received $15,000 from them via the city. White also persuaded management at the Garden to give up their share of receipts to make up the differences. Following this successful performance, Brown was cautioned by President Johnson to visit cities ravaged from riots following King's assassination to not resort to violence, telling them to \"cool it, there's another way\".\n\nResponding to pressure from black activists, including H. Rap Brown, to take a bigger stance on their issues and from footage of black on black crime committed in inner cities, Brown wrote the lyrics to the song \"Say It Loud – I'm Black and I'm Proud\", which his bandleader Alfred \"Pee Wee\" Ellis accompanied with a musical composition. Released late that summer, the song's lyrics helped to make it an anthem for the civil rights movement. Brown only performed the song sporadically following its initial release and later stated he had regrets recording it, saying in 1984, \"Now 'Say It Loud – I'm Black and I'm Proud' has done more for the black race than any other record, but if I had my choice, I wouldn't have done it, because I don't like defining anyone by race. To teach race is to teach separatism.\" In his autobiography he stated:\n\nThe song is obsolete now ... But it was necessary to teach pride then, and I think the song did a lot of good for a lot of people ... People called \"Black and Proud\" militant and angry – maybe because of the line about dying on your feet instead of living on your knees. But really, if you listen to it, it sounds like a children's song. That's why I had children in it, so children who heard it could grow up feeling pride ... The song cost me a lot of my crossover audience. The racial makeup at my concerts was mostly black after that. I don't regret it, though, even if it was misunderstood.\n\nIn 1969, Brown recorded two more songs of social commentary, \"World\" and \"I Don't Want Nobody to Give Me Nothing\", the latter song pleading for equal opportunity and self-reliance rather than entitlement. In 1970, in response to some black leaders for not being outspoken enough, he recorded \"Get Up, Get into It, Get Involved\" and \"Talkin' Loud and Sayin' Nothing\". In 1971, he began touring Africa, including Zambia and Nigeria. He was made \"freeman of the city\" in Lagos, Nigeria, by Oba Adeyinka Oyekan, for his \"influence on black people all over the world\". With his company, James Brown Enterprises, Brown helped to provide jobs for blacks in business in the communities. As the 1970s continued, Brown continued to record songs of social commentary, most prominently 1972's \"King Heroin\" and the two-part ballad \"Public Enemy\", which dealt with drug addiction.\n\nDuring the 1968 presidential campaign, Brown endorsed Democratic presidential candidate Hubert Humphrey and appeared with Humphrey at political rallies. Brown began supporting Republican president Richard Nixon after being invited to perform at Nixon's inaugural ball in January 1969. Brown's endorsement of Nixon during the 1972 presidential election negatively impacted his career during that period with several national Black organizations boycotting his records and protesting at his concert shows. Brown stated he was neither Democratic nor Republican despite his support of Republican presidents such as Nixon and Ronald Reagan. In 1999, when being interviewed by \"Rolling Stone\", the magazine asked him to name a hero in the 20th century; Brown mentioned John F. Kennedy and then-96-year-old U.S. Senator, and former Dixiecrat, Strom Thurmond, stating \"when the young whippersnappers get out of line, whether Democratic or Republican, an old man can walk up and say 'Wait a minute, son, it goes this way.' And that's great for our country. He's like a grandfather to me.\" In 2003, Brown was the featured attraction of a Washington D.C. fundraiser for the National Republican Senatorial Committee. Following the deaths of Ronald Reagan and his friend Ray Charles, Brown said to CNN, \"I'm kind of in an uproar. I love the country and I got – you know I've been around a long time, through many presidents and everything. So after losing Mr. Reagan, who I knew very well, then Mr. Ray Charles, who I worked with and lived with like, all our life, we had a show together in Oakland many, many years ago and it's like you found the placard.\"\n\nAt the end of his life, James Brown lived in Beech Island, South Carolina, directly across the Savannah River from Augusta, Georgia. Brown had diabetes that went undiagnosed for years, according to his longtime manager Charles Bobbit. In 2004, Brown was successfully treated for prostate cancer. Regardless of his health, Brown maintained his reputation as the \"hardest working man in show business\" by keeping up with his grueling performance schedule.\n\nIn 1962, Tammi Terrell joined the James Brown Revue. Even though she was only 17, Brown became sexually involved with Terrell in a relationship that continued until she escaped his abuse. Bobby Bennett, former member of the Famous Flames told Rolling Stone about the abuse he witnessed, \"He beat Tammi Terrell terrible,\" said Bennett. \"She was bleeding, shedding blood.\" Terrell, who died in 1970, was Brown's girlfriend before she became famous as Marvin Gaye's singing partner in the mid-Sixties. \"Tammi left him because she didn't want her butt whipped,\" said Bennett, who also claimed he saw Brown kick one pregnant girlfriend down a flight of stairs.\n\nBrown was married four times. His first marriage was to Velma Warren in 1953, they had three sons together. Over a decade later, the couple had separated and the final divorce decree was issued 1969; they maintained a close friendship that lasted until Brown's death. Brown's second marriage was to Deidre \"Deedee\" Jenkins, on October 22, 1970. They had two daughters together. The couple were separated by 1979, after what his daughter describes as years of domestic abuse, and the final divorce decree was issued on January 10, 1981. His third marriage was to Adrienne Lois Rodriguez (March 9, 1950 – January 6, 1996), in 1984. It was a contentious marriage that made headlines due to domestic abuse complaints; Rodriguez died in January 1996. Less than a year after her death, Brown hired Tomi Rae Hynie to be a background singer for his band. They married in 2001.\n\nOn December 23, 2002, Brown and Hynie held a wedding ceremony that was officiated by the Rev. Larry Flyer. Following Brown's death, controversy surrounded the circumstances of the marriage, with Brown's attorney, Albert \"Buddy\" Dallas, reporting that the marriage was not valid; Hynie was still married to Javed Ahmed, a man from Bangladesh. Hynie claimed Ahmed married her to obtain residency through a Green Card and that the marriage was annulled but the annulment did not occur until April 2004. In an attempt to prove her marriage to Brown was valid, Hynie produced a 2001 marriage certificate as proof of her marriage to Brown, but she did not provide King with court records pointing to an annulment of her marriage to him or to Ahmed. According to Dallas, Brown was angry and hurt that Hynie had concealed her prior marriage from him and Brown moved to file for annulment from Hynie. Dallas added that though Hynie's marriage to Ahmed was annulled after she married Brown, the Brown–Hynie marriage was not valid under South Carolina law because Brown and Hynie did not remarry after the annulment. In August 2003, Brown took out a full-page public notice in \"Variety\" featuring Hynie, James II and himself on vacation at Disney World to announce that he and Hynie were going their separate ways. In 2015, a judge ruled Hynie as Brown's legal widow.\n\nBrown had numerous children and acknowledged nine of them including five sons – Teddy (1954–1973), Terry, Larry, Daryl and James Joseph Brown Jr. and four daughters – Lisa, Dr. Yamma Noyola Brown Lumar, Deanna Brown Thomas and Venisha Brown (1964–2018). Brown also had eight grandchildren and four great-grandchildren. Brown's eldest son, Teddy, died in a car crash on June 14, 1973. According to an August 22, 2007, article published in the British newspaper \"The Daily Telegraph\", DNA tests indicate that Brown also fathered at least three extramarital children. The first one of them to be identified is LaRhonda Pettit (born 1962), a retired air stewardess and teacher who lives in Houston. During contesting of Brown's will, another of the Brown family attorneys, Debra Opri, revealed to Larry King that Brown wanted a DNA test performed after his death to confirm the paternity of James Brown Jr.—not for Brown's sake but for the sake of the other family members. In April 2007, Hynie selected a guardian ad litem whom she wants appointed by the court to represent her son, James Brown Jr., in the paternity proceedings. James Brown Jr. was confirmed to be his biological son.\n\nFor most of his career, Brown had a strict drug- and alcohol-free policy for any member in his entourage, including band members, and would fire people who disobeyed orders, particularly those who used or abused drugs and alcohol. Some early members of Brown's vocal group the Famous Flames were fired due to alcohol use. Despite the policy, some of the original members of Brown's 1970s band, the J.B.'s, including Catfish and Bootsy Collins, intentionally took LSD during a concert gig in 1971, causing Brown to fire them after the show because he had suspected them to be on drugs all along.\n\nHowever, by the mid-1980s it was alleged that Brown himself was using drugs. After he met and later married Adrienne Rodriguez, she and Brown began using PCP (\"angel dust\"). This drug usage resulted in violent outbursts from him and he was arrested several times for domestic violence against Rodriguez while high on the drug. After a 1988 arrest for allegedly hitting his wife with a lead pipe and shooting at her in their car during an argument, Brown went on the CNN program \"Sonya Live in L.A.\" and appeared to be behaving erratically in response to questions asked by host Sonya Friedman, refusing to discuss the domestic issue with Rodriguez, and wanting instead to focus on his professional life. At one point during the interview, Brown began shouting out his song titles to one of Friedman's questions. The interview later went viral and led some to assume that Brown, who refused to take off his shades throughout the interview, was either drunk or on drugs.\n\nOne of Brown's former mistresses recalled in a \"GQ\" magazine article on Brown some years after his death that Brown would smoke PCP \"until that got hard to find\", and cocaine, mixed with tobacco in Kool cigarettes. In January 1998, he spent a week in rehab to deal with an addiction to prescription drugs. A week after his release, he was arrested for an unlawful use of a handgun and possession of cannabis. Prior to his death in December 2006, when Brown entered Emory University Hospital, traces of cocaine were found in the singer's urine. His widow suggested Brown would \"do crack\" with a female acquaintance.\n\nBrown's personal life was marred by several brushes with the law. At the age of 16, he was convicted of theft and served three years in juvenile prison. During a concert held at Club 15 in Macon, Georgia in the early 1960s during a performance held by Otis Redding when he was performing alongside his former band, Johnny Jenkins and the Pinetoppers, Brown reportedly had a shootout with a musical rival, purported to be singer Joe Tex, which led to multiple people being shot and stabbed. Since Brown was still on parole at the time, he relied on his agent Clint Brantley \"and a few thousand dollars to make the situation disappear\". According to Jenkins, \"seven people got shot\", and after the shootout ended, a man appeared and gave \"each one of the injured a hundred dollars apiece not to carry it no further and not to talk to the press\". Brown was never charged for the incident.\n\nOn July 16, 1978, after performing at the Apollo, Brown was arrested for reportedly failing to turn in records from one of his radio stations after the station was forced to file for bankruptcy. Brown was arrested on April 3, 1988, for assault, and again in May 1988 on drug and weapons charges, and again on September 24, 1988, following a high-speed car chase on Interstate 20 near the Georgia–South Carolina state border. He was convicted of carrying an unlicensed pistol and assaulting a police officer, along with various drug-related and driving offenses. Although he was sentenced to six years in prison, he was eventually released on parole on February 27, 1991, after serving two years of his sentence. Brown's FBI file, released to \"The Washington Post\" in 2007 under the Freedom of Information Act, related Brown's claim that the high-speed chase did not occur as claimed by the police, and that local police shot at his car several times during an incident of police harassment and assaulted him after his arrest. Local authorities found no merit to Brown's accusations.\n\nIn 1998, a woman named Mary Simons accused Brown in a civil suit of holding her captive for three days, demanding oral sex and firing a gun in his office; Simons' charge was eventually dismissed. In another civil suit, filed by former background singer Lisa Rushton alleged that between 1994 and 1999, Brown allegedly demanded sexual favors and when refused, would cut off her pay and kept her offstage. She also claimed Brown would \"place a hand on her buttocks and loudly told her in a crowded restaurant to not look or speak to any other man besides himself; Rushton eventually withdrew her lawsuit. In yet another civil suit, a woman named Lisa Agbalaya, who worked for Brown, said the singer would tell her he had \"bull testicles\", handed her a pair of zebra-print underwear, told her to wear them while he massaged her with oil, and fired her after she refused. A Los Angeles jury cleared the singer of sexual harassment but found him liable for wrongful termination.\n\nThe police were summoned to Brown's residence on July 3, 2000, after he was accused of charging at an electric company repairman with a steak knife when the repairman visited Brown's house to investigate a complaint about having no lights at the residence. In 2003 Brown was pardoned by the South Carolina Department of Probation, Parole, and Pardon Services for past crimes that he was convicted of committing in South Carolina.\n\nFor the remainder of his life, Brown was repeatedly arrested for domestic violence. Adrienne Rodriguez, his third wife, had him arrested four times between 1987 and 1995 on charges of assault. In January 2004, Brown was arrested in South Carolina on a domestic violence charge after Tomi Rae Hynie accused him of pushing her to the floor during an argument at their home, where she suffered scratches and bruises to her right arm and hip. Later that year in June 2004, Brown pleaded no contest to the domestic violence incident, but served no jail time. Instead, Brown was required to forfeit a US$1,087 bond as punishment.\n\nIn January 2005, a woman named Jacque Hollander filed a lawsuit against James Brown, which stemmed from an alleged 1988 rape. When the case was initially heard before a judge in 2002, Hollander's claims against Brown were dismissed by the court as the limitations period for filing the suit had expired. Hollander claimed that stress from the alleged assault later caused her to contract Graves' disease, a thyroid condition. Hollander claimed that the incident took place in South Carolina while she was employed by Brown as a publicist. Hollander alleged that, during her ride in a van with Brown, Brown pulled over to the side of the road and sexually assaulted her while he threatened her with a shotgun. In her case against Brown, Hollander entered as evidence a DNA sample and a polygraph result, but the evidence was not considered due to the limitations defense. Hollander later attempted to bring her case before the Supreme Court, but nothing came of her complaint.\n\nBrown received awards and honors throughout his lifetime and after his death. In 1993 the City Council of Steamboat Springs, Colorado, conducted a poll of residents to choose a new name for the bridge that crossed the Yampa River on Shield Drive. The winning name, with 7,717 votes, was \"James Brown Soul Center of the Universe Bridge\". The bridge was officially dedicated in September 1993, and Brown appeared at the ribbon-cutting ceremony for the event. A petition was started by local ranchers to return the name to \"Stockbridge\" for historical reasons, but they backed off after citizens defeated their efforts because of the popularity of Brown's name. Brown returned to Steamboat Springs, Colorado, on July 4, 2002, for an outdoor festival, performing with bands such as The String Cheese Incident.\n\nDuring his long career, Brown received many prestigious music industry awards and honors. In 1983 he was inducted into the Georgia Music Hall of Fame. Brown was one of the first inductees into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame at its inaugural induction dinner in New York on January 23, 1986. At that time, the members of his original vocal group, The Famous Flames (Bobby Byrd, Johnny Terry, Bobby Bennett, and Lloyd Stallworth) were not inducted. However, on April 14, 2012, The Famous Flames were automatically and retroactively inducted into the Hall of Fame alongside Brown, without the need for nomination and voting, on the basis that they should have been inducted with him in 1986. On February 25, 1992, Brown was awarded a Lifetime Achievement Award at the 34th annual Grammy Awards. Exactly a year later, he received a Lifetime Achievement Award at the 4th annual Rhythm & Blues Foundation Pioneer Awards. A ceremony was held for Brown on January 10, 1997, to honor him with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.\n\nOn June 15, 2000, Brown was honored as an inductee to the New York Songwriters Hall of Fame. On August 6, 2002, he was honored as the first BMI Urban Icon at the BMI Urban Awards. His BMI accolades include an impressive ten R&B Awards and six Pop Awards. On November 14, 2006, Brown was inducted into the UK Music Hall of Fame, and he was one of several inductees to perform at the ceremony. In recognition of his accomplishments as an entertainer, Brown was a recipient of Kennedy Center Honors on December 7, 2003. In 2004 \"Rolling Stone\" magazine ranked James Brown as No. 7 on its list of the 100 Greatest Artists of All Time. In an article for \"Rolling Stone\", critic Robert Christgau cited Brown as \"the greatest musician of the rock era\".\n\nHe appeared on the BET Awards June 24, 2003, and received the Lifetime Achievement Award presented by Michael Jackson, and performed with him.\n\nBrown was also honored in his hometown of Augusta, Georgia, for his philanthropy and civic activities. On November 20, 1993, Mayor Charles DeVaney of Augusta held a ceremony to dedicate a section of 9th Street between Broad and Twiggs Streets, renamed \"James Brown Boulevard\", in the entertainer's honor. On May 6, 2005, as a 72nd birthday present for Brown, the city of Augusta unveiled a life-sized bronze James Brown statue on Broad Street. The statue was to have been dedicated a year earlier, but the ceremony was put on hold because of a domestic abuse charge that Brown faced at the time. In 2005, Charles \"Champ\" Walker and the We Feel Good Committee went before the County commission and received approval to change Augusta's slogan to \"We Feel Good\". Afterward, officials renamed the city's civic center the James Brown Arena, and James Brown attended a ceremony for the unveiling of the namesake center on October 15, 2006.\n\nOn December 30, 2006, during the public memorial service at the James Brown Arena, Dr. Shirley A.R. Lewis, president of Paine College, a historically black college in Augusta, Georgia, bestowed posthumously upon Brown an honorary doctorate in recognition and honor of his many contributions to the school in its times of need. Brown had originally been scheduled to receive the honorary doctorate from Paine College during its May 2007 commencement.\n\nDuring the 49th Annual Grammy Awards presentation on February 11, 2007, James Brown's famous cape was draped over a microphone by Danny Ray at the end of a montage in honor of notable people in the music industry who died during the previous year. Earlier that evening, Christina Aguilera delivered an impassioned performance of Brown's hit \"It's a Man's Man's Man's World\" followed by a standing ovation, while Chris Brown performed a dance routine in honor of James Brown.\n\nOn August 17, 2013, the official R&B Music Hall of Fame honored and inducted James Brown at a ceremony held at the Waetejen Auditorium at Cleveland State University.\n\nART THE BOX began in early 2015 as a collaboration between three organizations: the City of Augusta, the Downtown Development Authority and the Greater Augusta Arts Council. 19 local artists were selected by a committee to create art on 23 local traffic signal control cabinets (TSCCs). A competition was held to create the James Brown Tribute Box on the corner of James Brown Blvd. (9th Ave.) and Broad St. This box was designed and painted by local artist, Ms. Robbie Pitts Bellamy and has become a favorite photo opportunity to visitors and locals in Augusta, Georgia.\n\"I have a lot of musical heroes but I think James Brown is at the top of the list,\" remarked Public Enemy's Chuck D. \"Absolutely the funkiest man on Earth ... In a black household, James Brown is part of the fabric – Motown, Stax, Atlantic and James Brown.\"\n\nAs a tribute to James Brown, the Rolling Stones covered the song, \"I'll Go Crazy\" from Brown's \"Live at the Apollo\" album, during their 2007 European tour. Jimmy Page has remarked, \"He [James Brown] was almost a musical genre in his own right and he changed and moved forward the whole time so people were able to learn from him.\"\n\nOn December 22, 2007, the first annual \"Tribute Fit For the King of King Records\" in honor of James Brown was held at the Madison Theater in Covington, Kentucky. The tribute, organized by Bootsy Collins, featured appearances by Afrika Bambaataa, Chuck D of Public Enemy, The Soul Generals, Buckethead, Freekbass, Triage and many of Brown's surviving family members. Comedian Michael Coyer was the MC for the event. During the show, the mayor of Cincinnati proclaimed December 22 as James Brown Day.\n\nAs of 2019, a significant collection of James Brown clothing, memorabilia, and personal artifacts are on exhibit in downtown Augusta, Georgia at the Augusta History Museum.\n\nBULLET::::- Studio albums\n\nBULLET::::- \"Please Please Please\" (1958)\nBULLET::::- \"Try Me!\" (1959)\nBULLET::::- \"Think!\" (1960)\nBULLET::::- \"The Amazing James Brown\" (1961)\nBULLET::::- \"James Brown and His Famous Flames Tour the U.S.A.\" (1962)\nBULLET::::- \"Prisoner of Love\" (1963)\nBULLET::::- \"Grits & Soul\" (1964)\nBULLET::::- \"Out of Sight\" (1964)\nBULLET::::- \"James Brown Plays James Brown Today & Yesterday\" (1965)\nBULLET::::- \"Mighty Instrumentals\" (1966)\nBULLET::::- \"James Brown Plays New Breed (The Boo-Ga-Loo)\" (1966)\nBULLET::::- \"Handful of Soul\" (1966)\nBULLET::::- \"James Brown Sings Raw Soul\" (1967)\nBULLET::::- \"James Brown Plays the Real Thing\" (1967)\nBULLET::::- \"Cold Sweat\" (1967)\nBULLET::::- \"I Can't Stand Myself When You Touch Me\" (1968)\nBULLET::::- \"I Got the Feelin'\" (1968)\nBULLET::::- \"James Brown Plays Nothing But Soul\" (1968)\nBULLET::::- \"Thinking About Little Willie John and a Few Nice Things\" (1968)\nBULLET::::- \"Say It Loud – I'm Black and I'm Proud\" (1969)\nBULLET::::- \"Gettin' Down to It\" (1969)\nBULLET::::- \"The Popcorn\" (1969)\nBULLET::::- \"It's a Mother\" (1969)\nBULLET::::- \"Ain't It Funky\" (1970)\nBULLET::::- \"Soul on Top\" (1970)\nBULLET::::- \"It's a New Day – Let a Man Come In\" (1970)\nBULLET::::- \"Hey America\" (1970)\nBULLET::::- \"Sho Is Funky Down Here\" (1971)\nBULLET::::- \"Hot Pants\" (1971)\nBULLET::::- \"There It Is\" (1972)\nBULLET::::- \"Get on the Good Foot\" (1972)\nBULLET::::- \"Black Caesar\" (1973)\nBULLET::::- \"Slaughter's Big Rip-Off\" (1973)\nBULLET::::- \"The Payback\" (1973)\nBULLET::::- \"Hell\" (1974)\nBULLET::::- \"Reality\" (1974)\nBULLET::::- \"Sex Machine Today\" (1975)\nBULLET::::- \"Everybody's Doin' the Hustle & Dead on the Double Bump\" (1975)\nBULLET::::- \"Hot\" (1976)\nBULLET::::- \"Get Up Offa That Thing\" (1976)\nBULLET::::- \"Bodyheat\" (1976)\nBULLET::::- \"Mutha's Nature\" (1977)\nBULLET::::- \"Jam 1980's\" (1978)\nBULLET::::- \"Take a Look at Those Cakes\" (1978)\nBULLET::::- \"The Original Disco Man\" (1979)\nBULLET::::- \"People\" (1980)\nBULLET::::- \"Soul Syndrome\" (1980)\nBULLET::::- \"Nonstop!\" (1981)\nBULLET::::- \"Bring It On!\" (1983)\nBULLET::::- \"Gravity\" (1986)\nBULLET::::- \"I'm Real\" (1988)\nBULLET::::- \"Love Over-Due\" (1991)\nBULLET::::- \"Universal James\" (1992)\nBULLET::::- \"I'm Back\" (1998)\nBULLET::::- \"The Next Step\" (2002)\nBULLET::::- \"The T.A.M.I. Show\" (1964) (concert film)- with The Famous Flames\nBULLET::::- \"Ski Party\" (1965)- with The Famous Flames\nBULLET::::- \"\" (1968) (concert film)\nBULLET::::- \"The Phynx\" (1970)\nBULLET::::- \"Black Caesar\" (1973) (soundtrack only)\nBULLET::::- \"Slaughter's Big Rip-Off\" (1973) (soundtrack only)\nBULLET::::- Adiós Amigo (1976)\nBULLET::::- \"The Blues Brothers\" (1980)\nBULLET::::- \"Doctor Detroit\" (1983)\nBULLET::::- \"Rocky IV\" (1985)\nBULLET::::- \"\" (1989)\nBULLET::::- \"The Simpsons\" (1993)\nBULLET::::- \"When We Were Kings\" (1996) (documentary)\nBULLET::::- \"Duckman\" (1997)\nBULLET::::- \"Soulmates\" (1997)\nBULLET::::- \"Blues Brothers 2000\" (1998)\nBULLET::::- \"Holy Man\" (1998)\nBULLET::::- portrayed by Carlton Smith in \"Liberty Heights\" (1999)\nBULLET::::- \"Undercover Brother\" (2002)\nBULLET::::- \"The Tuxedo\" (2002)\nBULLET::::- \"\" (2002) (short film)\nBULLET::::- \"Paper Chasers\" (2003) (documentary)\nBULLET::::- \"Soul Survivor\" (2003) (documentary)\nBULLET::::- \"Sid Bernstein Presents ... \" (2005) (documentary)\nBULLET::::- \"Glastonbury\" (2006) (documentary)\nBULLET::::- \"Life on the Road with Mr. and Mrs. Brown\" (2007) (documentary; release pending)\nBULLET::::- \"\" (2008) (concert film)\nBULLET::::- \"I Got The Feelin': James Brown in the '60s\", three-DVD set featuring \"\", \"Live at the Apollo '68\", and the documentary \"The Night James Brown Saved Boston\"\nBULLET::::- \"Soul Power\" (2009) (documentary)\nBULLET::::- \"Get on Up\" (2014)\n\nBULLET::::- \"James Brown: The Man, the Message, the Music\" (1992), the first biopic about James Brown\nBULLET::::- \"Mr. Dynamite: The Rise of James Brown\" (2014), released in April 2014, written and directed by Alex Gibney, produced by Mick Jagger.\nBULLET::::- \"Get on Up\" (2014), released in theaters on August 1, 2014. Chadwick Boseman plays the role of James Brown in the film. Originally, Mick Jagger and Brian Grazer had begun producing a documentary film on Brown in 2013. A fiction film had been in the planning stages for many years and was revived when Jagger read the script by Jez and John-Henry Butterworth.\n\nGames\nBULLET::::- In the video game \"World of Warcraft\", the first boss character of the Forge of Souls dungeon is Bronjahm, \"the Godfather of Souls\". His quotes during the fight are musical references, and he has a chance of dropping an item called \"Papa's Brand New Bag\".\nBULLET::::- A different version of \"I Got You\", recorded in 1974, is playable in the rhythm video game \"Rock Band 3\". In addition, \"Get Up (I Feel Like Being a) Sex Machine (Pt. 1)\" is available for download across the series, while \"Super Bad (Pts. 1 & 2)\" was released later, only for the third game.\nBULLET::::- In the \"Worms Armaggedon\" and \"Worms World Party\" video games, many of James Brown's song titles are used in the \"Soul Man\" custom voice setting like \"Papa's Got a Brand New Bag\" or \"Like a Sex Machine\", clear references to James Brown.\n\nTelevision\nBULLET::::- Appeared as Lou DeLong in the 1987 \"Miami Vice\" episode \"Missing Hours\".\nBULLET::::- As himself (voice) in the 1993 \"The Simpsons\" episode \"Bart's Inner Child\".\nBULLET::::- In 1991, James Brown did a Pay Per View Special with top celebrities such as Quincy Jones, Rick James, Dan Aykroyd, Gladys Knight, Denzel Washington, Mc Hammer and others attended or were opening acts. This was produced with boxing promoter Buddy Dallas. 15.5 million households tuned in at a cost $19.99.\n\nMusic\nBULLET::::- The songs \"James Brown Is Dead\" and \"James Brown Is Still Alive\" are all about reports on the iconic musician James Brown, and were released in 1991.\n\nBULLET::::- Earl Tucker, a vaudeville performer whose dance moves appear on film\nFootnotes\nOther references\nBULLET::::- Sussman, M. (producer). (December 25, 2006). Arts: Soul classics by James Brown (multimedia presentation). \"The New York Times\". Retrieved January 9, 2007.\nBULLET::::- Slide show: James Brown through the years (December 25, 2006). \"The New York Times\". Retrieved January 9, 2007.\nBULLET::::- Lethem, J. (June 12, 2006). \"Being James Brown\", \"Rolling Stone Magazine\". Retrieved January 14, 2007.\nBULLET::::- \"Rolling Stone Magazine\" audio interview with Jonathan Lethem about James Brown and his music. \"Rolling Stone Magazine\". Retrieved January 9, 2007.\n\nBULLET::::- Brown, James, and Tucker, Bruce. (1986). \"James Brown: The Godfather of Soul\". New York: Thunder's Mouth Press.\nBULLET::::- George, Nelson, and Leeds, Alan (editors). (2008). \"The James Brown Reader: 50 Years of Writing about the Godfather of Soul\". New York: Plume.\nBULLET::::- McBride, James (2016) \"Kill 'Em and Leave: Searching for James Brown and the American Soul\". New York: Spiegel & Grau\nBULLET::::- Smith, R.J. (2011). \"The One: The Life and Music of James Brown\". New York: Gotham Books.\nBULLET::::- Sullivan, James. (2008). \"The Hardest Working Man: How James Brown Saved The Soul Of America\". New York: Gotham Books.\nBULLET::::- Wesley, Fred. (2002). \"Hit Me, Fred: Recollections of a Sideman\". Durham: Duke University Press.\nBULLET::::- Whitney, Marva and Waring, Charles. (2013) \"God, The Devil & James Brown:(Memoirs of a Funky Diva)\". New Romney: Bank House Books\n\nBULLET::::- Celebrities share memories of James Brown\nBULLET::::- Profile of James Brown at Soul Evolution\nBULLET::::- \"The Times\" Obituary for James Brown\nBULLET::::- \"James Brown, 1933–2006\". News and multimedia archive from The Augusta Chronicle\nBULLET::::- James Brown's Musicians Reflect On His Legacy – article from \"Down Beat Magazine\"\nBULLET::::- The Official \"Facebook\" Page on The Famous Flames\nBULLET::::- Biography: James Brown and the Black Arts movement of the 1960s and 1970s (biography at Funky-Stuff.com).\nBULLET::::- James Brown biography and concert review in cosmopolis.ch\nBULLET::::- RBMA Radio On Demand – Across 135th Street – Volume 7 – Tribute to James Brown – Chairman Mao (RBMA, Egotrip)\nBULLET::::- 1980 Interview with James Brown and the Rev. Al Sharpton by Jon Alpert on Democracy Now!\nBULLET::::- James Brown concert and interviews on NPR Music\nBULLET::::- James Brown radiostream\nBULLET::::- James Brown funeral program Digital Library of Georgia\nBULLET::::- The James Brown SuperFan Club\nBULLET::::- PBS American Masters James Brown: Soul Survivor\n"}
{"id": "15767", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15767", "title": "Jon Postel", "text": "Jon Postel\n\nJonathan Bruce Postel (; August 6, 1943 – October 16, 1998) was an American computer scientist who made many significant contributions to the development of the Internet, particularly with respect to standards. He is known principally for being the Editor of the Request for Comment (RFC) document series, for Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP), and for administering the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) until his death. In his lifetime he was known as the \"god of the Internet\" for his comprehensive influence on the medium.\n\nThe Internet Society's Postel Award is named in his honor, as is the Postel Center at Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California. His obituary was written by Vint Cerf and published as RFC 2468 in remembrance of Postel and his work. In 2012, Postel was inducted into the Internet Hall of Fame by the Internet Society. The Channel Islands' Domain Registry building was named after him in early 2016.\n\nPostel attended Van Nuys High School, and then UCLA where he earned his B.S. (1966) as well as his M.S. (1968) in Engineering. He then went on to complete his Ph.D. there in Computer Science in 1974, with Dave Farber as his thesis advisor.\nPostel started work at UCLA on 23 December 1969 as a Postgraduate Research Engineer (I) where he was involved in early work on the ARPANET. He was involved in the development of the Internet domain system and, at his instigation, Cerf and Bob Kahn developed a second set of protocols for handling data between networks, which is now known as Internet Protocol (IP). Together with Cerf and Steve Crocker, Postel worked on implementing most of the ARPANET protocols. Cerf would later become one of the principal designers of the TCP/IP standard, which works because of the sentence known as Postel's Law.\n\nPostel worked with ARPANET until 24 August 1973 when he left to join MITRE Corporation. He assisted with Network Information Center which was being set up at SRI by Elizabeth Feinler. In March 1977, he joined the Information Sciences Institute at the University of Southern California as a research scientist.\n\nPostel was the RFC Editor from 1969 until his death, and wrote and edited many important RFCs, including RFC 791, RFC 792 and RFC 793, which define the basic protocols of the Internet protocol suite, and RFC 2223, \"Instructions to RFC Authors\". Between 1982 and 1984 Postel co-authored the RFCs which became the foundation of today's DNS (RFC 819, RFC 881, RFC 882 and RFC 920) which were joined in 1995 by RFC 1591 which he also co-wrote.\nIn total, he wrote or co-authored more than 200 RFCs.\n\nPostel served on the Internet Architecture Board and its predecessors for many years. He was the Director of the names and number assignment clearinghouse, the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA), from its inception. He was the first member of the Internet Society, and was on its Board of Trustees. He was the original and long-time .us Top-Level Domain administrator. He also managed the Los Nettos Network.\n\nAll of the above were part-time activities he assumed in conjunction with his primary position as Director of the Computer Networks Division, Division 7, of the Information Sciences Institute at the University of Southern California.\n\nOn January 28, 1998, Postel, as a test, emailed eight of the twelve operators of Internet's regional root nameservers on his own authority and instructed them to reconfigure their servers, changing the root zone server from then SAIC subsidiary Network Solutions (NSI)'s A.ROOT-SERVERS.NET (198.41.0.4) to IANA's DNSROOT.IANA.ORG (198.32.1.98). The operators complied with Postel's instructions, thus dividing control of Internet naming between the non-government operators with IANA and the 4 remaining U.S. Government roots at NASA, DoD, and BRL with NSI. Though usage of the Internet was not interrupted, he soon received orders from senior government officials to undo this change, which he did. Within a week, the US NTIA issued \"A proposal to improve technical management of Internet names and addresses\", including changes to authority over the Internet DNS root zone, which ultimately, and controversially, increased U.S. control.\n\nOn October 16, 1998, Postel died of complications from heart surgery in Los Angeles, nine months after the DNS Root Authority incident. He was recovering from a surgery to replace a leaking heart valve.\n\nThe significance of Jon Postel's contributions to building the Internet, both technical and personal, were such that a memorial recollection of his life forms part of the core technical literature sequence of the Internet in the form of RFC 2468 \"I Remember IANA\", written by Vinton Cerf.\n\nAnother tribute \"Working with Jon Tribute delivered at UCLA, October 30, 1998\"\nRFC2441 , was written by D. Cohen.\n\nPerhaps his most famous legacy is from RFC 760, which includes a robustness principle often called \"Postel's law\": \"an implementation should be conservative in its sending behavior, and liberal in its receiving behavior\" (reworded in RFC 1122 as \"Be liberal in what you accept, and conservative in what you send\").\n\nBULLET::::- ARPANET\nBULLET::::- \"\" (1972 documentary w/Postel cameo)\nBULLET::::- History of the Internet\nBULLET::::- Jonathan B. Postel Service Award\nBULLET::::- STD 8\n\nBULLET::::- postel.org Research center at USC/ISI created in his honor.\n"}
{"id": "15768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15768", "title": "Joyce K. Reynolds", "text": "Joyce K. Reynolds\n\nJoyce K. Reynolds (? – December 28, 2015) was an American computer scientist who played a significant role in developing protocols underlying the Internet. She authored or co-authored many RFCs, most notably those introducing and specifying the Telnet, FTP, and POP protocols.\n\nReynolds held bachelor's and master's degrees in social sciences from the University of Southern California.\n\nFrom 1983 until 1998, she worked with Jon Postel to develop early functions of the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority, such as the global allocation of IP addresses, Autonomous System (AS) number allocation, and management of the root zone of the Domain Name System (DNS). After Postel’s death in 1998, Reynolds helped supervise the transition of the IANA functions to the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers. She worked with ICANN in this role until 2001, while remaining an employee of ISI.\n\nFrom 1987 to 2006, she served on the editorial team of the Request for Comments series, co-leading the RFC Editor function at the ISI from 1998 until 2006.\n\nAs Area Director of the User Services area, she was a member of the Internet Engineering Steering Group of the IETF from 1990 to March 1998.\n\nWith Bob Braden, she received the 2006 Postel Award in recognition of her services to the Internet. She is mentioned, along with a brief biography, in <nowiki>RFC 1336</nowiki>, \"Who's Who in the Internet\" (1992).\n\nShe died on December 28, 2015 due to complications from cancer.\n\nBULLET::::- Internet pioneers\nBULLET::::- Women in Technology\n\nBULLET::::- Page on the ICANNWiki\nBULLET::::- Obituary notice on IETF mailing list by Steve Crocker\n"}
{"id": "15769", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15769", "title": "Julmust", "text": "Julmust\n\nJulmust ( \"yule\" and ' \"not-yet-fermented juice of fruit or berries\", though there is no such juice in \"julmust\") is a soft drink that is mainly consumed in Sweden around Christmas. During the rest of the year, except Easter, it is usually quite difficult to find in stores, but sometimes it is sold at other times of the year under the name \"must\". During Easter the name is (from ', \"Easter\"). The content is the same regardless of the marketing name, although the length of time it is stored before bottling differs; however, the beverage is more closely associated with Christmas, somewhat less with Easter and traditionally not at all with the summer. 45 million litres of \"julmust\" are consumed during December, which is around 50% of the total soft drink volume in December and 75% of the total yearly must sales.\n\nMust was created by Harry Roberts and his father Robert Roberts in 1910 as a non-alcoholic alternative to beer. The syrup is still made exclusively by Roberts AB in Örebro. The syrup is sold to different soft drink manufacturers that then make the final product in their own way. This means that the must from two different companies doesn't taste the same, even though they are made of the same syrup.\n\nMust is made of carbonated water, sugar, hop extract, malt extract, spices, caramel colouring, citric acid, and preservatives. The hops and malt extracts give the must a somewhat root beer-like taste without the sassafras. It can be aged provided it is stored in a glass bottle. Some people buy \"julmust\" in December only to store it a year before drinking it. In 2013 a rumour occurred that the EU would ban julmust due to a directive banning the selling of malt beverages containing caramel colouring. The rumour however turned out to be false since julmust is not a fermented beverage and hence not affected by the directive.\n\nIn Sweden, \"julmust\" outsells Coca-Cola during the Christmas season; in fact, the consumption of Coca-Cola drops by as much as 50% over the holiday. This was quoted as one of the main reasons that The Coca-Cola Company broke away from their contract with the local brewer Pripps and started Coca-Cola Drycker Sverige AB instead. Coca-Cola Drycker Sverige AB produced its own \"julmust\", albeit very slyly with The Coca-Cola Company's name occupying only a small space on the label. Their \"julmust\" was never advertised until 2004, when Coca-Cola started marketing their \"julmust\" under the brand \"Bjäre julmust\", but they bought the syrup from Roberts AB. By 2007 the \"Bjäre julmust\" was only sold at McDonald's restaurants and it had completely disappeared from Coca-Colas range of products by Christmas 2008, only to return for Christmas 2011.\n\nBULLET::::- In November 2004 PepsiCo marketed a product somewhat similar in taste to \"julmust\" in the United States called Pepsi Holiday Spice. It was on sale during the 2004 and 2006 Christmas seasons.\nBULLET::::- Cost Plus World Market in the United States sells \"julmust\" during the Christmas holiday season.\nBULLET::::- IKEA in the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, Ireland, the Netherlands, Russia, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Japan, Italy, Australia, Austria, Germany, Hungary and Switzerland sells \"Dryck Julmust\" during Christmas, which is a Julmust variant with sweetener instead of sugar. As of 2017 it's called \"Vintersaga\" (winter saga) Swedish festive drink. It is also sold in Russia, the United Kingdom, Canada, Hungary and Switzerland as \"Dryck Påskmust\" at Easter.\nBULLET::::- \"Julmust\" can be found at speciality shops in the United Kingdom (also through Sainsbury's and Ocado) and Belgium.\nBULLET::::- \"Julmust\" is also available for purchase in Finland around Christmas. It is considered part of the Christmas dinner by the Swedish speaking minority.\n\nBULLET::::- List of soft drinks by country\n"}
{"id": "15770", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15770", "title": "Jules Verne", "text": "Jules Verne\n\nJules Gabriel Verne (; ; 8 February 1828 – 24 March 1905) was a French novelist, poet, and playwright.\n\nVerne's collaboration with the publisher Pierre-Jules Hetzel led to the creation of the \"Voyages extraordinaires\", a widely popular series of scrupulously researched adventure novels including \"Journey to the Center of the Earth\" (1864), \"Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea\" (1870), and \"Around the World in Eighty Days\" (1873).\n\nVerne is generally considered a major literary author in France and most of Europe, where he has had a wide influence on the literary avant-garde and on surrealism. His reputation was markedly different in Anglophone regions where he had often been labeled a writer of genre fiction or children's books, largely because of the highly abridged and altered translations in which his novels have often been printed (until the 1980s, when his \"literary reputation ... began to improve\".)\n\nVerne has been the second most-translated author in the world since 1979, ranking between Agatha Christie and William Shakespeare. He has sometimes been called the \"Father of Science Fiction\", a title that has also been given to H. G. Wells, Mary Shelley, and Hugo Gernsback.\n\nVerne was born on 8 February 1828, on Île Feydeau, a small artificial island on the Loire River within the town of Nantes, in No. 4 Rue Olivier-de-Clisson, the house of his maternal grandmother Dame Sophie Allotte de la Fuÿe. His parents were Pierre Verne, an attorney originally from Provins, and Sophie Allote de la Fuÿe, a Nantes woman from a local family of navigators and shipowners, of distant Scottish descent. In 1829, the Verne family moved some hundred meters away to No. 2 Quai Jean-Bart, where Verne's brother Paul was born the same year. Three sisters, Anna (1836), Mathilde (1839), and Marie (1842) would follow.\n\nIn 1834, at the age of six, Verne was sent to boarding school at 5 Place du Bouffay in Nantes. The teacher, Mme Sambin, was the widow of a naval captain who had disappeared some 30 years before. Mme Sambin often told the students that her husband was a shipwrecked castaway and that he would eventually return like Robinson Crusoe from his desert island paradise. The theme of the Robinsonade would stay with Verne throughout his life and appear in many of his novels, including \"The Mysterious Island\" (1874), \"Second Fatherland\" (1900), and \"The School for Robinsons\" (1882).\n\nIn 1836, Verne went on to École Saint‑Stanislas, a Catholic school suiting the pious religious tastes of his father. Verne quickly distinguished himself in \"mémoire\" (recitation from memory), geography, Greek, Latin, and singing. In the same year, 1836, Pierre Verne bought a vacation house at 29 Rue des Réformés in the village of Chantenay (now part of Nantes) on the Loire River. In his brief memoir \"Souvenirs d'enfance et de jeunesse\" (\"Memories of Childhood and Youth\", 1890), Verne recalled a deep fascination with the river and with the many merchant vessels navigating it. He also took vacations at Brains, in the house of his uncle Prudent Allotte, a retired shipowner, who had gone around the world and served as mayor of Brains from 1828 to 1837. Verne took joy in playing interminable rounds of the Game of the Goose with his uncle, and both the game and his uncle's name would be memorialized in two late novels (\"The Will of an Eccentric\" (1900) and \"Robur the Conqueror\" (1886), respectively).\n\nLegend has it that in 1839, at the age of 11, Verne secretly procured a spot as cabin boy on the three-mast ship \"Coralie\" with the intention of traveling to the Indies and bringing back a coral necklace for his cousin Caroline. The evening the ship set out for the Indies, it stopped first at Paimboeuf where Pierre Verne arrived just in time to catch his son and make him promise to travel \"only in his imagination\". It is now known that the legend is an exaggerated tale invented by Verne's first biographer, his niece Marguerite Allotte de la Füye, though it may have been inspired by a real incident.\n\nIn 1840, the Vernes moved again to a large apartment at No. 6 Rue Jean-Jacques-Rousseau, where the family's youngest child, Marie, was born in 1842. In the same year Verne entered another religious school, the Petit Séminaire de Saint-Donatien, as a lay student. His unfinished novel \"Un prêtre en 1839\" (\"A Priest in 1839\"), written in his teens and the earliest of his prose works to survive, describes the seminary in disparaging terms. From 1844 to 1846, Verne and his brother were enrolled in the Lycée Royal (now the Lycée Georges-Clemenceau) in Nantes. After finishing classes in rhetoric and philosophy, he took the baccalauréat at Rennes and received the grade \"Fairly good\" on 29 July 1846.\n\nBy 1847, when Verne was 19, he had taken seriously to writing long works in the style of Victor Hugo, beginning \"Un prêtre en 1839\" and seeing two verse tragedies, \"Alexandre VI\" and \"La Conspiration des poudres\" (\"The Gunpowder Plot\"), to completion. However, his father took it for granted that Verne, being the firstborn son of the family, would not attempt to make money in literature but would instead inherit the family law practice.\n\nIn 1847, Verne's father sent him to Paris, primarily to begin his studies in law school, and secondarily (according to family legend) to distance him temporarily from Nantes. His cousin Caroline, with whom he was in love, was married on 27 April 1847, to Émile Dezaunay, a man of 40, with whom she would have five children.\n\nAfter a short stay in Paris, where he passed first-year law exams, Verne returned to Nantes for his father's help in preparing for the second year (provincial law students were in that era required to go to Paris to take exams). While in Nantes, he met Rose Herminie Arnaud Grossetière, a young woman one year his senior, and fell intensely in love with her. He wrote and dedicated some 30 poems to her, including \"La Fille de l'air\" (\"The Daughter of Air\"), which describes her as \"blonde and enchanting / winged and transparent\". His passion seems to have been reciprocated, at least for a short time, but Grossetière's parents frowned upon the idea of their daughter marrying a young student of uncertain future. They married her instead to Armand Terrien de la Haye, a rich landowner 10 years her senior, on 19 July 1848.\n\nThe sudden marriage sent Verne into deep frustration. He wrote a hallucinatory letter to his mother, apparently composed in a state of half-drunkenness, in which under pretext of a dream he described his misery. This requited but aborted love affair seems to have permanently marked the author and his work, and his novels include a significant number of young women married against their will (Gérande in \"Master Zacharius\" (1854), Sava in \"Mathias Sandorf\" (1885), Ellen in \"A Floating City\" (1871), etc.), to such an extent that the scholar Christian Chelebourg attributed the recurring theme to a \"Herminie complex\". The incident also led Verne to bear a grudge against his birthplace and Nantes society, which he criticized in his poem \"La sixième ville de France\" (\"The Sixth City of France\").\n\nIn July 1848, Verne left Nantes again for Paris, where his father intended him to finish law studies and take up law as a profession. He obtained permission from his father to rent a furnished apartment at 24 Rue de l'Ancienne-Comédie, which he shared with Édouard Bonamy, another student of Nantes origin. (On his 1847 Paris visit, Verne had stayed at 2 Rue Thérèse, the house of his aunt Charuel, on the Butte Saint-Roch.sfnCompère1997c\n\nVerne arrived in Paris during a time of political upheaval: the French Revolution of 1848. In February, Louis Philippe I had been overthrown and had fled; on 24 February, a provisional government of the French Second Republic took power, but political demonstrations continued, and social tension remained. In June, barricades went up in Paris, and the government sent Louis-Eugène Cavaignac to crush the insurrection. Verne entered the city shortly before the election of Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte as the first president of the Republic, a state of affairs that would last until the French coup of 1851 . In a letter to his family, Verne described the bombarded state of the city after the recent June Days uprising but assured them that the anniversary of Bastille Day had gone by without any significant conflict.\nVerne used his family connections to make an entrance into Paris society. His uncle Francisque de Chatêaubourg introduced him into literary salons, and Verne particularly frequented those of Mme de Barrère, a friend of his mother's. While continuing his law studies, he fed his passion for the theatre, writing numerous plays. Verne later recalled: \"I was greatly under the influence of Victor Hugo, indeed, very excited by reading and re-reading his works. At that time I could have recited by heart whole pages of \"Notre Dame de Paris\", but it was his dramatic work that most influenced me.\" Another source of creative stimulation came from a neighbor: living on the same floor in the Rue de l'Ancienne-Comédie apartment house was a young composer, Aristide Hignard, with whom Verne soon became good friends, and Verne wrote several texts for Hignard to set as chansons.\n\nDuring this period, Verne's letters to his parents primarily focused on expenses and on a suddenly appearing series of violent stomach cramps, the first of many he would suffer from during his life. (Modern scholars have hypothesized that he suffered from colitis; Verne believed the illness to have been inherited from his mother's side.) Rumors of an outbreak of cholera in March 1849 exacerbated these medical concerns. Yet another health problem would strike in 1851 when Verne suffered the first of four attacks of facial paralysis. These attacks, rather than being psychosomatic, were due to an inflammation in the middle ear, though this cause remained unknown to Verne during his life.\nIn the same year, Verne was required to enlist in the French military, but the sortition process spared him, to his great relief. He wrote to his father: \"You should already know, dear papa, what I think of the military life, and of these domestic servants in livery. … You have to abandon all dignity to perform such functions.\" Verne's strong antiwar sentiments, to the dismay of his father, would remain steadfast throughout his life.\n\nThough writing profusely and frequenting the salons, Verne diligently pursued his law studies and graduated with a \"licence en droit\" in January 1851.\n\nThanks to his visits to salons, Verne came into contact in 1849 with Alexandre Dumas through the mutual acquaintance of a celebrated chirologist of the time, the Chevalier d'Arpentigny. Verne became close friends with Dumas' son, Alexandre Dumas, fils, and showed him a manuscript for a stage comedy, \"Les Pailles rompues\" (\"The Broken Straws\"). The two young men revised the play together, and Dumas, through arrangements with his father, had it produced by the Opéra-National at the Théâtre Historique in Paris, opening on 12 June 1850.\nIn 1851, Verne met with a fellow writer from Nantes, Pierre-Michel-François Chevalier (known as \"Pitre-Chevalier\"), the editor-in-chief of the magazine \"Musée des familles\" (\"The Family Museum\"). Pitre-Chevalier was looking for articles about geography, history, science, and technology, and was keen to make sure that the educational component would be made accessible to large popular audiences using a straightforward prose style or an engaging fictional story. Verne, with his delight in diligent research, especially in geography, was a natural for the job. Verne first offered him a short historical adventure story, \"The First Ships of the Mexican Navy\", written in the style of James Fenimore Cooper, whose novels had deeply influenced him. Pitre-Chevalier published it in July 1851, and in the same year published a second short story, \"A Voyage in a Balloon\"(August 1851). The latter story, with its combination of adventurous narrative, travel themes, and detailed historical research, would later be described by Verne as \"the first indication of the line of novel that I was destined to follow\".\n\nDumas fils put Verne in contact with Jules Seveste, a stage director who had taken over the directorship of the Théâtre-Historique and renamed it the Théâtre Lyrique. Seveste offered Verne the job of secretary of the theatre, with little or no salary attached. Verne accepted, using the opportunity to write and produce several comic operas written in collaboration with Hignard and the prolific librettist Michel Carré. To celebrate his employment at the Théâtre Lyrique, Verne joined with ten friends to found a bachelors' dining club, the \"Onze-sans-femme\" (Eleven Bachelors).\n\nFor some time, Verne's father pressed him to abandon his writing and begin a business as a lawyer. However, Verne argued in his letters that he could only find success in literature. The pressure to plan for a secure future in law reached its climax in January 1852, when his father offered Verne his own Nantes law practice. Faced with this ultimatum, Verne decided conclusively to continue his literary life and refuse the job, writing: \"Am I not right to follow my own instincts? It's because I know who I am that I realize what I can be one day.\"\nMeanwhile, Verne was spending much time at the Bibliothèque nationale de France, conducting research for his stories and feeding his passion for science and recent discoveries, especially in geography. It was in this period that Verne met the illustrious geographer and explorer Jacques Arago, who continued to travel extensively despite his blindness (he had lost his sight completely in 1837). The two men became good friends, and Arago's innovative and witty accounts of his travels led Verne toward a newly developing genre of literature: that of travel writing.\n\nIn 1852, two new pieces from Verne appeared in the \"Musée des familles\": \"Martin Paz\", a novella set in Lima, which Verne wrote in 1851 and published 10 July through 11 August 1852, and \"Les Châteaux en Californie, ou, Pierre qui roule n'amasse pas mousse\" (\"The Castles in California, or, A Rolling Stone Gathers No Moss\"), a one-act comedy full of racy double entendres. In April and May 1854, the magazine published Verne's short story \"Master Zacharius\", an E. T. A. Hoffmann-like fantasy featuring a sharp condemnation of scientific hubris and ambition, followed soon afterward by \"A Winter Amid the Ice\", a polar adventure story whose themes closely anticipated many of Verne's novels. The \"Musée\" also published some nonfiction popular science articles which, though unsigned, are generally attributed to Verne. Verne's work for the magazine was cut short in 1856 when he had a serious quarrel with Pitre-Chevalier and refused to continue contributing (a refusal he would maintain until 1863, when Pitre-Chevalier died, and the magazine went to new editorship).\n\nWhile writing stories and articles for Pitre-Chevalier, Verne began to form the idea of inventing a new kind of novel, a \"Roman de la Science\" (novel of science), which would allow him to incorporate large amounts of the factual information he so enjoyed researching in the Bibliothèque. He is said to have discussed the project with the elder Alexandre Dumas, who had tried something similar with an unfinished novel, \"Isaac Laquedem\", and who enthusiastically encouraged Verne's project.\n\nAt the end of 1854, another outbreak of cholera led to the death of Jules Seveste, Verne's employer at the Théâtre Lyrique and by then a good friend. Though his contract only held him to a further year of service, Verne remained connected to the theatre for several years after Seveste's death, seeing additional productions to fruition. He also continued to write plays and musical comedies, most of which were not performed.\n\nIn May 1856, Verne traveled to Amiens to be the best man at the wedding of a Nantes friend, Auguste Lelarge, to an Amiens woman named Aimée du Fraysse de Viane. Verne, invited to stay with the bride's family, took to them warmly, befriending the entire household and finding himself increasingly attracted to the bride's sister, Honorine de Viane Morel, a widow aged 26 with two young children. Hoping to find a secure source of income, as well as a chance to court Morel in earnest, he jumped at her brother's offer to go into business with a broker. Verne's father was initially dubious but gave in to his son's requests for approval in November 1856. With his financial situation finally looking promising, Verne won the favor of Morel and her family, and the couple were married on 10 January 1857.\n\nVerne plunged into his new business obligations, leaving his work at the Théâtre Lyrique and taking up a full-time job as an \"agent de change\" on the Paris Bourse, where he became the associate of the broker Fernand Eggly. Verne woke up early each morning so that he would have time to write, before going to the Bourse for the day's work; in the rest of his spare time, he continued to consort with the \"Onze-Sans-Femme\" club (all eleven of its \"bachelors\" had by this time gotten married). He also continued to frequent the Bibliothèque to do scientific and historical research, much of which he copied onto notecards for future use—a system he would continue for the rest of his life. According to the recollections of a colleague, Verne \"did better in repartee than in business\".\n\nIn July 1858, Verne and Aristide Hignard seized an opportunity offered by Hignard's brother: a sea voyage, at no charge, from Bordeaux to Liverpool and Scotland. The journey, Verne's first trip outside France, deeply impressed him, and upon his return to Paris he fictionalized his recollections to form the backbone of a semi-autobiographical novel, \"Backwards to Britain\" (written in the autumn and winter of 1859–1860 and not published until 1989). A second complementary voyage in 1861 took Hignard and Verne to Stockholm, from where they traveled to Christiania and through Telemark. Verne left Hignard in Denmark to return in haste to Paris, but missed the birth on 3 August 1861 of his only biological son, Michel.\n\nMeanwhile, Verne continued work on the idea of a \"Roman de la Science\", which he developed in a rough draft inspired, according to his recollections, by his \"love for maps and the great explorers of the world\". It took shape as a story of travel across Africa and would eventually become his first published novel, \"Five Weeks in a Balloon\".\n\nIn 1862, through their mutual acquaintance Alfred de Bréhat, Verne came into contact with the publisher Pierre-Jules Hetzel, and submitted to him the manuscript of his developing novel, then called \"Voyage en Ballon\". Hetzel, already the publisher of Balzac, George Sand, Victor Hugo, and other well-known authors, had long been planning to launch a high-quality family magazine in which entertaining fiction would combine with scientific education. He saw Verne, with his demonstrated inclination toward scrupulously researched adventure stories, as an ideal contributor for such a magazine, and accepted the novel, giving Verne suggestions for improvement. Verne made the proposed revisions within two weeks and returned to Hetzel with the final draft, now titled \"Five Weeks in a Balloon\". It was published by Hetzel on 31 January 1863.\n\nTo secure his services for the planned magazine, to be called the \"Magasin d'Éducation et de Récréation\" (\"Magazine of Education and Recreation\"), Hetzel also drew up a long-term contract in which Verne would give him three volumes of text per year, each of which Hetzel would buy outright for a flat fee. Verne, finding both a steady salary and a sure outlet for writing at last, accepted immediately. For the rest of his lifetime, most of his novels would be serialized in Hetzel's \"Magasin\" before their appearance in book form, beginning with his second novel for Hetzel, \"The Adventures of Captain Hatteras\" (1864–65).\nWhen \"The Adventures of Captain Hatteras\" was published in book form in 1866, Hetzel publicly announced his literary and educational ambitions for Verne's novels by saying in a preface that Verne's works would form a novel sequence called the \"Voyages extraordinaires\" (\"Extraordinary Voyages\" or \"Extraordinary Journeys\"), and that Verne's aim was \"to outline all the geographical, geological, physical, and astronomical knowledge amassed by modern science and to recount, in an entertaining and picturesque format that is his own, the history of the universe\". Late in life, Verne confirmed that this commission had become the running theme of his novels: \"My object has been to depict the earth, and not the earth alone, but the universe… And I have tried at the same time to realize a very high ideal of beauty of style. It is said that there can't be any style in a novel of adventure, but it isn't true.\" However, he also noted that the project was extremely ambitious: \"Yes! But the Earth is very large, and life is very short! In order to leave a completed work behind, one would need to live to be at least 100 years old!\"\n\nHetzel influenced many of Verne's novels directly, especially in the first few years of their collaboration, for Verne was initially so happy to find a publisher that he agreed to almost all of the changes Hetzel suggested. For example, when Hetzel disapproved of the original climax of \"Captain Hatteras\", including the death of the title character, Verne wrote an entirely new conclusion in which Hatteras survived. Hetzel also rejected Verne's next submission, \"Paris in the Twentieth Century\", believing its pessimistic view of the future and its condemnation of technological progress were too subversive for a family magazine. (The manuscript, believed lost for some time after Verne's death, was finally published in 1994.)\n\nThe relationship between publisher and writer changed significantly around 1869 when Verne and Hetzel were brought into conflict over the manuscript for \"Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea\". Verne had initially conceived of the submariner Captain Nemo as a Polish scientist whose acts of vengeance were directed against the Russians who had killed his family during the January uprising. Hetzel, not wanting to alienate the lucrative Russian market for Verne's books, demanded that Nemo be made an enemy of the slave trade, a situation that would make him an unambiguous hero. Verne, after fighting vehemently against the change, finally invented a compromise in which Nemo's past is left mysterious. After this disagreement, Verne became notably cooler in his dealings with Hetzel, taking suggestions into consideration but often rejecting them outright.\nFrom that point, Verne published two or more volumes a year. The most successful of these are: \"Voyage au centre de la Terre\" (\"Journey to the Center of the Earth\", 1864); \"De la Terre à la Lune\" (\"From the Earth to the Moon\", 1865); \"Vingt mille lieues sous les mers\" (\"Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea\", 1869); and \"Le tour du monde en quatre-vingts jours\" (\"Around the World in Eighty Days\"), which first appeared in \"Le Temps\" in 1872. Verne could now live on his writings. But most of his wealth came from the stage adaptations of \"Le tour du monde en quatre-vingts jours\" (1874) and \"Michel Strogoff\" (1876), which he wrote with Adolphe d'Ennery.\nIn 1867, Verne bought a small boat, the \"Saint-Michel\", which he successively replaced with the \"Saint-Michel II\" and the \"Saint-Michel III\" as his financial situation improved. On board the \"Saint-Michel III\", he sailed around Europe. After his first novel, most of his stories were first serialised in the \"Magazine d'Éducation et de Récréation\", a Hetzel biweekly publication, before being published in book form. His brother Paul contributed to \"40th French climbing of the Mont-Blanc\" and a collection of short stories – \"Doctor Ox\" – in 1874. Verne became wealthy and famous.\n\nMeanwhile, Michel Verne married an actress against his father's wishes, had two children by an underage mistress and buried himself in debts. The relationship between father and son improved as Michel grew older.\n\nThough he was raised Catholic, Verne became a deist in his later years, from about 1870 onward. Some scholars believe his deist philosophy is reflected in his novels, as they often involve the notion of God or divine providence but rarely mention the concept of Christ.\n\nOn 9 March 1886, as Verne was coming home, his twenty-six-year-old nephew, Gaston, shot at him twice with a pistol. The first bullet missed, but the second one entered Verne's left leg, giving him a permanent limp that could not be overcome. This incident was hushed up in the media, but Gaston spent the rest of his life in a mental asylum.\n\nAfter the death of both his mother and Hetzel, Jules Verne began publishing darker works. In 1888, Verne entered politics and was elected town councilor of Amiens, where he championed several improvements and served for fifteen years.\n\nVerne was made a Chevalier de la Légion d'honneur in 1870. He was promoted to an Officier de la Légion d'honneur in 1892.\nOn 24 March 1905, while ill with diabetes, Verne died at his home in Amiens, 44 Boulevard Longueville (now Boulevard Jules-Verne). His son, Michel Verne, oversaw publication of the novels \"Invasion of the Sea\" and \"The Lighthouse at the End of the World\" after Jules's death. The \"Voyages extraordinaires\" series continued for several years afterwards at the same rate of two volumes a year. It was later discovered that Michel Verne had made extensive changes in these stories, and the original versions were eventually published at the end of the 20th century by the Jules Verne Society (Société Jules Verne). In 1919, Michel Verne published The Barsac Mission (), which original drafts contained references to Esperanto, language about which his father had great interest.\n\nIn 1989, Verne's great-grandson discovered his ancestor's as yet unpublished novel \"Paris in the Twentieth Century\" which was subsequently published in 1994.\n\nVerne's largest body of work is the \"Voyages extraordinaires\" series, which includes all of his novels except for the two rejected manuscripts \"Paris in the Twentieth Century\" and \"Backwards to Britain\" (published posthumously in 1994 and 1989, respectively) and for projects left unfinished at his death (many of which would be posthumously adapted or rewritten for publication by his son Michel). Verne also wrote many plays, poems, song texts, operetta libretti, and short stories, as well as a variety of essays and miscellaneous non-fiction.\nAfter his debut under Hetzel, Verne was enthusiastically received in France by writers and scientists alike, with George Sand and Théophile Gautier among his earliest admirers. Several notable contemporary figures, from the geographer Vivien de Saint-Martin to the critic Jules Claretie, spoke highly of Verne and his works in critical and biographical notes.\n\nHowever, Verne's growing popularity among readers and playgoers (due especially to the highly successful stage version of \"Around the World in Eighty Days\") led to a gradual change in his literary reputation. As the novels and stage productions continued to sell, many contemporary critics felt that Verne's status as a commercially popular author meant he could only be seen as a mere genre-based storyteller, rather than a serious author worthy of academic study.\n\nThis denial of formal literary status took various forms, including dismissive criticism by such writers as Émile Zola and the lack of nomination to Verne for membership in the Académie Française, and was recognized by Verne himself, who said in a late interview: \"The great regret of my life is that I have never taken any place in French literature.\" To Verne, who considered himself \"a man of letters and an artist, living in the pursuit of the ideal\", this critical dismissal on the basis of literary ideology could only be seen as the ultimate snub.\n\nThis bifurcation of Verne as a popular genre writer but a critical \"persona non grata\" continued after his death, with early biographies (including one by Verne's own niece, Marguerite Allotte de la Fuÿe) focusing on error-filled and embroidered hagiography of Verne as a popular figure rather than on Verne's actual working methods or his output. Meanwhile, sales of Verne's novels in their original unabridged versions dropped markedly even in Verne's home country, with abridged versions aimed directly at children taking their place.\n\nHowever, the decades after Verne's death also saw the rise in France of the \"Jules Verne cult\", a steadily growing group of scholars and young writers who took Verne's works seriously as literature and willingly noted his influence on their own pioneering works. Some of the cult founded the Société Jules Verne, the first academic society for Verne scholars; many others became highly respected avant garde and surrealist literary figures in their own right. Their praise and analyses, emphasizing Verne's stylistic innovations and enduring literary themes, proved highly influential for literary studies to come.\n\nIn the 1960s and 1970s, thanks in large part to a sustained wave of serious literary study from well-known French scholars and writers, Verne's reputation skyrocketed in France. Roland Barthes' seminal essay \"Nautilus et Bateau Ivre\" (\"The Nautilus and the Drunken Boat\") was influential in its exegesis of the \"Voyages extraordinares\" as a purely literary text, while book-length studies by such figures as Marcel Moré and Jean Chesneaux considered Verne from a multitude of thematic vantage points.\n\nFrench literary journals devoted entire issues to Verne and his work, with essays by such imposing literary figures as Michel Butor, Georges Borgeaud, Marcel Brion, Pierre Versins, Michel Foucault, René Barjavel, Marcel Lecomte, Francis Lacassin, and Michel Serres; meanwhile, Verne's entire published opus returned to print, with unabridged and illustrated editions of his works printed by Livre de Poche and Éditions Rencontre. The wave reached its climax in Verne's sesquicentennial year 1978, when he was made the subject of an academic colloquium at the Centre culturel international de Cerisy-la-Salle, and \"Journey to the Center of the Earth\" was accepted for the French university system's Agrégation reading list. Since these events, Verne has been consistently recognized in Europe as a legitimate member of the French literary canon, with academic studies and new publications steadily continuing.\n\nVerne's reputation in English-speaking countries has been considerably slower in changing. Throughout the 20th century, most Anglophone scholars dismissed Verne as a genre writer for children and a naïve proponent of science and technology (despite strong evidence to the contrary on both counts), thus finding him more interesting as a technological \"prophet\" or as a subject of comparison to English-language writers such as Edgar Allan Poe and H. G. Wells than as a topic of literary study in his own right. This narrow view of Verne has undoubtedly been influenced by the poor-quality English translations and very loosely adapted Hollywood film versions through which most American and British readers have discovered Verne. However, since the mid-1980s a considerable number of serious English-language studies and translations have appeared, suggesting that a rehabilitation of Verne's Anglophone reputation may currently be underway.\n\nTranslation of Verne into English began in 1852, when Verne's short story \"A Voyage in a Balloon\" (1851) was published in the American journal \"Sartain's Union Magazine of Literature and Art\" in a translation by Anne T. Wilbur. Translation of his novels began in 1869 with William Lackland's translation of \"Five Weeks in a Balloon\" (originally published in 1863), and continued steadily throughout Verne's lifetime, with publishers and hired translators often working in great haste to rush his most lucrative titles into English-language print. Unlike Hetzel, who targeted all ages with his publishing strategies for the \"Voyages extraordinaires\", the British and American publishers of Verne chose to market his books almost exclusively to young audiences; this business move, with its implication that Verne could be treated purely as a children's author, had a long-lasting effect on Verne's reputation in English-speaking countries.\n\nThese early English-language translations have been widely criticized for their extensive textual omissions, errors, and alterations, and are not considered adequate representations of Verne's actual novels. The British writer Adam Roberts, in an essay for \"The Guardian\" titled \"Jules Verne deserves a better translation service\", commented: \"I'd always liked reading Jules Verne and I've read most of his novels; but it wasn't until recently that I really understood I hadn't been reading Jules Verne at all... It's a bizarre situation for a world-famous writer to be in. Indeed, I can't think of a major writer who has been so poorly served by translation.\"\n\nSimilarly, the American novelist Michael Crichton observed:\n\nSince 1965, a considerable number of more accurate English translations of Verne have appeared. However, the highly criticized older translations continue to be republished, due to their public domain status and in many cases their easy availability in online sources.\n\nThe relationship between Verne's \"Voyages extraordinaires\" and the literary genre science fiction is a complex one. Verne, like H. G. Wells, is frequently cited as one of the founders of the genre, and his profound influence on its development is indisputable; however, many earlier writers, such as Lucian of Samosata, Voltaire, and Mary Shelley, have also been cited as creators of science fiction, an unavoidable ambiguity arising from the vague definition and history of the genre.\n\nA primary issue at the heart of the dispute is the question of whether Verne's works count as science fiction to begin with. Maurice Renard claimed that Verne \"never wrote a single sentence of scientific-marvelous\". Verne himself argued repeatedly in interviews that his novels were not meant to be read as scientific, saying \"I have invented nothing\". His own goal was rather to \"depict the earth [and] at the same time to realize a very high ideal of beauty of style\", as he pointed out in an example:\n\nClosely related to Verne's science-fiction reputation is the often-repeated claim that he is a \"prophet\" of scientific progress, and that many of his novels involve elements of technology that were fantastic for his day but later became commonplace. These claims have a long history, especially in America, but the modern scholarly consensus is that such claims of prophecy are heavily exaggerated. In a 1961 article critical of \"Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea\"s scientific accuracy, Theodore L. Thomas speculated that Verne's storytelling skill and readers misremembering a book they read as children caused people to \"remember things from it that are not there. The impression that the novel contains valid scientific prediction seems to grow as the years roll by\". As with science fiction, Verne himself flatly denied that he was a futuristic prophet, saying that any connection between scientific developments and his work was \"mere coincidence\" and attributing his indisputable scientific accuracy to his extensive research: \"even before I began writing stories, I always took numerous notes out of every book, newspaper, magazine, or scientific report that I came across.\"\n\nVerne's novels have had a wide influence on both literary and scientific works; writers known to have been influenced by Verne include Marcel Aymé, Roland Barthes, René Barjavel, Michel Butor, Blaise Cendrars, Paul Claudel, Jean Cocteau, François Mauriac, Raymond Roussel, Claude Roy, Julio Cortázar, Antoine Saint-Exupéry, and Jean-Paul Sartre, while scientists and explorers who acknowledged Verne's inspiration have included Richard E. Byrd, Yuri Gagarin, Simon Lake, Hubert Lyautey, Guglielmo Marconi, Fridtjof Nansen, Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, Wernher von Braun, and Jack Parsons. He is credited with helping inspire the \"steampunk\" genre, a literary and social movement that glamorizes science fiction based on 19th-century technology.\n\nRay Bradbury summed up Verne's influence on literature and science the world over by saying: \"We are all, in one way or another, the children of Jules Verne.\"\n\nBULLET::::- ; statistics on \"Index Translationum\" database (1979–present, updates processed upon receipt from UNESCO members states)\nBULLET::::- Zvi Har'El's Jules Verne Collection, including a complete primary bibliography, a collection of academic scholarship, a Verne chronology, and a multilingual virtual library\nBULLET::::- Annotated bibliography with summaries of Verne's works\nBULLET::::- Jules Verne's works with concordances and frequency list\nBULLET::::- A Jules Verne Centennial at the Smithsonian Institution\nBULLET::::- The Jules Verne Collecting Resource with sources, images, and ephemera\nBULLET::::- Maps from Verne's books\nBULLET::::- Jules Verne Biography\nBULLET::::- The Jules Verne Museum in Nantes\nBULLET::::- The North American Jules Verne Society\nBULLET::::- Centre International Jules Verne\nBULLET::::- Jules Verne Collection From the Rare Book and Special Collections Division at the Library of Congress\nBULLET::::- Jules Verne on IMDb\n"}
{"id": "15771", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15771", "title": "Johannes Rau", "text": "Johannes Rau\n\nJohannes Rau (; 16 January 193127 January 2006) was a German politician (SPD). He was President of Germany from 1 July 1999 until 30 July 2004 and Minister President of North Rhine-Westphalia from 20 September 1978 to 9 June 1998. In the latter role, he also served as President of the Bundesrat in 1982/83 and in 1994/1995.\n\nRau was born in the Barmen part of Wuppertal, Rhine Province, as the third of five children. His family was strongly Protestant. As a schoolboy, Rau was active in the Confessing Church, a circle of the German Protestant Church which resisted Nazism.\n\nRau left school in 1949 and worked as a publisher, especially with the Protestant Youth Publishing House.\n\nRau was a member of the All-German People’s Party (GVP), which was founded by Gustav Heinemann. The party was known for proposing German reunification from 1952 until it was disbanded in 1957.\n\nIn 1958, the pacifist Rau and his political mentor, Gustav Heinemann, joined the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD), where he was active in the Wuppertal chapter. He served as deputy chairman of the SPD party of Wuppertal and was elected later on to the City Council (1964–1978), where he served as chairman of the SPD Group (1964–1967) and later as Mayor (1969–1970).\n\nIn 1958, Rau was elected for the first time as member of the \"Landtag\" (state parliament) of North Rhine-Westphalia. In 1967, he became chairman of the SPD fraction in the Landtag, and in 1970, he was Minister of Science and Education in the cabinet of Minister President Heinz Kühn. He soon gained a reputation as a reformer. As part of the mass education campaign of the 1970s, he founded five universities, each at different sites, in North Rhine-Westphalia and initiated Germany’s first distance learning university at Hagen (modelled on the \"Open University\").\n\nIn 1977, Rau became Chairman of the North Rhine-Westphalia SPD and, in 1978, Minister President of the state, which he remained until 1998, with four successful elections for the SPD, which became strongest party in the Landtag each time and gained an absolute majority three times, in 1980, 1985, 1990 and finally 1995. From 1995 onwards, Rau led an SPD-Greens coalition in North Rhine-Westphalia. Rau twice served as President of the Bundesrat in 1982/83 and 1994/95.\n\nIn 1987, Rau was his party's candidate to become chancellor of Germany for the SPD, but he lost the elections against Helmut Kohl’s Christian Democrats (CDU). In 1994, Rau was a candidate to become President of Germany but lost to Roman Herzog.\n\nIn 1998, Rau stepped down from his positions as SPD Chairman and Minister President, and on 23 May 1999, he was elected President of Germany by the Federal Assembly of Germany to succeed Roman Herzog (CDU). On 1 July 2004, he was succeeded by Horst Köhler. In common with all other Federal Presidents except for Heinemann, who had not wished to be seen off in this manner, Rau was honored by a Großer Zapfenstreich which, at his request, included the hymn \"Jesus bleibet meine Freude\" (literally \"that Jesus remain my Joy\", but commonly Jesu, Joy of Man's Desiring).\n\nDuring 2000, Rau became the first German head of state to address the Knesset, the Israeli parliament, in German. The controversial step prompted some Israeli delegates to walk out. However, Israeli President Moshe Katsav supported and praised him for bridging the gap between the two states. Rau had a deep and lifelong commitment to bringing reconciliation between Germany and its past.\n\nRau had a long history of heart disease and died 11 days after his 75th birthday on 27 January 2006. The funeral took place on 7 February following a funeral act of state on the Dorotheenstadt cemetery in Berlin in the closest of family and friends.\n\nThe maxim of Rau was \"to reconcile, not divide\".\n\nAs his personal motto, Rau adopted the Confessing Church dictum \"teneo, quia teneor\" (I hold because I am held).\n\nIn his acceptance speech after his election, Rau claimed \"A patriot I will be\" because \"a patriot is someone who loves his fatherland, a nationalist is someone who despises the fatherlands of the others\". The quote can be attributed to the French writer Romain Gary.\n\nRau was awarded fifteen honorary doctorates. \nIn 2001, he received the Leo Baeck Medal for his humanitarian work promoting tolerance and social justice.\n\nRau was known as a practising Christian (and sometimes titled , \"Brother John\", to ridicule his intense Christian position; however, he sometimes used this term himself). He held lay positions in, and was a member of, the Synod of the Evangelical Church in the Rhineland, a member church of the Evangelical Church in Germany.\n\nOn 9 August 1982, Rau married the political scientist, Christina Delius (born 1956). Christina Rau is a granddaughter of her husband's mentor, Gustav Heinemann, former President of Germany. The couple had three children: Anna Christina, born 1983, Philip Immanuel, born 1985 and Laura Helene, born 1986. \nSince 1995 Rau was aware of his dangerous aneurysm in the abdominal aorta, but declined an operation out of respect for his office and the upcoming election as president. On 23 July 2000 the operation took place at the University Hospital of Essen. On 18 August 2004, he had to undergo serious heart surgery, in which an artificial heart valve was inserted. Only two months later (19 October 2004) a hematoma in the abdominal cavity was surgically removed.\n\nAfter leaving office, Rau lived with his family in the federal capital, Berlin. However, they also kept a house in Wuppertal.\n\nBULLET::::- : Grand Cross Special Class of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany\n\nBULLET::::- : Grand Star of the Decoration of Honour for Services to the Republic of Austria (2004)\nBULLET::::- : Collar of the Order of the White Lion\nBULLET::::- : Collar of the Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana\nBULLET::::- : Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of the Falcon (1 July 2003)\nBULLET::::- : 2nd Class, then, 1st Class with Chain of the Order of the Three Stars\nBULLET::::- : Order of the White Eagle (Poland)\nBULLET::::- : Grand Cross (or 1st Class) of the Order of the White Double Cross (2001)\nBULLET::::- : First Class of the Order of the State of Republic of Turkey (2000)\nBULLET::::- : Knight of the Order of the Elephant (24 April 2002)\nBULLET::::- : Collar of the Order of Isabella the Catholic (8 November 2002)\nBULLET::::- Olympic Order\n\nBULLET::::- Germany\nBULLET::::- Politics of Germany\n\nBULLET::::- www.bundespraesident.de: Johannes Rau—Official biography\nBULLET::::- online book of condolence for Johannes Rau\n"}
{"id": "15772", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15772", "title": "Jackson", "text": "Jackson\n\nJackson may refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- Jackson (name), including a list of people with the surname or given name\n\nBULLET::::- Jackson, Queensland, a town in the Maranoa Region\nBULLET::::- Jackson North, Queensland, a locality in the Maranoa Region\nBULLET::::- Jackson South, Queensland, a locality in the Maranoa Region\nBULLET::::- Jackson oil field in Durham, Shire of Bulloo, Queensland\n\nBULLET::::- Jackson Inlet, Nunavut, Canada\nBULLET::::- Jackson Island (Nunavut), Canada\nBULLET::::- Jackson, Ontario, a small community southeast of London, Ontario\n\nBULLET::::- Jackson River (New Zealand)\nBULLET::::- Jacksons, New Zealand\n\nBULLET::::- Jackson, Alabama\nBULLET::::- Jackson, California\nBULLET::::- Jackson, Georgia\nBULLET::::- Jackson, Idaho\nBULLET::::- Jackson, Indiana\nBULLET::::- Jackson, Ripley County, Indiana\nBULLET::::- Jackson, Kentucky\nBULLET::::- Jackson, Louisiana\nBULLET::::- Jackson, Maine\nBULLET::::- Jackson, Michigan\nBULLET::::- Jackson, Minnesota\n\nBULLET::::- Jackson, Mississippi, the state capital and most populous city of Mississippi\nBULLET::::- Jackson, Missouri\nBULLET::::- Jackson, Nebraska\nBULLET::::- Jackson, New Hampshire\nBULLET::::- Jackson, Camden County, New Jersey\nBULLET::::- Jackson Township, New Jersey\nBULLET::::- Jackson, New York\nBULLET::::- Jackson, North Carolina\nBULLET::::- Jackson, Ohio\nBULLET::::- Jackson Township, Susquehanna County, Pennsylvania\nBULLET::::- Jackson, Rhode Island\nBULLET::::- Jackson, South Carolina\nBULLET::::- Jackson, Tennessee\nBULLET::::- Jackson, Washington\nBULLET::::- Jackson, Wisconsin (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Jackson, Wyoming\nBULLET::::- Jackson County (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Jackson Hole, a valley in the state of Wyoming\nBULLET::::- Jackson metropolitan area (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Jackson Parish, Louisiana\nBULLET::::- Jackson River (Virginia)\nBULLET::::- Jackson Township (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Lake Jackson (Georgia), a reservoir\n\nBULLET::::- Jackson Island, in Franz Josef Land, Russian Federation\nBULLET::::- Mount Jackson (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Jackson (crater), a prominent lunar impact crater in the northern hemisphere on the far side of the Moon\n\nBULLET::::- Jill and Jan Jackson, the title characters of \"The Jackson Twins\", a comic strip\nBULLET::::- Percy Jackson, title character of bestselling book series by Rick Riordan\nBULLET::::- Jackson \"Jax\" Teller, on the television show \"Sons of Anarchy\"\n\nBULLET::::- \"Jackson\" (2008 film), an American film\nBULLET::::- \"Jackson\" (2015 film), a film\n\nBULLET::::- Jackson (song), written by Jerry Leiber and Billy Edd Wheeler\nBULLET::::- \"Classical Electrodynamics\" (book), a physics textbook often known by the name of its author: Jackson\nBULLET::::- \"Jackson\" (album)\n\nBULLET::::- Jackson Guitars, a manufacturing company\nBULLET::::- Jackson Laboratory, a biomedical research institution\nBULLET::::- Jackson National Life, a financial services company\nBULLET::::- Jacksons (department store), a department store chain in the United Kingdom\n\nBULLET::::- Jackson (API) - a JSON processor for Java\nBULLET::::- Jackson structured programming\n\nBULLET::::- M36 tank destroyer, nicknamed the \"Jackson\", a United States tank destroyer in World War II\nBULLET::::- United States twenty-dollar bill, nicknamed for Andrew Jackson, whose picture appears on the obverse side\n\nBULLET::::- Jaxon (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Jackson Hole (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Jackson station (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Jacksonville (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Jax (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Justice Jackson (disambiguation)\n"}
{"id": "15773", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15773", "title": "Jabal Ram", "text": "Jabal Ram\n\nJabal Ram is a mountain in Jordan. Most authorities give its elevation as above sea level. It was once thought to be the highest point in Jordan, but SRTM data shows that Jabal Umm al Dami is above sea level and therefore higher.\n\nTraditional climbing routes over its eastern face make it one of the main attractions for climbers.\n\nThere are about ten scrambling routes across the mountain.\n\nTony Howard wrote a valuable book about Jordan, including Wadi Rum and Jabal Rum: Treks and Climbs in Wadi Rum, Jordan.\n\nThe most popular scrambling routes are the Thamudic and Sheikh Hamdans.\n"}
{"id": "15777", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15777", "title": "Joseph Goebbels", "text": "Joseph Goebbels\n\nPaul Joseph Goebbels (; 29 October 1897 – 1 May 1945) was a German Nazi politician and Reich Minister of Propaganda of Nazi Germany from 1933 to 1945. He was one of Adolf Hitler's closest and most devoted associates, and was known for his skills in public speaking and his deeply virulent antisemitism, which was evident in his publicly voiced views. He advocated progressively harsher discrimination, including the extermination of the Jews in the Holocaust.\n\nGoebbels, who aspired to be an author, obtained a Doctor of Philology degree from the University of Heidelberg in 1921. He joined the Nazi Party in 1924, and worked with Gregor Strasser in their northern branch. He was appointed \"Gauleiter\" (district leader) for Berlin in 1926, where he began to take an interest in the use of propaganda to promote the party and its programme. After the Nazis' seizure of power in 1933, Goebbels's Propaganda Ministry quickly gained and exerted control over the news media, arts, and information in Germany. He was particularly adept at using the relatively new media of radio and film for propaganda purposes. Topics for party propaganda included antisemitism, attacks on the Christian churches, and (after the start of the Second World War) attempting to shape morale.\n\nIn 1943, Goebbels began to pressure Hitler to introduce measures that would produce \"total war\", including closing businesses not essential to the war effort, conscripting women into the labour force, and enlisting men in previously exempt occupations into the Wehrmacht. Hitler finally appointed him as Reich Plenipotentiary for Total War on 23 July 1944, whereby Goebbels undertook largely unsuccessful measures to increase the number of people available for armaments manufacture and the Wehrmacht.\n\nAs the war drew to a close and Nazi Germany faced defeat, Magda Goebbels and the Goebbels children joined him in Berlin. They moved into the underground \"Vorbunker\", part of Hitler's underground bunker complex, on 22 April 1945. Hitler committed suicide on 30 April. In accordance with Hitler's will, Goebbels succeeded him as Chancellor of Germany; he served one day in this post. The following day, Goebbels and his wife committed suicide, after poisoning their six children with cyanide.\n\nPaul Joseph Goebbels was born on 29 October 1897 in Rheydt, an industrial town south of Mönchengladbach near Düsseldorf. Both of his parents were Roman Catholics with modest family backgrounds. His father Fritz was a German factory clerk; his mother Katharina (\"née\" Odenhausen) was born to Dutch and German parents in the Netherlands. Goebbels had five siblings: Konrad (1893–1947), Hans (1895–1949), Maria (1896–1896), Elisabeth (1901–1915), and Maria (1910–1949), who married the German filmmaker Max W. Kimmich in 1938. In 1932, Goebbels published a pamphlet of his family tree to refute the rumours that his grandmother was of Jewish ancestry.\n\nDuring childhood, Goebbels suffered from ill health, which included a long bout of inflammation of the lungs. He had a deformed right foot that turned inwards, due to a congenital deformity. It was thicker and shorter than his left foot. He underwent a failed operation to correct it just prior to starting grammar school. Goebbels wore a metal brace and special shoe because of his shortened leg and walked with a limp. He was rejected for military service in World War I due to this deformity.\nGoebbels was educated at a \"Gymnasium\", where he completed his \"Abitur\" (university entrance examination) in 1917. He was the top student of his class and was given the traditional honour to speak at the awards ceremony. His parents initially hoped that he would become a Catholic priest, and Goebbels seriously considered it. He studied literature and history at the universities of Bonn, Würzburg, Freiburg, and Munich, aided by a scholarship from the Albertus Magnus Society. By this time Goebbels had begun to distance himself from the church.\n\nHistorians, including Richard J. Evans and Roger Manvell, speculate that Goebbels' lifelong pursuit of women may have been in compensation for his physical disability. At Freiburg, he met and fell in love with Anka Stalherm, who was three years his senior. She went on to Würzburg to continue school, as did Goebbels. In 1921 he wrote a semi-autobiographical novel, \"Michael\", a three-part work of which only Parts I and III have survived. Goebbels felt he was writing his \"own story\". Antisemitic content and material about a charismatic leader may have been added by Goebbels shortly before the book was published in 1929 by Eher-Verlag, the publishing house of the Nazi Party (National Socialist German Workers' Party; NSDAP). By 1920, the relationship with Anka was over. The break-up filled Goebbels with thoughts of suicide.\n\nAt the University of Heidelberg, Goebbels wrote his doctoral thesis on Wilhelm von Schütz, a minor 19th century romantic dramatist. He had hoped to write his thesis under the supervision of Friedrich Gundolf, a literary historian. It did not seem to bother Goebbels that Gundolf was Jewish. Gundolf was no longer teaching, so directed Goebbels to associate professor Max Freiherr von Waldberg. Waldberg, also Jewish, recommended Goebbels write his thesis on Wilhelm von Schütz. After submitting the thesis and passing his oral examination, Goebbels earned his PhD in 1921. By 1940 he had written 14 books.\n\nGoebbels returned home and worked as a private tutor. He also found work as a journalist and was published in the local newspaper. His writing during that time reflected his growing antisemitism and dislike for modern culture. In the summer of 1922, he met and began a love affair with Else Janke, a schoolteacher. After she revealed to him that she was half-Jewish, Goebbels stated the \"enchantment [was] ruined.\" Nevertheless, he continued to see her on and off until 1927.\n\nHe continued for several years to try to become a published author. His diaries, which he began in 1923 and continued for the rest of his life, provided an outlet for his desire to write. The lack of income from his literary works (he wrote two plays in 1923, neither of which sold) forced him to take employment as a caller on the stock exchange and as a bank clerk in Cologne, a job he detested. He was dismissed from the bank in August 1923 and returned to Rheydt. During this period, he read avidly and was influenced by the works of Oswald Spengler, Fyodor Dostoyevsky, and Houston Stewart Chamberlain, the British-born German writer whose book \"The Foundations of the Nineteenth Century\" (1899) was one of the standard works of the extreme right in Germany. He also began to study the \"social question\" and read the works of Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, Rosa Luxemburg, August Bebel and Gustav Noske. According to German historian Peter Longerich, Goebbels's diary entries from late 1923 to early 1924 reflected the writings of a man who was isolated, preoccupied with \"religious-philosophical\" issues, and lacked a sense of direction. Diary entries of mid-December 1923 forward show Goebbels was moving towards the \"Völkisch\" nationalist movement.\n\nGoebbels first took an interest in Adolf Hitler and Nazism in 1924. In February 1924, Hitler's trial for treason began in the wake of his failed attempt to seize power in the Beer Hall Putsch of 8–9 November 1923. The trial attracted widespread press coverage and gave Hitler a platform for propaganda. Hitler was sentenced to five years prison, but was released on 20 December 1924, after serving just over a year. Goebbels was drawn to the NSDAP mostly because of Hitler's charisma and commitment to his beliefs. He joined the NSDAP around this time, becoming member number 8762. In late 1924, Goebbels offered his services to Karl Kaufmann, who was \"Gauleiter\" (NSDAP district leader) for the Rhine-Ruhr District. Kaufmann put him in touch with Gregor Strasser, a leading Nazi organiser in northern Germany, who hired him to work on their weekly newspaper and undertake secretarial work for the regional party offices. He was also put to work as party speaker and representative for Rhineland-Westphalia. Members of Strasser's northern branch of the NSDAP, including Goebbels, had a more socialist outlook than the rival Hitler group in Munich. Strasser disagreed with Hitler on many parts of the party platform, and in November 1926 began working on a revision.\n\nHitler viewed Strasser's actions as a threat to his authority, and summoned 60 \"Gauleiters\" and party leaders, including Goebbels, to a special conference in Bamberg, in Streicher's \"Gau\" of Franconia, where he gave a two-hour speech repudiating Strasser's new political programme. Hitler was opposed to the socialist leanings of the northern wing, stating it would mean \"political bolshevization of Germany.\" Further, there would be \"no princes, only Germans,\" and a legal system with no \"Jewish system of exploitation ... for plundering of our people.\" The future would be secured by acquiring land, not through expropriation of the estates of the former nobility, but through colonising territories to the east. Goebbels was horrified by Hitler's characterisation of socialism as \"a Jewish creation\" and his assertion that a Nazi government would not expropriate private property. He wrote in his diary: \"I no longer fully believe in Hitler. That's the terrible thing: my inner support has been taken away.\"\n\nAfter reading Hitler's book \"Mein Kampf\", Goebbels found himself agreeing with Hitler's assertion of a \"Jewish doctrine of Marxism\". In February 1926 Goebbels gave a speech titled \"Lenin or Hitler?\" in which he asserted that communism or Marxism could not save the German people, but he believed it would cause a \"socialist nationalist state\" to arise in Russia. In 1926, Goebbels published a pamphlet titled \"\"Nazi-Sozi\"\" which attempted to explain how National Socialism differed from Marxism.\n\nIn hopes of winning over the opposition, Hitler arranged meetings in Munich with the three Greater Ruhr \"Gau\" leaders, including Goebbels. Goebbels was impressed when Hitler sent his own car to meet them at the railway station. That evening Hitler and Goebbels both gave speeches at a beer hall rally. The following day, Hitler offered his hand in reconciliation to the three men, encouraging them to put their differences behind them. Goebbels capitulated completely, offering Hitler his total loyalty. He wrote in his diary: \"I love him ... He has thought through everything,\" \"Such a sparkling mind can be my leader. I bow to the greater one, the political genius.\" He later wrote: \"Adolf Hitler, I love you because you are both great and simple at the same time. What one calls a genius.\" As a result of the Bamberg and Munich meetings, Strasser's new draft of the party programme was discarded. The original National Socialist Program of 1920 was retained unchanged, and Hitler's position as party leader was greatly strengthened.\n\nAt Hitler's invitation, Goebbels spoke at party meetings in Munich and at the annual Party Congress, held in Weimar in 1926. For the following year's event, Goebbels was involved in the planning for the first time. He and Hitler arranged for the rally to be filmed. Receiving praise for doing well at these events led Goebbels to shape his political ideas to match Hitler's, and to admire and idolise him even more.\n\nGoebbels was first offered the position of party \"Gauleiter\" for the Berlin section in August 1926. He travelled to Berlin in mid-September and by the middle of October accepted the position. Thus Hitler's plan to divide and dissolve the northwestern \"Gauleiters\" group that Goebbels had served in under Strasser was successful. Hitler gave Goebbels great authority over the area, allowing him to determine the course for organisation and leadership for the \"Gau\". Goebbels was given control over the local \"Sturmabteilung\" (SA) and \"Schutzstaffel\" (SS) and answered only to Hitler. The party membership numbered about 1,000 when Goebbels arrived, and he reduced it to a core of 600 of the most active and promising members. To raise money, he instituted membership fees and began charging admission to party meetings. Aware of the value of publicity (both positive and negative), he deliberately provoked beer-hall battles and street brawls, including violent attacks on the Communist Party of Germany. Goebbels adapted recent developments in commercial advertising to the political sphere, including the use of catchy slogans and subliminal cues. His new ideas for poster design included using large type, red ink, and cryptic headers that encouraged the reader to examine the fine print to determine the meaning.\n\nLike Hitler, Goebbels practised his public speaking skills in front of a mirror. Meetings were preceded by ceremonial marches and singing, and the venues were decorated with party banners. His entrance (almost always late) was timed for maximum emotional impact. Goebbels usually meticulously planned his speeches ahead of time, using pre-planned and choreographed inflection and gestures, but he was also able to improvise and adapt his presentation to make a good connection with his audience. He used loudspeakers, decorative flames, uniforms, and marches to attract attention to speeches.\n\nGoebbels' tactic of using provocation to bring attention to the NSDAP, along with violence at the public party meetings and demonstrations, led the Berlin police to ban the NSDAP from the city on 5 May 1927. Violent incidents continued, including young Nazis randomly attacking Jews in the streets. Goebbels was subjected to a public speaking ban until the end of October. During this period, he founded the newspaper \"Der Angriff\" (\"The Attack\") as a propaganda vehicle for the Berlin area, where few supported the party. It was a modern-style newspaper with an aggressive tone; 126 libel suits were pending against Goebbels at one point. To his disappointment, circulation was initially only 2,000. Material in the paper was highly anti-communist and antisemitic. Among the paper's favourite targets was the Jewish Deputy Chief of the Berlin Police Bernhard Weiß. Goebbels gave him the derogatory nickname \"Isidore\" and subjected him to a relentless campaign of Jew-baiting in the hope of provoking a crackdown he could then exploit. Goebbels continued to try to break into the literary world, with a revised version of his book \"Michael\" finally being published, and the unsuccessful production of two of his plays (\"Der Wanderer\" and \"Die Saat\" (\"The Seed\")). The latter was his final attempt at playwriting. During this period in Berlin he had relationships with many women, including his old flame Anka Stalherm, who was now married and had a small child. He was quick to fall in love, but easily tired of a relationship and moved on to someone new. He worried too about how a committed personal relationship might interfere with his career.\n\nThe ban on the NSDAP was lifted before the Reichstag elections on 20 May 1928. The NSDAP lost nearly 100,000 voters and earned only 2.6 per cent of the vote nationwide. Results in Berlin were even worse, where they attained only 1.4 per cent of the vote. Goebbels was one of 12 NSDAP members to gain election to the Reichstag. This gave him immunity from prosecution for a long list of outstanding charges, including a three-week jail sentence he received in April for insulting the deputy police chief Weiß. The Reichstag changed the immunity regulations in February 1931, and Goebbels was forced to pay fines for libellous material he had placed in \"Der Angriff\" over the course of the previous year.\n\nIn his newspaper \"Berliner Arbeiterzeitung\" (\"Berlin Workers Newspaper\"), Gregor Strasser was highly critical of Goebbels' failure to attract the urban vote. However, the party as a whole did much better in rural areas, attracting as much as 18 per cent of the vote in some regions. This was partly because Hitler had publicly stated just prior to the election that Point 17 of the party programme, which mandated the expropriation of land without compensation, would apply only to Jewish speculators and not private landholders. After the election, the party refocused their efforts to try to attract still more votes in the agricultural sector. In May, shortly after the election, Hitler considered appointing Goebbels as party propaganda chief. But he hesitated, as he worried that the removal of Gregor Strasser from the post would lead to a split in the party. Goebbels considered himself well suited to the position, and began to formulate ideas about how propaganda could be used in schools and the media.\n\nBy 1930 Berlin was the party's second-strongest base of support after Munich. That year the violence between the Nazis and communists led to local SA troop leader Horst Wessel being shot by two members of the Communist Party of Germany. He later died in hospital. Exploiting Wessel's death, Goebbels turned him into a martyr for the Nazi movement. He officially declared Wessel's march \"Die Fahne hoch\" (\"Raise the flag\"), renamed as the \"Horst-Wessel-Lied\", to be the NSDAP anthem.\n\nThe Great Depression greatly impacted Germany and by 1930 there was a dramatic increase in unemployment. During this time, the Strasser brothers started publishing a new daily newspaper in Berlin, the \"Nationaler Sozialist\". Like their other publications, it conveyed the brothers' own brand of Nazism, including nationalism, anti-capitalism, social reform, and anti-Westernism. Goebbels complained vehemently about the rival Strasser newspapers to Hitler, and admitted that their success was causing his own Berlin newspapers to be \"pushed to the wall\". In late April 1930, Hitler publicly and firmly announced his opposition to Gregor Strasser and appointed Goebbels to replace him as Reich leader of NSDAP propaganda. One of Goebbels' first acts was to ban the evening edition of the \"Nationaler Sozialist\". Goebbels was also given control of other Nazi papers across the country, including the party's national newspaper, the \"Völkischer Beobachter\" (\"People's Observer\"). He still had to wait until 3 July for Otto Strasser and his supporters to announce they were leaving the NSDAP. Upon receiving the news, Goebbels was relieved the \"crisis\" with the Strassers was finally over and glad that Otto Strasser had lost all power.\n\nThe rapid deterioration of the economy led to the resignation on 27 March 1930 of the coalition government that had been elected in 1928. A new cabinet was formed, and Paul von Hindenburg used his power as president to govern via emergency decrees. He appointed Heinrich Brüning as chancellor. Goebbels took charge of the NSDAP's national campaign for Reichstag elections called for 14 September 1930. Campaigning was undertaken on a huge scale, with thousands of meetings and speeches held all over the country. Hitler's speeches focused on blaming the country's economic woes on the Weimar Republic, particularly its adherence to the terms of the Treaty of Versailles, which required war reparations that had proven devastating to the German economy. He proposed a new German society based on race and national unity. The resulting success took even Hitler and Goebbels by surprise: the party received 6.5 million votes nationwide and took 107 seats in the Reichstag, making it the second largest party in the country.\n\nIn late 1930 Goebbels met Magda Quandt, a divorcée who had joined the party a few months earlier. She worked as a volunteer in the party offices in Berlin, helping Goebbels organise his private papers. Her flat on the \"Reichskanzlerplatz\" soon became a favourite meeting place for Hitler and other NSDAP officials. Goebbels and Quandt married on 19 December 1931.\n\nFor two further elections held in 1932, Goebbels organised massive campaigns that included rallies, parades, speeches, and Hitler travelling around the country by aeroplane with the slogan \"the Führer over Germany\". Goebbels wrote in his diary that the Nazis must gain power and exterminate Marxism. He undertook numerous speaking tours during these election campaigns and had some of their speeches published on gramophone records and as pamphlets. Goebbels was also involved in the production of a small collection of silent films that could be shown at party meetings, though they did not yet have enough equipment to widely use this medium. Many of Goebbels' campaign posters used violent imagery such as a giant half-clad male destroying political opponents or other perceived enemies such as \"International High Finance\". His propaganda characterised the opposition as \"November criminals\", \"Jewish wire-pullers\", or a communist threat. Support for the party continued to grow, but neither of these elections led to a majority government. In an effort to stabilise the country and improve economic conditions, Hindenburg appointed Hitler as Reich chancellor on 30 January 1933.\n\nTo celebrate Hitler's appointment as chancellor, Goebbels organised a torchlight parade in Berlin on the night of 30 January of an estimated 60,000 men, many in the uniforms of the SA and SS. The spectacle was covered by a live state radio broadcast, with commentary by longtime party member and future Minister of Aviation Hermann Göring. Goebbels was disappointed not to be given a post in Hitler's new cabinet. Bernhard Rust was appointed as Minister of Culture, the post that Goebbels was expecting to receive. Like other NSDAP officials, Goebbels had to deal with Hitler's leadership style of giving contradictory orders to his subordinates, while placing them into positions where their duties and responsibilities overlapped. In this way, Hitler fostered distrust, competition, and infighting among his subordinates to consolidate and maximise his own power. The NSDAP took advantage of the Reichstag fire of 27 February 1933, with Hindenburg passing the Reichstag Fire Decree the following day at Hitler's urging. This was the first of several pieces of legislation that dismantled democracy in Germany and put a totalitarian dictatorship—headed by Hitler—in its place. On 5 March, yet another Reichstag election took place, the last to be held before the defeat of the Nazis at the end of the Second World War. While the NSDAP increased their number of seats and percentage of the vote, it was not the landslide expected by the party leadership. Goebbels finally received Hitler's appointment to the cabinet, officially becoming head of the newly created Reich Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda on 14 March.\n\nThe role of the new ministry, which set up its offices in the 18th-century Ordenspalais across from the Reich Chancellery, was to centralise Nazi control of all aspects of German cultural and intellectual life. Goebbels hoped to increase popular support of the party from the 37 per cent achieved at the last free election held in Germany on 25 March 1933 to 100 per cent support. An unstated goal was to present to other nations the impression that the NSDAP had the full and enthusiastic backing of the entire population. One of Goebbels' first productions was staging the Day of Potsdam, a ceremonial passing of power from Hindenburg to Hitler, held in Potsdam on 21 March. He composed the text of Hitler's decree authorising the Nazi boycott of Jewish businesses, held on 1 April. Later that month, Goebbels travelled back to Rheydt, where he was given a triumphal reception. The townsfolk lined the main street, which had been renamed in his honour. On the following day, Goebbels was declared a local hero.\n\nGoebbels converted the 1 May holiday from a celebration of workers' rights (observed as such especially by the communists) into a day celebrating the NSDAP. In place of the usual ad hoc labour celebrations, he organised a huge party rally held at Tempelhof Field in Berlin. The following day, all trade union offices in the country were forcibly disbanded by the SA and SS, and the Nazi-run German Labour Front was created to take their place. \"We are the masters of Germany,\" he commented in his diary entry of 3 May. Less than two weeks later, he gave a speech at the Nazi book burning in Berlin on 10 May, a ceremony he suggested.\n\nMeanwhile, the NSDAP began passing laws to marginalise Jews and remove them from German society. The Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service, passed on 7 April 1933, forced all non-Aryans to retire from the legal profession and civil service. Similar legislation soon deprived Jewish members of other professions of their right to practise. The first Nazi concentration camps (initially created to house political dissenters) were founded shortly after Hitler seized power. In a process termed \"Gleichschaltung\" (co-ordination), the NSDAP proceeded to rapidly bring all aspects of life under control of the party. All civilian organisations, including agricultural groups, volunteer organisations, and sports clubs, had their leadership replaced with Nazi sympathisers or party members. By June 1933, virtually the only organisations not in the control of the NSDAP were the army and the churches. In a move to manipulate Germany's middle class and shape popular opinion, the regime passed on 4 October 1933 the \"Schriftleitergesetz\" (Editor's Law), which became the cornerstone of the Nazi Party's control of the popular press. Modeled to some extent on the system in Benito Mussolini's Italy, the law defined a \"Schriftleiter\" as anyone who wrote, edited, or selected texts and/or illustrated material for serial publication. Individuals selected for this position were chosen based on experiential, educational, and racial criteria. The law required journalists to \"regulate their work in accordance with National Socialism as a philosophy of life and as a conception of government.\"\n\nAt the end of June 1934, top officials of the SA and opponents of the regime, including Gregor Strasser, were arrested and killed in a purge later called the Night of Long Knives. Goebbels was present at the arrest of SA leader Ernst Röhm in Munich. On 2 August 1934, President von Hindenburg died. In a radio broadcast, Goebbels announced that the offices of president and chancellor had been combined, and Hitler had been formally named as \"Führer und Reichskanzler\" (leader and chancellor).\n\nThe propaganda ministry was organised into seven departments: administration and legal; mass rallies, public health, youth, and race; radio; national and foreign press; films and film censorship; art, music, and theatre; and protection against counter-propaganda, both foreign and domestic. Goebbels style of leadership was tempestuous and unpredictable. He would suddenly change direction and shift his support between senior associates; he was a difficult boss and liked to berate his staff in public. Goebbels was successful at his job, however; \"Life\" wrote in 1938 that \"[p]ersonally he likes nobody, is liked by nobody, and runs the most efficient Nazi department.\" John Gunther wrote in 1940 that Goebbels \"is the cleverest of all the Nazis\", but could not succeed Hitler because \"everybody hates him\".\n\nThe Reich Film Chamber, which all members of the film industry were required to join, was created in June 1933. Goebbels promoted the development of films with a Nazi slant, and ones that contained subliminal or overt propaganda messages. Under the auspices of the \"Reichskulturkammer\" (Reich Chamber of Culture), created in September, Goebbels added additional sub-chambers for the fields of broadcasting, fine arts, literature, music, the press, and the theatre. As in the film industry, anyone wishing to pursue a career in these fields had to be a member of the corresponding chamber. In this way anyone whose views were contrary to the regime could be excluded from working in their chosen field and thus silenced. In addition, journalists (now considered employees of the state) were required to prove Aryan descent back to the year 1800, and if married, the same requirement applied to the spouse. Members of any chamber were not allowed to leave the country for their work without prior permission of their chamber. A committee was established to censor books, and works could not be re-published unless they were on the list of approved works. Similar regulations applied to other fine arts and entertainment; even cabaret performances were censored. Many German artists and intellectuals left Germany in the pre-war years rather than work under these restrictions.\n\nGoebbels was particularly interested in controlling the radio, which was then still a fairly new mass medium. Sometimes under protest from individual states (particularly Prussia, headed by Göring), Goebbels gained control of radio stations nationwide, and placed them under the \"Reichs-Rundfunk-Gesellschaft\" (German National Broadcasting Corporation) in July 1934. Manufacturers were urged by Goebbels to produce inexpensive home receivers, called \"Volksempfänger\" (people's receiver), and by 1938 nearly ten million sets had been sold. Loudspeakers were placed in public areas, factories, and schools, so that important party broadcasts would be heard live by nearly all Germans. On 2 September 1939 (the day after the start of the war), Goebbels and the Council of Ministers proclaimed it illegal to listen to foreign radio stations. Disseminating news from foreign broadcasts could result in the death penalty. Albert Speer, Hitler's architect and later Minister for Armaments and War Production, later said the regime \"made the complete use of all technical means for domination of its own country. Through technical devices like the radio and loudspeaker, 80 million people were deprived of independent thought.\"\n\nA major focus of Nazi propaganda was Hitler himself, who was glorified as a heroic and infallible leader and became the focus of a cult of personality. Much of this was spontaneous, but some was stage-managed as part of Goebbels' propaganda work. Adulation of Hitler was the focus of the 1934 Nuremberg Rally, where his moves were carefully choreographed. The rally was the subject of the film \"Triumph of the Will\", one of several Nazi propaganda films directed by Leni Riefenstahl. It won the Gold Medal at the 1935 Venice Film Festival. At the 1935 Nazi party congress rally at Nuremberg, Goebbels declared that \"Bolshevism is the declaration of war by Jewish-led international subhumans against culture itself.\"\n\nGoebbels was involved in planning the staging of the 1936 Summer Olympics, held in Berlin. It was around this time that he met and started having an affair with the actress Lída Baarová, whom he continued to see until 1938. A major project in 1937 was the Degenerate Art Exhibition, organised by Goebbels, which ran in Munich from July to November. The exhibition proved wildly popular, attracting over two million visitors. A degenerate music exhibition took place the following year. Meanwhile, Goebbels was disappointed by the lack of quality in the National Socialist artwork, films, and literature.\n\nIn 1933, Hitler signed the \"Reichskonkordat\" (Reich Concordat), a treaty with the Vatican that required the regime to honour the independence of Catholic institutions and prohibited clergy from involvement in politics. However, the regime continued to target the Christian churches and to try to weaken their influence. Throughout 1935 and 1936, hundreds of clergy and nuns were arrested, often on trumped up charges of currency smuggling or sexual offences. Goebbels widely publicised the trials in his propaganda campaigns, showing the cases in the worst possible light. Restrictions were placed on public meetings, and Catholic publications faced censorship. Catholic schools were required to reduce religious instruction and crucifixes were removed from state buildings. Hitler often vacillated on whether or not the \"Kirchenkampf\" (church struggle) should be a priority, but his frequent inflammatory comments on the issue were enough to convince Goebbels to intensify his work on the issue; in February 1937 he stated he wanted to eliminate the Protestant church.\n\nIn response to the persecution, Pope Pius XI had the \"\"Mit brennender Sorge\"\" (\"With Burning Concern\") Encyclical smuggled into Germany for Passion Sunday 1937 and read from every pulpit. It denounced the systematic hostility of the regime toward the church. In response, Goebbels renewed the regime's crackdown and propaganda against Catholics. His speech of 28 May in Berlin in front of 20,000 party members, which was also broadcast on the radio, attacked the Catholic church as morally corrupt. As a result of the propaganda campaign, enrolment in denominational schools dropped sharply, and by 1939 all such schools were disbanded or converted to public facilities. Harassment and threats of imprisonment led the clergy to be much more cautious in their criticism of the regime. Partly out of foreign policy concerns, Hitler ordered a scaling back of the church struggle by the end of July 1937.\n\nAs early as February 1933, Hitler announced that rearmament must be undertaken, albeit clandestinely at first, as to do so was in violation of the Versailles Treaty. A year later he told his military leaders that 1942 was the target date for going to war in the east. Goebbels was one of the most enthusiastic supporters of Hitler aggressively pursuing Germany's expansionist policies sooner rather than later. At the time of the Reoccupation of the Rhineland in 1936, Goebbels summed up his general attitude in his diary: \"[N]ow is the time for action. Fortune favors the brave! He who dares nothing wins nothing.\" In the lead-up to the Sudetenland crisis in 1938, Goebbels took the initiative time and again to use propaganda to whip up sympathy for the Sudeten Germans while campaigning against the Czech government. Still, Goebbels was well aware there was a growing \"war panic\" in Germany and so by July had the press conduct propaganda efforts at a lower level of intensity. After the western powers acceded to Hitler's demands concerning Czechoslovakia in 1938, Goebbels soon redirected his propaganda machine against Poland. From May onwards, he orchestrated a campaign against Poland, fabricating stories about atrocities against ethnic Germans in Danzig and other cities. Even so, he was unable to persuade the majority of Germans to welcome the prospect of war. He privately held doubts about the wisdom of risking a protracted war against Britain and France by attacking Poland.\n\nAfter the Invasion of Poland in 1939, Goebbels used his propaganda ministry and the Reich chambers to control access to information domestically. To his chagrin, his rival Joachim von Ribbentrop, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, continually challenged Goebbels' jurisdiction over the dissemination of international propaganda. Hitler declined to make a firm ruling on the subject, so the two men remained rivals for the remainder of the Nazi era. Goebbels did not participate in the military decision making process, nor was he made privy to diplomatic negotiations until after the fact.\n\nThe Propaganda Ministry took over the broadcasting facilities of conquered countries immediately after surrender, and began broadcasting prepared material using the existing announcers as a way to gain the trust of the citizens. Most aspects of the media, both domestically and in the conquered countries, were controlled by Goebbels and his department. The German Home Service, the Armed Forces Programme, and the German European Service were all rigorously controlled in everything from the information they were permitted to disseminate to the music they were allowed to play. Party rallies, speeches, and demonstrations continued; speeches were broadcast on the radio and short propaganda films were exhibited using 1,500 mobile film vans. Hitler made fewer public appearances and broadcasts as the war progressed, so Goebbels increasingly became the voice of the Nazi regime for the German people. From May 1940 he wrote frequent editorials that were published in \"Das Reich\" which were later read aloud over the radio. He found films to be his most effective propaganda medium, after radio. At his insistence, initially half the films made in wartime Germany were propaganda films (particularly on antisemitism) and war propaganda films (recounting both historical wars and current exploits of the Wehrmacht).\n\nGoebbels became preoccupied with morale and the efforts of the people on the home front. He believed that the more the people at home were involved in the war effort, the better their morale would be. For example, he initiated a programme for the collection of winter clothing and ski equipment for troops on the eastern front. At the same time, Goebbels implemented changes to have more \"entertaining material\" in radio and film produced for the public, decreeing in late 1942 that 20 per cent of the films should be propaganda and 80 per cent light entertainment. As \"Gauleiter\" of Berlin, Goebbels dealt with increasingly serious shortages of necessities such as food and clothing, as well as the need to ration beer and tobacco, which were important for morale. Hitler suggested watering the beer and degrading the quality of the cigarettes so that more could be produced, but Goebbels refused, saying the cigarettes were already of such low quality that it was impossible to make them any worse. Through his propaganda campaigns, he worked hard to maintain an appropriate level of morale among the public about the military situation, neither too optimistic nor too grim. The series of military setbacks the Germans suffered in this period – the thousand-bomber raid on Cologne (May 1942), the Allied victory at the Second Battle of El Alamein (November 1942), and especially the catastrophic defeat at the Battle of Stalingrad (February 1943) – were difficult matters to present to the German public, who were increasingly weary of the war and sceptical that it could be won. On 15 January 1943, Hitler appointed Goebbels as head of the newly created Air Raid Damage committee, which meant Goebbels was nominally in charge of nationwide civil air defences and shelters as well as the assessment and repair of damaged buildings. In actuality, the defence of areas other than Berlin remained in the hands of the local \"Gauleiters\", and his main tasks were limited to providing immediate aid to the affected civilians and using propaganda to improve their morale.\n\nBy early 1943, the war produced a labour crisis for the regime. Hitler created a three-man committee with representatives of the State, the army, and the Party in an attempt to centralise control of the war economy. The committee members were Hans Lammers (head of the Reich Chancellery), Field Marshal Wilhelm Keitel, chief of the \"Oberkommando der Wehrmacht\" (Armed Forces High Command; OKW), and Martin Bormann, who controlled the Party. The committee was intended to independently propose measures regardless of the wishes of various ministries, with Hitler reserving most final decisions to himself. The committee, soon known as the \"Dreierausschuß\" (Committee of Three), met eleven times between January and August 1943. However, they ran up against resistance from Hitler's cabinet ministers, who headed deeply entrenched spheres of influence and were excluded from the committee. Seeing it as a threat to their power, Goebbels, Göring, and Speer worked together to bring it down. The result was that nothing changed, and the Committee of Three declined into irrelevance by September 1943.\n\nPartly in response to being excluded from the Committee of Three, Goebbels pressured Hitler to introduce measures that would produce \"total war\", including closing businesses not essential to the war effort, conscripting women into the labour force, and enlisting men in previously exempt occupations into the Wehrmacht. Some of these measures were implemented in an edict of 13 January, but to Goebbels' dismay, Göring demanded that his favourite restaurants in Berlin should remain open, and Lammers successfully lobbied Hitler to have women with children exempted from conscription, even if they had child care available. After receiving an enthusiastic response to his speech of 30 January 1943 on the topic, Goebbels believed he had the support of the German people in his call for total war. His next speech, the Sportpalast speech of 18 February 1943, was a passionate demand for his audience to commit to total war, which he presented as the only way to stop the Bolshevik onslaught and save the German people from destruction. The speech also had a strong antisemitic element and hinted at the extermination of the Jewish people that was already underway. The speech was presented live on radio and was filmed as well. During the live version of the speech, Goebbels accidentally begins to mention the \"extermination\" of the Jews; this is omitted in the published text of the speech.\n\nGoebbels' efforts had little impact for the time being, as while Hitler was in principle in favour of total war, he was not prepared to implement changes over the objections of his ministers. The discovery around this time of a mass grave of Polish officers that had been killed by the Red Army in the 1940 Katyn massacre was made use of by Goebbels in his propaganda in an attempt to drive a wedge between the Soviets and the other western allies.\n\nAfter the Allied invasion of Sicily (July 1943) and the strategic Soviet victory in the Battle of Kursk (July–August 1943), Goebbels began to recognise that the war could no longer be won. Following the Allied invasion of Italy and the fall of Mussolini in September, he raised with Hitler the possibility of a separate peace, either with the Soviets or with Britain. Hitler rejected both of these proposals.\n\nAs Germany's military and economic situation grew steadily worse, on 25 August 1943 \"Reichsführer-SS\" Heinrich Himmler took over the post of interior minister, replacing Wilhelm Frick. Intensive air raids on Berlin and other cities took the lives of thousands of people. Göring's Luftwaffe attempted to retaliate with air raids on London in early 1944, but they no longer had sufficient aircraft to make much of an impact. While Goebbels' propaganda in this period indicated that a huge retaliation was in the offing, the V-1 flying bombs, launched on British targets beginning in mid-June 1944, had little effect, with only around 20 per cent reaching their intended targets. To boost morale, Goebbels continued to publish propaganda to the effect that further improvements to these weapons would have a decisive impact on the outcome of the war. Meanwhile, in the Normandy landings of 6 June 1944, the Allies successfully gained a foothold in France.\n\nThroughout July 1944, Goebbels and Speer continued to press Hitler to bring the economy to a total war footing. The 20 July plot, where Hitler was almost killed by a bomb at his field headquarters in East Prussia, played into the hands of those who had been pushing for change: Bormann, Goebbels, Himmler, and Speer. Over the objections of Göring, Goebbels was appointed on 23 July as Reich Plenipotentiary for Total War, charged with maximising the manpower for the Wehrmacht and the armaments industry at the expense of sectors of the economy not critical to the war effort. Through these efforts, he was able to free up an additional half a million men for military service. However, as many of these new recruits came from the armaments industry, the move put him in conflict with armaments minister Speer. Untrained workers from elsewhere were not readily absorbed into the armaments industry, and likewise, the new Wehrmacht recruits waited in barracks for their turn to be trained.\n\nAt Hitler's behest, the \"Volkssturm\" (People's Storm) – a nationwide militia of men previously considered unsuitable for military service – was formed on 18 October 1944. Goebbels recorded in his diary that 100,000 recruits were sworn in from his \"Gau\" alone. However, the men, mostly age 45 to 60, received only rudimentary training and many were not properly armed. Goebbels' notion that these men could effectively serve on the front lines against Soviet tanks and artillery was unrealistic at best. The programme was deeply unpopular.\n\nIn the last months of the war, Goebbels' speeches and articles took on an increasingly apocalyptic tone. By the beginning of 1945, with the Soviets on the Oder River and the Western Allies preparing to cross the Rhine River, he could no longer disguise the fact that defeat was inevitable. Berlin had little in the way of fortifications or artillery, and even \"Volkssturm\" units were in short supply, as almost everything and everyone had been sent to the front. Goebbels noted in his diary on 21 January that millions of Germans were fleeing westward. He tentatively discussed with Hitler the issue of making peace overtures to the western allies, but Hitler again refused. Privately, Goebbels was conflicted at pushing the case with Hitler since he did not want to lose the confidence of his Führer.\n\nWhen other Nazi leaders urged Hitler to leave Berlin and establish a new centre of resistance in the National Redoubt in Bavaria, Goebbels opposed this, arguing for a heroic last stand in Berlin. His family (except for Magda's son Harald, who had served in the Luftwaffe and been captured by the Allies) moved into their house in Berlin to await the end. He and Magda may have discussed suicide and the fate of their young children in a long meeting on the night of 27 January. He knew how the outside world would view the criminal acts committed by the regime, and had no desire to subject himself to the \"debacle\" of a trial. He burned his private papers on the night of 18 April.\n\nGoebbels knew how to play on Hitler's fantasies, encouraging him to see the hand of providence in the death of United States President Franklin D. Roosevelt on 12 April. Whether Hitler really saw this event as a turning point as Goebbels proclaimed is not known. By this time, Goebbels had gained the position he had wanted so long – at the side of Hitler. Göring was utterly discredited, although he was not stripped of his offices until 23 April. Himmler, whose appointment as commander of Army Group Vistula had led to disaster on the Oder, was also in disgrace with Hitler. Most of Hitler's inner circle, including Göring, Himmler, Ribbentrop, and Speer, prepared to leave Berlin immediately after Hitler's birthday celebration on 20 April. Even Bormann was \"not anxious\" to meet his end at Hitler's side. On 22 April, Hitler announced that he would stay in Berlin until the end and then shoot himself. Goebbels moved with his family into the \"Vorbunker\", connected to the lower \"Führerbunker\" under the Reich Chancellery garden in central Berlin, that same day. He told Vice-Admiral Hans-Erich Voss that he would not entertain the idea of either surrender or escape. On 23 April, Goebbels made the following proclamation to the people of Berlin:\n\nAfter midnight on 29 April, with the Soviets advancing ever closer to the bunker complex, Hitler married Eva Braun in a small civil ceremony within the \"Führerbunker\". Afterwards, Hitler hosted a modest wedding breakfast with his new wife. Hitler then took secretary Traudl Junge to another room and dictated his last will and testament. Goebbels and Bormann were two of the witnesses.\n\nIn his last will and testament, Hitler named no successor as Führer or leader of the Nazi Party. Instead, he appointed Goebbels as Reich Chancellor; Grand Admiral Karl Dönitz, who was at Flensburg near the Danish border, as Reich President; and Bormann as Party Minister. Goebbels wrote a postscript to the will stating that he would \"categorically refuse\" to obey Hitler's order to leave Berlin–as he put it, \"the first time in my life\" that he had not complied with Hitler's orders. He felt compelled to remain with Hitler \"for reasons of humanity and personal loyalty\". Further, his wife and children would be staying, as well. They would end their lives \"side by side with the Führer\".\n\nIn the mid-afternoon of 30 April, Hitler shot himself. Goebbels was depressed, and stated that he would walk around the Chancellery garden until he was killed by the Russian shelling. Voss later recounted Goebbels as saying: \"It is a great pity that such a man (Hitler) is not with us any longer. But there is nothing to be done. For us, everything is lost now and the only way out left for us is the one which Hitler chose. I shall follow his example.\"\n\nOn 1 May, Goebbels completed his sole official act as Chancellor. He dictated a letter to General Vasily Chuikov and ordered German General Hans Krebs to deliver it under a white flag. Chuikov, as commander of the Soviet 8th Guards Army, commanded the Soviet forces in central Berlin. Goebbels' letter informed Chuikov of Hitler's death and requested a ceasefire. After this was rejected, Goebbels decided that further efforts were futile.\nLater on 1 May, Vice-Admiral Voss saw Goebbels for the last time: \"... While saying goodbye I asked Goebbels to join us. But he replied: 'The captain must not leave his sinking ship. I have thought about it all and decided to stay here. I have nowhere to go because with little children I will not be able to make it, especially with a leg like mine...' \" On the evening of 1 May, Goebbels arranged for an SS dentist, Helmut Kunz, to inject his six children with morphine so that when they were unconscious, an ampule of cyanide could be then crushed in each of their mouths. According to Kunz's later testimony, he gave the children morphine injections but it was Magda Goebbels and SS-\"Obersturmbannführer\" Ludwig Stumpfegger, Hitler's personal doctor, who administered the cyanide.\n\nAt around 20:30, Goebbels and Magda left the bunker and walked up to the garden of the Chancellery, where they committed suicide. There are several different accounts of this event. One account was that they each bit on a cyanide ampule near where Hitler had been buried and were given a coup de grâce immediately afterwards. Goebbels' SS adjutant Günther Schwägermann testified in 1948 that they walked ahead of him up the stairs and out into the Chancellery garden. He waited in the stairwell and heard the shots sound. Schwägermann then walked up the remaining stairs and, once outside, saw their lifeless bodies. Following Goebbels' prior order, Schwägermann had an SS soldier fire several shots into Goebbels' body, which did not move.\n\nThe bodies were then doused with petrol, but they were only partially burned and not buried. A few days later, Voss was brought back to the bunker by the Soviets to identify the partly burned bodies of Joseph and Magda Goebbels and their children. The remains of the Goebbels' family, Hitler, Braun, General Krebs, and Hitler's dogs were repeatedly buried and exhumed. The last burial was at the SMERSH facility in Magdeburg on 21 February 1946. In 1970, KGB director Yuri Andropov authorised an operation to destroy the remains. On 4 April 1970, a Soviet KGB team used detailed burial charts to exhume five wooden boxes at the Magdeburg SMERSH facility. Those were burned, crushed, and scattered into the Biederitz river, a tributary of the nearby Elbe.\n\nGoebbels was antisemitic from a young age. After joining the NSDAP and meeting Hitler, his antisemitism grew and became more radical. He began to see the Jews as a destructive force with a negative impact on German society. After the Nazis seized power, he repeatedly urged Hitler to take action against the Jews. Despite his extreme antisemitism, Goebbels spoke of the \"rubbish of race-materialism\" and of the unnecessity of biological racism for the Nazi ideology. He also described Himmler's ideology as \"in many regards, mad\" and thought Alfred Rosenberg's theories were ridiculous.\n\nThe Nazi party's goal was to remove Jews from German cultural and economic life, and eventually to remove them from the country altogether. In addition to his propaganda efforts, Goebbels actively promoted the persecution of the Jews through pogroms, legislation, and other actions. Discriminatory measures he instituted in Berlin in the early years of the regime included bans against their using public transport and requiring that Jewish shops be marked as such.\n\nIn November 1938, the German diplomat Ernst vom Rath was killed in Paris by a young Jewish man. In response, Goebbels arranged for inflammatory antisemitic material to be released by the press, and the result was the start of a pogrom. Jews were attacked and synagogues destroyed all over Germany. The situation was further inflamed by a speech Goebbels gave at a party meeting on the night of 8 November, where he obliquely called for party members to incite further violence against Jews while making it appear to be a spontaneous series of acts by the German people. At least a hundred Jews were killed, several hundred synagogues were damaged or destroyed, and thousands of Jewish shops were vandalised in an event called \"Kristallnacht\" (Night of Broken Glass). Around 30,000 Jewish men were sent to concentration camps. The destruction stopped after a conference held on 12 November, where Göring pointed out that the destruction of Jewish property was in effect the destruction of German property since the intention was that it would all eventually be confiscated.\n\nGoebbels continued his intensive antisemitic propaganda campaign that culminated in Hitler's 30 January 1939 Reichstag speech, which Goebbels helped to write:\n\nWhile Goebbels had been pressing for expulsion of the Berlin Jews since 1935, there were still 62,000 living in the city in 1940. Part of the delay in their deportation was that they were needed as workers in the armaments industry. Deportations of German Jews began in October 1941, with the first transport from Berlin leaving on 18 October. Some Jews were shot immediately on arrival in destinations such as Riga and Kaunas. In preparation for the deportations, Goebbels ordered that all German Jews were required by law to wear an identifying yellow badge as of 5 September 1941. On 6 March 1942, Goebbels received a copy of the minutes of the Wannsee Conference. The document made the Nazi policy clear: the Jewish population of Europe was to be sent to extermination camps in occupied areas of Poland and killed. His diary entries of the period show that he was well aware of the fate of the Jews. \"In general, it can probably be established that 60 per cent of them will have to be liquidated, while only 40 per cent can be put to work. ... A judgment is being carried out on the Jews which is barbaric but thoroughly deserved,\" he wrote on 27 March 1942.\n\nGoebbels had frequent discussions with Hitler about the fate of the Jews, a subject they discussed almost every time they met. He was aware throughout that the Jews were being exterminated, and completely supported this decision. He was one of the few top Nazi officials to do so publicly.\n\nHitler was very fond of Magda Goebbels and the children. He enjoyed staying at the Goebbels' Berlin apartment, where he could relax. Magda had a close relationship with Hitler, and became a member of his small coterie of female friends. She also became an unofficial representative of the regime, receiving letters from all over Germany from women with questions about domestic matters or child custody issues.\n\nIn 1936, Goebbels met the Czech actress Lída Baarová and by the winter of 1937 began an intense affair with her. Magda had a long conversation with Hitler about it on 15 August 1938. Unwilling to put up with a scandal involving one of his top ministers, Hitler demanded that Goebbels break off the relationship. Thereafter, Joseph and Magda seemed to reach a truce until the end of September. The couple had another falling out at that point, and once again Hitler became involved, insisting the couple stay together. Hitler arranged for publicity photos to be taken of himself with the reconciled couple in October. Magda too had affairs, including a relationship with Kurt Ludecke in 1933 and Karl Hanke in 1938.\n\nThe Goebbels family included Harald Quandt (Magda's son from her first marriage; born 1921), plus Helga (1932), Hilde (1934), Helmuth (1935), Holde (1937), Hedda (1938), and Heide (1940). Harald was the only member of the family to survive the war.\n\nBULLET::::- Glossary of Nazi Germany\nBULLET::::- Gottbegnadeten list\nBULLET::::- List of Nazi Party leaders and officials\nBULLET::::- Nazi propaganda\n\n\n\nBULLET::::- Online books, movies, images, and speeches at the Internet Archive\nBULLET::::- Collection of speeches and essays by Joseph Goebbels at Calvin University\nBULLET::::- \"The Man Behind Hitler\", documentary film and supplementary material from PBS\n"}
{"id": "15780", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15780", "title": "Coen brothers", "text": "Coen brothers\n\nJoel Coen (born November 29, 1954) and Ethan Coen (born September 21, 1957), collectively referred to as the Coen brothers (), are American filmmakers. Their films span many genres and styles, which they frequently subvert or parody. Their most acclaimed works include \"Miller's Crossing\" (1990), \"Barton Fink\" (1991), \"Fargo\" (1996), \"The Big Lebowski\" (1998), \"O Brother, Where Art Thou?\" (2000), \"No Country for Old Men\" (2007), \"True Grit\" (2010), \"Inside Llewyn Davis\" (2013), and \"The Ballad of Buster Scruggs\" (2018).\n\nThe brothers write, direct and produce their films jointly, although until \"The Ladykillers\" (2004) Joel received sole credit for directing and Ethan for producing. They often alternate top billing for their screenplays while sharing editing credits under the alias Roderick Jaynes. They have been nominated for 13 Academy Awards together, and individually for one award each, winning Best Original Screenplay for \"Fargo\" and Best Picture, Best Director and Best Adapted Screenplay for \"No Country for Old Men\". The duo also won the Palme d'Or for \"Barton Fink\" (1991).\n\nThe Coens have written a number of films they did not direct, including the biographical war drama \"Unbroken\" (2014), the historical legal thriller \"Bridge of Spies\" (2015), and lesser-known, commercially unsuccessful comedies such as \"Crimewave\" (1985), \"The Naked Man\" (1998) and \"Gambit\" (2012). Ethan is also a writer of short stories, theater and poetry.\n\nKnown for many distinctive stylistic trademarks including genre hybridity, the brothers' films \"No Country for Old Men\", \"A Serious Man\" and \"Inside Llewyn Davis\" have been ranked in the BBC's 2016 poll of the greatest motion pictures since 2000.\n\nJoel and Ethan Coen were born and raised in St. Louis Park, Minnesota, a suburb of Minneapolis. Their mother, Rena (née Neumann), was an art historian at St. Cloud State University, and their father, Edward Coen, was an economist at the University of Minnesota. Their family is Jewish.\n\nWhen they were children, Joel saved money from mowing lawns to buy a Vivitar Super 8 camera. Together, the brothers remade movies they saw on television, with their neighborhood friend Mark Zimering (\"Zeimers\") as the star. Their first attempt was a romp entitled \"Henry Kissinger, Man on the Go\". Cornel Wilde's \"The Naked Prey\" (1965) became their \"Zeimers in Zambia\", which also featured Ethan as a native with a spear.\n\nJoel Coen has said: \"In regards to whether our background influences our film making ... who knows? We don't think about it ... There's no doubt that our Jewish heritage affects how we see things.\"\n\nJoel and Ethan graduated from St. Louis Park High School in 1973 and 1976, respectively, and from Bard College at Simon's Rock in Great Barrington, Massachusetts. Joel then spent four years in the undergraduate film program at New York University, where he made a 30-minute thesis film called \"Soundings\". Ethan went on to Princeton University and earned an undergraduate degree in philosophy in 1979. His senior thesis was a 41-page essay, \"Two Views of Wittgenstein's Later Philosophy\".\n\nJoel has been married to actress Frances McDormand since 1984. In 1995, they adopted their son, Pedro McDormand Coen, from Paraguay when he was six months old. McDormand has acted in several Coen Brothers films, including a minor appearance in \"Miller's Crossing\", a supporting role in \"Raising Arizona,\" lead roles in \"Blood Simple\" and \"The Man Who Wasn't There\", her Academy Award-winning role in \"Fargo\", and her starring role in \"Burn After Reading\". She also provided a voice-over in \"Barton Fink\".\n\nEthan married film editor Tricia Cooke in 1990. They have two children: daughter Dusty and son Buster Jacob, who goes to Vassar College.\n\nBoth couples live in New York.\n\nAfter graduating from New York University, Joel worked as a production assistant on a variety of industrial films and music videos. He developed a talent for film editing and met Sam Raimi while assisting Edna Ruth Paul in editing Raimi's first feature film, \"The Evil Dead\" (1981).\n\nIn 1984 the brothers wrote and directed \"Blood Simple\", their first commercial film together. Set in Texas, the film tells the tale of a shifty, sleazy bar owner who hires a private detective to kill his wife and her lover. The film contains elements that point to their future direction: distinctive homages to genre movies (in this case noir and horror), plot twists layered over a simple story, dark humor, and \"mise-en-scène\". The film starred Frances McDormand, who went on to feature in many of the Coen brothers' films (and marry Joel). Upon release the film received much praise and won awards for Joel's direction at both the Sundance and Independent Spirit awards.\n\nTheir next project was \"Crimewave\" (1985), directed by Sam Raimi and written by the Coens and Raimi. Joel and Raimi also made cameo appearances in \"Spies Like Us\" (1985).\n\nThe brothers' next film was \"Raising Arizona\" (1987), the story of an unlikely married couple: ex-convict H.I. (Nicolas Cage) and police officer Ed (Holly Hunter), who long for a baby but are unable to conceive. When a local furniture tycoon (Trey Wilson) appears on television with his newly born quintuplets and jokes that they \"are more than we can handle\", H.I. steals one of the quintuplets to bring up as their own. The film featured Frances McDormand, John Goodman, William Forsythe, Sam McMurray, and Randall \"Tex\" Cobb.\n\n\"Miller's Crossing\", released in 1990, starred Albert Finney, Gabriel Byrne, and John Turturro. The film is about feuding gangsters in the Prohibition era, inspired by Dashiell Hammett's novels \"Red Harvest\" (1929) and \"The Glass Key\" (serialized in 1930).\n\nThe following year, they released \"Barton Fink\" (1991); set in 1941, in which a New York playwright, the eponymous Barton Fink (played by John Turturro), moves to Los Angeles to write a B-movie. He settles down in his hotel room to commence writing but suffers writer's block until he is invaded by the man next door (John Goodman). \"Barton Fink\" was a critical success, earning Oscar nominations and winning three major awards at the 1991 Cannes Film Festival, including the Palme d'Or. It was their first film with cinematographer Roger Deakins, a key collaborator for the next 25 years.\n\n\"The Hudsucker Proxy\" (co-written with Raimi) was released in 1994. In it, the board of a large corporation in 1958 New York City appoints a naive schmo as president (Tim Robbins) for underhanded reasons. The film bombed at the box office ($30 million budget, $3 million gross in the USA), even though it featured Paul Newman and Jennifer Jason Leigh. Frances McDormand appears in a brief uncredited role.\n\nThe Coens wrote and directed the crime thriller \"Fargo\" (1996), set in their home state of Minnesota. Jerry Lundegaard (William H. Macy), who has serious financial problems, has his wife kidnapped so that his wealthy father-in-law will pay the ransom. His plan goes wrong when the kidnappers deviate from the plan and local cop Marge Gunderson (McDormand) starts to investigate. Produced on a small budget of $7 million, \"Fargo\" was a critical and commercial success, with particular praise for its dialogue and McDormand's performance. The film received several awards, including a BAFTA award and Cannes award for direction, and two Oscars: a Best Original Screenplay and a Best Actress Oscar for McDormand.\n\nIn the Coens' next film, the black comedy \"The Big Lebowski\" (1998), \"The Dude\" (Jeff Bridges), a Los Angeles slacker, is used as an unwitting pawn in a kidnapping plot with his bowling buddies (Steve Buscemi and John Goodman). Despite initially receiving mixed reviews and underperforming at the box office, it is now well received by critics, and is regarded as a classic cult film. An annual festival, Lebowski Fest, began in 2002, and many adhere to the philosophy of \"Dudeism\". \"Entertainment Weekly\" ranked it 8th on their Funniest Movies of the Past 25 Years list in 2008.\n\n\"Gates of Eden\", a collection of short stories written by Ethan Coen, was published in 1998. The same year, Ethan co-wrote the comedy \"The Naked Man\", directed by their storyboard artist J. Todd Anderson.\n\nThe Coen brothers' next film, \"O Brother, Where Art Thou?\" (2000), was another critical and commercial success. The title was borrowed from the Preston Sturges film \"Sullivan's Travels\" (1941), whose lead character, movie director John Sullivan, had planned to make a film with that title. Based loosely on Homer's \"Odyssey\" (complete with a Cyclops, sirens, \"et al.\"), the story is set in Mississippi in the 1930s and follows a trio of escaped convicts who, after absconding from a chain gang, journey home to recover bank-heist loot the leader has buried—but they have no clear perception of where they are going. The film highlighted the comic abilities of George Clooney as the oddball lead character Ulysses Everett McGill, and of Tim Blake Nelson and John Turturro, his sidekicks. The film's bluegrass and old-time soundtrack, offbeat humor and digitally desaturated cinematography made it a critical and commercial hit. It was the first feature film to use all-digital color grading. The film's soundtrack CD was also successful, spawning a concert and concert/documentary DVD, \"Down from the Mountain.\"\n\nThe Coens next produced another noirish thriller, \"The Man Who Wasn't There\" (2001). Set in late 1940s California, a laconic chain-smoking barber (played by Billy Bob Thornton) discovers a way to blackmail his wife's lover and use the proceeds to invest in a dry cleaning business.\n\nThe Coens directed the 2003 film \"Intolerable Cruelty\", starring George Clooney and Catherine Zeta-Jones, a throwback to the romantic comedies of the 1940s. It focuses on hotshot divorce lawyer Miles Massey and a beautiful divorcée whom Massey managed to prevent from receiving any money in her divorce. She vows to get even with him while, at the same time, he becomes smitten with her. \"Intolerable Cruelty\" received generally positive reviews, although it is considered one of the duo's weaker films. Also that year, they executive produced and did an uncredited rewrite of the Christmas black comedy \"Bad Santa\", which garnered positive reviews.\n\nIn 2004, the Coens made \"The Ladykillers\", a remake of the Ealing Studios classic. A professor, played by Tom Hanks, assembles a team to rob a casino. They rent a room in an elderly woman's home to plan the heist. When the woman discovers the plot, the gang decides to murder her to ensure her silence. The Coens received some of the most lukewarm reviews of their careers in response to this film.\n\nThey directed two short films for two separate anthology films—\"Paris, je t'aime\" (\"Tuileries\", 2006) starring Steve Buscemi, and \"To Each His Own Cinema\" (\"World Cinema\", 2007) starring Josh Brolin. Both films received highly positive reviews.\n\n\"No Country for Old Men\", released in November 2007, closely follows the 2005 novel of the same name by Cormac McCarthy. Vietnam veteran Llewelyn Moss (Josh Brolin), living near the Texas/Mexico border, stumbles upon, and decides to take, two million dollars in drug money. He must then go on the run to avoid those trying to recover the money, including sociopathic killer Anton Chigurh (Javier Bardem), who confounds both Llewelyn and local sheriff Ed Tom Bell (Tommy Lee Jones). The plotline is a return to noir themes, but in some respects it was a departure for the Coens; with the exception of Stephen Root, none of the stable of regular Coen actors appears in the film. \"No Country\" received nearly universal critical praise, garnering a 94% \"Fresh\" rating at Rotten Tomatoes. It won four Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Director and Best Adapted Screenplay, all of which were received by the Coens, as well as Best Supporting Actor received by Bardem. The Coens, as \"Roderick Jaynes\", were also nominated for Best Editing, but lost. It was the first time since 1961 (when Jerome Robbins and Robert Wise won for \"West Side Story\") that two directors received the Academy Award for Best Director at the same time.\n\nIn January 2008, Ethan Coen's play \"Almost an Evening\" premiered off-broadway at the Atlantic Theater Company Stage 2, opening to mostly enthusiastic reviews. The initial run closed on February 10, 2008, but the same production was moved to a new theatre for a commercial off-Broadway run at the Bleecker Street Theater in New York City. Produced by The Atlantic Theater Company, it ran there from March 2008 through June 1, 2008. and Art Meets Commerce. In May 2009, the Atlantic Theater Company produced Coen's \"Offices\", as part of their mainstage season at the Linda Gross Theater.\n\n\"Burn After Reading\", a comedy starring Brad Pitt and George Clooney, was released September 12, 2008, and portrays a collision course between a gym instructor, spies and Internet dating. Released to positive reviews, it debuted at #1 in North America.\n\nIn 2009, the Coens directed a television commercial titled \"Air Freshener\" for the Reality Coalition.\n\nThey next directed \"A Serious Man\", released October 2, 2009, a \"gentle but dark\" period comedy (set in 1967) with a low budget. The film is based loosely on the Coens' childhoods in an academic family in the largely Jewish suburb of Saint Louis Park, Minnesota; it also drew comparisons to the \"Book of Job\". Filming took place late in the summer of 2008, in the neighborhoods of Roseville and Bloomington, Minnesota, at Normandale Community College, and at St. Olaf College. The film was nominated for the Oscars for Best Picture and Best Original Screenplay.\n\n\"True Grit\" (2010) is based on the 1968 novel of the same name by Charles Portis. Filming was done in Texas and New Mexico. Hailee Steinfeld stars as Mattie Ross along with Jeff Bridges as Marshal Rooster Cogburn. Matt Damon and Josh Brolin also appear in the movie. \"True Grit\" was nominated for ten Academy Awards, including Best Picture.\n\nEthan Coen wrote the one-act comedy \"Talking Cure\", which was produced on Broadway in 2011 as part of \"Relatively Speaking\", an anthology of three one-act plays by Coen, Elaine May, and Woody Allen.\n\n\"Inside Llewyn Davis\" (2013) is a treatise on the 1960s folk music scene in New York City's Greenwich Village, and very loosely based on the life of Dave Van Ronk. The film stars Oscar Isaac, Justin Timberlake and Carey Mulligan. It won the Grand Prix at the 2013 Cannes Film Festival, where it was highly praised by critics. They received a Golden Globe nomination for Best Original Song for \"Please Mr. Kennedy\", which is heard in the film.\n\n\"Fargo\", a television series inspired by their film of the same name, premiered in June 2014 on the FX network. It is created by Noah Hawley and executive produced by the brothers.\n\nThe Coens also contributed to the screenplay for \"Unbroken\", along with Richard LaGravenese and William Nicholson. The film, directed by Angelina Jolie, and based on Laura Hillenbrand's non-fiction book, \"\" (2010) which itself was based on the life of Louis Zamperini, was released on December 25, 2014 to average reviews.\n\nThe Coens co-wrote, with playwright Matt Charman, the screenplay for the dramatic historical thriller \"Bridge of Spies\", about the 1960 U-2 Incident. The film was directed by Steven Spielberg, and released on October 4, 2015 to critical acclaim. They were nominated for the Best Original Screenplay at the 88th Academy Awards.\n\nThe Coens directed the film \"Hail, Caesar!\", about a \"fixer\" in 1950s Hollywood trying to discover what happened to a cast member who vanishes during filming. It stars Coen regulars George Clooney, Josh Brolin, Frances McDormand, Scarlett Johansson and Tilda Swinton, as well as Channing Tatum, Ralph Fiennes, Jonah Hill, and Alden Ehrenreich. The film was released on February 5, 2016.\n\nIn 2016, the Coens gave to their longtime friend and collaborator John Turturro the right to use his character of Jesus Quintana from \"The Big Lebowski\" in his own spin-off, \"Going Places\", which he would also write and direct. The Coens have no involvement in the production. In August 2016, the film began principal photography.\n\nThe Coens first wrote the script for \"Suburbicon\" in 1986. The film was eventually directed by George Clooney and began filming in October 2016. It was released by Paramount Pictures in the fall of 2017.\n\nThe Coens most recently directed \"The Ballad of Buster Scruggs\", a Western anthology starring Tim Blake Nelson, Liam Neeson, and James Franco. It began streaming on Netflix on November 16, 2018, after a brief theatrical run.\n\nIn a 1998 interview with Alex Simon for \"Venice\" magazine, the Coens discussed a project called \"The Contemplations\", which would be an anthology of short films based on stories in a leather bound book from a \"dusty old library\". This project may have influenced or evolved into \"The Ballad of Buster Scruggs\", which has the same structure.\n\nIn 2001, Joel stated that \"a Cold War comedy called \"62 Skidoo\" is one I'd like to do someday\".\n\nThe Coens had hoped to film James Dickey's novel \"To the White Sea\". They were due to start production in 2002, with Jeremy Thomas producing and Brad Pitt in the lead role, but it was canceled when the Coens felt that the budget offered was not enough to successfully produce the film.\n\nIn 2008, it was announced that the Coen brothers would write and direct an adaptation of Michael Chabon's novel \"The Yiddish Policemen's Union\" (2007). They were to produce the film with Scott Rudin for Columbia Pictures. In the fall of 2012, however, Chabon told \"Mother Jones\" that \"the Coen brothers wrote a draft of a script and then they seemed to move on\", and that the film rights had \"lapsed back to me\".\n\nIn 2009, the Coen brothers stated that they are interested in making a sequel to \"Barton Fink\" called \"Old Fink\", which would take place in the 1960s, around the same time period as \"A Serious Man\". The brothers also stated that they have had talks with John Turturro in reprising his role as Fink, but they were waiting \"until he was actually old enough to play the part\".\n\nIn 2011, the brothers were working on a television project, called \"Harve Karbo\", about a quirky Los Angeles private eye for Imagine Television.\n\nIn December 2013, the Coens stated in an interview that they are working on a new musical comedy centered around an opera singer, though they have said it is \"not a musical per se\". In the same interview, they revealed they are also working on a sword and sandals drama film set in ancient Rome.\n\nIn August 2015, it was announced that Warner Bros. had optioned the film rights to Ross Macdonald's novel \"Black Money\" for the Coen brothers to potentially write and direct.\n\nIn October 2016, \"The Hollywood Reporter\" reported that the Coens would work on the screenplay for Fox titled \"Dark Web\", and based on Joshuah Bearman's two-part \"Wired\" article about Ross Ulbricht and his illicit Silk Road online marketplace. The project originated in 2013, with novelist Dennis Lehane on board for the screenplay. Chernin Entertainment will produce.\n\nThe Coen brothers' own film production company, Mike Zoss Productions located in New York City, has been credited on their films from \"O Brother, Where Art Thou?\" onwards. It was named after Mike Zoss Drug, an independent pharmacy in St. Louis Park since 1950 that was the brothers' beloved hangout when they were growing up in the Twin Cities. The name was also used for the pharmacy in \"No Country for Old Men\". The Mike Zoss logo consists of a crayon drawing of a horse, standing in a field of grass, with its head turned around as it looks back over its hindquarters.\n\nUp to 2003, Joel received sole credit for directing and Ethan for producing, due to guild rules that disallowed multiple director credits to prevent dilution of the position's significance. The only exception to this rule is if the co-directors are an \"established duo\". Now that they were able to share the director credit the Coen brothers have become only the third duo to be nominated for the Academy Award for Best Director. The first two pairs to achieve this were Robert Wise and Jerome Robbins (who won for \"West Side Story\" in 1961), and Warren Beatty and Buck Henry (who were nominated for \"Heaven Can Wait\" in 1978).\n\nOnly seven other directors have won three Oscars for the same film, a distinction the duo shares with Billy Wilder, James L. Brooks, Francis Ford Coppola, James Cameron, Peter Jackson, Alejandro G. Iñárritu, and Alfonso Cuarón.\n\nWith four Academy Award nominations for \"No Country for Old Men\" for the duo (Best Picture, Best Director, Best Adapted Screenplay, and Best Film Editing as Roderick Jaynes), the Coen brothers have tied the record for the most nominations by a single nominee (counting an \"established duo\" as one nominee) for the same film. Orson Welles set the record in 1941 with \"Citizen Kane\" being nominated for Best Picture (though at the time, individual producers were not named as nominees), Director, Best Actor, and Screenplay. Warren Beatty received the same nominations, first for \"Heaven Can Wait\" in 1978 and again in 1981 with \"Reds\". Alan Menken also then achieved the same feat when he was nominated for Best Score and triple-nominated for Best Song for \"Beauty and the Beast\" in 1991. In 2018, Alfonso Cuarón was nominated for Best Picture, Best Director, Best Original Screenplay, and Best Cinematography for \"Roma\".\n\nThe Coen brothers frequently cast certain actors in their films, most frequently Frances McDormand, Steve Buscemi, John Goodman, Jon Polito, George Clooney, and John Turturro. They have worked twice with Jeff Bridges, Scarlett Johansson and Tim Blake Nelson and at least three times with Michael Badalucco, Richard Jenkins, Stephen Root, Bruce Campbell, J.K. Simmons, and Josh Brolin.\n\nThe Coens similarly tend to collaborate with certain filmmakers as well, especially Roger Deakins, Jess Gonchor, Skip Lievsay, and Mary Zophres. They used cinematographer Barry Sonnenfeld on their first three films, through \"Miller's Crossing\", until Sonnenfeld left to pursue his own directing career. Deakins has been the Coen brothers' cinematographer for all their subsequent films except \"Burn After Reading\", on which they employed Emmanuel Lubezki, and \"Inside Llewyn Davis\" and \"The Ballad of Buster Scruggs\", on which they employed Bruno Delbonnel.\n\nSam Raimi is another frequent collaborator. He helped write \"The Hudsucker Proxy\", which the Coen brothers directed, and the Coen brothers helped write \"Crimewave\", which Raimi directed. Raimi took tips about filming \"A Simple Plan\" (1998) from the Coen brothers, who had recently finished \"Fargo\". (Both films are set in blindingly white snow, which reflects a lot of light and can make metering for a correct exposure tricky). Raimi has cameo appearances in \"Miller's Crossing\" and \"The Hudsucker Proxy\". Raimi and the Coens met when Raimi directed \"The Evil Dead\" (1981), for which Joel was hired as an assistant editor.\n\nCarter Burwell has scored all of the Coens' films, aside from \"Crimewave\" (1985), although T Bone Burnett produced much of the traditional music in \"O Brother, Where Art Thou?\" and \"The Ladykillers\", and was in charge of archive music for \"The Big Lebowski\". Skip Lievsay handles the sound editing for all of the Coens' films.\n\nMost of the Coens' films have been credited to the editor \"Roderick Jaynes\", an alias which refers collectively to the two Coen brothers. Tricia Cooke, Ethan's wife, was also an editor on three of their films (\"The Big Lebowski\", \"O Brother, Where Art Thou?\", and \"The Man Who Wasn't There\") after working as assistant editor on four of their earlier films (\"Miller's Crossing\", \"Barton Fink\", \"The Hudsucker Proxy\", and \"Fargo\"). Michael R. Miller edited \"Raising Arizona\" and \"Miller's Crossing\".\n\n! rowspan=\"2\"  Year\n! rowspan=\"2\"  Film\n! colspan=\"2\" style=\"text-align:center;\" Academy Awards\n! colspan=\"2\" style=\"text-align:center;\" BAFTA Awards\n! colspan=\"2\" style=\"text-align:center;\" Golden Globe Awards\n! Nominations\n! Wins\n! Nominations\n! Wins\n! Nominations\n! Wins\n1991\n\"Barton Fink\"\nalign=center3\n\nalign=center1\n\n1996\n\"Fargo\"\nalign=center7\nalign=center2\nalign=center6\nalign=center1\nalign=center4\n\n2000\n\"O Brother, Where Art Thou?\"\nalign=center2\nalign=center4\nalign=center2\nalign=center1\n2001\n\"The Man Who Wasn't There\"\nalign=center1\nalign=center1\nalign=center1\nalign=center3\n\n2007\n\"No Country for Old Men\"\nalign=center8\nalign=center4\nalign=center9\nalign=center3\nalign=center4\nalign=center2\n2008\n\"Burn After Reading\"\n\nalign=center3\nalign=center2\n\n2009\n\"A Serious Man\"\nalign=center2\nalign=center1\nalign=center1\n\n2010\n\"True Grit\"\nalign=center10\nalign=center8\nalign=center1\n\n2013\n\"Inside Llewyn Davis\"\nalign=center2\nalign=center3\nalign=center3\n\n2014\n\"Unbroken\"\nalign=center3\n\n2015\n\"Bridge of Spies\"\nalign=center6\nalign=center1\nalign=center9\nalign=center1\nalign=center1\n\n2016\n\"Hail, Caesar!\"\nalign=center1\nalign=center1\n\n2018\n\"The Ballad of Buster Scruggs\"\nalign=center3\nalign=center1\n\n!colspan=\"2\"Total\n!align=center48\n!align=center7\n!align=center46\n!align=center7\n!align=center21\n!align=center3\n\n style=\"text-align:center;\"\n! style=\"background:#B0C4DE;\"  Year\n! style=\"background:#B0C4DE;\"  Performer\n! style=\"background:#B0C4DE;\"  Film\n! style=\"background:#B0C4DE;\"  Result\n\nBULLET::::- (Includes all films up to \"The Ladykillers\" and some subsidiary works [\"Crimewave\", \"Down from the Mountain\", \"Bad Santa\"].)\n\nBULLET::::- Joel and Ethan Coen at Rotten Tomatoes\nBULLET::::- Coenesque: The Films of the Coen Brothers\nBULLET::::- video: The Films of the Coen Brothers, compilation of movie clips, 3 min.\nBULLET::::- (joint pseudonym)\nBULLET::::- Ethan and Joel Coen at LC Authorities, with 27 and 20 records\n"}
{"id": "15781", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15781", "title": "Jorge Luis Borges", "text": "Jorge Luis Borges\n\nJorge Francisco Isidoro Luis Borges Acevedo (; ; 24 August 1899 – 14 June 1986) was an Argentine short-story writer, essayist, poet and translator, and a key figure in Spanish-language and universal literature. His best-known books, \"Ficciones\" (\"Fictions\") and \"El Aleph\" (\"The Aleph\"), published in the 1940s, are compilations of short stories interconnected by common themes, including dreams, labyrinths, philosophy, libraries, mirrors, fictional writers, and mythology. Borges' works have contributed to philosophical literature and the fantasy genre, and have been considered by some critics to mark the beginning of the magic realist movement in 20th century Latin American literature. His late poems converse with such cultural figures as Spinoza, Camões, and Virgil.\n\nBorn in a suburb of Buenos Aires, Borges later moved with his family to Switzerland in 1914, where he studied at the Collège de Genève. The family travelled widely in Europe, including Spain. On his return to Argentina in 1921, Borges began publishing his poems and essays in surrealist literary journals. He also worked as a librarian and public lecturer. In 1955, he was appointed director of the National Public Library and professor of English Literature at the University of Buenos Aires. He became completely blind by the age of 55. Scholars have suggested that his progressive blindness helped him to create innovative literary symbols through imagination. By the 1960s, his work was translated and published widely in the United States and Europe. Borges himself was fluent in several languages.\n\nIn 1961, he came to international attention when he received the first Formentor prize (Prix International), which he shared with Samuel Beckett. In 1971, he won the Jerusalem Prize. His international reputation was consolidated in the 1960s, aided by his works being available in English, by the Latin American Boom and by the success of García Márquez's \"One Hundred Years of Solitude\". He dedicated his final work, \"The Conspirators\", to the city of Geneva, Switzerland. Writer and essayist J. M. Coetzee said of him: \"He, more than anyone, renovated the language of fiction and thus opened the way to a remarkable generation of Spanish American novelists.\"\n\nJorge Francisco Isidoro Luis Borges Acevedo was born into an educated middle-class family on 24 August 1899. They were in comfortable circumstances but not wealthy enough to live in downtown Buenos Aires so the family resided in Palermo, then a poorer suburb. Borges's mother, Leonor Acevedo Suárez, came from a traditional Uruguayan family of criollo (Spanish) origin. Her family had been much involved in the European settling of South America and the Argentine War of Independence, and she spoke often of their heroic actions.\n\nHis 1929 book, \"Cuaderno San Martín\", includes the poem \"Isidoro Acevedo\", commemorating his grandfather, Isidoro de Acevedo Laprida, a soldier of the Buenos Aires Army. A descendant of the Argentine lawyer and politician Francisco Narciso de Laprida, de Acevedo Laprida fought in the battles of Cepeda in 1859, Pavón in 1861, and Los Corrales in 1880. De Acevedo Laprida died of pulmonary congestion in the house where his grandson Jorge Luis Borges was born.\n\nBorges's own father, Jorge Guillermo Borges Haslam (24 February 1874 – 14 February 1938) was a lawyer, and wrote a novel \"El caudillo\" in 1921. Borges Haslam was born in Entre Ríos of Spanish, Portuguese, and English descent, the son of Francisco Borges Lafinur, a colonel, and Frances Ann Haslam, an Englishwoman. Borges Haslam grew up speaking English at home. The family frequently traveled to Europe. Borges Haslam wed Leonor Acevedo Suarez in 1898 and their offspring also included the painter Norah Borges, sister of Jorge Luis Borges.\n\nAt age nine, Jorge Luis Borges translated Oscar Wilde's \"The Happy Prince\" into Spanish. It was published in a local journal, but Borges' friends thought the real author was his father. Borges Haslam was a lawyer and psychology teacher who harboured literary aspirations. Borges said his father \"tried to become a writer and failed in the attempt\", despite the 1921 opus \"El caudillo\". Jorge Luis Borges wrote, \"as most of my people had been soldiers and I knew I would never be, I felt ashamed, quite early, to be a bookish kind of person and not a man of action.\"\n\nJorge Luis Borges was taught at home until the age of 11, was bilingual in Spanish and English, reading Shakespeare in the latter at the age of twelve. The family lived in a large house with an English library of over one thousand volumes; Borges would later remark that \"if I were asked to name the chief event in my life, I should say my father's library.\"\n\nHis father gave up practicing law due to the failing eyesight that would eventually afflict his son. In 1914, the family moved to Geneva, Switzerland, and spent the next decade in Europe. Borges Haslam was treated by a Geneva eye specialist, while Jorge Luis and his sister Norah attended school; there Jorge Luis learned French. He read Thomas Carlyle in English, and he began to read philosophy in German. In 1917, when he was eighteen, he met writer Maurice Abramowicz and began a literary friendship that would last for the remainder of his life. He received his baccalauréat from the Collège de Genève in 1918. The Borges family decided that, due to political unrest in Argentina, they would remain in Switzerland during the war. After World War I, the family spent three years living in various cities: Lugano, Barcelona, Majorca, Seville, and Madrid. They remained in Europe until 1921.\n\nAt that time, Borges discovered the writings of Arthur Schopenhauer and Gustav Meyrink's \"The Golem\" (1915) which became influential to his work. In Spain, Borges fell in with and became a member of the avant-garde, anti-Modernismo Ultraist literary movement, inspired by Guillaume Apollinaire and Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, close to the Imagists. His first poem, \"Hymn to the Sea,\" written in the style of Walt Whitman, was published in the magazine \"Grecia\". While in Spain, he met such noted Spanish writers as Rafael Cansinos Assens and Ramón Gómez de la Serna.\nIn 1921, Borges returned with his family to Buenos Aires. He had little formal education, no qualifications and few friends. He wrote to a friend that Buenos Aires was now \"overrun by arrivistes, by correct youths lacking any mental equipment, and decorative young ladies\". He brought with him the doctrine of Ultraism and launched his career, publishing surreal poems and essays in literary journals. Borges published his first published collection of poetry, \"Fervor de Buenos Aires\", in 1923 and contributed to the avant-garde review \"Martín Fierro\".\n\nBorges co-founded the journals \"Prisma\", a broadsheet distributed largely by pasting copies to walls in Buenos Aires, and \"Proa\". Later in life, Borges regretted some of these early publications, attempting to purchase all known copies to ensure their destruction.\n\nBy the mid-1930s, he began to explore existential questions and fiction. He worked in a style that Argentine critic Ana María Barrenechea has called \"irreality.\" Many other Latin American writers, such as Juan Rulfo, Juan José Arreola, and Alejo Carpentier, were investigating these themes, influenced by the phenomenology of Husserl and Heidegger, and the existentialism of Jean-Paul Sartre. In this vein, Borges biographer Edwin Williamson underlines the danger of inferring an autobiographically inspired basis for the content or tone of certain of his works: books, philosophy, and imagination were as much a source of real inspiration to him as his own lived experience, if not more so. \n\nFrom the first issue, Borges was a regular contributor to \"Sur\", founded in 1931 by Victoria Ocampo. It was then Argentina's most important literary journal and helped Borges find his fame. Ocampo introduced Borges to Adolfo Bioy Casares, another well-known figure of Argentine literature, who was to become a frequent collaborator and close friend. They wrote a number of works together, some under the \"nom de plume\" H. Bustos Domecq, including a parody detective series and fantasy stories. During these years, a family friend, Macedonio Fernández, became a major influence on Borges. The two would preside over discussions in cafés, at country retreats, or in Fernandez's tiny apartment in the Balvanera district. He appears by name in Borges's \"Dialogue about a Dialogue\", in which the two discuss the immortality of the soul. In 1933, Borges gained an editorial appointment at \"Revista Multicolor de los Sábados\" (the literary supplement of the Buenos Aires newspaper \"Crítica\"), where he first published the pieces collected as \"Historia universal de la infamia\" (\"A Universal History of Infamy\") in 1935.\n\nThe book includes two types of writing: the first lies somewhere between non-fictional essays and short stories, using fictional techniques to tell essentially true stories. The second consists of literary forgeries, which Borges initially passed off as translations of passages from famous but seldom-read works. In the following years, he served as a literary adviser for the publishing house Emecé Editores, and from 1936-39 wrote weekly columns for \"El Hogar\". In 1938, Borges found work as the first assistant at the Miguel Cané Municipal Library. It was in a working-class area and there were so few books that cataloging more than one hundred books per day, he was told, would leave little to do for the other staff and so look bad. The task took him about an hour each day and the rest of his time he spent in the basement of the library, writing and translating.\n\nBorges's father died in 1938, shortly before his 64th birthday. On Christmas Eve that year, Borges suffered a severe head injury; during treatment, he nearly died of sepsis. While recovering from the accident, Borges began exploring a new style of writing for which he would become famous. His first story written after his accident, \"Pierre Menard, Author of the \"Quixote\",” came out in May 1939. One of his most famous works, \"Menard\" examines the nature of authorship, as well as the relationship between an author and his historical context. His first collection of short stories, \"El jardín de senderos que se bifurcan\" (\"The Garden of Forking Paths\"), appeared in 1941, composed mostly of works previously published in \"Sur\".\n\nThe title story concerns a Chinese professor in England, Dr. Yu Tsun, who spies for Germany during World War I, in an attempt to prove to the authorities that an Asian person is able to obtain the information that they seek. A combination of book and maze, it can be read in many ways. Through it, Borges arguably invented the hypertext novel and went on to describe a theory of the universe based upon the structure of such a novel.\n\nEight stories taking up over sixty pages, the book was generally well received, but \"El jardín de senderos que se bifurcan\" failed to garner for him the literary prizes many in his circle expected. Victoria Ocampo dedicated a large portion of the July 1942 issue of \"Sur\" to a \"Reparation for Borges.\" Numerous leading writers and critics from Argentina and throughout the Spanish-speaking world contributed writings to the \"reparation\" project.\n\nWith his vision beginning to fade in his early thirties and unable to support himself as a writer, Borges began a new career as a public lecturer. He became an increasingly public figure, obtaining appointments as president of the Argentine Society of Writers and as professor of English and American Literature at the Argentine Association of English Culture. His short story \"Emma Zunz\" was made into a film (under the name of \"Días de odio\", \"Days of Hate\", directed in 1954 by Leopoldo Torre Nilsson). Around this time, Borges also began writing screenplays.\n\nIn 1955, he became director of the Argentine National Library. By the late 1950s he had become completely blind. Neither the coincidence nor the irony of his blindness as a writer escaped Borges:\n\nHis later collection of poetry, \"Elogio de la Sombra\" (\"In Praise of Darkness\"), develops this theme. In 1956 the University of Cuyo awarded Borges the first of many honorary doctorates and the following year he received the National Prize for Literature . From 1956 to 1970, Borges also held a position as a professor of literature at the University of Buenos Aires and other temporary appointments at other universities. In the fall of 1967 and spring of 1968, he delivered the Charles Eliot Norton Lectures at Harvard University.\n\nAs his eyesight deteriorated, Borges relied increasingly on his mother's help. When he was not able to read and write anymore (he never learned to read Braille), his mother, to whom he had always been close, became his personal secretary. When Perón returned from exile and was re-elected president in 1973, Borges immediately resigned as director of the National Library.\n\nEight of Borges's poems appear in the 1943 anthology of Spanish American Poets by H.R. Hays. \"The Garden of Forking Paths\", one of the first Borges stories to be translated into English, appeared in the August 1948 issue of \"Ellery Queen's Mystery Magazine\", translated by Anthony Boucher. Though several other Borges translations appeared in literary magazines and anthologies during the 1950s (and one story appeared in the science fiction magazine \"Fantastic Universe\" in 1960), his international fame dates from the early 1960s.\n\nIn 1961, Borges received the first \"Prix International\", which he shared with Samuel Beckett. While Beckett had garnered a distinguished reputation in Europe and America, Borges had been largely unknown and untranslated in the English-speaking world and the prize stirred great interest in his work. The Italian government named Borges \"Commendatore\" and the University of Texas at Austin appointed him for one year to the Tinker Chair. This led to his first lecture tour in the United States. In 1962, two major anthologies of Borges's writings were published in English by New York presses: \"Ficciones\" and \"Labyrinths\". In that year, Borges began lecture tours of Europe. Numerous honors were to accumulate over the years such as a Special Edgar Allan Poe Award from the Mystery Writers of America \"for distinguished contribution to the mystery genre\" (1976), the Balzan Prize (for Philology, Linguistics and literary Criticism) and the Prix mondial Cino Del Duca, the Cervantes Prize (all 1980), as well as the French Legion of Honour (1983) and the Diamond Konex Award for Literature Arts as the most important writer in the last decade in his country.\n\nIn 1967, Borges began a five-year period of collaboration with the American translator Norman Thomas di Giovanni, through whom he became better known in the English-speaking world. Di Giovanni contended that Borges' popularity was due to him writing with multiple languages in mind and deliberately using Latin words as a bridge from Spanish to English.\n\nBorges continued to publish books, among them \"El libro de los seres imaginarios\" (\"Book of Imaginary Beings\", 1967, co-written with Margarita Guerrero), \"El informe de Brodie\" (\"Dr. Brodie's Report\", 1970), and \"El libro de arena\" (\"The Book of Sand\", 1975). He lectured prolifically. Many of these lectures were anthologized in volumes such as \"Siete noches\" (\"Seven Nights\") and \"Nueve ensayos dantescos\" (\"Nine Dantesque Essays\").\n\nHis presence in 1967 on campus at the University of Virginia, Charlottesville influenced a group of students among whom was Jared Loewenstein, who would later become founder and curator of the Jorge Luis Borges Collection at UVA, one of the largest repositories of documents and manuscripts pertaining to the early works of JLB. In 1984, he travelled to Athens, Greece and later to Rethymnon, Crete where he was awarded an honorary doctorate from the School of Philosophy at University of Crete.\n\nIn 1967, Borges married the recently widowed Elsa Astete Millán. Friends believed that his mother, who was 90 and anticipating her own death, wanted to find someone to care for her blind son. The marriage lasted less than three years. After a legal separation, Borges moved back in with his mother, with whom he lived until her death at age 99. Thereafter, he lived alone in the small flat he had shared with her, cared for by Fanny, their housekeeper of many decades.\n\nFrom 1975 until the time of his death, Borges traveled internationally. He was often accompanied in these travels by his personal assistant María Kodama, an Argentine woman of Japanese and German ancestry. In April 1986, a few months before his death, he married her via an attorney in Paraguay, in what was then a common practice among Argentines wishing to circumvent the Argentine laws of the time regarding divorce. On his religious views, Borges declared himself an agnostic, clarifying: \"Being an agnostic means all things are possible, even God, even the Holy Trinity. This world is so strange that anything may happen, or may not happen.\"\n\nDuring his final days in Geneva, Borges began brooding about the possibility of an afterlife. Although calm and collected about his own death, Borges began probing Kodama as to whether she inclined more towards the Shinto beliefs of her father or the Catholicism of her mother. Kodama \"had always regarded Borges as an Agnostic, as she was herself\", but given the insistence of his questioning, she offered to call someone more \"qualified\". Borges responded, \"You are asking me if I want a priest.\" He then instructed her to call two clergymen, a Catholic priest, in memory of his mother, and a Protestant minister, in memory of his English grandmother. He was visited first by Father Pierre Jacquet and by Pastor Edouard de Montmollin.\n\nBorges died of liver cancer on 14 June 1986, aged 86, in Geneva. His burial was preceded by an ecumenical service at the Protestant Cathédrale de Saint Pierre on 18 June. With many Swiss and Argentine dignitaries present, Pastor de Montmollin read the First Chapter of St John's Gospel. He then preached that \"Borges was a man who had unceasingly searched for the right word, the term that could sum up the whole, the final meaning of things.\" He explained, however, that no man can reach that word through his own efforts and in trying becomes lost in a labyrinth. Pastor de Montmollin concluded, \"It is not man who discovers the word, it is the Word that comes to him.\"\n\nFather Jacquet also preached, saying that, when visiting Borges before his death, he had found \"a man full of love, who received from the Church the forgiveness of his sins\". After the funeral, Borges was laid to rest in Geneva's Cimetière de Plainpalais. His grave, marked by a rough-hewn headstone, is adorned with carvings derived from Anglo-Saxon and Old Norse art and literature.\n\nKodama, his widow and heir on the basis of the marriage and two wills, gained control over his works. Her assertive administration of his estate resulted in a bitter dispute with the French publisher Gallimard regarding the republication of the complete works of Borges in French, with Pierre Assouline in \"Le Nouvel Observateur\" (August 2006) calling her \"an obstacle to the dissemination of the works of Borges\". Kodama took legal action against Assouline, considering the remark unjustified and defamatory, asking for a symbolic compensation of one euro.\n\nKodama also rescinded all publishing rights for existing collections of his work in English, including the translations by Norman Thomas di Giovanni, in which Borges himself collaborated, and from which di Giovanni would have received an unusually high fifty percent of the royalties. Kodama commissioned new translations by Andrew Hurley, which have become the standard translations in English.\n\nDuring the 1920s and 30s, Borges was a vocal supporter of Hipólito Yrigoyen and the social democratic Radical Civic Union. In 1945, Borges signed a manifesto calling for an end to military rule and the establishment of political liberty and democratic elections. By the 1960s, he had grown more skeptical of democracy. During a 1971 conference at Columbia University, a creative writing student asked Borges what he regarded as \"a writer's duty to his time\". Borges replied, \"I think a writer's duty is to be a writer, and if he can be a good writer, he is doing his duty. Besides, I think of my own opinions as being superficial. For example, I am a Conservative, I hate the Communists, I hate the Nazis, I hate the anti-Semites, and so on; but I don't allow these opinions to find their way into my writings—except, of course, when I was greatly elated about the Six-Day War. Generally speaking, I think of keeping them in watertight compartments. Everybody knows my opinions, but as for my dreams and my stories, they should be allowed their full freedom, I think. I don't want to intrude into them, I'm writing fiction, not fables.\" In the 1980s, towards the end of his life, Borges regained his earlier faith in democracy and held it out as the only hope for Argentina.\n\nIn an interview with Richard Burgin during the late 1960s, Borges described himself as a \"mild\" adherent of classical liberalism. He further recalled that his opposition to Marxism and communism was absorbed in his childhood. \"Well, I have been brought up to think that the individual should be strong and the State should be weak. I couldn't be enthusiastic about theories where the State is more important than the individual.\" He labeled himself a \"Spencerian anarchist\", following his father. After the overthrow via coup d'état of President Juan Domingo Perón in 1955, Borges supported efforts to purge Argentina's Government of Peronists and dismantle the former President's welfare state. He was enraged that the Communist Party of Argentina opposed these measures and sharply criticized them in lectures and in print. Borges's opposition to the Party in this matter ultimately led to a permanent rift with his longtime lover, Argentine Communist Estela Canto.\n\nIn a 1956 interview given to \"El Hogar\", he said \"[Communists] are in favor of totalitarian regimes and systematically combat freedom of thought, oblivious of the fact that the principal victims of dictatorships are, precisely, intelligence and culture.\"\n\nHe elaborated: \"Many people are in favor of dictatorships because they allow them to avoid thinking for themselves. Everything is presented to them ready-made. There are even agencies of the State that supply them with opinions, passwords, slogans, and even idols to exalt or cast down according to the prevailing wind or in keeping with the directives of the thinking heads of the single party.\"\n\nIn later years, Borges frequently expressed contempt for Marxist and Communist authors, poets, and intellectuals. In an interview with Burgin, Borges referred to Chilean poet Pablo Neruda as \"a very fine poet\" but a \"very mean man\" for unconditionally supporting the Soviet Union and demonizing the United States. Borges commented about Neruda, \"Now he knows that's rubbish.\"\n\nIn the same interview, Borges also criticized famed Marxist poet and playwright Federico Garcia Lorca, who was abducted by Nationalist soldiers and executed without trial during the Spanish Civil War. In Borges' opinion, Lorca's poetry and plays, when examined against his tragic death, appeared better than they actually were.\n\nIn 1934, Argentine ultra-nationalists, sympathetic to Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party, asserted Borges was secretly Jewish, and by implication, not a true Argentine. Borges responded with the essay \"Yo, Judío\" (\"I, a Jew\"), a reference to the old \"Yo, Argentino\" (\"I, an Argentine\"), a defensive phrase used during pogroms of Argentine Jews to make it clear to attackers that an intended victim was not Jewish. In the essay he says that he would be proud to be a Jew, with a backhanded reminder that any pure Castilian might be likely to have Jewish ancestry from a millennium ago.\n\nBoth before and during the Second World War, Borges regularly published essays attacking the Nazi police state and its racist ideology. His outrage was fueled by his deep love for German literature. In an essay published in 1937, Borges attacked the Nazi Party's use of children's books to inflame antisemitism. He wrote, \"I don't know if the world can do without German civilization, but I do know that its corruption by the teachings of hatred is a crime.\"\n\nIn a 1938 essay, Borges reviewed an anthology which rewrote German authors of the past to fit the Nazi party line. He was disgusted by what he described as Germany's \"chaotic descent into darkness\" and the attendant rewriting of history. He argued that such books sacrificed the German people's culture, history and integrity in the name of restoring their national honour. Such use of children's books for propaganda he writes, \"perfect the criminal arts of barbarians.\"\n\nIn a 1944 essay, Borges postulated,\n\nIn 1946, Borges published the short story \"Deutsches Requiem\", which masquerades as the last testament of a condemned Nazi war criminal named Otto Dietrich zur Linde.\n\nIn a 1971 conference at Columbia University, Borges was asked about the story by a student from the creative writing program. He recalled, \"When the Germans were defeated I felt great joy and relief, but at the same time I thought of the German defeat as being somehow tragic, because here we have perhaps the most educated people in Europe, who have a fine literature, a fine tradition of philosophy and poetry. Yet these people were bamboozled by a madman named Adolf Hitler, and I think there is tragedy there.\"\n\nIn a 1967 interview with Burgin, Borges recalled how his interactions with Argentina's Nazi sympathisers led him to create the story. He recalled, \"And then I realized that those people that were on the side of Germany, that they never thought of German victories or the German glory. What they really liked was the idea of the Blitzkrieg, of London being on fire, of the country being destroyed. As to the German fighters, they took no stock in them. Then I thought, well now Germany has lost, now America has saved us from this nightmare, but since nobody can doubt on which side I stood, I'll see what can be done from a literary point of view in favor of the Nazis. And then I created the ideal Nazi.\"\n\nAt Columbia University in 1971, Borges further elaborated on the story's creation, \"I tried to imagine what a real Nazi might be like. I mean someone who thought of violence as being praiseworthy for its own sake. Then I thought that this archetype of the Nazis wouldn't mind being defeated; after all, defeats and victories are mere matters of chance. He would still be glad of the fact, even if the Americans and British won the war. Naturally, when I am with Nazis, I find they are not my idea of what a Nazi is, but this wasn't meant to be a political tract. It was meant to stand for the fact that there was something tragic in the fate of a real Nazi. Except that I wonder if a real Nazi ever existed. At least, when I went to Germany, I never met one. They were all feeling sorry for themselves and wanted me to feel sorry for them as well.\"\n\nIn 1946, Argentine President Juan Perón began transforming Argentina into a one-party state with the assistance of his wife, Evita. Almost immediately, the spoils system was the rule of the day, as ideological critics of the ruling \"Partido Justicialista\" were fired from government jobs. During this period, Borges was informed that he was being \"promoted\" from his position at the Miguel Cané Library to a post as inspector of poultry and rabbits at the Buenos Aires municipal market. Upon demanding to know the reason, Borges was told, \"Well, you were on the side of the Allies, what do you expect?\" Borges resigned the following day.\n\nPerón's treatment of Borges became a cause célèbre for the Argentine intelligentsia. The Argentine Society of Writers (SADE) held a formal dinner in his honour. At the dinner, a speech was read which Borges had written for the occasion. It said:\n\nIn the aftermath, Borges found himself much in demand as a lecturer and one of the intellectual leaders of the Argentine opposition. In 1951 he was asked by anti-Peronist friends to run for president of SADE. Borges, then suffering from depression caused by a failed romance, reluctantly accepted. He later recalled that he would awake every morning and remember that Perón was President and feel deeply depressed and ashamed. Perón's government had seized control of the Argentine mass media and regarded SADE with indifference. Borges later recalled, however, \"Many distinguished men of letters did not dare set foot inside its doors.\" Meanwhile, SADE became an increasing refuge for critics of the regime. SADE official Luisa Mercedes Levinson noted, \"We would gather every week to tell the latest jokes about the ruling couple and even dared to sing the songs of the French Resistance, as well as 'La Marseillaise'\".\n\nAfter Evita Perón's death on 26 July 1952, Borges received a visit from two policemen, who ordered him to put up two portraits of the ruling couple on the premises of SADE. Borges indignantly refused, calling it a ridiculous demand. The policemen replied that he would soon face the consequences. The Justicialist Party placed Borges under 24-hour surveillance and sent policemen to sit in on his lectures; in September they ordered SADE to be permanently closed down. Like much of the Argentine opposition to Perón, SADE had become marginalized due to persecution by the State, and very few active members remained.\n\nAccording to Edwin Williamson,\n\nOn 16 September 1955, General Pedro Eugenio Aramburu's \"Revolución Libertadora\" toppled the ruling party and forced Perón into exile. Borges was overjoyed and joined demonstrators marching through the streets of Buenos Aires. According to Williamson, Borges shouted, \"Viva la Patria\", until his voice grew hoarse. Due to the influence of Borges' mother and his own role on the opposition to Peron, the provisional government appointed Borges as the Director of the National Library.\n\nIn his essay \"L'Illusion Comique\", Borges wrote there were two histories of Peronism in Argentina. The first he described as \"the criminal one\", composed of the police state tactics used against both real and imagined anti-Peronists. The second history was, according to Borges, \"the theatrical one\" composed of \"tales and fables made for consumption by dolts.\" He argued that, despite their claims to detest capitalism, Juan and Eva Perón \"copied its methods, dictating names and slogans to the people\" in the same way that multi-national corporations \"impose their razor blades, cigarettes, and washing machines.\" Borges then listed the numerous conspiracy theories the ruling couple dictated to their followers and how those theories were accepted without question.\n\nBorges concluded:\n\nIn a 1967 interview, Borges said, \"Perón was a humbug, and he knew it, and everybody knew it. But Perón could be very cruel. I mean, he had people tortured, killed. And his wife was a common prostitute.\"\n\nWhen Perón returned from exile in 1973 and regained the Presidency, Borges was enraged. In a 1975 interview for \"National Geographic\", he said \"Damn, the snobs are back in the saddle. If their posters and slogans again defile the city, I'll be glad I've lost my sight. Well, they can't humiliate me as they did before my books sold well.\"\n\nAfter being accused of being unforgiving, Borges quipped, \"I resented Perón's making Argentina look ridiculous to the world ... as in 1951, when he announced control over thermonuclear fusion, which still hasn't happened anywhere but in the sun and the stars. For a time, Argentines hesitated to wear band aids for fear friends would ask, 'Did the atomic bomb go off in your hand?' A shame, because Argentina really has world-class scientists.\"\n\nAfter Borges' death in 1986, the Peronist \"Partido Justicialista\" declined to send a delegate to the writer's memorial service in Buenos Aires. A spokesman for the Party said that this was in reaction to \"certain declarations he had made about the country.\" Later, at the City Council of Buenos Aires, Peronist politicians refused to honor Borges as an Argentine, commenting that he \"chose to die abroad.\" When infuriated politicians from the other parties demanded to know the real reason, the Peronists finally explained that Borges had made statements about Evita Perón which they called \"unacceptable\".\n\nDuring the 1970s, Borges at first expressed support for Argentina's military junta, but was scandalized by the junta's actions during the Dirty War. In protest against their support of the regime, Borges ceased publishing in the newspaper \"La Nación\".\n\nIn 1985, he wrote a short poem about the Falklands War called \"Juan López y John Ward\", about two fictional soldiers (one from each side), who died in the Falklands, in which he refers to \"islands that were too famous\". He also said about the war: \"The Falklands thing was a fight between two bald men over a comb.\"\n\nWardrip-Fruin and Montfort argue that Borges \"may have been the most important figure in Spanish-language literature since Cervantes. He was clearly of tremendous influence, writing intricate poems, short stories, and essays that instantiated concepts of dizzying power.\"\n\nIn addition to short stories for which he is most noted, Borges also wrote poetry, essays, screenplays, literary criticism, and edited numerous anthologies. His longest work of fiction is a fourteen-page story, \"The Congress\", first published in 1971. His late-onset blindness strongly influenced his later writing. Borges wrote: \"When I think of what I've lost, I ask, 'Who know themselves better than the blind?' – for every thought becomes a tool.\"\n\nParamount among his intellectual interests are elements of mythology, mathematics, theology, integrating these through literature, sometimes playfully, sometimes with great seriousness.\n\nBorges composed poetry throughout his life. As his eyesight waned (it came and went, with a struggle between advancing age and advances in eye surgery), he increasingly focused on writing poetry, since he could memorize an entire work in progress.\n\nHis poems embrace the same wide range of interests as his fiction, along with issues that emerge in his critical works and translations, and from more personal musings. For example, his interest in idealism runs through his work, reflected in the fictional world of Tlön in \"Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius\" and in his essay \"A New Refutation of Time\". It also appears as a theme in \"On Exactitude in Science\" and in his poems \"Things\" and \"El Golem\" (\"The Golem\") and his story \"The Circular Ruins\".\n\nBorges was a notable translator. He translated works of literature in English, French, German, Old English, and Old Norse into Spanish. His first publication, for a Buenos Aires newspaper, was a translation of Oscar Wilde's story \"The Happy Prince\" into Spanish when he was nine. At the end of his life he produced a Spanish-language version of a part of Snorri Sturluson's \"Prose Edda\". He also translated (while simultaneously subtly transforming) the works of, among others, Ambrose Bierce, William Faulkner, André Gide, Hermann Hesse, Franz Kafka, Rudyard Kipling, Edgar Allan Poe, Walt Whitman, and Virginia Woolf. Borges wrote and lectured extensively on the art of translation, holding that a translation may improve upon the original, may even be unfaithful to it, and that alternative and potentially contradictory renderings of the same work can be equally valid. Borges employed the devices of literary forgery and the review of an imaginary work, both forms of modern pseudo-epigrapha.\n\nBorges's best-known set of literary forgeries date from his early work as a translator and literary critic with a regular column in the Argentine magazine \"El Hogar\". Along with publishing numerous legitimate translations, he also published original works, for example, in the style of Emanuel Swedenborg or \" One Thousand and One Nights\", originally claiming them to be translations of works he had chanced upon. In another case, he added three short, falsely attributed pieces into his otherwise legitimate and carefully researched anthology \"El matrero\". Several of these are gathered in the \"A Universal History of Infamy\".\n\nWhile Borges was the great popularizer of the review of an imaginary work, he had developed the idea from Thomas Carlyle's \"Sartor Resartus\", a book-length review of a non-existent German transcendentalist work, and the biography of its equally non-existent author. In \"This Craft of Verse\", Borges says that in 1916 in Geneva \"[I] discovered, and was overwhelmed by, Thomas Carlyle. I read \"Sartor Resartus\", and I can recall many of its pages; I know them by heart.\"\n\nIn the introduction to his first published volume of fiction, \"The Garden of Forking Paths\", Borges remarks, \"It is a laborious madness and an impoverishing one, the madness of composing vast books, setting out in five hundred pages an idea that can be perfectly related orally in five minutes. The better way to go about it is to pretend that those books already exist, and offer a summary, a commentary on them.\" He then cites both \"Sartor Resartus\" and Samuel Butler's \"The Fair Haven\", remarking, however, that \"those works suffer under the imperfection that they themselves are books, and not a whit less tautological than the others. A more reasonable, more inept, and more lazy man, I have chosen to write \"notes\" on imaginary books.\"\n\nOn the other hand, Borges was wrongly attributed some works, like the poem \"Instantes\".\n\nBorges's change in style from regionalist \"criollismo\" to a more cosmopolitan style brought him much criticism from journals such as \"Contorno\", a leftist, Sartre-influenced Argentine publication founded by David Viñas and his brother, along with other intellectuals such as Noé Jitrik and Adolfo Prieto. In the post-Peronist Argentina of the early 1960s, \"Contorno\" met with wide approval from the youth who challenged the authenticity of older writers such as Borges and questioned their legacy of experimentation. Magic realism and exploration of universal truths, they argued, had come at the cost of responsibility and seriousness in the face of society's problems.\n\nThe \"Contorno\" writers acknowledged Borges and Eduardo Mallea for being \"doctors of technique\" but argued that their work lacked substance due to their lack of interaction with the reality that they inhabited, an existentialist critique of their refusal to embrace existence and reality in their artwork.\n\nThe story \"The Sect of the Phoenix\" is famously interpreted to allude to the ubiquity of sexual intercourse among humans – a concept whose essential qualities the narrator of the story is not able to relate to. With a few notable exceptions, women are almost entirely absent from Borges' fiction.\n\nHowever, there are some instances in Borges' later writings of romantic love, for example the story \"Ulrikke\" from \"The Book of Sand\". The protagonist of the story \"El muerto\" also lusts after the \"splendid, contemptuous, red-haired woman\" of Azevedo Bandeira and later \"sleeps with the woman with shining hair\". Although they do not appear in the stories, women are significantly discussed as objects of unrequited love in his short stories \"The Zahir\" and \"The Aleph\". The plot of \"La Intrusa\" was based on a true story of two friends. Borges turned their fictional counterparts into brothers, excluding the possibility of a homosexual relationship.\n\nBorges was never awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature, something which continually distressed the writer. He was one of several distinguished authors who never received the honour. Borges commented, \"Not granting me the Nobel Prize has become a Scandinavian tradition; since I was born they have not been granting it to me\".\n\nSome observers speculated that Borges did not receive the award in his later life because of his conservative political views, or, more specifically, because he had accepted an honour from Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet.\n\nBorges was nominated in 1967, and was among the final three choices considered by the committee, according to Nobel records unsealed on the 50th anniversary, in 2017. The committee considered Borges, Graham Greene and Miguel Ángel Asturias, with the latter chosen winner.\n\nMany of Borges's best-known stories deal with themes of time (\"The Secret Miracle\"), infinity (\"The Aleph\"), mirrors (\"Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius\") and labyrinths (\"The Two Kings and the Two Labyrinths\", \"The House of Asterion\", \"The Immortal\", \"The Garden of Forking Paths\"). Williamson writes, \"His basic contention was that fiction did not depend on the illusion of reality; what mattered ultimately was an author's ability to generate \"poetic faith\" in his reader.\"\n\nHis stories often have fantastical themes, such as a library containing every possible 410-page text (\"The Library of Babel\"), a man who forgets nothing he experiences (\"Funes, the Memorious\"), an artifact through which the user can see everything in the universe (\"The Aleph\"), and a year of still time given to a man standing before a firing squad (\"The Secret Miracle\"). Borges told realistic stories of South American life, of folk heroes, streetfighters, soldiers, gauchos, detectives, and historical figures. He mixed the real and the fantastic, fact with fiction. His interest in compounding fantasy, philosophy, and the art of translation are evident in articles such as \"The Translators of \"The Book of One Thousand and One Nights\"\". In the \"Book of Imaginary Beings\", a thoroughly researched bestiary of mythical creatures, Borges wrote, \"There is a kind of lazy pleasure in useless and out-of-the-way erudition.\" Borges's interest in fantasy was shared by Bioy Casares, with whom he coauthored several collections of tales between 1942 and 1967.\n\nOften, especially early in his career, the mixture of fact and fantasy crossed the line into the realm of hoax or literary forgery.\n\n\"The Garden of Forking Paths\" (1941) presents the idea of forking paths through networks of time, none of which is the same, all of which are equal. Borges uses the recurring image of \"a labyrinth that folds back upon itself in infinite regression\" so we \"become aware of all the possible choices we might make.\" The forking paths have branches to represent these choices that ultimately lead to different endings. Borges saw man's search for meaning in a seemingly infinite universe as fruitless and instead uses the maze as a riddle for time, not space. He examined the themes of universal randomness (\"The Lottery in Babylon\") and madness (\"The Zahir\"). Due to the success of the \"Forking Paths\" story, the term \"Borgesian\" came to reflect a quality of narrative non-linearity.\n\nThe philosophical term \"Borgesian conundrum\" is named after him and has been defined as the ontological question of \"whether the writer writes the story, or it writes him.\" The original concept put forward by Borges is in \"Kafka and His Precursors\". After reviewing works that were written before those of Kafka, Borges wrote:\n\nAlong with other young Argentine writers of his generation, Borges initially rallied around the fictional character of Martín Fierro. \"Martín Fierro\", a poem by José Hernández, was a dominant work of 19th century Argentine literature. Its eponymous hero became a symbol of Argentine sensibility, untied from European values – a gaucho, free, poor, \"pampas\"-dwelling.\n\nThe character Fierro is illegally drafted to serve at a border fort to defend it against the indigenous population but ultimately deserts to become a \"gaucho matrero\", the Argentine equivalent of a North American western outlaw. Borges contributed keenly to the avant garde \"Martín Fierro magazine\" in the early 1920s.\n\nAs Borges matured, he came to a more nuanced attitude toward the Hernández poem. In his book of essays on the poem, Borges separates his admiration for the aesthetic virtues of the work from his mixed opinion of the moral virtues of its protagonist. In his essay \"The Argentine Writer and Tradition\" (1951), Borges celebrates how Hernández expresses the Argentine character. In a key scene in the poem, Martín Fierro and El Moreno compete by improvising songs on universal themes such as time, night, and the sea, reflecting the real-world gaucho tradition of \"payadas\", improvised musical dialogues on philosophical themes. Borges points out that Hernández evidently knew the difference between actual gaucho tradition of composing poetry versus the \"gauchesque\" fashion among Buenos Aires literati.\n\nIn his works he refutes the arch-nationalist interpreters of the poem and disdains others, such as critic Eleuterio Tiscornia, for their Europeanising approach. Borges denies that Argentine literature should distinguish itself by limiting itself to \"local colour\", which he equates with cultural nationalism. Racine and Shakespeare's work, he says, looked beyond their countries' borders. Neither, he argues, need the literature be bound to the heritage of old world Spanish or European tradition. Nor should it define itself by the conscious rejection of its colonial past. He asserts that Argentine writers need to be free to define Argentine literature anew, writing about Argentina and the world from the point of view of those who have inherited the whole of world literature. Williamson says \"Borges's main argument is that the very fact of writing from the margins provides Argentine writers with a special opportunity to innovate without being bound to the canons of the centre, ... at once a part of and apart from the centre, which gives them much potential freedom\".\n\nBorges focused on universal themes, but also composed a substantial body of literature on themes from Argentine folklore and history. His first book, the poetry collection \"Fervor de Buenos Aires\" (\"Passion for Buenos Aires\"), appeared in 1923. Borges's writings on things Argentine, include Argentine culture (\"History of the Tango\"; \"Inscriptions on Horse Wagons\"), folklore (\"Juan Muraña\", \"Night of the Gifts\"), literature (\"The Argentine Writer and Tradition\", \"Almafuerte\"; \"Evaristo Carriego\"), and national concerns (\"Celebration of the Monster\", \"Hurry, Hurry\", \"The Mountebank\", \"Pedro Salvadores\"). Ultranationalists, however, continued to question his Argentine identity.\n\nBorges's interest in Argentine themes reflects, in part, the inspiration of his family tree. Borges had an English paternal grandmother who, around 1870, married the \"criollo\" Francisco Borges, a man with a military command and a historic role in the Argentine Civil Wars in what is now Argentina and Uruguay.\n\nSpurred by pride in his family's heritage, Borges often used those civil wars as settings in fiction and quasi-fiction (for example, \"The Life of Tadeo Isidoro Cruz,\" \"The Dead Man,\" \"Avelino Arredondo\") as well as poetry (\"General Quiroga Rides to His Death in a Carriage\"). Borges's maternal great-grandfather, Manuel Isidoro Suárez, was another military hero, whom Borges immortalized in the poem \"A Page to Commemorate Colonel Suárez, Victor at Junín\".\n\nHis non-fiction explores many of the themes found in his fiction. Essays such as \"The History of the Tango\" or his writings on the epic poem \"Martín Fierro\" explore Argentine themes, such as the identity of the Argentine people and of various Argentine subcultures. The varying genealogies of characters, settings, and themes in his stories, such as \"La muerte y la brújula\", used Argentine models without pandering to his readers or framing Argentine culture as \"exotic\".\n\nIn fact, contrary to what is usually supposed, the geographies found in his fictions often do not correspond to those of real-world Argentina. In his essay \"El escritor argentino y la tradición\", Borges notes that the very absence of camels in the Qur'an was proof enough that it was an Arabian work (despite the fact that camels are, in fact, mentioned in the Qur'an). He suggested that only someone trying to write an \"Arab\" work would purposefully include a camel. He uses this example to illustrate how his dialogue with universal existential concerns was just as Argentine as writing about gauchos and tangos.\n\nAt the time of the Argentine Declaration of Independence in 1816, the population was predominantly \"criollo\" (of Spanish ancestry). From the mid-1850s on waves of immigration from Europe, especially Italy and Spain, arrived in the country, and in the following decades the Argentine national identity diversified. Borges was writing in a strongly European literary context, immersed in Spanish, English, French, German, Italian, Anglo-Saxon and Old Norse literature. He also read translations of Near Eastern and Far Eastern works. Borges's writing is also informed by scholarship of Christianity, Buddhism, Islam, and Judaism, including prominent religious figures, heretics, and mystics.\n\nReligion and heresy are explored in such stories as \"Averroes's Search\", \"The Writing of the God\", \"The Theologians\", and \"Three Versions of Judas\". The curious inversion of mainstream Christian concepts of redemption in the latter story is characteristic of Borges's approach to theology in his literature.\n\nIn describing himself, he said, \"I am not sure that I exist, actually. I am all the writers that I have read, all the people that I have met, all the women that I have loved; all the cities that I have visited, all my ancestors.\" As a young man, he visited the frontier \"pampas\" which extend beyond Argentina into Uruguay and Brazil. Borges said that his father wished him \"to become a citizen of the world, a great cosmopolitan,\" in the way of Henry and William James.\n\nBorges lived and studied in Switzerland and Spain as a young student. As Borges matured, he traveled through Argentina as a lecturer and, internationally, as a visiting professor; he continued to tour the world as he grew older, finally settling in Geneva where he had spent some of his youth. Drawing on the influence of many times and places, Borges's work belittled nationalism and racism. Portraits of diverse coexisting cultures characteristic of Argentina are especially pronounced in the book \"Six Problems for don Isidoro Parodi\" (co-authored with Bioy Casares) and \"Death and the Compass\". Borges wrote that he considered Mexican essayist Alfonso Reyes to be \"the best prose-writer in the Spanish language of any time.\"\n\nBorges was also an admirer of some Oriental culture, e.g. the ancient Chinese board game of Go, about which he penned some verses, while The Garden of Forking Paths had a strong oriental theme.\n\nBorges was rooted in the Modernism predominant in its early years and was influenced by Symbolism. Like Vladimir Nabokov and James Joyce, he combined an interest in his native culture with broader perspectives, also sharing their multilingualism and inventiveness with language. However, while Nabokov and Joyce tended toward progressively larger works, Borges remained a miniaturist. His work progressed \"away\" from what he referred to as \"the baroque\": his later style is far more transparent and naturalistic than his earlier works. Borges represented the humanist view of media that stressed the social aspect of art driven by emotion. If art represented the tool, then Borges was more interested in how the tool could be used to relate to people.\n\nExistentialism saw its apogee during the years of Borges's greatest artistic production. It has been argued that his choice of topics largely ignored existentialism's central tenets. Critic Paul de Man notes, \"Whatever Borges's existential anxieties may be, they have little in common with Sartre's robustly prosaic view of literature, with the earnestness of Camus' moralism, or with the weighty profundity of German existential thought. Rather, they are the consistent expansion of a purely poetic consciousness to its furthest limits.\"\n\nThe essay collection \"Borges y la Matemática\" (Borges and Mathematics, 2003) by Argentine mathematician and writer Guillermo Martínez, outlines how Borges used concepts from mathematics in his work. Martínez states that Borges had, for example, at least a superficial knowledge of set theory, which he handles with elegance in stories such as \"The Book of Sand\". Other books such as \"The Unimaginable Mathematics of Borges' Library of Babel\" by William Goldbloom Bloch (2008) and \"Unthinking Thinking: Jorge Luis Borges, Mathematics, and the New Physics\" by Floyd Merrell (1991) also explore this relationship.\n\nFritz Mauthner, philosopher of language and author of the \"Wörterbuch der Philosophie\" (\"Dictionary of Philosophy\"), had an important influence on Borges. Borges always recognized the influence of this German philosopher. According to the literary review \"Sur,\" the book was one of the five books most noted and read by Borges. The first time that Borges mentioned Mauthner was in 1928 in his book \"The language of the Argentines\" (El idioma de los argentinos). In a 1962 interview Borges described Mauthner as possessing a fine sense of humor as well as great knowledge and erudition.\n\nBULLET::::- Illustrated by Donato Grima.\nBULLET::::- Burgin, Richard (1969) \"Jorge Luis Borges: Conversations\", Holt Rinehart & Winston\nBULLET::::- Burgin, Richard (1998) \"Jorge Luis Borges: Conversations\", University Press of Mississippi\nBULLET::::- Laín Corona, Guillermo. \"Borges and Cervantes: Truth and Falsehood in the Narration\". \"Neophilologus\", 93 (2009): 421–37.\nBULLET::::- Laín Corona, Guillermo. \"Teoría y práctica de la metáfora en torno a \"Fervor de Buenos Aires\", de Borges\". \"Cuadernos de Aleph. Revista de literatura hispánica\", 2 (2007): 79–93. https://web.archive.org/web/20120105024915/http://cuadernosdealeph.com/revista_2007/A2007_pdf/06%20Teor%C3%ADa.pdf\nBULLET::::- Manovich, Lev, New Media from Borges to HTML, 2003\nBULLET::::- Murray, Janet H., Inventing the Medium, 2003\n\n\nBULLET::::- BBC Radio 4 discussion programme from \"In our time\". (Audio 45 mins)\nBULLET::::- The Garden of Forking Paths Borges site from The Modern Word.\nBULLET::::- Borges Center, University of Pittsburgh.\nBULLET::::- The Friends of Jorge Luis Borges Worldwide Society & Associates\nBULLET::::- International Foundation Jorge Luis Borges\nBULLET::::- Jorge Luis Borges recorded at the Library of Congress for the Hispanic Division's audio literary archive on April 23, 1976.\n"}
{"id": "15782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15782", "title": "Jane Austen", "text": "Jane Austen\n\nJane Austen (; 16 December 1775 – 18 July 1817) was an English novelist known primarily for her six major novels, which interpret, critique and comment upon the British landed gentry at the end of the 18th century. Austen's plots often explore the dependence of women on marriage in the pursuit of favourable social standing and economic security. Her works critique the novels of sensibility of the second half of the 18th century and are part of the transition to 19th-century literary realism. Her use of biting irony, along with her realism, humour, and social commentary, have long earned her acclaim among critics, scholars, and popular audiences alike.\n\nWith the publications of \"Sense and Sensibility\" (1811), \"Pride and Prejudice\" (1813), \"Mansfield Park\" (1814) and \"Emma\" (1816), she achieved success as a published writer. She wrote two additional novels, \"Northanger Abbey\" and \"Persuasion\", both published posthumously in 1818, and began another, eventually titled \"Sanditon\", but died before its completion. She also left behind three volumes of juvenile writings in manuscript, a short epistolary novel \"Lady Susan\", and another unfinished novel, \"The Watsons\". Her six full-length novels have rarely been out of print, although they were published anonymously and brought her moderate success and little fame during her lifetime.\n\nA significant transition in her posthumous reputation occurred in 1833, when her novels were republished in Richard Bentley's Standard Novels series, illustrated by Ferdinand Pickering, and sold as a set. They gradually gained wider acclaim and popular readership. In 1869, fifty-two years after her death, her nephew's publication of \"A Memoir of Jane Austen\" introduced a compelling version of her writing career and supposedly uneventful life to an eager audience.\n\nAusten has inspired many critical essays and literary anthologies. Her novels have inspired many films, from 1940's \"Pride and Prejudice\" to more recent productions like \"Sense and Sensibility\" (1995), \"Emma\" (1996), \"Mansfield Park\" (1999), \"Pride & Prejudice\" (2005), and \"Love & Friendship\" (2016).\n\nThere is little biographical information about Jane Austen's life except the few letters that survive and the biographical notes her family members wrote. During her lifetime, Austen may have written as many as 3,000 letters, but only 161 survived. Many of the letters were written to Austen's older sister Cassandra, who in 1843 burned the greater part of them and cut pieces out of those she kept. Ostensibly, Cassandra destroyed or censored her sister's letters to prevent their falling into the hands of relatives and ensuring that \"younger nieces did not read any of Jane Austen's sometimes acid or forthright comments on neighbours or family members\". Cassandra believed that in the interest of tact and Jane's penchant for forthrightness, these details should be destroyed. The paucity of record of Austen's life leaves modern biographers little with which to work.\n\nThe situation was compounded as successive generations of the family expunged and sanitised the already opaque details of Austen's biography. The heirs of Jane's brother, Admiral Francis Austen, destroyed more letters; details were excised from the \"Biographical Notice\" her brother wrote in 1818; and family details continued to be omitted or embellished in her nephew's \"A Memoir of Jane Austen\", published in 1869, and in William and Richard Arthur Austen-Leigh's biography \"Jane Austen: Her Life and Letters\", published in 1913. The legend the family and relatives created reflects their biases in favour of \"good quiet Aunt Jane\", portraying a woman whose domestic situation was happy and whose family was the mainstay of her life. Austen scholar Jan Fergus explains that modern biographies tend to include details excised from the letters and family biographical materials, but that the challenge is to avoid the polarising view that Austen experienced periods of deep unhappiness and was \"an embittered, disappointed woman trapped in a thoroughly unpleasant family\".\nJane Austen was born in Steventon, Hampshire, on 16 December 1775. She was born a month later than her parents expected; her father wrote of her arrival in a letter that her mother \"certainly expected to have been brought to bed a month ago\". He added that her arrival was particularly welcome as \"a future companion to her sister\". The winter of 1776 was particularly harsh and it was not until 5 April that she was baptised at the local church with the single name Jane.\n\nFor much of Jane's life, her father, George Austen (1731–1805), served as the rector of the Anglican parishes at Steventon and at nearby Deane. He came from an old, respected, and wealthy family of wool merchants. Over the centuries as each generation of eldest sons received inheritances, their wealth was consolidated, and George's branch of the family fell into poverty. He and his two sisters were orphaned as children and had to be taken in by relatives. His sister Philadelphia went to India to find a husband and George entered St John's College, Oxford on a fellowship, where he most likely met Cassandra Leigh (1739–1827). She came from the prominent Leigh family; her father was rector at All Souls College, Oxford, where she grew up among the gentry. Her eldest brother James inherited a fortune and large estate from his great-aunt Perrot, with the only condition that he change his name to Leigh-Perrot.\n\nGeorge and Cassandra exchanged miniatures in 1763 and probably were engaged around that time. George received the living for the Steventon parish from the wealthy husband of his second cousin, Thomas Knight, who owned Steventon and its associated farms, one of which the Austen family rented to live in. Two months after Cassandra's father died, they married on 26 April 1764 at St Swithin's Church in Bath, by licence, in a simple ceremony. They left for Hampshire the same day.\n\nTheir income was modest, with George's small \"per annum\" living; Cassandra brought to the marriage the expectation of a small inheritance at the time of her mother's death. The Austens took up temporary residence at the nearby Deane rectory until Steventon, a 16th-century house in disrepair, underwent necessary renovations. Cassandra gave birth to three children while living at Deane: James in 1765, George in 1766, and Edward in 1767. Her custom was to keep an infant at home for several months and then place it with Elizabeth Littlewood, a woman living nearby to nurse and raise for twelve to eighteen months.\nIn 1768 the family finally took up residence in Steventon. Henry was the first child to be born there, in 1771. At about this time Cassandra could no longer ignore the signs that little George was developmentally disabled. He was subject to seizures, may have been deaf and mute, and she chose to send him out to be fostered. In 1773, Cassandra was born, followed by Francis in 1774, and Jane in 1775.\n\nAccording to Honan, the atmosphere of the Austen home was an \"open, amused, easy intellectual\" one, where the ideas of those with whom the Austens might disagree politically or socially were considered and discussed. The family relied on the patronage of their kin and hosted visits from numerous family members. Cassandra Austen spent the summer of 1770 in London with George's sister, Philadelphia, and her daughter Eliza, accompanied by his other sister, Mrs Walter and her daughter Philly. Philadelphia and Eliza Hancock were, according to Le Faye, \"the bright comets flashing into an otherwise placid solar system of clerical life in rural Hampshire, and the news of their foreign travels and fashionable London life, together with their sudden descents upon the Steventon household in between times, all helped to widen Jane's youthful horizon and influence her later life and works.\"\n\nCassandra Austen's cousin Thomas Leigh visited a number of times in the 1770s and 1780s, inviting young Cassie to visit them in Bath in 1781. The first mention of Jane occurs in family documents on her return, \"... and almost home they were when they met Jane & Charles, the two little ones of the family, who had to go as far as New Down to meet the chaise, & have the pleasure of riding home in it.\" Le Faye writes that \"Mr Austen's predictions for his younger daughter were fully justified. Never were sisters more to each other than Cassandra and Jane; while in a particularly affectionate family, there seems to have been a special link between Cassandra and Edward on the one hand, and between Henry and Jane on the other.\"\n\nFrom 1773 until 1796, George Austen supplemented his income by farming and by teaching three or four boys at a time, who boarded at his home. The Reverend Austen had an annual income of £200 from his two livings. This was a very modest income at the time; by comparison, a skilled worker like a blacksmith or a carpenter could make about £100 annually while the typical annual income of a gentry family was between £1,000 and £5,000.\n\nDuring this period of her life, Austen attended church regularly, socialised with friends and neighbours, and read novels — often of her own composition — aloud with her family in the evenings. Socialising with the neighbours often meant dancing, either impromptu in someone's home after supper or at the balls held regularly at the assembly rooms in the town hall. Her brother Henry later said that \"Jane was fond of dancing, and excelled in it\".\n\nIn 1783, Austen and her sister Cassandra were sent to Oxford to be educated by Mrs Ann Cawley who took them with her to Southampton when she moved there later in the year. In the autumn both girls were sent home when they caught typhus and Austen nearly died. Austen was from then home educated, until she attended boarding school in Reading with her sister from early in 1785 at the Reading Abbey Girls' School, ruled by Mrs La Tournelle, who possessed a cork leg and a passion for theatre. The school curriculum probably included some French, spelling, needlework, dancing and music and, perhaps, drama. The sisters returned home before December 1786 because the school fees for the two girls were too high for the Austen family. After 1786, Austen \"never again lived anywhere beyond the bounds of her immediate family environment\".\n\nThe remainder of her education came from reading, guided by her father and brothers James and Henry. Irene Collins believes that Austen \"used some of the same school books as the boys\" her father tutored. Austen apparently had unfettered access both to her father's library and that of a family friend, Warren Hastings. Together these collections amounted to a large and varied library. Her father was also tolerant of Austen's sometimes risqué experiments in writing, and provided both sisters with expensive paper and other materials for their writing and drawing.\n\nPrivate theatricals were an essential part of Austen's education. From her early childhood, the family and friends staged a series of plays in the rectory barn, including Richard Sheridan's \"The Rivals\" (1775) and David Garrick's \"Bon Ton\". Austen's eldest brother James wrote the prologues and epilogues and she probably joined in these activities, first as a spectator and later as a participant. Most of the plays were comedies, which suggests how Austen's satirical gifts were cultivated. At the age of 12, she tried her own hand at dramatic writing; she wrote three short plays during her teenage years.\n\nFrom the age of eleven, and perhaps earlier, Austen wrote poems and stories for her own and her family's amusement. In these works the details of daily life are exaggerated, common plot devices are parodied, and the \"stories are full of anarchic fantasies of female power, licence, illicit behaviour, and general high spirits\", according to Janet Todd. Austen later compiled fair copies of twenty-nine early works into three bound notebooks, now referred to as the \"Juvenilia\", containing work written between 1787 and 1793. She called the three notebooks \"Volume the First\", \"Volume the Second\" and \"Volume the Third\", and they preserve 90,000 words she wrote during those years. The \"Juvenilia\" are often, according to scholar Richard Jenkyns, \"boisterous\" and \"anarchic\"; he compares them to the work of 18th-century novelist Laurence Sterne.\n\nAmong these works are a satirical novel in letters titled \"Love and Freindship\" , written at age fourteen in 1790, in which she mocked popular novels of sensibility. The next year she wrote \"The History of England\", a manuscript of thirty-four pages accompanied by thirteen watercolour miniatures by her sister, Cassandra. Austen's \"History\" parodied popular historical writing, particularly Oliver Goldsmith's \"History of England\" (1764). Honan speculates that not long after writing \"Love and Freindship\", Austen decided to \"write for profit, to make stories her central effort\", that is, to become a professional writer. When she was around eighteen years old, Austen began to write longer, more sophisticated works.\n\nIn August 1792, aged seventeen, Austen started writing \"Catharine or the Bower\", which presaged her mature work, especially \"Northanger Abbey\"; it was left unfinished and the story picked up in \"Lady Susan\", which Todd describes as less prefiguring than \"Catharine\". A year later, she began, but abandoned a short play, later titled \"Sir Charles Grandison or the happy Man, a comedy in 6 acts\", which she returned to and completed around 1800. This was a short parody of various school textbook abridgements of Austen's favourite contemporary novel, \"The History of Sir Charles Grandison\" (1753), by Samuel Richardson.\nWhen Austen became an aunt for the first time at age eighteen, she sent new-born niece Fanny-Catherine Austen-Knight \"five short pieces of ... the Juvenilia now known collectively as 'Scraps' .., purporting to be her 'Opinions and Admonitions on the conduct of Young Women. For niece Jane-Anna-Elizabeth Austen (also born in 1793) Jane Austen wrote \"two more 'Miscellanious [sic] Morsels', dedicating them to [Anna] on 2 June 1793, 'convinced that if you seriously attend to them, You will derive from them very important Instructions, with regard to your Conduct in Life. There is manuscript evidence that Austen continued to work on these pieces as late as 1811 (when she was 36), and that her niece and nephew, Anna and James Edward Austen, made further additions as late as 1814.\n\nBetween 1793 and 1795 (aged eighteen to twenty) Austen wrote \"Lady Susan\", a short epistolary novel, usually described as her most ambitious and sophisticated early work. It is unlike any of Austen's other works. Austen biographer Claire Tomalin describes the novella's heroine as a sexual predator who uses her intelligence and charm to manipulate, betray and abuse her lovers, friends and family. Tomalin writes:\n\nTold in letters, it is as neatly plotted as a play, and as cynical in tone as any of the most outrageous of the Restoration dramatists who may have provided some of her inspiration ... It stands alone in Austen's work as a study of an adult woman whose intelligence and force of character are greater than those of anyone she encounters.\nAccording to Janet Todd, the model for the title character may have been Eliza de Feuillide, who inspired Austen with stories of her glamorous life and various adventures. Eliza's French husband was guillotined in 1794; she married Jane's brother Henry Austen in 1797.\n\nWhen Austen was twenty, Tom Lefroy, a neighbour, visited Steventon from December 1795 to January 1796. He had just finished a university degree and was moving to London for training as a barrister. Lefroy and Austen would have been introduced at a ball or other neighbourhood social gathering, and it is clear from Austen's letters to Cassandra that they spent considerable time together: \"I am almost afraid to tell you how my Irish friend and I behaved. Imagine to yourself everything most profligate and shocking in the way of dancing and sitting down together.\"\n\nAusten wrote in her first surviving letter to her sister Cassandra that Lefroy was a \"very gentlemanlike, good-looking, pleasant young man\". Five days later in another letter, Austen wrote that she expected an \"offer\" from her \"friend\" and that \"I shall refuse him, however, unless he promises to give away his white coat\", going on to write \"I will confide myself in the future to Mr Tom Lefroy, for whom I don't give a sixpence\" and refuse all others. The next day, Austen wrote: \"The day will come on which I flirt my last with Tom Lefroy and when you receive this it will be all over. My tears flow as I write at this melancholy idea\".\n\nHalperin cautioned that Austen often satirised popular sentimental romantic fiction in her letters, and some of the statements about Lefroy may have been ironic. However, it is clear that Austen was genuinely attracted to Lefroy and subsequently none of her other suitors ever quite measured up to him. The Lefroy family intervened and sent him away at the end of January. Marriage was impractical as both Lefroy and Austen must have known. Neither had any money, and he was dependent on a great-uncle in Ireland to finance his education and establish his legal career. If Tom Lefroy later visited Hampshire, he was carefully kept away from the Austens, and Jane Austen never saw him again. In November 1798, Lefroy was still on Austen's mind as she wrote to her sister she had tea with one of his relatives, wanted desperately to ask about him, but could not bring herself to raise the subject.\nAfter finishing \"Lady Susan\", Austen began her first full-length novel \"Elinor and Marianne\". Her sister remembered that it was read to the family \"before 1796\" and was told through a series of letters. Without surviving original manuscripts, there is no way to know how much of the original draft survived in the novel published anonymously in 1811 as \"Sense and Sensibility\".\n\nAusten began a second novel, \"First Impressions\" (later published as \"Pride and Prejudice\"), in 1796. She completed the initial draft in August 1797, aged 21; as with all of her novels, Austen read the work aloud to her family as she was working on it and it became an \"established favourite\". At this time, her father made the first attempt to publish one of her novels. In November 1797, George Austen wrote to Thomas Cadell, an established publisher in London, to ask if he would consider publishing \"First Impressions\". Cadell returned Mr. Austen's letter, marking it \"Declined by Return of Post\". Austen may not have known of her father's efforts. Following the completion of \"First Impressions\", Austen returned to \"Elinor and Marianne\" and from November 1797 until mid-1798, revised it heavily; she eliminated the epistolary format in favour of third-person narration and produced something close to \"Sense and Sensibility\". In 1797, Austen met her cousin (and future sister-in-law), Eliza de Feuillide, a French aristocrat whose first husband the Comte de Feuillide had been guillotined, causing her to flee to Britain, where she married Henry Austen. The description of the execution of the Comte de Feuillide related by his widow left Austen with an intense horror of the French Revolution that lasted for the rest of her life.\n\nDuring the middle of 1798, after finishing revisions of \"Elinor and Marianne\", Austen began writing a third novel with the working title \"Susan\" — later \"Northanger Abbey\" — a satire on the popular Gothic novel. Austen completed her work about a year later. In early 1803, Henry Austen offered \"Susan\" to Benjamin Crosby, a London publisher, who paid £10 for the copyright. Crosby promised early publication and went so far as to advertise the book publicly as being \"in the press\", but did nothing more. The manuscript remained in Crosby's hands, unpublished, until Austen repurchased the copyright from him in 1816.\n\nIn December 1800 George Austen unexpectedly announced his decision to retire from the ministry, leave Steventon, and move the family to 4, Sydney Place in Bath. While retirement and travel were good for the elder Austens, Jane Austen was shocked to be told she was moving from the only home she had ever known. An indication of her state of mind is her lack of productivity as a writer during the time she lived at Bath. She was able to make some revisions to \"Susan\", and she began and then abandoned a new novel, \"The Watsons\", but there was nothing like the productivity of the years 1795–1799. Tomalin suggests this reflects a deep depression disabling her as a writer, but Honan disagrees, arguing Austen wrote or revised her manuscripts throughout her creative life, except for a few months after her father died. It is often claimed that Austen was unhappy in Bath, which caused her to lose interest in writing, but it is just as possible that Austen's social life in Bath prevented her from spending much time writing novels. The critic Robert Irvine argued that if Austen spent more time writing novels when she was in the countryside, it might just have been because she had more spare time as opposed to being more happy in the countryside as is often argued. Furthermore, Austen frequently both moved and travelled over southern England during this period, which was hardly a conducive environment for writing a long novel. Austen sold the rights to publish \"Susan\" to a publisher Crosby & Company, who paid her £10. The Crosby & Company advertised \"Susan\", but never published it.\n\nThe years from 1801 to 1804 are something of a blank space for Austen scholars as Cassandra destroyed all of her letters from her sister in this period for unknown reasons. In December 1802 Austen received her only known proposal of marriage. She and her sister visited Alethea and Catherine Bigg, old friends who lived near Basingstoke. Their younger brother, Harris Bigg-Wither, had recently finished his education at Oxford and was also at home. Bigg-Wither proposed and Austen accepted. As described by Caroline Austen, Jane's niece, and Reginald Bigg-Wither, a descendant, Harris was not attractive — he was a large, plain-looking man who spoke little, stuttered when he did speak, was aggressive in conversation, and almost completely tactless. However, Austen had known him since both were young and the marriage offered many practical advantages to Austen and her family. He was the heir to extensive family estates located in the area where the sisters had grown up. With these resources, Austen could provide her parents a comfortable old age, give Cassandra a permanent home and, perhaps, assist her brothers in their careers. By the next morning, Austen realised she had made a mistake and withdrew her acceptance. No contemporary letters or diaries describe how Austen felt about this proposal. Irvine described Bigg-Wither as a somebody who \"...seems to have been a man very hard to like, let alone love\".\n\nIn 1814, Austen wrote a letter to her niece, Fanny Knight, who had asked for advice about a serious relationship, telling her that \"having written so much on one side of the question, I shall now turn around & entreat you not to commit yourself farther, & not to think of accepting him unless you really do like him. Anything is to be preferred or endured rather than marrying without Affection\". The English scholar Douglas Bush wrote that Austen had \"had a very high ideal of the love that should unite a husband and wife ... All of her heroines ... know in proportion to their maturity, the meaning of ardent love\". A possible autobiographical element in \"Sense and Sensibility\" occurs when Elinor Dashwood contemplates that \"the worse and most irremediable of all evils, a connection for life\" with an unsuitable man.\nIn 1804, while living in Bath, Austen started, but did not complete her novel, \"The Watsons\". The story centres on an invalid and impoverished clergyman and his four unmarried daughters. Sutherland describes the novel as \"a study in the harsh economic realities of dependent women's lives\". Honan suggests, and Tomalin agrees, that Austen chose to stop work on the novel after her father died on 21 January 1805 and her personal circumstances resembled those of her characters too closely for her comfort.\n\nHer father's relatively sudden death left Jane, Cassandra, and their mother in a precarious financial situation. Edward, James, Henry, and Francis Austen (known as Frank) pledged to make annual contributions to support their mother and sisters. For the next four years, the family's living arrangements reflected their financial insecurity. They spent part of the time in rented quarters in Bath before leaving the city in June 1805 for a family visit to Steventon and Godmersham. They moved for the autumn months to the newly fashionable seaside resort of Worthing, on the Sussex coast, where they resided at Stanford Cottage. It was here that Austen is thought to have written her fair copy of \"Lady Susan\" and added its \"Conclusion\". In 1806 the family moved to Southampton, where they shared a house with Frank Austen and his new wife. A large part of this time they spent visiting various branches of the family.\n\nOn 5 April 1809, about three months before the family's move to Chawton, Austen wrote an angry letter to Richard Crosby, offering him a new manuscript of \"Susan\" if needed to secure the immediate publication of the novel, and requesting the return of the original so she could find another publisher. Crosby replied that he had not agreed to publish the book by any particular time, or at all, and that Austen could repurchase the manuscript for the £10 he had paid her and find another publisher. She did not have the resources to buy the copyright back at that time, but was able to purchase it in 1816.\n\nAround early 1809 Austen's brother Edward offered his mother and sisters a more settled life — the use of a large cottage in Chawton village that was part of Edward's nearby estate, Chawton House. Jane, Cassandra and their mother moved into Chawton cottage on 7 July 1809. Life was quieter in Chawton than it had been since the family's move to Bath in 1800. The Austens did not socialise with gentry and entertained only when family visited. Her niece Anna described the family's life in Chawton as \"a very quiet life, according to our ideas, but they were great readers, and besides the housekeeping our aunts occupied themselves in working with the poor and in teaching some girl or boy to read or write.\"\n\nAt the time, married British women did not have the legal power to sign contracts, and it was common for a woman wishing to publish to have a male relative represent her to sign the contract. Like most women authors at the time, Austen had to publish her books anonymously. At the time, the ideal roles for a woman were as wife and mother, and writing for women was regarded at best as a secondary form of activity; a woman who wished to be a full-time writer was felt to be degrading her femininity, so books by women were usually published anonymously in order to maintain the conceit that the female writer was only publishing as a sort of part-time job, and was not seeking to become a \"literacy lioness\" (i.e a celebrity).\n\nDuring her time at Chawton, Jane Austen published four generally well-received novels. Through her brother Henry, the publisher Thomas Egerton agreed to publish \"Sense and Sensibility\", which, like all of Jane Austen's novels except \"Pride and Prejudice\", was published \"on commission\", that is, at the author's financial risk. When publishing on commission, publishers would advance the costs of publication, repay themselves as books were sold and then charge a 10% commission for each book sold, paying the rest to the author. If a novel did not recover its costs through sales, the author was responsible for them. The alternative to selling via commission was the selling the copyright, where an author received a one-time payment from the publisher for the manuscript, which occurred with \"Pride and Prejudice\". Austen's experience with \"Susan\" (the manuscript that became \"Northanger Abbey\") where she sold the copyright to the publisher Crosby & Sons for £10, who did not publish the book, forcing her to buy back the copyright in order to get her work published, left Austen leery of this method of publishing. The final alternative, of selling by subscription, where a group of people would agree to buy a book in advance, was not an option for Austen as only authors who were well known or had an influential aristocratic patron who would recommend an up-coming book to their friends, could sell by subscription. \"Sense and Sensibility\" appeared in October 1811, and was described as being written \"By a Lady\". As it was sold on commission, Egerton used expensive paper and set the price at 15 shillings.\nReviews were favourable and the novel became fashionable among young aristocratic opinion-makers; the edition sold out by mid-1813. Austen's novels were published in larger editions than was normal for this period. The small size of the novel-reading public and the large costs associated with hand production (particularly the cost of handmade paper) meant that most novels were published in editions of 500 copies or less to reduce the risks to the publisher and the novelist. Even some of the most successful titles during this period were issued in editions of not more than 750 or 800 copies and later reprinted if demand continued. Austen's novels were published in larger editions, ranging from about 750 copies of \"Sense and Sensibility\" to about 2,000 copies of \"Emma\". It is not clear whether the decision to print more copies than usual of Austen's novels was driven by the publishers or the author. Since all but one of Austen's books were originally published \"on commission\", the risks of overproduction were largely hers (or Cassandra's after her death) and publishers may have been more willing to produce larger editions than was normal practice when their own funds were at risk. Editions of popular works of non-fiction were often much larger.\n\nAusten made £140 from \"Sense and Sensibility\", which provided her with some financial and psychological independence. After the success of \"Sense and Sensibility\", all of Austen's subsequent books were billed as written \"By the author of \"Sense and Sensibility\"\" and Austen's name never appeared on her books during her lifetime. Egerton then published \"Pride and Prejudice\", a revision of \"First Impressions\", in January 1813. Austen sold the copyright to \"Pride and Prejudice\" to Egerton for £110. To maximise profits, he used cheap paper and set the price at 18 shillings. He advertised the book widely and it was an immediate success, garnering three favourable reviews and selling well. Had Austen sold \"Pride and Prejudice\" on commission, she would had made a profit of £475, or twice her father's annual income. By October 1813 Egerton was able to begin selling a second edition. \"Mansfield Park\" was published by Egerton in May 1814. While \"Mansfield Park\" was ignored by reviewers, it was very popular with readers. All copies were sold within six months, and Austen's earnings on this novel were larger than for any of her other novels.\n\nUnknown to Austen, her novels were translated into French and published in cheaply produced, pirated editions in France. The literary critic Noel King commented that given the prevailing rage in France at the time was for lush romantic fantasies, it is remarkable that her novels with the emphasis on everyday English life had any sort of a market in France. However, King cautioned that Austen's chief translator in France, Madame Isabelle de Montolieu, had only the most rudimentary knowledge of English, and her translations were more of \"imitations\" than translations proper, as Montolieu depended upon assistants to provide a summary, which she then translated into an embellished French that often radically altered Austen's plots and characters. The first of the Austen novels to be published that credited her as the author was in France, when \"Persuasion\" was published in 1821 as \"La Famille Elliot ou L'Ancienne Inclination\".\n\nAusten learned that the Prince Regent admired her novels and kept a set at each of his residences. In November 1815, the Prince Regent's librarian James Stanier Clarke invited Austen to visit the Prince's London residence and hinted Austen should dedicate the forthcoming \"Emma\" to the Prince. Though Austen disliked the Prince Regent, she could scarcely refuse the request. Austen disapproved of the Prince Regent on the account of his womanising, gambling, drinking, spendthrift ways and generally disreputable behaviour. She later wrote \"Plan of a Novel, according to Hints from Various Quarters\", a satiric outline of the \"perfect novel\" based on the librarian's many suggestions for a future Austen novel. Austen was greatly annoyed by Clarke's often pompous literary advice, and the \"Plan of A Novel\" parodying Clarke was intended as her revenge for all of the unwanted letters she had received from the royal librarian.\n\nIn mid-1815 Austen moved her work from Egerton to John Murray, a better known London publisher, who published \"Emma\" in December 1815 and a second edition of \"Mansfield Park\" in February 1816. \"Emma\" sold well, but the new edition of \"Mansfield Park\" did poorly, and this failure offset most of the income from \"Emma\". These were the last of Austen's novels to be published during her lifetime.\n\nWhile Murray prepared \"Emma\" for publication, Austen began \"The Elliots\", later published as \"Persuasion\". She completed her first draft in July 1816. In addition, shortly after the publication of \"Emma\", Henry Austen repurchased the copyright for \"Susan\" from Crosby. Austen was forced to postpone publishing either of these completed novels by family financial troubles. Henry Austen's bank failed in March 1816, depriving him of all of his assets, leaving him deeply in debt and losing Edward, James, and Frank Austen large sums. Henry and Frank could no longer afford the contributions they had made to support their mother and sisters.\n\nAusten was feeling unwell by early 1816, but ignored the warning signs. By the middle of that year, her decline was unmistakable, and she began a slow, irregular deterioration. The majority of biographers rely on Dr. Vincent Cope's 1964 retrospective diagnosis and list her cause of death as Addison's disease, although her final illness has also been described as resulting from Hodgkin's lymphoma. When her uncle died and left his entire fortune to his wife, effectively disinheriting his relatives, she suffered a relapse, writing, \"I am ashamed to say that the shock of my Uncle's Will brought on a relapse ... but a weak Body must excuse weak Nerves\".\n\nShe continued to work in spite of her illness. Dissatisfied with the ending of \"The Elliots\", she rewrote the final two chapters, which she finished on 6 August 1816. In January 1817 Austen began \"The Brothers\" (titled \"Sanditon\" when published in 1925), and completed twelve chapters before stopping work in mid-March 1817, probably due to illness. Todd describes \"Sanditon\"s heroine, Diana Parker, as an \"energetic invalid\". In the novel, Austen mocked hypochondriacs and though she describes the heroine as \"bilious\", five days after abandoning the novel she wrote of herself that she was turning \"every wrong colour\" and living \"chiefly on the sofa\". She put down her pen on 18 March 1817, making a note of it.\n\nAusten made light of her condition, describing it as \"bile\" and rheumatism. As her illness progressed, she experienced difficulty walking and lacked energy; by mid-April she was confined to bed. In May Cassandra and Henry brought her to Winchester for treatment, by which time she suffered agonising pain and welcomed death. Austen died in Winchester on 18 July 1817 at the age of 41. Henry, through his clerical connections, arranged for his sister to be buried in the north aisle of the nave of Winchester Cathedral. The epitaph composed by her brother James praises Austen's personal qualities, expresses hope for her salvation and mentions the \"extraordinary endowments of her mind\", but does not explicitly mention her achievements as a writer.\n\nIn the months after Austen's death in July 1817, Cassandra, Henry Austen and Murray arranged for the publication of \"Persuasion\" and \"Northanger Abbey\" as a set. Henry Austen contributed a \"Biographical Note\" dated December 1817, which for the first time identified his sister as the author of the novels. Tomalin describes it as \"a loving and polished eulogy\". Sales were good for a year — only 321 copies remained unsold at the end of 1818.\n\nAlthough Austen's six novels were out of print in England in the 1820s, they were still being read through copies housed in private libraries and circulating libraries. Austen had early admirers. The first piece of what we might now call fan fiction (or real-person fiction) using her as a character dates to 1823. It's in a letter to the editor in \"The Lady's Magazine\". It refers to Austen's genius and suggests that aspiring authors were envious of her powers. \n\nIn 1832 Richard Bentley purchased the remaining copyrights to all of her novels, and over the following winter published five illustrated volumes as part of his \"Standard Novels\" series. In October 1833, Bentley released the first collected edition of her works. Since then, Austen's novels have been continuously in print.\n\nAusten's works critique the sentimental novels of the second half of the 18th century and are part of the transition to 19th-century literary realism. The earliest English novelists, Richardson, Henry Fielding and Tobias Smollett, were followed by the school of sentimentalists and romantics such as Walter Scott, Horace Walpole, Clara Reeve, Ann Radcliffe, and Oliver Goldsmith, whose style and genre Austen rejected, returning the novel on a \"slender thread\" to the tradition of Richardson and Fielding for a \"realistic study of manners\". In the mid-20th century, literary critics F. R. Leavis and Ian Watt placed her in the tradition of Richardson and Fielding; both believe that she used their tradition of \"irony, realism and satire to form an author superior to both\".\n\nWalter Scott noted Austen's \"resistance to the trashy sensationalism of much of modern fiction—'the ephemeral productions which supply the regular demand of watering places and circulating libraries'\". Yet her rejection of these genres is complex, as evidenced by \"Northanger Abbey\" and \"Emma\". Similar to William Wordsworth, who excoriated the modern frantic novel in the \"Preface\" to his \"Lyrical Ballads\" (1800), Austen distances herself from escapist novels; the discipline and innovation she demonstrates is similar to his, and she shows \"that rhetorically less is artistically more.\" She eschewed popular Gothic fiction, stories of terror in which a heroine typically was stranded in a remote location, a castle or abbey (32 novels between 1784 and 1818 contain the word \"abbey\" in their title). Yet in \"Northanger Abbey\" she alludes to the trope, with the heroine, Catherine, anticipating a move to a remote locale. Rather than full-scale rejection or parody, Austen transforms the genre, juxtaposing reality, with descriptions of elegant rooms and modern comforts, against the heroine's \"novel-fueled\" desires. Nor does she completely denigrate Gothic fiction: instead she transforms settings and situations, such that the heroine is still imprisoned, yet her imprisonment is mundane and real—regulated manners and the strict rules of the ballroom. In \"Sense and Sensibility\" Austen presents characters who are more complex than in staple sentimental fiction, according to critic Keymer, who notes that although it is a parody of popular sentimental fiction, \"Marianne in her sentimental histrionics responds to the calculating world ... with a quite justifiable scream of female distress.\"\nRichardson's \"Pamela\", the prototype for the sentimental novel, is a didactic love story with a happy ending, written at a time women were beginning to have the right to choose husbands and yet were restricted by social conventions. Austen attempted Richardson's epistolary style, but found the flexibility of narrative more conducive to her realism, a realism in which each conversation and gesture carries a weight of significance. The narrative style utilises free indirect speech—she was the first English novelist to do so extensively—through which she had the ability to present a character's thoughts directly to the reader and yet still retain narrative control. The style allows an author to vary discourse between the narrator's voice and values and those of the characters.\n\nAusten had a natural ear for speech and dialogue, according to scholar Mary Lascelles \"Few novelists can be more scrupulous than Jane Austen as to the phrasing and thoughts of their characters.\" Techniques such as fragmentary speech suggest a character's traits and their tone; \"syntax and phrasing rather than vocabulary\" is utilised to indicate social variants. Dialogue reveals a character's mood—frustration, anger, happiness—each treated differently and often through varying patterns of sentence structures. When Elizabeth Bennet rejects Darcy, her stilted speech and the convoluted sentence structure reveals that he has wounded her:\nFrom the very beginning, from the first moment I may almost say, of my acquaintance with you, your manners impressing me with the fullest belief of your arrogance, your conceit, and your selfish disdain of the feelings of others, were such as to form that the groundwork of disapprobation, on which succeeding events have built so immovable a dislike. And I had not known you a month before I felt that you were the last man in the world whom I could ever be prevailed on to marry.\nAusten's plots highlight women's traditional dependence on marriage to secure social standing and economic security. As an art form, the 18th-century novel lacked the seriousness of its equivalents from the 19th century, when novels were treated as \"the natural vehicle for discussion and ventilation of what mattered in life\". Rather than delving too deeply into the psyche of her characters, Austen enjoys them and imbues them with humour, according to critic John Bayley. He believes that the well-spring of her wit and irony is her own attitude that comedy \"is the saving grace of life\". Part of Austen's fame rests on the historical and literary significance that she was the first woman to write great comic novels. Samuel Johnson's influence is evident, in that she follows his advice to write \"a representation of life as may excite mirth\".\n\nHer humour comes from her modesty and lack of superiority, allowing her most successful characters, such as Elizabeth Bennet, to transcend the trivialities of life, which the more foolish characters are overly absorbed in. Austen used comedy to explore the individualism of women's lives and gender relations, and she appears to have used it to find the goodness in life, often fusing it with \"ethical sensibility\", creating artistic tension. Critic Robert Polhemus writes, \"To appreciate the drama and achievement of Austen, we need to realize how deep was her passion for both reverence and ridicule ... and her comic imagination reveals both the harmonies and the telling contradictions of her mind and vision as she tries to reconcile her satirical bias with her sense of the good.\"\n\nAs Austen's works were published anonymously, they brought her little personal renown. They were fashionable among opinion-makers, but were rarely reviewed. Most of the reviews were short and on balance favourable, although superficial and cautious. They most often focused on the moral lessons of the novels. Sir Walter Scott, a leading novelist of the day, contributed one anonymously. Using the review as a platform to defend the then-disreputable genre of the novel, he praised Austen's realism. The other important early review was attributed to Richard Whately in 1821. However, Whately denied having authored the review, which drew favourable comparisons between Austen and such acknowledged greats as Homer and Shakespeare, and praised the dramatic qualities of her narrative. Scott and Whately set the tone for almost all subsequent 19th-century Austen criticism.\n\nBecause Austen's novels did not conform to Romantic and Victorian expectations that \"powerful emotion [be] authenticated by an egregious display of sound and colour in the writing\", 19th-century critics and audiences preferred the works of Charles Dickens and George Eliot. In a rare sympathetic review, in this case of \"Emma\" in 1815, Sir Walter Scott wrote that book displayed \"the art of copying from nature as she really exists in the common walks of life, and presenting to the reader, instead of the splendid scenes from an imaginary world, a correct and striking representation of that which is daily taking place around him\". Though Scott was positive, Austen's work did not match the prevailing aesthetic values of the Romantic zeitgeist. Her novels were republished in Britain from the 1830s and sold at a steady rate, but they were not best-sellers. The first French critic who paid notice to Austen was Philarète Chasles who completely dismissed her as a writer, giving her two sentences in an 1842 essay on the influence of Sir Walter Scott, calling her a boring, imitative writer who wrote nothing of substance. Apart from Chasles, Austen was almost completely ignored in France until 1878.\n\nAusten had many admiring readers in the 19th century, who considered themselves part of a literary elite. Philosopher and literary critic George Henry Lewes expressed this viewpoint in a series of enthusiastic articles published in the 1840s and 1850s. This theme continued later in the century with novelist Henry James, who referred to Austen several times with approval and on one occasion ranked her with Shakespeare, Cervantes, and Henry Fielding as among \"the fine painters of life\".\n\nThe publication of James Edward Austen-Leigh's \"A Memoir of Jane Austen\" in 1869 introduced Austen to a wider public as \"dear aunt Jane\", the respectable maiden aunt. Publication of the \"Memoir\" spurred the reissue of Austen's novels — the first popular editions were released in 1883 and fancy illustrated editions and collectors' sets quickly followed. Author and critic Leslie Stephen described the popular mania that started to develop for Austen in the 1880s as \"Austenolatry\". In 1878, the French critic Léon Boucher published the essay \"Le Roman Classique en Angleterre\", where he called Austen a \"genius\", which was the first time that epithet had been used in France to describe Austen. The first proper translation of Austen into French that was completely faithful to the original occurred in 1899 when Félix Fénéon translated \"Northanger Abbey\" into French as \"Catherine Moreland\". Around the start of the 20th century, members of the literary elite reacted against the popularisation of Austen. They referred to themselves as \"Janeites\" in order to distinguish themselves from the masses who did not properly understand her works. For example, Henry James responded negatively to what he described as \"a beguiled infatuation\" with Austen, a rising tide of public interest that exceeded Austen's \"intrinsic merit and interest\". The American literary critic A. Walton Litz noted that the \"anti-Janites\" in the 19th and 20th centuries comprise a formidable literary squad of Mark Twain, Henry James, Charlotte Brontë, D.H. Lawrence and Kingsley Amis, but in \"every case the adverse judgement merely reveals the special limitations or eccentricities of the critic, leaving Jane Austen relatively untouched\".\n\nSeveral of Austen's works have been subject to academic study. The first dissertation on Austen was published in 1883, by George Pellew, a student at Harvard University. The first examination came from a 1911 essay by Oxford Shakespearean scholar A. C. Bradley. In his essay, Bradley groups Austen's novels into \"early\" and \"late\" works, a distinction still used by scholars today. The first academic books devoted to Austen in France was \"Jane Austen\" by Paul and Kate Rague published in 1914, where the Ragues set out to explain why French critics and readers should take Austen seriously. The same year, Léonie Villard published \"Jane Austen, Sa Vie et Ses Oeuvres\", which was originally her PhD thesis, marking the first time that Austen was the subject of serious academic study in France. The second examination in English was R.W. Chapman's 1923 edition of Austen's collected works. Not only was it the first scholarly edition of Austen's works, it was also the first scholarly edition of any English novelist. The Chapman text has remained the basis for all subsequent published editions of Austen's works.\n\nWith the publication in 1939 of Mary Lascelles' \"Jane Austen and Her Art\", the academic study of Austen took hold. Lascelles's work included an analysis of the books Austen read and the effect of her reading on her work as well as an extended analysis of Austen's style and her \"narrative art\". Concern arose that academics were taking over Austen criticism and that it was becoming increasingly esoteric, a debate that has continued since.\n\nThe period since World War II has seen more scholarship on Austen using a diversity of critical approaches, including feminist theory, and perhaps most controversially, postcolonial theory. The continuing disconnection between the popular appreciation of Austen, particularly by modern Janeites, and the academic appreciation of Austen has widened considerably. After the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, Austen was in disfavor with the authorities who only wanted Western authors to be published in translation whose work could be presented as representing the West in a negative light, and Austen was regarded as too \"frivolous\" for this purpose. As hostile as the treatment of Austen was in the 1950s, it paled besides the treatment of her books during the \"Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution\" in China between 1966–69, when Austen was banned as a \"British bourgeois imperialist\" author. In the late 1970s, Austen was allowed to be published in China, where her popularity with readers confounded the authorities who had trouble understanding that people sometimes want to read books for enjoyment instead of dialectical purposes. A sign of the way that Austen can still spark debate can be seen when the American English professor Gene Koppel mentioned in a lecture that Austen and her family were \"Tories of the deepest dye\" [the Tories were the conservative party while the Whigs were the liberal party], a statement which greatly upset many of Koppel's liberal students, who much to his amusement, complained to him how was it possible that Austen was a conservative. The conservative Koppel noted several feminist authors such as Claudia Johnson and Mollie Sandock were claiming Austen for their own cause. Citing the work of Hans-Georg Gadamer, Koppel argued that different people can and do react to the same work of literature in different ways as art is always a subjective discipline as various people have their standards for evaluating literature. As such, Koppel argued that competing interpretations of Austen's work, provided that they are grounded in readings of her work are all equally valid, and so it is equally possible to see Austen as a feminist critiquing Regency society and as a conservative upholding the values of Regency society.\n\nAusten's novels have resulted in sequels, prequels and adaptations of almost every type, from soft-core pornography to fantasy. From the 19th century, her family members published conclusions to her incomplete novels, and by 2000 there were over 100 printed adaptations. The first dramatic adaptation of Austen was published in 1895, Rosina Filippi's \"Duologues and Scenes from the Novels of Jane Austen: Arranged and Adapted for Drawing-Room Performance\", and Filippi was also responsible for the first professional stage adaptation, \"The Bennets\" (1901). The first film adaptation was the 1940 MGM production of \"Pride and Prejudice\" starring Laurence Olivier and Greer Garson. BBC television dramatisations since the 1970s have attempted to adhere meticulously to Austen's plots, characterisations and settings. The British critic Robert Irvine noted that in American film adaptations of Austen's novels, starting with the 1940 version of \"Pride and Prejudice\" and continuing on to today, class is subtly downplayed as the United States is officially an egalitarian nation where all people are equal and the society of Regency England depicted by Austen that is grounded in a hierarchy based upon the ownership of land and the antiquity of the family name is one that Americans cannot embrace in its entirety.\n\nFrom 1995 many Austen adaptations appeared, with Ang Lee's film of \"Sense and Sensibility\", for which screenwriter and star Emma Thompson won an Academy Award, and the BBC's immensely popular TV mini-series \"Pride and Prejudice\", starring Jennifer Ehle and Colin Firth. A 2005 British production of \"Pride and Prejudice\", directed by Joe Wright and starring Keira Knightley and Matthew Macfadyen, was followed in 2007 by ITV's \"Mansfield Park\", \"Northanger Abbey\" and \"Persuasion\", and in 2016 by \"Love & Friendship\", a film version of \"Lady Susan\" that borrowed the title of Austen's \"Love and \" [sic].\n\nAusten is on the £10 note which was introduced in 2017, replacing Charles Darwin.\n\nNovels\nBULLET::::- \"Sense and Sensibility\" (1811)\nBULLET::::- \"Pride and Prejudice\" (1813)\nBULLET::::- \"Mansfield Park\" (1814)\nBULLET::::- \"Emma\" (1815)\nBULLET::::- \"Northanger Abbey\" (1818, posthumous)\nBULLET::::- \"Persuasion\" (1818, posthumous)\nBULLET::::- \"Lady Susan\" (1871, posthumous)\n\nUnfinished fiction\nBULLET::::- \"The Watsons\" (1804)\nBULLET::::- \"Sanditon\" (1817)\n\nOther works\nBULLET::::- \"Sir Charles Grandison\" (adapted play) (1793, 1800)\nBULLET::::- \"Plan of a Novel\" (1815)\nBULLET::::- Poems (1796–1817)\nBULLET::::- Prayers (1796–1817)\nBULLET::::- Letters (1796–1817)\n\nJuvenilia — Volume the First (1787–1793)\nBULLET::::- Frederic & Elfrida\nBULLET::::- Jack & Alice\nBULLET::::- Edgar & Emma\nBULLET::::- Henry and Eliza\nBULLET::::- The Adventures of Mr. Harley\nBULLET::::- Sir William Mountague\nBULLET::::- Memoirs of Mr. Clifford\nBULLET::::- The Beautifull Cassandra\nBULLET::::- Amelia Webster\nBULLET::::- The Visit\nBULLET::::- The Mystery\nBULLET::::- The Three Sisters\nBULLET::::- A beautiful description\nBULLET::::- The generous Curate\nBULLET::::- Ode to Pity\n\nJuvenilia — Volume the Second (1787–1793)\nBULLET::::- Love and Freindship\nBULLET::::- Lesley Castle\nBULLET::::- The History of England\nBULLET::::- A Collection of Letters\nBULLET::::- The female philosopher\nBULLET::::- The first Act of a Comedy\nBULLET::::- A Letter from a Young Lady\nBULLET::::- A Tour through Wales\nBULLET::::- A Tale\n\nJuvenilia — Volume the Third (1787–1793)\nBULLET::::- Evelyn\nBULLET::::- Catherine, or The Bower\n\nBULLET::::- Jane Austen's family and ancestry\n\nBULLET::::- Alexander, Christine and Juliet McMaster, eds. \"The Child Writer from Austen to Woolf\". Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005. .\nBULLET::::- Auerbach, Emily. \"Searching for Jane Austen\". Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 2004.\nBULLET::::- Austen, Jane. \"Catharine and Other Writings\". Ed. Margaret Anne Doody and Douglas Murray. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993. .\nBULLET::::- Austen, Jane. \"The History of England\". Ed. David Starkey. Icon Books, HarperCollins Publishers, 2006. .\nBULLET::::- Austen, Henry Thomas. \"Biographical Notice of the Author\". \"Northanger Abbey and Persuasion\". London: John Murray, 1817.\nBULLET::::- Austen-Leigh, James Edward. \"A Memoir of Jane Austen\". 1926. Ed. R.W. Chapman. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1967.\nBULLET::::- Austen-Leigh, William and Richard Arthur Austen-Leigh. \"Jane Austen: Her Life and Letters, A Family Record\". London: Smith, Elder & Co., 1913.\nBULLET::::- Bayley, John. \"Characterization in Jane Austen\". \"The Jane Austen Companion\". Ed. J. David Grey. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1986. . 24–34\nBULLET::::- Baker, Amy. \"Caught in the Act of Greatness: Jane Austen's Characterization Of Elizabeth And Darcy By Sentence Structure In \"Pride and Prejudice\"\". \"Explicator\", Vol. 72, Issue 3, 2014. 169–178\nBULLET::::- Brownstein, Rachel M. \"Out of the Drawing Room, Onto the Lawn\". \"Jane Austen in Hollywood\". Eds. Linda Troost and Sayre Greenfield. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 2001 . 13–21.\nBULLET::::- Butler, Marilyn. \"History, Politics and Religion\". \"The Jane Austen Companion\". Ed. J. David Grey. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1986. . 190–208\nBULLET::::- Byrne, Paula. \"Jane Austen and the Theatre\". London and New York: Continuum, 2002. .\nBULLET::::- Cartmell, Deborah and Whelehan, Imelda, eds. \"The Cambridge Companion to Literature on Screen\". Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007. .\nBULLET::::- Collins, Irene. \"Jane Austen and the Clergy\". London: The Hambledon Press, 1994. .\nBULLET::::- Copeland, Edward and Juliet McMaster, eds. \"The Cambridge Companion to Jane Austen\". Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014. .\nBULLET::::- Doody, Margaret Anne. \"The Early Short Fiction\". \"The Cambridge Companion to Jane Austen\". Eds. Edward Copeland and Juliet McMaster. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014. . 72–86.\nBULLET::::- Duffy, Joseph. \"Criticism, 1814–1870\". \"The Jane Austen Companion\". Ed. J. David Grey. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1986. . 93–101\nBULLET::::- Fergus, Jan. \"Biography\". \"Jane Austen in Context\". Ed. Janet Todd. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005. . 3–11\nBULLET::::- Fergus, Jan. \"The Professional Woman Writer\". \"The Cambridge Companion to Jane Austen\". Eds. Edward Copeland and Juliet McMaster. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014. . 1–20.\nBULLET::::- Gay, Penny. \"Jane Austen and the Theatre\". Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002. .\nBULLET::::- Gilson, David. \"Letter publishing history\". \"Jane Austen in Context\". Ed. Janet Todd. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005. . 121–159\nBULLET::::- Gilson, David. \"Editions and Publishing History\". \"The Jane Austen Companion\". Ed. J. David Grey. New York: Macmillan, 1986. . 135–139\nBULLET::::- Grey, J. David. \"The Jane Austen Companion\". New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1986. .\nBULLET::::- Grundy, Isobel. \"Jane Austen and literary traditions\". \"The Cambridge Companion to Jane Austen\". Eds. Edward Copeland and Juliet McMaster. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014. . 192–214\nBULLET::::- Halperin, John. \"Jane Austen's Lovers\". \"SEL: Studies in English Literature 1500–1900\" Vol. 25, No. 4, Autumn, 1985. 719–720\nBULLET::::- Harding, D.W., \"Regulated Hatred: An Aspect of the Work of Jane Austen\". \"Jane Austen: A Collection of Critical Essays\". Ed. Ian Watt. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1963.\nBULLET::::- Honan, Park. \"Jane Austen: A Life\". New York: St. Martin's Press, 1987. .\nBULLET::::- Irvine, Robert \"Jane Austen\". London: Routledge, 2005.\nBULLET::::- Jenkyns, Richard. \"A Fine Brush on Ivory: An Appreciation of Jane Austen\". Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004. .\nBULLET::::- Johnson, Claudia. \"Austen cults and cultures\". \"The Cambridge Companion to Jane Austen\". Eds. Edward Copeland and Juliet McMaster. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014. . 232–247.\nBULLET::::- Kelly, Gary. \"Education and accomplishments\". \"Jane Austen in Context\". Ed. Janet Todd. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005. . 252–259\nBULLET::::- Keymer, Thomas. \"\"Northanger Abbey\" and \"Sense and Sensibility\"\". \"The Cambridge Companion to Jane Austen\". Eds. Edward Copeland and Juliet McMaster. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014. . 21–38\nBULLET::::- Kirkham, Margaret. \"Portraits\". \"Jane Austen in Context\". Ed. Janet Todd. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005. . 68–82\nBULLET::::- Lascelles, Mary. \"Jane Austen and Her Art\". Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1966 [1939].\nBULLET::::- Leavis, F.R. \"The Great Tradition: George Eliot, Henry James, Joseph Conrad\". London: Chatto & Windus, 1960.\nBULLET::::- Le Faye, Deirdre, ed. \"Jane Austen's Letters\". Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995. .\nBULLET::::- Le Faye, Deirdre. \"Chronology of Jane Austen's Life\". \"The Cambridge Companion to Jane Austen\". Eds. Edward Copeland and Juliet McMaster. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014. . xv–xxvi\nBULLET::::- Le Faye, Deirdre. \"Jane Austen: The World of Her Novels\". New York: Harry N. Abrams, 2002. .\nBULLET::::- Le Faye, Deirdre. \"Jane Austen: A Family Record\". Second Edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004. .\nBULLET::::- Le Faye, Deirdre. \"Letters\". \"Jane Austen in Context\". Ed. Janet Todd. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005. . 33–40\nBULLET::::- Le Faye, \"Memoirs and Biographies\". \"Jane Austen in Context\". Ed. Janet Todd. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005. . 51–58\nBULLET::::- Litz, A. Walton. \"Jane Austen: A Study of Her Development\". New York: Oxford University Press, 1965.\nBULLET::::- Litz, A. Walton. \"Chronology of Composition\". \"The Jane Austen Companion\". Ed. J. David Grey. New York: Macmillan, 1986. . 47–62\nBULLET::::- Lodge, David. \"Jane Austen's Novels: Form and Structure\". \"The Jane Austen Companion\". Ed. J. David Grey. New York: Macmillan, 1986. . 165–179\nBULLET::::- Looser, Devoney. \"The Making of Jane Austen\". Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2017. .\nBULLET::::- Lynch, Deirdre Shauna. \"Sequels\". \"Jane Austen in Context\". Ed. Janet Todd. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005. . 160–169\nBULLET::::- MacDonagh, Oliver. \"Jane Austen: Real and Imagined Worlds\". New Haven: Yale University Press, 1991. .\nBULLET::::- McMaster, Juliet. \"Education\". \"The Jane Austen Companion\". Ed. J. David Grey. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1986. . 140–142\nBULLET::::- Miller, D.A. \"Jane Austen, or The Secret of Style\". Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003. .\nBULLET::::- Nokes, David. \"Jane Austen: A Life\". Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998. .\nBULLET::::- Page, Norman. \"The Language of Jane Austen\". Oxford: Blackwell, 1972. .\nBULLET::::- Polhemus, Robert M. \"Jane Austen's Comedy\". \"The Jane Austen Companion\". Ed. J. David Grey. New York: Macmillan, 1986. . 60–71\nBULLET::::- Raven, James. \"Book Production\". \"Jane Austen in Context\". Ed. Janet Todd. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005. . 194–203\nBULLET::::- Raven, James. \"The Business of Books: Booksellers and the English Book Trade\". New Haven: Yale University Press, 2007. .\nBULLET::::- Rajan, Rajeswari. \"Critical Responses, Recent\". \"Jane Austen in Context\". Ed. Janet Todd. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005. . 101–10.\nBULLET::::- Scott, Walter. \"Walter Scott, an unsigned review of \"Emma\", \"Quarterly Review\"\". \"Jane Austen: The Critical Heritage, 1812–1870\". Ed. B.C. Southam. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1968. . 58–69.\nBULLET::::- Southam, B.C. \"Grandison\". \"The Jane Austen Companion\". Ed. J. David Grey. New York: Macmillan, 1986. . 187–189\nBULLET::::- Southam, B.C. \"Criticism, 1870–1940\". \"The Jane Austen Companion\". Ed. J. David Grey. New York: Macmillan, 1986. . 102–109\nBULLET::::- Southam, B.C., ed. \"Jane Austen: The Critical Heritage, 1812–1870\". Vol. 1. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1968. .\nBULLET::::- Southam, B.C., ed. \"Jane Austen: The Critical Heritage, 1870–1940\". Vol. 2. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1987. .\nBULLET::::- Southam, B.C. \"Juvenilia\". \"The Jane Austen Companion\". Ed. J. David Grey. New York: Macmillan, 1986. . 244–255\nBULLET::::- Stovel, Bruce. \"Further reading\". \"The Cambridge Companion to Jane Austen\". Eds. Edward Copeland and Juliet McMaster. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014. . 248–266.\nBULLET::::- Sutherland, Kathryn. \"Chronology of composition and publication\". \"Jane Austen in Context\". Ed. Janet Todd. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005. . 12–22\nBULLET::::- Todd, Janet, ed. \"Jane Austen in Context\". Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005. .\nBULLET::::- Todd, Janet. \"The Cambridge Introduction to Jane Austen\". Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015. .\nBULLET::::- Tomalin, Claire. \"Jane Austen: A Life\". New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1997. .\nBULLET::::- Troost, Linda. \"The Nineteenth-Century Novel on Film\". \"The Cambridge Companion to Literature on Screen\". Eds. Deborah Cartmell and Imelda Whelehan. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007. . 75–89\nBULLET::::- Trott, Nicola. \"Critical Responess, 1830–1970\", \"Jane Austen in Context\". Ed. Janet Todd. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005. . 92–100\nBULLET::::- Tucker, George Holbert. \"Amateur Theatricals at Steventon\". \"The Jane Austen Companion\". Ed. J. David Grey. New York: Macmillan, 1986. . 1–4\nBULLET::::- Tucker, George Holbert. \"Jane Austen's Family\". \"The Jane Austen Companion\". Ed. J. David Grey. New York: Macmillan, 1986. . 143–153\nBULLET::::- Waldron, Mary. \"Critical Response, early\". \"Jane Austen in Context\". Ed. Janet Todd. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005. . 83–91\nBULLET::::- Watt, Ian. \"Introduction\". \"Jane Austen: A Collection of Critical Essays\". Ed. Ian Watt. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1963.\nBULLET::::- Watt, Ian, ed. \"Jane Austen: A Collection of Critical Essays\". Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1963.\nBULLET::::- Wiltshire, John. \"Jane Austen and the Body: The Picture of Health\". Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992. .\n\nBULLET::::- Gubar, Susan and Sandra Gilbert. \"The Madwoman in the Attic: The Woman Writer and the Nineteenth Century Literary Imagination\". New Haven: Yale University Press, 1984 [1979]. .\n\nBULLET::::- Jane Austen's Fiction Manuscripts Digital Edition, a digital archive from the University of Oxford\nBULLET::::- \"A Memoir of Jane Austen\" by James Edward Austen-Leigh\nBULLET::::- Jane Austen at the British Library\n\nBULLET::::- Jane Austen's House Museum in Chawton\nBULLET::::- The Jane Austen Centre in Bath\n\nBULLET::::- The Republic of Pemberley\nBULLET::::- The Jane Austen Society of Australia\nBULLET::::- The Jane Austen Society of North America\nBULLET::::- The Jane Austen Society of the United Kingdom\n"}
{"id": "15785", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15785", "title": "June", "text": "June\n\nJune is the sixth month of the year in the Julian and Gregorian calendars, the second of four months to have a length of 30 days, and the third of five months to have a length of less than 31 days. June contains the summer solstice in the Northern Hemisphere, the day with the most daylight hours, and the winter solstice in the Southern Hemisphere, the day with the fewest daylight hours (excluding polar regions in both cases). June in the Northern Hemisphere is the seasonal equivalent to December in the Southern Hemisphere and vice versa. In the Northern Hemisphere, the beginning of the traditional astronomical summer is 21 June (meteorological summer begins on 1 June). In the Southern Hemisphere, meteorological winter begins on 1 June.\n\nAt the start of June, the sun rises in the constellation of Taurus; at the end of June, the sun rises in the constellation of Gemini. However, due to the precession of the equinoxes, June begins with the sun in the astrological sign of Gemini, and ends with the sun in the astrological sign of Cancer.\n\nThe Latin name for June is \"Junius\". Ovid offers multiple etymologies for the name in the \"Fasti\", a poem about the Roman calendar. The first is that the month is named after the Roman goddess Juno, the goddess of marriage and the wife of the supreme deity Jupiter; the second is that the name comes from the Latin word \"iuniores\", meaning \"younger ones\", as opposed to \"maiores\" (\"elders\") for which the preceding month May \"(Maius)\" may be named.\nAnother source claims June is named after Lucius Junius Brutus, founder of the roman Republic and ancestor of the Roman gens Junia .\n\nIn ancient Rome, the period from mid-May through mid-June was considered inauspicious for marriage. Ovid says that he consulted the Flaminica Dialis, the high priestess of Jupiter, about setting a date for his daughter's wedding, and was advised to wait till after June 15. Plutarch, however, implies that the entire month of June was more favorable for weddings than May.\n\nCertain meteor showers take place in June. The Arietids takes place May 22 to July 2 each year, and peaks on June 7. The Beta Taurids June 5 to July 18. The June Bootids take place roughly between 26 June and 2 July each year.\n\nUnder the calendar of ancient Rome, the festival of Ludi Fabarici took place on May 29 – June 1, Kalendae Fabariae took place on June 1, the Festival to Bellona took place on June 3, Ludi Piscatorii took place on June 7, and Vestalia took place from June 7 – June 15. A Rosalia was held on June 20. The Secular Games were held roughly every 100 years in either May or June. These dates do not correspond to the modern Gregorian calendar.\n\nBULLET::::- In Catholic tradition, June is the Month of the Most Sacred Heart of Jesus.\nBULLET::::- LGBT+ Pride Month (United States)\nBULLET::::- African-American Music Appreciation Month (officially recognized by the United States)\nBULLET::::- ALS Awareness Month (Canada)\nBULLET::::- Caribbean American Heritage Month (United States)\nBULLET::::- Crop over (Barbados), celebrated until the first Monday in August.\nBULLET::::- Great Outdoors Month (United States)\nBULLET::::- National Smile Month (United Kingdom)\nBULLET::::- National Oceans Month (United States)\nBULLET::::- Season of Emancipation (April 14 to August 23) (Barbados)\nBULLET::::- PTSD Awareness Month (United States)\n\n\"(All Baha'i, Islamic, and Jewish observances begin at the sundown prior to the date listed, and end at sundown of the date in question unless otherwise noted.)\"\nBULLET::::- List of observances set by the Bahá'í calendar\nBULLET::::- List of observances set by the Chinese calendar\nBULLET::::- List of observances set by the Hebrew calendar\nBULLET::::- List of observances set by the Islamic calendar\nBULLET::::- List of observances set by the Solar Hijri calendar\n\nBULLET::::- Bike to Work Week Victoria (May 27 – June 2)\nBULLET::::- Phi Ta Khon (Dan Sai, Loei province, Isan, Thailand) Dates are selected by village mediums and can take place anywhere between March and July.\nBULLET::::- See also Movable Western Christian observances\nBULLET::::- See also Movable Eastern Christian observances\n\nBULLET::::- Birthday of the Yang di-Pertuan Agong (Malaysia)\nBULLET::::- National Trails Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Saiō Matsuri (Meiwa, Mie, Japan)\n\nBULLET::::- Armed Forces Day (Canada)\nBULLET::::- Children's Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Father's Day (Lithuania, Switzerland)\nBULLET::::- National Cancer Survivors Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Teacher's Day (Hungary)\nBULLET::::- The Seamen's Day (Iceland)\n\nBULLET::::- June Holiday (Lá Saoire i mí Mheitheamh) (Republic of Ireland)\nBULLET::::- Queen's Official Birthday (New Zealand, Cook Islands, Western Australia)\nBULLET::::- Western Australia Day\n\nBULLET::::- Global Running Day\n\nBULLET::::- Labour Day (Bahamas)\nBULLET::::- National Doughnut Day (United States)\n\nBULLET::::- China's Cultural Heritage Day (China)\nBULLET::::- Start of National Dairy Goat Awareness Week, ending on the third Saturday\nBULLET::::- National Day (Montserrat, Pitcairn Islands, Saint Helena, South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands, Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom))\nBULLET::::- Queen's Official Birthday (United Kingdom, Tuvalu)\n\nBULLET::::- Canadian Rivers Day\nBULLET::::- Children's Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Father's Day (Austria, Belgium)\nBULLET::::- Mother's Day (Luxembourg)\n\nBULLET::::- Queen's Official Birthday (Norfolk Island)\n\nBULLET::::- Queen's Official Birthday (Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Australia, with the exception of Western Australia, which celebrates on the first Monday)\n\nBULLET::::- Seersucker Thursday (United States)\n\nBULLET::::- International Surfing Day\n\nBULLET::::- Bike Week (Bicycle Week) (United Kingdom, Ireland)\n\nBULLET::::- Father's Day (Afghanistan, Albania, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Aruba, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Bermuda, Brunei, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Curaçao, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Dominica, Ecuador, Ethiopia, France, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Hong Kong, Hungary, India, Ireland, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Kosovo, Kuwait, Laos, Macau, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Mozambique, Namibia, Netherlands, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, People's Republic of China, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Slovakia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United Kingdom, United States, Venezuela, Vietnam, Zambia, and Zimbabwe).\n\nBULLET::::- National Flip Flop Day (United States)\n\nBULLET::::- Day of Private Reflection (Northern Ireland)\nBULLET::::- International Surfing Day\nBULLET::::- International Yoga Day\nBULLET::::- Midsummer\nBULLET::::- National Aboriginal Day (Canada)\nBULLET::::- World Music Day\n\nBULLET::::- We Tripantu, (Mapuche, southern Chile)\nBULLET::::- Willkakuti, an Andean-Amazonic New Year (Aymara)\n\nBULLET::::- Take Your Dog to Work Day (United Kingdom, United States)\n\nBULLET::::- Finnish Flag Day\nBULLET::::- Juhannus (Finland)\n\nBULLET::::- Pixie Day (Ottery St. Mary, England)\n\nBULLET::::- Discovery Day (Newfoundland and Labrador)\n\nBULLET::::- National Bomb Pop Day (United States)\n\nBULLET::::- Armed Forces Day (United Kingdom)\nBULLET::::- Inventors' and Rationalizers' Day (Russia)\nBULLET::::- Veterans' Day (Netherlands)\n\nBULLET::::- Father's Day (Haiti)\nBULLET::::- Log Cabin Day (Michigan, United States)\nBULLET::::- Mother's Day (Kenya)\n\nBULLET::::- May 15 – June 15 Tourette Syndrome awareness month.\nBULLET::::- May 25 – June 25 Bicycle Month (Canada)\nBULLET::::- May 27 – June 3 National Reconciliation Week (Australia)\nBULLET::::- May 28 – Flag Day (Philippines) (Display of the flag in all places until June 12 is encouraged)\nBULLET::::- May 31 – June 1 Gawai Dayak (Dayaks in Sarawak, Malaysia and West Kalimantan, Indonesia)\nBULLET::::- June 1\nBULLET::::- Children's Day (International), and its related observances:\nBULLET::::- Global Day of Parents\nBULLET::::- The Day of Protection of Children Rights (Armenia)\nBULLET::::- Mothers' and Children's Day (Mongolia)\nBULLET::::- Fei Fei Day (Vancouver)\nBULLET::::- Global Day of Parents\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Samoa)\nBULLET::::- Madaraka Day (Kenya)\nBULLET::::- National Maritime Day (Mexico)\nBULLET::::- National Tree Planting Day (Cambodia)\nBULLET::::- Pancasila Day (Indonesia)\nBULLET::::- President's Day (Palau)\nBULLET::::- Victory Day (Tunisia)\nBULLET::::- World Milk Day\nBULLET::::- June 2\nBULLET::::- Children's Day (North Korea)\nBULLET::::- Civil Aviation Day (Azerbaijan)\nBULLET::::- Coronation of King Jigme Singye Wangchuck (Bhutan)\nBULLET::::- Day of Hristo Botev (Bulgaria)\nBULLET::::- Decoration Day (Canada)\nBULLET::::- Festa della Repubblica (Italy)\nBULLET::::- International Whores' Day\nBULLET::::- National Rocky Road Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- National Rotisserie Chicken Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Social Forestry Day (Bhutan)\nBULLET::::- June 3\nBULLET::::- Confederate Memorial Day (Kentucky, Louisiana, and Tennessee, United States)\nBULLET::::- Economist day (Buenos Aires, Argentina)\nBULLET::::- Mabo Day (Australia)\nBULLET::::- Martyr's Day (Uganda)\nBULLET::::- National Chocolate Macaroon Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- National Egg Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Opium Suppression Movement Day (Taiwan)\nBULLET::::- World Clubfoot Day\nBULLET::::- June 4\nBULLET::::- Armed Forces Day/Birthday of Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim (Finland)\nBULLET::::- Emancipation Day/Independence Day (Tonga)\nBULLET::::- Flag Day (Estonia)\nBULLET::::- International Day of Innocent Children Victims of Aggression\nBULLET::::- National Cheese Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- National Cognac Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- National Unity Day (Hungary)\nBULLET::::- Tiananmen Square Protests of 1989 Memorial Day (International)\nBULLET::::- June 5\nBULLET::::- Arbor Day (New Zealand)\nBULLET::::- Constitution Day (Denmark)\nBULLET::::- Constitution Day (Faroe Island)\nBULLET::::- Day of Reclamation (Azerbaijan)\nBULLET::::- Father's Day (Denmark)\nBULLET::::- Indian Arrival Day (Suriname)\nBULLET::::- Liberation Day (Seychelles)\nBULLET::::- National Gingerbread Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- National Moonshine Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- President's Day (Equatorial Guinea)\nBULLET::::- Teachers' Day (Romania)\nBULLET::::- World Environment Day\nBULLET::::- June 6\nBULLET::::- Anniversary of the Normandy Landings\nBULLET::::- Argentina's Engineering Day\nBULLET::::- Engineer's Day (Taiwan)\nBULLET::::- Memorial Day (South Korea)\nBULLET::::- Korean Children's Union Foundation Day (North Korea)\nBULLET::::- National Applesauce Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- National Day of Sweden (Sweden)\nBULLET::::- Queensland Day (Queensland)\nBULLET::::- Teachers' Day (Bolivia)\nBULLET::::- UN Russian Language Day (United Nations)\nBULLET::::- June 7\nBULLET::::- Anniversary of the Memorandum of the Slovak Nation (Slovakia)\nBULLET::::- Battle of Arica Day (Arica y Parinacota Region, Chile)\nBULLET::::- Birthday of Prince Joachim (Denmark)\nBULLET::::- Chocolate Ice Cream Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Commemoration Day of St John the Forerunner (Armenian Apostolic Church)\nBULLET::::- Flag Day (Peru)\nBULLET::::- Journalist Day (Argentina)\nBULLET::::- Ludi Piscatorii (Roman Empire)\nBULLET::::- Sette Giugno (Malta)\nBULLET::::- Union Dissolution Day (Norway)\nBULLET::::- June 8\nBULLET::::- Bounty Day (Norfolk Island)\nBULLET::::- Caribbean American HIV/AIDS Awareness Day\nBULLET::::- Engineer's Day (Peru)\nBULLET::::- Primož Trubar Day (Slovenia)\nBULLET::::- World Brain Tumor Day (international)\nBULLET::::- World Oceans Day (international)\nBULLET::::- June 9\nBULLET::::- Anniversary of the Accession of King Abdullah II (Jordan)\nBULLET::::- Autonomy Day (Åland Islands)\nBULLET::::- La Rioja Day (La Rioja)\nBULLET::::- Murcia Day (Murcia)\nBULLET::::- National Heroes' Day (Uganda)\nBULLET::::- June 10\nBULLET::::- Abolition Day (French Guiana)\nBULLET::::- Army Day (Jordan)\nBULLET::::- National Iced Tea Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Navy Day (Italy)\nBULLET::::- Portugal Day (Portugal)\nBULLET::::- Reconciliation Day (Republic of the Congo)\nBULLET::::- June 11\nBULLET::::- American Evacuation Day (Libya)\nBULLET::::- Birthday of Prince Henrik (Denmark)\nBULLET::::- Brazilian Navy commemorative day\nBULLET::::- Davis Day (Cape Breton, Nova Scotia, Canada)\nBULLET::::- Kamehameha Day (Hawaii, United States)\nBULLET::::- National Corn on the Cob Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- National German Chocolate Cake Day Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Student Day (Honduras)\nBULLET::::- June 12\nBULLET::::- Chaco Armistice Day (Paraguay)\nBULLET::::- \"Dia dos Namorados\" (Brazil)\nBULLET::::- Helsinki Day (Finland)\nBULLET::::- June 12 Commemoration (Lagos State)\nBULLET::::- Loving Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Philippine Independence Day.\nBULLET::::- National Peanut Butter Cookie Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Russia Day (Russia)\nBULLET::::- World Day Against Child Labour (international)\nBULLET::::- June 13\nBULLET::::- Inventors' Day (Hungary)\nBULLET::::- Suleimaniah City Fallen and Martyrs Day (Iraqi Kurdistan)\nBULLET::::- June 14\nBULLET::::- Commemoration of the Soviet Deportation related observances:\nBULLET::::- Mourning and Commemoration Day or \"Leinapäev\" (Estonia)\nBULLET::::- Mourning and Hope Day (Lithuania)\nBULLET::::- Day of Memory for Repressed People (Armenia)\nBULLET::::- Flag Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Freedom Day (Malawi)\nBULLET::::- Liberation Day (Falkland Islands and South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands)\nBULLET::::- World Blood Donor Day (international)\nBULLET::::- June 15\nBULLET::::- Arbor Day (Costa Rica)\nBULLET::::- Cagayan de Oro Charter Day (Cagayan de Oro City)\nBULLET::::- Day of Valdemar and Reunion day (Flag Day) (Denmark)\nBULLET::::- Engineer's Day (Italy)\nBULLET::::- Global Wind Day (international)\nBULLET::::- Mangaia Gospel Day (Mangaia, Cook Islands)\nBULLET::::- National Lobster Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- National Salvation Day (Azerbaijan)\nBULLET::::- Statehood Day (Arkansas, United States)\nBULLET::::- June 16\nBULLET::::- Bloomsday (Dublin, Ireland)\nBULLET::::- Engineer's Day (Argentina)\nBULLET::::- International Day of the African Child\nBULLET::::- Anniversary of Martyrdom of Guru Arjan Dev (Sikhism)\nBULLET::::- National Fudge Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Sussex Day (Sussex)\nBULLET::::- Youth Day (South Africa)\nBULLET::::- June 17\nBULLET::::- Bunker Hill Day (Suffolk County, Massachusetts, United States)\nBULLET::::- Father's Day (El Salvador, Guatemala)\nBULLET::::- Icelandic National Day\nBULLET::::- National Eat Your Vegetables Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Occupation of the Latvian Republic Day (Latvia)\nBULLET::::- World Day to Combat Desertification and Drought (International)\nBULLET::::- Zemla Intifada Day ()\nBULLET::::- June 18\nBULLET::::- Autistic Pride Day (International)\nBULLET::::- Human Rights Day (Azerbaijan)\nBULLET::::- Foundation Day (Benguet)\nBULLET::::- Human Rights Day (Azerbaijan)\nBULLET::::- International Sushi Day\nBULLET::::- National Day (Seychelles)\nBULLET::::- Queen Mother's Birthday (Cambodia)\nBULLET::::- Waterloo Day (United Kingdom)\nBULLET::::- June 19\nBULLET::::- Day of the Independent Hungary (Hungary)\nBULLET::::- Feast of Forest (Palawan)\nBULLET::::- Juneteenth (United States, especially African Americans)\nBULLET::::- Labour Day (Trinidad and Tobago)\nBULLET::::- Laguna Day (Laguna)\nBULLET::::- Never Again Day (Uruguay)\nBULLET::::- Surigao del Norte Day (Surigao del Norte)\nBULLET::::- Surigao del Sur Day (Surigao del Sur)\nBULLET::::- World Sickle Cell Day (International)\nBULLET::::- World Sauntering Day\nBULLET::::- June 20\nBULLET::::- Day of the National Flag (Argentina)\nBULLET::::- Festival in honor of Summanus (Roman Empire)\nBULLET::::- Gas Sector Day (Azerbaijan)\nBULLET::::- Martyrs' Day (Eritrea)\nBULLET::::- National Ice Cream Soda Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- National Kouign Amann Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- National Vanilla Milkshake Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- West Virginia Day (West Virginia)\nBULLET::::- World Refugee Day (International)\nBULLET::::- June 21\nBULLET::::- Day of the Martyrs (Togo)\nBULLET::::- Father's Day (Egypt, Lebanon, Jordan, Syria, Uganda, United Arab Emirates)\nBULLET::::- Go Skateboarding Day\nBULLET::::- National Aboriginal Day (Canada)\nBULLET::::- National Day (Greenland)\nBULLET::::- National Peaches 'N' Cream Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- World Humanist Day (Humanism)\nBULLET::::- World Hydrography Day\nBULLET::::- June 22\nBULLET::::- Anti-Fascist Struggle Day (Croatia)\nBULLET::::- Day of Remembrance of the Victims of the Great Patriotic War (Belarus)\nBULLET::::- Father's Day (Guernsey, Isle of Man, and Jersey)\nBULLET::::- Teachers' Day (El Salvador)\nBULLET::::- June 23\nBULLET::::- Father's Day (Nicaragua, Poland)\nBULLET::::- Grand Duke's Official Birthday (Luxembourg)\nBULLET::::- International Widows Day (international)\nBULLET::::- National Day of Remembrance for Victims of Terrorism (Canada)\nBULLET::::- Okinawa Memorial Day (Okinawa, Japan)\nBULLET::::- St John's Eve (Roman Catholic Church, Europe):\nBULLET::::- Bonfires of Saint John (Spain)\nBULLET::::- First day of Golowan Festival (Cornwall)\nBULLET::::- Jaaniõhtu (Estonia)\nBULLET::::- Jāņi (Latvia)\nBULLET::::- Last day of Drăgaica fair (Buzău, Romania)\nBULLET::::- Festa de São João do Porto (Portugal)\nBULLET::::- United Nations Public Service Day (International)\nBULLET::::- Victory Day (Estonia)\nBULLET::::- June 24\nBULLET::::- Army Day or Battle of Carabobo Day (Venezuela)\nBULLET::::- Bannockburn Day (Scotland)\nBULLET::::- Day of the Caboclo (Amazonas, Brazil)\nBULLET::::- St John's Day, second day of celebrations.\nBULLET::::- Enyovden (Bulgaria)\nBULLET::::- Jaanipäev (Estonia)\nBULLET::::- Jāņi (Latvia)\nBULLET::::- Jónsmessa (Iceland)\nBULLET::::- Midsummer Day (England)\nBULLET::::- Saint Jonas' Festival or \"Joninės\" (Lithuania)\nBULLET::::- Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day (Quebec, Canada)\nBULLET::::- Sânziene (western Carpathian Mountains of Romania)\nBULLET::::- Youth Day (Ukraine)\nBULLET::::- June 25\nBULLET::::- Arbor Day (Philippines)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Mozambique)\nBULLET::::- National Catfish Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Statehood Day (Croatia)\nBULLET::::- Statehood Day (Slovenia)\nBULLET::::- Statehood Day (Virginia)\nBULLET::::- Teacher's Day (Guatemala)\nBULLET::::- World Vitiligo Day\nBULLET::::- June 26\nBULLET::::- Army and Navy Day (Azerbaijan)\nBULLET::::- Flag Day (Romania)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Madagascar)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Somalia)\nBULLET::::- International Day against Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking (International)\nBULLET::::- International Day in Support of Victims of Torture (International)\nBULLET::::- National Chocolate Pudding Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Ratcatcher's Day (Hamelin, Germany)\nBULLET::::- Sunthorn Phu Day (Thailand)\nBULLET::::- World Refrigeration Day (International)\nBULLET::::- June 27\nBULLET::::- Canadian Multiculturalism Day (Canada)\nBULLET::::- Day of Turkmen Workers of Culture and Art (Turkmenistan)\nBULLET::::- Helen Keller Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Djibouti)\nBULLET::::- Mixed Race Day (Brazil)\nBULLET::::- National HIV Testing Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- PTSD Awareness Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Seven Sleepers Day or \"Siebenschläfertag\" (Germany)\nBULLET::::- Unity Day (Tajikistan)\nBULLET::::- June 28\nBULLET::::- Constitution Day (Ukraine)\nBULLET::::- Family Day (Vietnam)\nBULLET::::- National Ceviche Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- National Tapicoa Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Poznań Remembrance Day (Poland)\nBULLET::::- Soviet Occupation Day, Moldova\nBULLET::::- Stonewall Riots Anniversary (United States)\nBULLET::::- Tau Day\nBULLET::::- Vidovdan (Eastern Orthodox Church)\nBULLET::::- June 29\nBULLET::::- Feast of Saints Peter and Paul\nBULLET::::- Haro Wine Festival (Haro, La Rioja, Spain)\nBULLET::::- Engineer's Day (Ecuador)\nBULLET::::- Fallen Soldiers' and Missing in Action Memorial Day ()\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Seychelles)\nBULLET::::- Veterans' Day (Netherlands)\nBULLET::::- June 30\nBULLET::::- Armed Forces Day (Guatemala)\nBULLET::::- General Prayer Day (Central African Republic)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Democratic Republic of the Congo)\nBULLET::::- Navy Day (Israel)\nBULLET::::- Philippine–Spanish Friendship Day (Philippines)\nBULLET::::- Revolution Day (Sudan)\n\nBULLET::::- June's birthstones are pearl, alexandrite and moonstone.\nBULLET::::- The birth flowers are rose and honeysuckle.\nBULLET::::- The zodiac signs for the month of June are Gemini (until June 20) and Cancer (from June 21 onwards).\n"}
{"id": "15786", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15786", "title": "July", "text": "July\n\nJuly is the seventh month of the year (between June and August) in the Julian and Gregorian Calendars and the fourth of seven months to have a length of 31 days. It was named by the Roman Senate in honour of Roman general Julius Caesar, it being the month of his birth. Prior to that, it was called Quintilis, being the fifth month of the 10-month calendar.\n\nIt is on average the warmest month in most of the Northern Hemisphere, where it is the second month of summer, and the coldest month in much of the Southern Hemisphere, where it is the second month of winter. The second half of the year commences in July. In the Southern Hemisphere, July is the seasonal equivalent of January in the Northern hemisphere.\n\n\"Dog days\" are considered to begin in early July in the Northern Hemisphere, when the hot sultry weather of summer usually starts. Spring lambs born in late winter or early spring are usually sold before 1 July.\n\nJuly is the traditional period known as \"fence month,\" the closed season for deer in England. The end of England's High Court of Justice Trinity Term takes place on 31 July. July is also the time in which the elections take place for the Japanese House of Councillors, held every three years and replacing half of its seats.\n\nIn Ancient Rome, the festival of Poplifugia was celebrated on 5 July, and Ludi Apollinares was held on 13 July and for several days afterwards. However, these dates do not correspond to the modern Gregorian calendar.\nBULLET::::- July's birthstone is the ruby, which symbolizes contentment.\nBULLET::::- Its birth flowers are the Larkspur or the Water Lily.\nBULLET::::- The zodiac signs for the month of July are Cancer (until July 22) and Leo (July 23 onwards).\n\n\"This list does not necessarily imply either official status nor general observance.\"\n\nBULLET::::- Season of Emancipation 14 April to 23 August (Barbados)\nBULLET::::- Honor America Days: 14 June to 4 July (United States)\n\nBULLET::::- In Catholic tradition, July is the Month of the Most Precious Blood of Jesus.\nBULLET::::- Group B Strep Awareness Month (United States, United Kingdom)\nBULLET::::- National Hot Dog Month (United States)\nBULLET::::- National Ice Cream Month (United States)\n\n\"(All Baha'i, Islamic, and Jewish observances begin at the sundown prior to the date listed, and end at sundown of the date in question unless otherwise noted.)\"\nBULLET::::- List of observances set by the Bahá'í calendar\nBULLET::::- List of observances set by the Chinese calendar\nBULLET::::- List of observances set by the Hebrew calendar\nBULLET::::- List of observances set by the Islamic calendar\nBULLET::::- List of observances set by the Solar Hijri calendar\nBULLET::::- Phi Ta Khon (Dan Sai, Loei province, Isan, Thailand) – Dates are selected by village mediums and can take place anywhere between March and July.\nBULLET::::- Ra o te Ui Ariki (Cook Islands) July 6\nBULLET::::- Senior Citizen's Day (Kiribati) July 9\nBULLET::::- Collector Car Appreciation Day (United States) July 12\nBULLET::::- Construction Holiday (Quebec) July 21 to August 3\nBULLET::::- Shark Week (United States)\nBULLET::::- See also Movable Western Christian observances\nBULLET::::- See also Movable Eastern Christian observances\n\nBULLET::::- Carnival Monday, continues to next day (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines)\nBULLET::::- CARICOM Day (Guyana)\nBULLET::::- Heroes' Day (Zambia)\nBULLET::::- Mother's Day (South Sudan)\nBULLET::::- National Day (Cayman Islands)\nNational holiday, Canada Day\n\nBULLET::::- Unity Day (Zambia)\n\nBULLET::::- Fishermen's Holiday (Marshall Islands)\n\nBULLET::::- Tynwald Day (Isle of Man)\n\nBULLET::::- Día del Amigo (Peru)\nBULLET::::- International Co-operative Day\nBULLET::::- International Free Hugs Day\n\nBULLET::::- Navy Days (Netherlands)\n\nBULLET::::- Navy Day (Ukraine)\nBULLET::::- Youth Day (Singapore)\n\nBULLET::::- Alexanderson Day (Sweden)\n\nBULLET::::- NAIDOC Week (Australia)\n\nBULLET::::- National Tree Day (Mexico)\n\nBULLET::::- Father's Day (Uruguay)\nBULLET::::- Sea Sunday (Western Christianity)\n\nBULLET::::- National Day of Commemoration (Ireland)\n\nBULLET::::- Birthday of Don Luis Muñoz Rivera (Puerto Rico, United States)\nBULLET::::- Children's Day (Cuba, Panama, and Venezuela)\nBULLET::::- Galla Bayramy (Turkmenistan)\nBULLET::::- Marine Day (Japan)\nBULLET::::- Presidents' Day (Botswana)\n\nBULLET::::- Birthday of Don Luis Muñoz Rivera (Puerto Rico, United States)\nBULLET::::- Mandela Day (South Africa)\n\nBULLET::::- Galla Bayramy (Turkmenistan)\nBULLET::::- National Ice Cream Day (United States)\n\nBULLET::::- National Chili Dog Day (United States)\n\nBULLET::::- National Schools Tree Day (Australia)\nBULLET::::- System Administrator Appreciation Day\n\nBULLET::::- Tobata Gion Yamagasa festival (Tobata, Japan)\n\nBULLET::::- Black Saturday (France)\nBULLET::::- National Dance Day (United States)\n\nBULLET::::- Parents' Day (United States)\n\nBULLET::::- Father's Day (Dominican Republic)\nBULLET::::- National Tree Day (Australia)\nBULLET::::- Navy Day (Russia)\nBULLET::::- Reek Sunday (Ireland)\n\nBULLET::::- July 1\nBULLET::::- Armed Forces Day (Singapore)\nBULLET::::- Canada Day (Canada)\nBULLET::::- Children's Day (Pakistan)\nBULLET::::- Communist Party of China Founding Day (People's Republic of China)\nBULLET::::- Day of Officials and Civil Servants (Hungary)\nBULLET::::- Doctors' Day (India)\nBULLET::::- Emancipation Day (Netherlands Antilles)\nBULLET::::- Engineer's Day (Bahrain, Mexico)\nBULLET::::- Feast of the Most Precious Blood (removed from official Roman Catholic calendar since 1969)\nBULLET::::- Hong Kong Special Administrative Region Establishment Day (Hong Kong, China)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Burundi)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Rwanda)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Somalia)\nBULLET::::- International Tartan Day\nBULLET::::- July Morning (Bulgaria)\nBULLET::::- Keti Koti (Emancipation Day) (Suriname)\nBULLET::::- Madeira Day (Madeira, Portugal)\nBULLET::::- Moving Day (Quebec) (Canada)\nBULLET::::- National Creative Ice Cream Flavor Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- National Gingersnap Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Newfoundland and Labrador Memorial Day\nBULLET::::- Republic Day (Ghana)\nBULLET::::- Sir Seretse Khama Day (Botswana)\nBULLET::::- Territory Day (British Virgin Islands)\nBULLET::::- Van Mahotsav, celebrated until July 7 (India)\nBULLET::::- July 2\nBULLET::::- Flag Day (Curaçao) (Kingdom of the Netherlands)\nBULLET::::- Palio di Provenzano (Siena, Italy)\nBULLET::::- Police Day (Azerbaijan)\nBULLET::::- World UFO Day\nBULLET::::- July 3\nBULLET::::- The start of the dog days according to the \"Old Farmer's Almanac\" but not according to established meaning in most European cultures.\nBULLET::::- Emancipation Day (United States Virgin Islands)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Belarus)\nBULLET::::- Stay out of the Sun Day\nBULLET::::- Women's Day (Myanmar)\nBULLET::::- July 4\nBULLET::::- Birthday of Queen Sonja (Norway)\nBULLET::::- Dree Festival, celebrated until July 7 (Apatani people, Arunachal Pradesh, India)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Abkhazia)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Liberation Day (Northern Mariana Islands)\nBULLET::::- Liberation Day (Rwanda)\nBULLET::::- Republic Day (Philippines)\nBULLET::::- July 5\nBULLET::::- Armed Forces Day (Venezuela)\nBULLET::::- Bloody Thursday (International Longshore and Warehouse Union)\nBULLET::::- Constitution Day (Armenia)\nBULLET::::- Emancipation Day (New York City, United States)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Algeria)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Cape Verde)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Venezuela)\nBULLET::::- Saints Cyril and Methodius Feast Day (celebrated as a public holiday in Slovakia)\nBULLET::::- X-Day (Church of the SubGenius)\nBULLET::::- July 6\nBULLET::::- Constitution Day (Cayman Islands)\nBULLET::::- Day of the Capital (Kazakhstan)\nBULLET::::- National Fried Chicken Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Comoros)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day/Republic Day, (Malawi)\nBULLET::::- Jan Hus Day (Czech Republic)\nBULLET::::- Kupala Night (Poland, Russia, Belarus and Ukraine)\nBULLET::::- Statehood Day (Lithuania)\nBULLET::::- Teachers' Day (Peru)\nBULLET::::- July 7\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Solomon Islands)\nBULLET::::- Ivan Kupala Day (Belarus, Poland, Russia, Ukraine)\nBULLET::::- Saba Saba Day (Tanzania)\nBULLET::::- Tanabata (Japan, Gregorian date, some follow the traditional calendar)\nBULLET::::- World Chocolate Day\nBULLET::::- July 8\nBULLET::::- Air Force and Air Defense Forces Day (Ukraine)\nBULLET::::- Peter and Fevronia Day (Russian Orthodox)\nBULLET::::- July 9\nBULLET::::- Arbor Day (Cambodia)\nBULLET::::- Constitution Day (Australia)\nBULLET::::- Constitution Day (Palau)\nBULLET::::- Constitutionalist Revolution Day (São Paulo)\nBULLET::::- Day of the Employees of the Diplomatic Service (Azerbaijan)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Argentina, South Sudan)\nBULLET::::- Nunavut Day (Nunavut)\nBULLET::::- July 10\nBULLET::::- Armed Forces Day (Mauritania)\nBULLET::::- Beatles Day (Liverpool and Hamburg)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Bahamas)\nBULLET::::- Nikola Tesla Day\nBULLET::::- Statehood Day (Wyoming)\nBULLET::::- July 11\nBULLET::::- China National Maritime Day (China)\nBULLET::::- Day of the Flemish Community (Flemish Community of Belgium)\nBULLET::::- Eleventh Night (Northern Ireland)\nBULLET::::- Gospel Day (Kiribati)\nBULLET::::- Imamat Day (Isma'ilism)\nBULLET::::- World Population Day (International)\nBULLET::::- July 12\nBULLET::::- Birthday of the Heir to the Crown of Tonga (Tonga)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Kiribati, São Tomé and Príncipe)\nBULLET::::- Malala Day\nBULLET::::- The Twelfth, also known as Orangemen's Day (Northern Ireland, Newfoundland and Labrador)\nBULLET::::- July 13\nBULLET::::- Statehood Day (Montenegro)\nBULLET::::- July 14\nBULLET::::- Bastille Day (France and French dependencies)\nBULLET::::- Birthday of Victoria, Crown Princess of Sweden, an official flag day (Sweden)\nBULLET::::- Hondurans' Day (Honduras)\nBULLET::::- Republic Day (Iraq)\nBULLET::::- July 15\nBULLET::::- Bon Festival (Kantō region, Japan)\nBULLET::::- Elderly Men Day (Kiribati)\nBULLET::::- Festival of Santa Rosalia (Palermo, Sicily)\nBULLET::::- Sultan's Birthday (Brunei Darussalam)\nBULLET::::- July 16\nBULLET::::- Engineer's Day (Honduras)\nBULLET::::- Holocaust Memorial Day (France)\nBULLET::::- July 17\nBULLET::::- International Firgun Day\nBULLET::::- July 18\nBULLET::::- Constitution Day (Uruguay)\nBULLET::::- Nelson Mandela International Day\nBULLET::::- July 19\nBULLET::::- Liberation Day (Nicaragua)\nBULLET::::- Martyrs' Day (Burma)\nBULLET::::- July 20\nBULLET::::- Día del Amigo (Argentina)\nBULLET::::- Engineer's Day (Costa Rica)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Colombia)\nBULLET::::- Lempira's Day (Honduras)\nBULLET::::- Tree Planting Day (Central African Republic)\nBULLET::::- July 21\nBULLET::::- Belgian National Day\nBULLET::::- Racial Harmony Day (Singapore)\nBULLET::::- July 22\nBULLET::::- Foundation Day in Cleveland\nBULLET::::- July 23\nBULLET::::- Birthday of Haile Selassie (Rastafari)\nBULLET::::- Children's Day (Indonesia)\nBULLET::::- Flag Day (Abkhazia)\nBULLET::::- National Hot Dog Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- National Remembrance Day (Papua New Guinea)\nBULLET::::- Renaissance Day (Oman)\nBULLET::::- Revolution Day (Egypt)\nBULLET::::- July 24\nBULLET::::- Children's Day (Vanuatu)\nBULLET::::- Navy Day (Venezuela)\nBULLET::::- Pioneer Day (Utah) (United States)\nBULLET::::- Simón Bolívar Day (Ecuador, Venezuela, Colombia, and Bolivia)\nBULLET::::- July 25\nBULLET::::- Guanacaste Day (Costa Rica)\nBULLET::::- National Day of Galicia (Galicia (Spain))\nBULLET::::- National Baha'i Day (Jamaica)\nBULLET::::- Puerto Rico Constitution Day (Puerto Rico)\nBULLET::::- Republic Day (Tunisia)\nBULLET::::- Revolution Day (Egypt)\nBULLET::::- July 26\nBULLET::::- Day of National Significance (Barbados)\nBULLET::::- Day of the National Rebellion (Cuba)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Liberia)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Maldives)\nBULLET::::- Kargil Victory Day (India)\nBULLET::::- July 27\nBULLET::::- Day of Victory in the Great Fatherland Liberation War (North Korea)\nBULLET::::- Iglesia ni Cristo Day (the Philippines)\nBULLET::::- José Celso Barbosa Day (Puerto Rico)\nBULLET::::- Martyrs and Wounded Soldiers Day (Vietnam)\nBULLET::::- National Korean War Veterans Armistice Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- National Sleepy Head Day (Finland)\nBULLET::::- July 28\nBULLET::::- Day of Commemoration of the Great Upheaval (Canada)\nBULLET::::- Fiestas Patrias (Peru)\nBULLET::::- Liberation Day (San Marino)\nBULLET::::- Ólavsøka Eve (Faroe Islands)\nBULLET::::- World Hepatitis Day\nBULLET::::- July 29\nBULLET::::- International Tiger Day\nBULLET::::- National Anthem Day (Romania)\nBULLET::::- National Thai Language Day (Thailand)\nBULLET::::- Ólavsøka, opening of the Løgting session (Faroe Islands)\nBULLET::::- Olsok (Faroe Islands, (Finland, Norway)\nBULLET::::- July 30\nBULLET::::- Feast of the Throne (Morocco)\nBULLET::::- Día del Amigo (Paraguay)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Vanuatu)\nBULLET::::- Martyrs Day (South Sudan)\nBULLET::::- July 31\nBULLET::::- \"Ka Hae Hawaiʻi\" Day (Hawaii, United States)\nBULLET::::- Martyrdom Day of Shahid Udham Singh (Haryana and Punjab, India)\nBULLET::::- Treasury Day (Poland)\nBULLET::::- Warriors' Day (Malaysia)\nBULLET::::- Mimozicas' death Day (Serbia)\n\nBULLET::::- List of historical anniversaries\n"}
