{"id": "15930", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15930", "title": "John Calvin", "text": "John Calvin\n\nJohn Calvin (; \n\nCalvin was a tireless polemic and apologetic writer who generated much controversy. He also exchanged cordial and supportive letters with many reformers, including Philipp Melanchthon and Heinrich Bullinger. In addition to his seminal \"Institutes of the Christian Religion\", Calvin wrote commentaries on most books of the Bible, confessional documents, and various other theological treatises.\n\nCalvin was originally trained as a humanist lawyer. He broke from the Roman Catholic Church around 1530. After religious tensions erupted in widespread deadly violence against Protestant Christians in France, Calvin fled to Basel, Switzerland, where in 1536 he published the first edition of the \"Institutes\". In that same year, Calvin was recruited by Frenchman William Farel to join the Reformation in Geneva, where he regularly preached sermons throughout the week; but the governing council of the city resisted the implementation of their ideas, and both men were expelled. At the invitation of Martin Bucer, Calvin proceeded to Strasbourg, where he became the minister of a church of French refugees. He continued to support the reform movement in Geneva, and in 1541 he was invited back to lead the church of the city.\n\nFollowing his return, Calvin introduced new forms of church government and liturgy, despite opposition from several powerful families in the city who tried to curb his authority. During this period, Michael Servetus, a Spaniard regarded by both Roman Catholics and Protestants as having a heretical view of the Trinity, arrived in Geneva. He was denounced by Calvin and burned at the stake for heresy by the city council. Following an influx of supportive refugees and new elections to the city council, Calvin's opponents were forced out. Calvin spent his final years promoting the Reformation both in Geneva and throughout Europe.\n\nJohn Calvin was born as Jehan Cauvin on 10 July 1509, at Noyon, a town in Picardy, a province of the Kingdom of France. He was the first of four sons who survived infancy. His mother, Jeanne le Franc, was the daughter of an innkeeper from Cambrai. She died of an unknown cause in Calvin's childhood, after having borne four more children. Calvin's father, Gérard Cauvin, had a prosperous career as the cathedral notary and registrar to the ecclesiastical court; he died in 1531, after suffering for two years with testicular cancer. Gérard intended his three sons—Charles, Jean, and Antoine—for the priesthood.\n\nYoung Calvin was particularly precocious. By age 12, he was employed by the bishop as a clerk and received the tonsure, cutting his hair to symbolise his dedication to the Church. He also won the patronage of an influential family, the Montmors. Through their assistance, Calvin was able to attend the Collège de la Marche, Paris, where he learned Latin from one of its greatest teachers, Mathurin Cordier. Once he completed the course, he entered the Collège de Montaigu as a philosophy student.\n\nIn 1525 or 1526, Gérard withdrew his son from the Collège de Montaigu and enrolled him in the University of Orléans to study law. According to contemporary biographers Theodore Beza and Nicolas Colladon, Gérard believed that Calvin would earn more money as a lawyer than as a priest. After a few years of quiet study, Calvin entered the University of Bourges in 1529. He was intrigued by Andreas Alciati, a humanist lawyer. Humanism was a European intellectual movement which stressed classical studies. During his 18-month stay in Bourges, Calvin learned Koine Greek, a necessity for studying the New Testament.\n\nAlternate theories have been suggested regarding the date of Calvin's religious conversion. Some have placed the date of his conversion around 1533, shortly before he resigned his chaplaincy. In this view, his resignation is the direct evidence for his conversion to the evangelical faith. However, T. H. L. Parker argues that while this date is a terminus for his conversion, the more likely date is in late 1529 or early 1530. The main evidence for his conversion is contained in two significantly different accounts of his conversion. In the first, found in his \"Commentary on the Book of Psalms\", Calvin portrayed his conversion as a sudden change of mind, brought about by God:\nGod by a sudden conversion subdued and brought my mind to a teachable frame, which was more hardened in such matters than might have been expected from one at my early period of life. Having thus received some taste and knowledge of true godliness, I was immediately inflamed with so intense a desire to make progress therein, that although I did not altogether leave off other studies, yet I pursued them with less ardour.\nIn the second account, Calvin wrote of a long process of inner turmoil, followed by spiritual and psychological anguish:\nBeing exceedingly alarmed at the misery into which I had fallen, and much more at that which threatened me in view of eternal death, I, duty bound, made it my first business to betake myself to your way, condemning my past life, not without groans and tears. And now, O Lord, what remains to a wretch like me, but instead of defence, earnestly to supplicate you not to judge that fearful abandonment of your Word according to its deserts, from which in your wondrous goodness you have at last delivered me.\nScholars have argued about the precise interpretation of these accounts, but most agree that his conversion corresponded with his break from the Roman Catholic Church. The Calvin biographer Bruce Gordon has stressed that \"the two accounts are not antithetical, revealing some inconsistency in Calvin's memory, but rather [are] two different ways of expressing the same reality.\"\n\nBy 1532, Calvin received his licentiate in law and published his first book, a commentary on Seneca's \"De Clementia\". After uneventful trips to Orléans and his hometown of Noyon, Calvin returned to Paris in October 1533. During this time, tensions rose at the Collège Royal (later to become the Collège de France) between the humanists/reformers and the conservative senior faculty members. One of the reformers, Nicolas Cop, was rector of the university. On 1 November 1533 he devoted his inaugural address to the need for reform and renewal in the Roman Catholic Church. The address provoked a strong reaction from the faculty, who denounced it as heretical, forcing Cop to flee to Basel. Calvin, a close friend of Cop, was implicated in the offence, and for the next year he was forced into hiding. He remained on the move, sheltering with his friend Louis du Tillet in Angoulême and taking refuge in Noyon and Orléans. He was finally forced to flee France during the Affair of the Placards in mid-October 1534. In that incident, unknown reformers had posted placards in various cities criticizing the Roman Catholic mass, to which adherents of the Roman Catholic church responded with violence against the would-be Reformers and their sympathizers. In January 1535, Calvin joined Cop in Basel, a city under the enduring influence of the late reformer Johannes Oecolampadius.\n\nIn March 1536, Calvin published the first edition of his \"Institutio Christianae Religionis\" or \"Institutes of the Christian Religion\". The work was an \"apologia\" or defense of his faith and a statement of the doctrinal position of the reformers. He also intended it to serve as an elementary instruction book for anyone interested in the Christian faith. The book was the first expression of his theology. Calvin updated the work and published new editions throughout his life. Shortly after its publication, he left Basel for Ferrara, Italy, where he briefly served as secretary to Princess Renée of France. By June he was back in Paris with his brother Antoine, who was resolving their father's affairs. Following the Edict of Coucy, which gave a limited six-month period for heretics to reconcile with the Catholic faith, Calvin decided that there was no future for him in France. In August he set off for Strasbourg, a free imperial city of the Holy Roman Empire and a refuge for reformers. Due to military manoeuvres of imperial and French forces, he was forced to make a detour to the south, bringing him to Geneva.\n\nCalvin had intended to stay only a single night, but William Farel, a fellow French reformer residing in the city, implored him to stay and assist him in his work of reforming the church there, insisting that it was his pious duty. Calvin, who reluctantly agreed to remain, later recounted:\n\nThen Farel, who was working with incredible zeal to promote the gospel, bent all his efforts to keep me in the city. And when he realized that I was determined to study in privacy in some obscure place, and saw that he gained nothing by entreaty, he descended to cursing, and said that God would surely curse my peace if I held back from giving help at a time of such great need. Terrified by his words, and conscious of my own timidity and cowardice, I gave up my journey and attempted to apply whatever gift I had in defense of my faith.\n\nCalvin accepted his new role without any preconditions on his tasks or duties. The office to which he was initially assigned is unknown. He was eventually given the title of \"reader\", which most likely meant that he could give expository lectures on the Bible. Sometime in 1537 he was selected to be a \"pastor\" although he never received any pastoral consecration. For the first time, the lawyer-theologian took up pastoral duties such as baptisms, weddings, and church services.\n\nDuring late 1536, Farel drafted a confession of faith, and Calvin wrote separate articles on reorganizing the church in Geneva. On 16 January 1537, Farel and Calvin presented their \"Articles concernant l'organisation de l'église et du culte à Genève\" (Articles on the Organization of the Church and its Worship at Geneva) to the city council. The document described the manner and frequency of their celebrations of the Eucharist, the reason for, and the method of, excommunication, the requirement to subscribe to the confession of faith, the use of congregational singing in the liturgy, and the revision of marriage laws. The council accepted the document on the same day.\n\nAs the year progressed, Calvin and Farel's reputation with the council began to suffer. The council was reluctant to enforce the subscription requirement, as only a few citizens had subscribed to their confession of faith. On 26 November, the two ministers hotly debated the council over the issue. Furthermore, France was taking an interest in forming an alliance with Geneva and as the two ministers were Frenchmen, councillors had begun to question their loyalty. Finally, a major ecclesiastical-political quarrel developed when the city of Bern, Geneva's ally in the reformation of the Swiss churches, proposed to introduce uniformity in the church ceremonies. One proposal required the use of unleavened bread for the Eucharist. The two ministers were unwilling to follow Bern's lead and delayed the use of such bread until a synod in Zurich could be convened to make the final decision. The council ordered Calvin and Farel to use unleavened bread for the Easter Eucharist. In protest, they refused to administer communion during the Easter service. This caused a riot during the service and the next day, the council told Farel and Calvin to leave Geneva.\n\nFarel and Calvin then went to Bern and Zurich to plead their case. The resulting synod in Zurich placed most of the blame on Calvin for not being sympathetic enough toward the people of Geneva. It asked Bern to mediate with the aim of restoring the two ministers. The Geneva council refused to readmit the two men, who then took refuge in Basel. Subsequently, Farel received an invitation to lead the church in Neuchâtel. Calvin was invited to lead a church of French refugees in Strasbourg by that city's leading reformers, Martin Bucer and Wolfgang Capito. Initially, Calvin refused because Farel was not included in the invitation, but relented when Bucer appealed to him. By September 1538 Calvin had taken up his new position in Strasbourg, fully expecting that this time it would be permanent; a few months later, he applied for and was granted citizenship of the city.\n\nDuring his time in Strasbourg, Calvin was not attached to one particular church, but held his office successively in the Saint-Nicolas Church, the Sainte-Madeleine Church and the former Dominican Church, renamed the Temple Neuf. (All of these churches still exist, but none are in the architectural state of Calvin's days.) Calvin ministered to 400–500 members in his church. He preached or lectured every day, with two sermons on Sunday. Communion was celebrated monthly and congregational singing of the psalms was encouraged. He also worked on the second edition of the \"Institutes\". Calvin was dissatisfied with its original structure as a catechism, a primer for young Christians.\n\nFor the second edition, published in 1539, Calvin dropped this format in favour of systematically presenting the main doctrines from the Bible. In the process, the book was enlarged from six chapters to seventeen. He concurrently worked on another book, the \"Commentary on Romans\", which was published in March 1540. The book was a model for his later commentaries: it included his own Latin translation from the Greek rather than the Latin Vulgate, an exegesis, and an exposition. In the dedicatory letter, Calvin praised the work of his predecessors Philipp Melanchthon, Heinrich Bullinger, and Martin Bucer, but he also took care to distinguish his own work from theirs and to criticise some of their shortcomings.\n\nCalvin's friends urged him to marry. Calvin took a prosaic view, writing to one correspondent:I, who have the air of being so hostile to celibacy, I am still not married and do not know whether I will ever be. If I take a wife it will be because, being better freed from numerous worries, I can devote myself to the Lord. Several candidates were presented to him including one young woman from a noble family. Reluctantly, Calvin agreed to the marriage, on the condition that she would learn French. Although a wedding date was planned for March 1540, he remained reluctant and the wedding never took place. He later wrote that he would never think of marrying her, \"unless the Lord had entirely bereft me of my wits\". Instead, in August of that year, he married Idelette de Bure, a widow who had two children from her first marriage.\n\nGeneva reconsidered its expulsion of Calvin. Church attendance had dwindled and the political climate had changed; as Bern and Geneva quarrelled over land, their alliance frayed. When Cardinal Jacopo Sadoleto wrote a letter to the city council inviting Geneva to return to the Catholic faith, the council searched for an ecclesiastical authority to respond to him. At first Pierre Viret was consulted, but when he refused, the council asked Calvin. He agreed and his \"Responsio ad Sadoletum\" (Letter to Sadoleto) strongly defended Geneva's position concerning reforms in the church. On 21 September 1540 the council commissioned one of its members, Ami Perrin, to find a way to recall Calvin. An embassy reached Calvin while he was at a colloquy, a conference to settle religious disputes, in Worms. His reaction to the suggestion was one of horror in which he wrote, \"Rather would I submit to death a hundred times than to that cross on which I had to perish daily a thousand times over.\"\n\nCalvin also wrote that he was prepared to follow the Lord's calling. A plan was drawn up in which Viret would be appointed to take temporary charge in Geneva for six months while Bucer and Calvin would visit the city to determine the next steps. The city council pressed for the immediate appointment of Calvin in Geneva. By mid-1541, Strasbourg decided to lend Calvin to Geneva for six months. Calvin returned on 13 September 1541 with an official escort and a wagon for his family.\n\nIn supporting Calvin's proposals for reforms, the council of Geneva passed the \"Ordonnances ecclésiastiques\" (Ecclesiastical Ordinances) on 20 November 1541. The ordinances defined four orders of ministerial function: pastors to preach and to administer the sacraments; doctors to instruct believers in the faith; elders to provide discipline; and deacons to care for the poor and needy. They also called for the creation of the \"Consistoire\" (Consistory), an ecclesiastical court composed of the lay elders and the ministers. The city government retained the power to summon persons before the court, and the Consistory could judge only ecclesiastical matters having no civil jurisdiction. Originally, the court had the power to mete out sentences, with excommunication as its most severe penalty. The government contested this power and on 19 March 1543 the council decided that all sentencing would be carried out by the government.\nIn 1542, Calvin adapted a service book used in Strasbourg, publishing \"La Forme des Prières et Chants Ecclésiastiques\" (The Form of Prayers and Church Hymns). Calvin recognised the power of music and he intended that it be used to support scripture readings. The original Strasbourg psalter contained twelve psalms by Clément Marot and Calvin added several more hymns of his own composition in the Geneva version. At the end of 1542, Marot became a refugee in Geneva and contributed nineteen more psalms. Louis Bourgeois, also a refugee, lived and taught music in Geneva for sixteen years and Calvin took the opportunity to add his hymns, the most famous being the Old Hundredth.\n\nIn the same year of 1542, Calvin published \"Catéchisme de l'Eglise de Genève\" (Catechism of the Church of Geneva), which was inspired by Bucer's \"Kurze Schrifftliche Erklärung\" of 1534. Calvin had written an earlier catechism during his first stay in Geneva which was largely based on Martin Luther's Large Catechism. The first version was arranged pedagogically, describing Law, Faith, and Prayer. The 1542 version was rearranged for theological reasons, covering Faith first, then Law and Prayer.\n\nHistorians debate the extent to which Geneva was a theocracy. On the one hand, Calvin's theology clearly called for separation between church and state. Other historians have stressed the enormous political power wielded on a daily basis by the clerics.\nDuring his ministry in Geneva, Calvin preached over two thousand sermons. Initially he preached twice on Sunday and three times during the week. This proved to be too heavy a burden and late in 1542 the council allowed him to preach only once on Sunday. In October 1549, he was again required to preach twice on Sundays and, in addition, every weekday of alternate weeks. His sermons lasted more than an hour and he did not use notes. An occasional secretary tried to record his sermons, but very little of his preaching was preserved before 1549. In that year, professional scribe Denis Raguenier, who had learned or developed a system of shorthand, was assigned to record all of Calvin's sermons. An analysis of his sermons by T. H. L. Parker suggests that Calvin was a consistent preacher and his style changed very little over the years. John Calvin was also known for his thorough manner of working his way through the Bible in consecutive sermons. From March 1555 to July 1556, Calvin delivered two hundred sermons on Deuteronomy.\n\nVoltaire wrote about Calvin, Luther and Zwingli, \"If they condemned celibacy in the priests, and opened the gates of the convents, it was only to turn all society into a convent. Shows and entertainments were expressly forbidden by their religion; and for more than two hundred years there was not a single musical instrument allowed in the city of Geneva. They condemned auricular confession, but they enjoined a public one; and in Switzerland, Scotland, and Geneva it was performed the same as penance.\"\n\nVery little is known about Calvin's personal life in Geneva. His house and furniture were owned by the council. The house was big enough to accommodate his family as well as Antoine's family and some servants. On 28 July 1542, Idelette gave birth to a son, Jacques, but he was born prematurely and survived only briefly. Idelette fell ill in 1545 and died on 29 March 1549. Calvin never married again. He expressed his sorrow in a letter to Viret:\n\nI have been bereaved of the best friend of my life, of one who, if it has been so ordained, would willingly have shared not only my poverty but also my death. During her life she was the faithful helper of my ministry. From her I never experienced the slightest hindrance.\n\nThroughout the rest of his life in Geneva, he maintained several friendships from his early years including Montmor, Cordier, Cop, Farel, Melanchthon and Bullinger.\n\nCalvin encountered bitter opposition to his work in Geneva. Around 1546, the uncoordinated forces coalesced into an identifiable group whom he referred to as the libertines, but who preferred to be called either Spirituels or Patriots. According to Calvin, these were people who felt that after being liberated through grace, they were exempted from both ecclesiastical and civil law. The group consisted of wealthy, politically powerful, and interrelated families of Geneva. At the end of January 1546, Pierre Ameaux, a maker of playing cards who had already been in conflict with the Consistory, attacked Calvin by calling him a \"Picard\", an epithet denoting anti-French sentiment, and accused him of false doctrine. Ameaux was punished by the council and forced to make expiation by parading through the city and begging God for forgiveness. A few months later Ami Perrin, the man who had brought Calvin to Geneva, moved into open opposition. Perrin had married Françoise Favre, daughter of François Favre, a well-established Genevan merchant. Both Perrin's wife and father-in-law had previous conflicts with the Consistory. The court noted that many of Geneva's notables, including Perrin, had breached a law against dancing. Initially, Perrin ignored the court when he was summoned, but after receiving a letter from Calvin, he appeared before the Consistory.\n\nBy 1547, opposition to Calvin and other French refugee ministers had grown to constitute the majority of the syndics, the civil magistrates of Geneva. On 27 June an unsigned threatening letter in Genevan dialect was found at the pulpit of St. Pierre Cathedral where Calvin preached. Suspecting a plot against both the church and the state, the council appointed a commission to investigate. Jacques Gruet, a Genevan member of Favre's group, was arrested and incriminating evidence was found when his house was searched. Under torture, he confessed to several crimes including writing the letter left in the pulpit which threatened the church leaders. A civil court condemned Gruet to death and he was beheaded on 26 July. Calvin was not opposed to the civil court's decision.\n\nThe libertines continued organizing opposition, insulting the appointed ministers, and challenging the authority of the Consistory. The council straddled both sides of the conflict, alternately admonishing and upholding Calvin. When Perrin was elected first syndic in February 1552, Calvin's authority appeared to be at its lowest point. After some losses before the council, Calvin believed he was defeated; on 24 July 1553 he asked the council to allow him to resign. Although the libertines controlled the council, his request was refused. The opposition realised that they could curb Calvin's authority, but they did not have enough power to banish him.\n\nThe turning point in Calvin's fortunes occurred when Michael Servetus, a brilliant scientist, discoverer of the circulation of the blood, and polymath and a fugitive from ecclesiastical authorities, appeared in Geneva on 13 August 1553. Servetus was a Spanish physician and Protestant theologian who boldly criticised the doctrine of the Trinity and paedobaptism (infant baptism). In July 1530 he disputed with Johannes Oecolampadius in Basel and was eventually expelled. He went to Strasbourg, where he published a pamphlet against the Trinity. Bucer publicly refuted it and asked Servetus to leave. After returning to Basel, Servetus published \"Two Books of Dialogues on the Trinity\" () which caused a sensation among Reformers and Catholics alike. The Inquisition in Spain ordered his arrest.\n\nCalvin and Servetus were first brought into contact in 1546 through a common acquaintance, Jean Frellon of Lyon; they exchanged letters debating doctrine; Calvin used a pseudonym as \"Charles d' Espeville\"; Servetus left his unsigned. Eventually, Calvin lost patience and refused to respond; by this time Servetus had written around thirty letters to Calvin. Calvin was particularly outraged when Servetus sent him a copy of the \"Institutes of the Christian Religion\" heavily annotated with arguments pointing to errors in the book. When Servetus mentioned that he would come to Geneva, \"Espeville\" (Calvin) wrote a letter to Farel on 13 February 1546 noting that if Servetus were to come, he would not assure him safe conduct: \"for if he came, as far as my authority goes, I would not let him leave alive.\"\n\nIn 1553 Servetus published \"Christianismi Restitutio\" (English: The Restoration of Christianity), in which he rejected the Christian doctrine of the Trinity and the concept of predestination. In the same year, Calvin's representative, Guillaume de Trie, sent letters alerting the French Inquisition to Servetus. Calling him a \"Spanish-Portuguese\", suspecting and accusing him of his recently proved Jewish converso origin. De Trie wrote down that \"his proper name is Michael Servetus, but he currently calls himself Villeneuve, practising medicine. He stayed for some time in Lyon, and now he is living in Vienne.\" When the inquisitor-general of France learned that Servetus was hiding in Vienne, according to Calvin under an assumed name, he contacted Cardinal François de Tournon, the secretary of the archbishop of Lyon, to take up the matter. Servetus was arrested and taken in for questioning. His letters to Calvin were presented as evidence of heresy, but he denied having written them, and later said he was not sure it was his handwriting. He said, after swearing before the holy gospel, that \"he was Michel De Villeneuve Doctor in Medicine about 42 years old, native of Tudela of the kingdom of Navarre, a city under the obedience to the Emperor\". The following day he said: \"..although he was not Servetus he assumed the person of Servet for debating with Calvin\". He managed to escape from prison, and the Catholic authorities sentenced him \"in absentia\" to death by slow burning.\n\nOn his way to Italy, Servetus stopped in Geneva to visit \"\"d'Espeville\"\", where he was recognized and arrested. Calvin's secretary, Nicholas de la Fontaine, composed a list of accusations that was submitted before the court. The prosecutor was Philibert Berthelier, a member of a libertine family and son of a famous Geneva patriot, and the sessions were led by Pierre Tissot, Perrin's brother-in-law. The libertines allowed the trial to drag on in an attempt to harass Calvin. The difficulty in using Servetus as a weapon against Calvin was that the heretical reputation of Servetus was widespread and most of the cities in Europe were observing and awaiting the outcome of the trial. This posed a dilemma for the libertines, so on 21 August the council decided to write to other Swiss cities for their opinions, thus mitigating their own responsibility for the final decision. While waiting for the responses, the council also asked Servetus if he preferred to be judged in Vienne or in Geneva. He begged to stay in Geneva. On 20 October the replies from Zurich, Basel, Bern, and Schaffhausen were read and the council condemned Servetus as a heretic. The following day he was sentenced to burning at the stake, the same sentence as in Vienne. Some scholars claim that Calvin and other ministers asked that he be beheaded instead of burnt, knowing that burning at the stake was the only legal recourse. This plea was refused and on 27 October, Servetus was burnt alive at the Plateau of Champel at the edge of Geneva.\n\nAfter the death of Servetus, Calvin was acclaimed a defender of Christianity, but his ultimate triumph over the libertines was still two years away. He had always insisted that the Consistory retain the power of excommunication, despite the council's past decision to take it away. During Servetus's trial, Philibert Berthelier asked the council for permission to take communion, as he had been excommunicated the previous year for insulting a minister. Calvin protested that the council did not have the legal authority to overturn Berthelier's excommunication. Unsure of how the council would rule, he hinted in a sermon on 3 September 1553 that he might be dismissed by the authorities. The council decided to re-examine the \"Ordonnances\" and on 18 September it voted in support of Calvin—excommunication was within the jurisdiction of the Consistory. Berthelier applied for reinstatement to another Genevan administrative assembly, the \"Deux Cents\" (Two Hundred), in November. This body reversed the council's decision and stated that the final arbiter concerning excommunication should be the council. The ministers continued to protest, and as in the case of Servetus, the opinions of the Swiss churches were sought. The affair dragged on through 1554. Finally, on 22 January 1555, the council announced the decision of the Swiss churches: the original \"Ordonnances\" were to be kept and the Consistory was to regain its official powers.\n\nThe libertines' downfall began with the February 1555 elections. By then, many of the French refugees had been granted citizenship and with their support, Calvin's partisans elected the majority of the syndics and the councillors. On 16 May the libertines took to the streets in a drunken protest and attempted to burn down a house that was supposedly full of Frenchmen. The syndic Henri Aulbert tried to intervene, carrying with him the baton of office that symbolised his power. Perrin seized the baton and waved it over the crowd, which gave the appearance that he was taking power and initiating a \"coup d'état\". The insurrection was soon over when another syndic appeared and ordered Perrin to go with him to the town hall. Perrin and other leaders were forced to flee the city. With the approval of Calvin, the other plotters who remained in the city were found and executed. The opposition to Calvin's church polity came to an end.\n\nCalvin's authority was practically uncontested during his final years, and he enjoyed an international reputation as a reformer distinct from Martin Luther. Initially, Luther and Calvin had mutual respect for each other. A doctrinal conflict had developed between Luther and Zurich reformer Huldrych Zwingli on the interpretation of the eucharist. Calvin's opinion on the issue forced Luther to place him in Zwingli's camp. Calvin actively participated in the polemics that were exchanged between the Lutheran and Reformed branches of the Reformation movement. At the same time, Calvin was dismayed by the lack of unity among the reformers. He took steps toward rapprochement with Bullinger by signing the \"Consensus Tigurinus\", a concordat between the Zurich and Geneva churches. He reached out to England when Archbishop of Canterbury Thomas Cranmer called for an ecumenical synod of all the evangelical churches. Calvin praised the idea, but ultimately Cranmer was unable to bring it to fruition.\n\nCalvin sheltered Marian exiles (those who fled the reign of Catholic Mary Tudor in England) in Geneva starting in 1555. Under the city's protection, they were able to form their own reformed church under John Knox and William Whittingham and eventually carried Calvin's ideas on doctrine and polity back to England and Scotland. \nWithin Geneva, Calvin's main concern was the creation of a \"collège\", an institute for the education of children. A site for the school was selected on 25 March 1558 and it opened the following year on 5 June 1559. Although the school was a single institution, it was divided into two parts: a grammar school called the \"collège\" or \"schola privata\" and an advanced school called the \"académie\" or \"schola publica\". Calvin tried to recruit two professors for the institute, Mathurin Cordier, his old friend and Latin scholar who was now based in Lausanne, and Emmanuel Tremellius, the former Regius professor of Hebrew in Cambridge. Neither was available, but he succeeded in obtaining Theodore Beza as rector. Within five years there were 1,200 students in the grammar school and 300 in the advanced school. The \"collège\" eventually became the Collège Calvin, one of the college preparatory schools of Geneva; the \"académie\" became the University of Geneva.\n\nCalvin was deeply committed to reforming his homeland, France. The Protestant movement had been energetic, but lacked central organizational direction. With financial support from the church in Geneva, Calvin turned his enormous energies toward uplifting the French Protestant cause. As one historian explains:\n\nIn late 1558, Calvin became ill with a fever. Since he was afraid that he might die before completing the final revision of the \"Institutes\", he forced himself to work. The final edition was greatly expanded to the extent that Calvin referred to it as a new work. The expansion from the 21 chapters of the previous edition to 80 was due to the extended treatment of existing material rather than the addition of new topics. Shortly after he recovered, he strained his voice while preaching, which brought on a violent fit of coughing. He burst a blood-vessel in his lungs, and his health steadily declined. He preached his final sermon in St. Pierre on 6 February 1564. On 25 April, he made his will, in which he left small sums to his family and to the \"collège\". A few days later, the ministers of the church came to visit him, and he bade his final farewell, which was recorded in \"Discours d'adieu aux ministres\". He recounted his life in Geneva, sometimes recalling bitterly some of the hardships he had suffered. Calvin died on 27 May 1564 aged 54. At first his body lay in state, but since so many people came to see it, the reformers were afraid that they would be accused of fostering a new saint's cult. On the following day, he was buried in an unmarked grave in the Cimetière des Rois. The exact location of the grave is unknown; a stone was added in the 19th century to mark a grave traditionally thought to be Calvin's.\n\nCalvin developed his theology in his biblical commentaries as well as his sermons and treatises, but the most comprehensive expression of his views is found in his magnum opus, the \"Institutes of the Christian Religion\". He intended that the book be used as a summary of his views on Christian theology and that it be read in conjunction with his commentaries. The various editions of that work spanned nearly his entire career as a reformer, and the successive revisions of the book show that his theology changed very little from his youth to his death. The first edition from 1536 consisted of only six chapters. The second edition, published in 1539, was three times as long because he added chapters on subjects that appear in Melanchthon's \"Loci Communes\". In 1543, he again added new material and expanded a chapter on the Apostles' Creed. The final edition of the \"Institutes\" appeared in 1559. By then, the work consisted of four books of eighty chapters, and each book was named after statements from the creed: Book 1 on God the Creator, Book 2 on the Redeemer in Christ, Book 3 on receiving the Grace of Christ through the Holy Spirit, and Book 4 on the Society of Christ or the Church.\n\nThe first statement in the \"Institutes\" acknowledges its central theme. It states that the sum of human wisdom consists of two parts: the knowledge of God and of ourselves. Calvin argues that the knowledge of God is not inherent in humanity nor can it be discovered by observing this world. The only way to obtain it is to study scripture. Calvin writes, \"For anyone to arrive at God the Creator he needs Scripture as his Guide and Teacher.\" He does not try to prove the authority of scripture but rather describes it as \"autopiston\" or self-authenticating. He defends the trinitarian view of God and, in a strong polemical stand against the Catholic Church, argues that images of God lead to idolatry. At the end of the first book, he offers his views on providence, writing, \"By his Power God cherishes and guards the World which he made and by his Providence rules its individual Parts.\" Humans are unable to fully comprehend why God performs any particular action, but whatever good or evil people may practise, their efforts always result in the execution of God's will and judgments.\n\nThe second book includes several essays on original sin and the fall of man, which directly refer to Augustine, who developed these doctrines. He often cited the Church Fathers in order to defend the reformed cause against the charge that the reformers were creating new theology. In Calvin's view, sin began with the fall of Adam and propagated to all of humanity. The domination of sin is complete to the point that people are driven to evil. Thus fallen humanity is in need of the redemption that can be found in Christ. But before Calvin expounded on this doctrine, he described the special situation of the Jews who lived during the time of the Old Testament. God made a covenant with Abraham, promising the coming of Christ. Hence, the Old Covenant was not in opposition to Christ, but was rather a continuation of God's promise. Calvin then describes the New Covenant using the passage from the Apostles' Creed that describes Christ's suffering under Pontius Pilate and his return to judge the living and the dead. For Calvin, the whole course of Christ's obedience to the Father removed the discord between humanity and God.\n\nIn the third book, Calvin describes how the spiritual union of Christ and humanity is achieved. He first defines faith as the firm and certain knowledge of God in Christ. The immediate effects of faith are repentance and the remission of sin. This is followed by spiritual regeneration, which returns the believer to the state of holiness before Adam's transgression. Complete perfection is unattainable in this life, and the believer should expect a continual struggle against sin. Several chapters are then devoted to the subject of justification by faith alone. He defined justification as \"the acceptance by which God regards us as righteous whom he has received into grace.\" In this definition, it is clear that it is God who initiates and carries through the action and that people play no role; God is completely sovereign in salvation. Near the end of the book, Calvin describes and defends the doctrine of predestination, a doctrine advanced by Augustine in opposition to the teachings of Pelagius. Fellow theologians who followed the Augustinian tradition on this point included Thomas Aquinas and Martin Luther, though Calvin's formulation of the doctrine went further than the tradition that went before him. The principle, in Calvin's words, is that \"All are not created on equal terms, but some are preordained to eternal life, others to eternal damnation; and, accordingly, as each has been created for one or other of these ends, we say that he has been predestinated to life or to death.\"\n\nThe final book describes what he considers to be the true Church and its ministry, authority, and sacraments. He denied the papal claim to primacy and the accusation that the reformers were schismatic. For Calvin, the Church was defined as the body of believers who placed Christ at its head. By definition, there was only one \"catholic\" or \"universal\" Church. Hence, he argued that the reformers \"had to leave them in order that we might come to Christ.\" The ministers of the Church are described from a passage from Ephesians, and they consisted of apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors, and doctors. Calvin regarded the first three offices as temporary, limited in their existence to the time of the New Testament. The latter two offices were established in the church in Geneva. Although Calvin respected the work of the ecumenical councils, he considered them to be subject to God's Word found in scripture. He also believed that the civil and church authorities were separate and should not interfere with each other.\n\nCalvin defined a sacrament as an earthly sign associated with a promise from God. He accepted only two sacraments as valid under the new covenant: baptism and the Lord's Supper (in opposition to the Catholic acceptance of seven sacraments). He completely rejected the Catholic doctrine of transubstantiation and the treatment of the Supper as a sacrifice. He also could not accept the Lutheran doctrine of sacramental union in which Christ was \"in, with and under\" the elements. His own view was close to Zwingli's symbolic view, but it was not identical. Rather than holding a purely symbolic view, Calvin noted that with the participation of the Holy Spirit, faith was nourished and strengthened by the sacrament. In his words, the eucharistic rite was \"a secret too sublime for my mind to understand or words to express. I experience it rather than understand it.\"\n\nCalvin's theology caused controversy. Pierre Caroli, a Protestant minister in Lausanne accused Calvin as well as Viret and Farel of Arianism in 1536. Calvin defended his beliefs on the Trinity in \"Confessio de Trinitate propter calumnias P. Caroli\". In 1551 Jérôme-Hermès Bolsec, a physician in Geneva, attacked Calvin's doctrine of predestination and accused him of making God the author of sin. Bolsec was banished from the city, and after Calvin's death, he wrote a biography which severely maligned Calvin's character. In the following year, Joachim Westphal, a Gnesio-Lutheran pastor in Hamburg, condemned Calvin and Zwingli as heretics in denying the eucharistic doctrine of the union of Christ's body with the elements. Calvin's \"Defensio sanae et orthodoxae doctrinae de sacramentis\" (A Defence of the Sober and Orthodox Doctrine of the Sacrament) was his response in 1555. In 1556 , a Dutch dissident, held a public disputation with Calvin during his visit to Frankfurt, in which Velsius defended free will against Calvin's doctrine of predestination. Following the execution of Servetus, a close associate of Calvin, Sebastian Castellio, broke with him on the issue of the treatment of heretics. In Castellio's \"Treatise on Heretics\" (1554), he argued for a focus on Christ's moral teachings in place of the vanity of theology, and he afterward developed a theory of tolerance based on biblical principles.\n\nScholars have debated Calvin's view of the Jews and Judaism. Some have argued that Calvin was the least anti-semitic among all the major reformers of his time, especially in comparison to Martin Luther. Others have argued that Calvin was firmly within the anti-semitic camp. Scholars agree that it is important to distinguish between Calvin's views toward the biblical Jews and his attitude toward contemporary Jews. In his theology, Calvin does not differentiate between God's covenant with Israel and the New Covenant. He stated, \"all the children of the promise, reborn of God, who have obeyed the commands by faith working through love, have belonged to the New Covenant since the world began.\" Nevertheless, he was a covenant theologian and argued that the Jews are a rejected people who must embrace Jesus to re-enter the covenant.\n\nMost of Calvin's statements on the Jewry of his era were polemical. For example, Calvin once wrote, \"I have had much conversation with many Jews: I have never seen either a drop of piety or a grain of truth or ingenuousness – nay, I have never found common sense in any Jew.\" In this respect, he differed little from other Protestant and Catholic theologians of his day. Among his extant writings, Calvin only dealt explicitly with issues of contemporary Jews and Judaism in one treatise, \"Response to Questions and Objections of a Certain Jew\". In it, he argued that Jews misread their own scriptures because they miss the unity of the Old and New Testaments.\n\nThe aim of Calvin's political theory was to safeguard the rights and freedoms of ordinary people. Although he was convinced that the Bible contained no blueprint for a certain form of government, Calvin favored a combination of democracy and aristocracy (mixed government). He appreciated the advantages of democracy. To further minimize the misuse of political power, Calvin proposed to divide it among several political institutions like the aristocracy, lower estates, or magistrates in a system of checks and balances (separation of powers). Finally, Calvin taught that if rulers rise up against God they lose their divine right and must be deposed. State and church are separate, though they have to cooperate to the benefit of the people. Christian magistrates have to make sure that the church can fulfill its duties in freedom. In extreme cases the magistrates have to expel or execute dangerous heretics. But nobody can be forced to become a Protestant.\n\nCalvin thought that agriculture and the traditional crafts were normal human activities. With regard to trade and the financial world he was more liberal than Luther, but both were strictly opposed to usury. Calvin allowed the charging of modest interest rates on loans. Like the other Reformers Calvin understood work as a means through which the believers expressed their gratitude to God for their redemption in Christ and as a service to their neighbors. Everybody was obliged to work; loafing and begging were rejected. The idea that economic success was a visible sign of God's grace played only a minor role in Calvin's thinking. It became more important in later, partly secularized forms of Calvinism and became the starting-point of Max Weber's theory about the rise of capitalism.\n\nCalvin's first published work was a commentary of Seneca the Younger's \"De Clementia\". Published at his own expense in 1532, it showed that he was a humanist in the tradition of Erasmus with a thorough understanding of classical scholarship. His first theological work, the \"Psychopannychia\", attempted to refute the doctrine of soul sleep as promulgated by the Anabaptists. Calvin probably wrote it during the period following Cop's speech, but it was not published until 1542 in Strasbourg.\n\nCalvin produced commentaries on most of the books of the Bible. His first commentary on Romans was published in 1540, and he planned to write commentaries on the entire New Testament. Six years passed before he wrote his second, a commentary on First Epistle to the Corinthians, but after that he devoted more attention to reaching his goal. Within four years he had published commentaries on all the Pauline epistles, and he also revised the commentary on Romans. He then turned his attention to the general epistles, dedicating them to Edward VI of England. By 1555 he had completed his work on the New Testament, finishing with the Acts and the Gospels (he omitted only the brief second and third Epistles of John and the Book of Revelation). For the Old Testament, he wrote commentaries on Isaiah, the books of the Pentateuch, the Psalms, and Joshua. The material for the commentaries often originated from lectures to students and ministers that he reworked for publication. From 1557 onwards, he could not find the time to continue this method, and he gave permission for his lectures to be published from stenographers' notes. These \"Praelectiones\" covered the minor prophets, Daniel, Jeremiah, Lamentations, and part of Ezekiel.\n\nCalvin also wrote many letters and treatises. Following the \"Responsio ad Sadoletum\", Calvin wrote an open letter at the request of Bucer to Charles V in 1543, \"Supplex exhortatio ad Caesarem\", defending the reformed faith. This was followed by an open letter to the pope (\"Admonitio paterna Pauli III\") in 1544, in which Calvin admonished Paul III for depriving the reformers of any prospect of rapprochement. The pope proceeded to open the Council of Trent, which resulted in decrees against the reformers. Calvin refuted the decrees by producing the \"Acta synodi Tridentinae cum Antidoto\" in 1547. When Charles tried to find a compromise solution with the Augsburg Interim, Bucer and Bullinger urged Calvin to respond. He wrote the treatise, \"Vera Christianae pacificationis et Ecclesiae reformandae ratio\" in 1549, in which he described the doctrines that should be upheld, including justification by faith.\n\nCalvin provided many of the foundational documents for reformed churches, including documents on the catechism, the liturgy, and church governance. He also produced several confessions of faith in order to unite the churches. In 1559, he drafted the French confession of faith, the Gallic Confession, and the synod in Paris accepted it with few changes. The Belgic Confession of 1561, a Dutch confession of faith, was partly based on the Gallic Confession.\n\nAfter the deaths of Calvin and his successor, Beza, the Geneva city council gradually gained control over areas of life that were previously in the ecclesiastical domain. Increasing secularisation was accompanied by the decline of the church. Even the Geneva \"académie\" was eclipsed by universities in Leiden and Heidelberg, which became the new strongholds of Calvin's ideas, first identified as \"Calvinism\" by Joachim Westphal in 1552. By 1585, Geneva, once the wellspring of the reform movement, had become merely its symbol. Calvin had always warned against describing him as an \"idol\" and Geneva as a new \"Jerusalem\". He encouraged people to adapt to the environments in which they found themselves. Even during his polemical exchange with Westphal, he advised a group of French-speaking refugees, who had settled in Wesel, Germany, to integrate with the local Lutheran churches. Despite his differences with the Lutherans, he did not deny that they were members of the true Church. Calvin's recognition of the need to adapt to local conditions became an important characteristic of the reformation movement as it spread across Europe.\n\nDue to Calvin's missionary work in France, his programme of reform eventually reached the French-speaking provinces of the Netherlands. Calvinism was adopted in the Electorate of the Palatinate under Frederick III, which led to the formulation of the Heidelberg Catechism in 1563. This and the Belgic Confession were adopted as confessional standards in the first synod of the Dutch Reformed Church in 1571. Several leading divines, either Calvinist or those sympathetic to Calvinism, settled in England (Martin Bucer, Peter Martyr, and Jan Laski) and Scotland (John Knox). During the English Civil War, the Calvinistic Puritans produced the Westminster Confession, which became the confessional standard for Presbyterians in the English-speaking world.\nAs the Ottoman Empire did not force Muslim conversion on its conquered western territories, reformed ideas were quickly adopted in the two-thirds of Hungary they occupied (the Habsburg-ruled third part of Hungary remained Catholic). A Reformed Constitutional Synod was held in 1567 in Debrecen, the main hub of Hungarian Calvinism, where the Second Helvetic Confession was adopted as the official confession of Hungarian Calvinists.\nHaving established itself in Europe, the movement continued to spread to other parts of the world including North America, South Africa, and Korea.\n\nCalvin did not live to see the foundation of his work grow into an international movement; but his death allowed his ideas to break out of their city of origin, to succeed far beyond their borders, and to establish their own distinct character.\n\nCalvin is recognized as a Renewer of the Church in Lutheran churches, and as a saint in the Church of England, commemorated on 26 May, and on 28 May by the Episcopal Church (USA).\n\nBULLET::::- Theology of John Calvin\nBULLET::::- Corpus Reformatorum\nBULLET::::- Franciscus Junius (the elder)\nBULLET::::- Genevan psalter\nBULLET::::- History of Protestantism\nBULLET::::- Immanuel Tremellius\nBULLET::::- John Calvin's views on Mary\nBULLET::::- Otto Zeinenger\nBULLET::::- Swiss Reformation\nBULLET::::- Theodore Beza\nBULLET::::- Wilhelm Heinrich Neuser\nBULLET::::- Criticism of Protestantism\n\nBULLET::::- (originally published 1965).\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\n\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- Tamburello, Dennis E. (2007), \"Union with Christ: John Calvin and the Mysticism of St. Bernard\", Louisville, Kentucky: Westminster John Knox Press,\n\nBULLET::::- The John Calvin Bibliography of the H. Henry Meeter Center for Calvin Studies\nBULLET::::- Calvinism Resources Database\nBULLET::::- Writings of Calvin at the Christian Classics Ethereal Library\nBULLET::::- Writings and lectures by and about John Calvin at the SWRB\nBULLET::::- Sermons by Calvin\nBULLET::::- \"Psychopannychia\"\nBULLET::::- Catholic Encyclopedia\n"}
{"id": "15935", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15935", "title": "June 16", "text": "June 16\n\nBULLET::::- 363 – Emperor Julian marches back up the Tigris and burns his fleet of supply ships. During the withdrawal Roman forces suffered several attacks from the Persians.\nBULLET::::- 632 – Yazdegerd III ascends the throne as king (\"shah\") of the Persian Empire. He becomes the last ruler of the Sasanian dynasty (modern Iran).\nBULLET::::- 1407 – Ming–Hồ War: Retired King Hồ Quý Ly and his son King Hồ Hán Thương of Hồ dynasty are captured by the Ming armies.\nBULLET::::- 1487 – Battle of Stoke Field: King Henry VII of England defeats the leaders of a Yorkist rebellion in the final engagement of the Wars of the Roses.\nBULLET::::- 1586 – Mary, Queen of Scots, recognizes Philip II of Spain as her heir and successor.\nBULLET::::- 1745 – War of the Austrian Succession: New England colonial troops under the command of William Pepperrell capture the Fortress of Louisbourg in Louisbourg, New France (Old Style date).\nBULLET::::- 1746 – War of the Austrian Succession: Austria and Sardinia defeat a Franco-Spanish army at the Battle of Piacenza.\nBULLET::::- 1755 – French and Indian War: The French surrender Fort Beauséjour to the British, leading to the expulsion of the Acadians.\nBULLET::::- 1774 – Foundation of Harrodsburg, Kentucky.\nBULLET::::- 1779 – Spain declares war on the Kingdom of Great Britain, and the Great Siege of Gibraltar begins.\nBULLET::::- 1795 – French Revolutionary Wars: In what became known as Cornwallis's Retreat, a British Royal Navy squadron led by Vice Admiral William Cornwallis strongly resists a much larger French Navy force and withdraws largely intact, setting up the French Navy defeat at the Battle of Groix six days later.\nBULLET::::- 1811 – Survivors of an attack the previous day by Tla-o-qui-aht on board the Pacific Fur Company's ship \"Tonquin\" intentionally detonate a powder magazine on the ship, destroying it and killing about 100 attackers.\nBULLET::::- 1815 – Battle of Ligny and Battle of Quatre Bras, two days before the Battle of Waterloo.\nBULLET::::- 1819 – A major earthquake strikes the Kutch district of western India, killing over 1,543 people and raising a 6 m high, 6 km wide, ridge, extending for at least 80 km, that was known as the Allah Bund (\"Dam of God\").\nBULLET::::- 1836 – The formation of the London Working Men's Association gives rise to the Chartist Movement.\nBULLET::::- 1846 – The Papal conclave of 1846 elects Pope Pius IX, beginning the longest reign in the history of the papacy.\nBULLET::::- 1858 – Abraham Lincoln delivers his \"House Divided\" speech in Springfield, Illinois.\nBULLET::::- 1858 – The Battle of Morar takes place during the Indian Mutiny.\nBULLET::::- 1871 – The Universities Tests Act 1871 allows students to enter the Universities of Oxford, Cambridge and Durham without religious tests (except for those intending to study theology).\nBULLET::::- 1883 – The Victoria Hall theatre panic in Sunderland, England kills 183 children.\nBULLET::::- 1884 – The first purpose-built roller coaster, LaMarcus Adna Thompson's \"Switchback Railway\", opens in New York's Coney Island amusement park.\nBULLET::::- 1897 – A treaty annexing the Republic of Hawaii to the United States is signed; the Republic would not be dissolved until a year later.\nBULLET::::- 1903 – The Ford Motor Company is incorporated.\nBULLET::::- 1903 – Roald Amundsen commences the first east-west navigation of the Northwest Passage, leaving Oslo, Norway.\nBULLET::::- 1904 – Eugen Schauman assassinates Nikolay Bobrikov, Governor-General of Finland.\nBULLET::::- 1904 – Irish author James Joyce begins a relationship with Nora Barnacle and subsequently uses the date to set the actions for his novel \"Ulysses\"; this date is now traditionally called \"Bloomsday\".\nBULLET::::- 1911 – IBM founded as the Computing-Tabulating-Recording Company in Endicott, New York.\nBULLET::::- 1922 – General election in the Irish Free State: The pro-Treaty Sinn Féin win a large majority.\nBULLET::::- 1925 – The most famous Young Pioneer camp of the Soviet Union, Artek, is established.\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Sovnarkom establishes decree time in the USSR.\nBULLET::::- 1933 – The National Industrial Recovery Act is passed in the United States, allowing businesses to avoid antitrust prosecution if they established voluntary wage, price, and working condition regulations on an industry-wide basis. Large portions of the law are later declared unconstitutional.\nBULLET::::- 1940 – World War II: Marshal Henri Philippe Pétain becomes Chief of State of Vichy France (\"Chef de l'État Français\").\nBULLET::::- 1940 – A Communist government is installed in Lithuania.\nBULLET::::- 1944 – At age 14, George Junius Stinney, Jr. becomes the youngest person executed in the United States in the 20th century.\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Members of the Malayan Communist Party kill three British plantation managers in Sungai Siput; in response, British Malaya declares a state of emergency.\nBULLET::::- 1955 – In a futile effort to topple Argentine President Juan Perón, rogue aircraft pilots of the Argentine Navy drop several bombs upon an unarmed crowd demonstrating in favor of Perón in Buenos Aires, killing 364 and injuring at least 800. At the same time on the ground, some soldiers attempt to stage a coup but are suppressed by loyal forces.\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Imre Nagy, Pál Maléter and other leaders of the 1956 Hungarian Uprising are executed.\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Rudolf Nureyev defects from the Soviet Union.\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Soviet Space Program: \"Vostok 6\" Mission: Cosmonaut Valentina Tereshkova becomes the first woman in space.\nBULLET::::- 1972 – The largest single-site hydroelectric power project in Canada is inaugurated at Churchill Falls Generating Station.\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Soweto uprising: A non-violent march by 15,000 students in Soweto, South Africa turns into days of rioting when police open fire on the crowd.\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Oracle Corporation is incorporated in Redwood Shores, California, as Software Development Laboratories (SDL) by Larry Ellison, Bob Miner and Ed Oates.\nBULLET::::- 1981 – U.S. President Ronald Reagan awards the Congressional Gold Medal to Ken Taylor, Canada's former ambassador to Iran, for helping six Americans escape from Iran during the hostage crisis of 1979-81; he is the first foreign citizen bestowed the honor.\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Revolutions of 1989: Imre Nagy, the former Hungarian Prime Minister, is reburied in Budapest following the collapse of Communism in Hungary.\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Daïat Labguer (M'sila) massacre in Algeria: Fifty people die.\nBULLET::::- 2000 – Israel complies with United Nations Security Council Resolution 425 22 years after its issuance, which calls on Israel to completely withdraw from Lebanon. Israel does so, except the disputed Shebaa farms.\nBULLET::::- 2010 – Bhutan becomes the first country to institute a total ban on tobacco.\nBULLET::::- 2012 – China successfully launches its Shenzhou 9 spacecraft, carrying three astronauts, including the first female Chinese astronaut Liu Yang, to the Tiangong-1 orbital module.\nBULLET::::- 2012 – The United States Air Force's robotic Boeing X-37B spaceplane returns to Earth after a classified 469-day orbital mission.\nBULLET::::- 2013 – A multi-day cloudburst centered on the North Indian state of Uttarakhand caused devastating floods and landslides becoming the country's worst natural disaster since the 2004 tsunami.\nBULLET::::- 2016 – Shanghai Disneyland Park, the first Disney Park in Mainland China opens to the public.\nBULLET::::- 2019 – Upwards to 2,000,000 participate in the 2019 Hong Kong anti-extradition bill protests, the largest in Hong Kong's history.\n\nBULLET::::- 1139 – Emperor Konoe of Japan (d. 1155)\nBULLET::::- 1332 – Isabella de Coucy, English daughter of Edward III of England (d. 1382)\nBULLET::::- 1454 – Joanna of Aragon, Queen of Naples (d. 1517)\nBULLET::::- 1514 – John Cheke, English academic and politician, English Secretary of State (d. 1557)\nBULLET::::- 1583 – Axel Oxenstierna, Swedish politician, Lord High Chancellor of Sweden (d. 1654)\nBULLET::::- 1591 – Joseph Solomon Delmedigo, Greek-Italian physician, mathematician, and theorist (d. 1655)\nBULLET::::- 1606 – Arthur Chichester, 1st Earl of Donegall, Irish soldier and politician (d. 1675)\nBULLET::::- 1613 – John Cleveland, English poet and educator (d. 1658)\nBULLET::::- 1625 – Samuel Chappuzeau, French scholar (d. 1701)\nBULLET::::- 1633 – Jean de Thévenot, French linguist and botanist (d. 1667)\nBULLET::::- 1644 – Henrietta Anne Stuart, Princess of Scotland, England and Ireland (d. 1670)\nBULLET::::- 1653 – James Bertie, 1st Earl of Abingdon, English nobleman (d. 1699)\nBULLET::::- 1713 – Meshech Weare, American farmer, lawyer, and politician, 1st Governor of New Hampshire (d. 1786)\nBULLET::::- 1723 – Adam Smith, Scottish philosopher and economist (d. 1790)\nBULLET::::- 1738 – Mary Katherine Goddard, American publisher (d. 1816)\nBULLET::::- 1754 – Salawat Yulayev, Russian poet (d. 1800)\nBULLET::::- 1792 – John Linnell, English painter and engraver (d. 1882)\nBULLET::::- 1801 – Julius Plücker, German mathematician and physicist (d. 1868)\nBULLET::::- 1806 – Edward Davy, English physician and chemist (d. 1885)\nBULLET::::- 1813 – Otto Jahn, German archaeologist and philologist (d. 1869)\nBULLET::::- 1820 – Athanase Josué Coquerel, Dutch-French preacher and theologian (d. 1875)\nBULLET::::- 1821 – Old Tom Morris, Scottish golfer and architect (d. 1908)\nBULLET::::- 1826 – Constantin von Ettingshausen, Austrian geologist and botanist (d. 1897)\nBULLET::::- 1829 – Geronimo, American tribal leader (d. 1909)\nBULLET::::- 1836 – Wesley Merritt, American general and politician, Military Governor of the Philippines (d. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 1837 – Ernst Laas, German philosopher and academic (d. 1885)\nBULLET::::- 1838 – Frederic Archer, English organist, composer, and conductor (d. 1901)\nBULLET::::- 1838 – Cushman Kellogg Davis, American lieutenant and politician, 7th Governor of Minnesota (d. 1900)\nBULLET::::- 1840 – Ernst Otto Schlick, German engineer and author (d. 1913)\nBULLET::::- 1850 – Max Delbrück, German chemist and academic (d. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 1857 – Arthur Arz von Straußenburg, Austrian-Hungarian general (d. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 1858 – Gustaf V of Sweden (d. 1950)\nBULLET::::- 1863 – Francisco León de la Barra, Mexican politician and diplomat, interim president, 1911 (d. 1939)\nBULLET::::- 1866 – Germanos Karavangelis, Greek-Austrian metropolitan (d. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 1874 – Arthur Meighen, Canadian lawyer and politician, 9th Prime Minister of Canada (d. 1960)\nBULLET::::- 1880 – Otto Eisenschiml, Austrian-American chemist and author (d. 1963)\nBULLET::::- 1882 – Mohammad Mosaddegh, Iranian educator and politician, 60th Prime Minister of Iran (d. 1967)\nBULLET::::- 1885 – Erich Jacoby, Estonian-Polish architect (d. 1941)\nBULLET::::- 1888 – Alexander Friedmann, Russian physicist and mathematician (d. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 1888 – Peter Stoner, American mathematician and astronomer (d. 1980)\nBULLET::::- 1890 – Stan Laurel, English actor and comedian (d. 1965)\nBULLET::::- 1896 – Murray Leinster, American author and screenwriter (d. 1976)\nBULLET::::- 1897 – Georg Wittig, German chemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1987)\nBULLET::::- 1899 – Helen Traubel, American operatic soprano (d. 1972)\nBULLET::::- 1902 – Barbara McClintock, American geneticist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1992)\nBULLET::::- 1902 – George Gaylord Simpson, American paleontologist and author (d. 1984)\nBULLET::::- 1906 – Alan Fairfax, Australian cricketer (d. 1955)\nBULLET::::- 1907 – Jack Albertson, American actor (d. 1981)\nBULLET::::- 1909 – Archie Carr, American ecologist and zoologist (d. 1987)\nBULLET::::- 1910 – Juan Velasco Alvarado, Peruvian general and politician, 1st President of Peru (d. 1977)\nBULLET::::- 1912 – Albert Chartier, Canadian illustrator (d. 2004)\nBULLET::::- 1912 – Enoch Powell, English soldier and politician, Secretary of State for Health (d. 1998)\nBULLET::::- 1914 – Eleanor Sokoloff, American pianist and teacher\nBULLET::::- 1915 – John Tukey, American mathematician and academic (d. 2000)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Marga Faulstich, German glass chemist (d. 1998)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Phaedon Gizikis, Greek general and politician, President of Greece (d. 1999)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Katharine Graham, American publisher (d. 2001)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Aurelio Lampredi, Italian automobile and aircraft engine designer (d. 1989)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Irving Penn, American photographer (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Isabelle Holland, Swiss-American author (d. 2002)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Raymond Lemieux, Canadian chemist and academic (d. 2002)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – José López Portillo, Mexican lawyer and politician, 31st President of Mexico (d. 2004)\nBULLET::::- 1922 – Ilmar Kullam, Estonian basketball player and coach (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Ron Flockhart, Scottish race car driver (d. 1962)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Faith Domergue, American actress (d. 1999)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Jean d'Ormesson, French journalist and author (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Otto Muehl, Austrian-Portuguese painter and director (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Efraín Ríos Montt, Guatemalan general and politician, 26th President of Guatemala (d. 2018)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Tom Graveney, English cricketer and sportscaster (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Herbert Lichtenfeld, German author and screenwriter (d. 2001)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Ariano Suassuna, Brazilian author and playwright (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1929 – Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Emir of Kuwait\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Vilmos Zsigmond, Hungarian-American cinematographer and producer (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Eileen Atkins, English actress and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Roger Neilson, Canadian ice hockey player and coach (d. 2003)\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Jim Dine, American painter and illustrator\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Simeon Saxe-Coburg-Gotha, Bulgarian politician, 48th Prime Minister of Bulgaria\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Erich Segal, American author and screenwriter (d. 2010)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Thomas Boyd-Carpenter, English general\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Torgny Lindgren, Swedish author and poet (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Joyce Carol Oates, American novelist, short story writer, critic, and poet\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Billy \"Crash\" Craddock, American singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Māris Čaklais, Latvian poet, writer, and journalist (d. 2003)\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Neil Goldschmidt, American lawyer and politician, 33rd Governor of Oregon\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Rosalind Baker, Australian author\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Lamont Dozier, American songwriter and producer\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Tommy Horton, English golfer (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Mumtaz Hamid Rao, Pakistani journalist (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Giacomo Agostini, Italian motorcycle racer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Eddie Levert, American R&B/soul singer-songwriter, musician, and actor\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Henri Richelet, French painter and etcher\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Claire Alexander, Canadian ice hockey player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Lucienne Robillard, Canadian social worker and politician, 59th Secretary of State for Canada\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Rick Adelman, American basketball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1946 – John Astor, 3rd Baron Astor of Hever, English businessman and politician\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Karen Dunnell, English statistician and academic\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Tom Harrell, American trumpet player and composer\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Neil MacGregor, Scottish historian and curator\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Iain Matthews, English singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Jodi Rell, American politician, 87th Governor of Connecticut\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Mark Ritts, American actor, puppeteer, and producer (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Derek Sanderson, Canadian ice hockey player and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Simon Williams, English actor and playwright\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Tom Malone, American trombonist, composer, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Buddy Roberts, American wrestler (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Al Cowlings, American ex-NFL player and close friend of O.J. Simpson and Nicole Brown Simpson\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Tom Wyner, English-American voice actor, director, producer, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Ron LeFlore, American baseball player and manager\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Paulo Cézar Caju, Brazilian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Ralph Mann, American hurdler and author\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Mithun Chakraborty, Indian actor and politician\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Michel Clair, Canadian lawyer and politician\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Jerry Petrowski, American politician and farmer\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Charlie Dominici, American singer and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Roberto Durán, Panamanian boxer\nBULLET::::- 1952 – George Papandreou, Greek sociologist and politician, 182nd Prime Minister of Greece\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Gino Vannelli, Canadian singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Valerie Mahaffey, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Ian Mosley, English drummer\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Matthew Saad Muhammad, American boxer and trainer (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Garry Roberts, Irish guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Grete Faremo, Norwegian politician, Norwegian Minister of Defence\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Laurie Metcalf, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Artemy Troitsky, Russian journalist and critic\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Ian Buchanan, Scottish-American actor\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Leeona Dorrian, Lady Dorrian, Scottish lawyer and judge\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Darrell Griffith, American basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Ulrike Tauber, German swimmer\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Warren Rodwell, Australian soldier, educator and musician\nBULLET::::- 1959 – The Ultimate Warrior, American wrestler (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Peter Sterling, Australian rugby league player and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Can Dündar, Turkish journalist and author\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Robbie Kerr, Australian cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Steve Larmer, Canadian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Margus Metstak, Estonian basketball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Wally Joyner, American baseball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Arnold Vosloo, South African-American actor\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Anthony Wong, Hong Kong singer\nBULLET::::- 1963 – The Sandman, American wrestler\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Danny Burstein, American actor and singer\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Michael Richard Lynch, Irish computer scientist and entrepreneur; co-founded HP Autonomy\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Richard Madaleno, American politician\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Mark Occhilupo, Australian surfer\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Olivier Roumat, French rugby player\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Phil Vischer, American voice actor, director, producer, and screenwriter, co-created \"VeggieTales\"\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Jan Železný, Czech javelin thrower and coach\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Charalambos Andreou, Cypriot footballer\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Jürgen Klopp, German footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Adam Schmitt, American singer-songwriter, musician, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Shami Chakrabarti, English lawyer and academic\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Mark Crossley, English-Welsh footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Younus AlGohar, Pakistani poet and academic, co-founded Messiah Foundation International\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Clifton Collins Jr., American actor\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Cobi Jones, American soccer player and manager\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Phil Mickelson, American golfer\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Tupac Shakur, American rapper and producer (d. 1996)\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Kiko Loureiro, Brazilian guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Eddie Cibrian, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Glenicia James, Saint Lucian cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Anthony Carter, American basketball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Craig Fitzgibbon, Australian rugby league player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Duncan Hames, English accountant and politician\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Kerry Wood, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Daniel Brühl, Spanish-German actor\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Dainius Zubrus, Lithuanian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Fish Leong, Malaysian singer\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Brandon Armstrong, American basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Phil Christophers, German-English rugby player\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Henry Perenara, New Zealand rugby league player and referee\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Martin Stranzl, Austrian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Joey Yung, Hong Kong singer\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Benjamin Becker, German tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Kevin Bieksa, Canadian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Alexandre Giroux, Canadian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Ola Kvernberg, Norwegian violinist\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Miguel Villalta, Peruvian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1982 – May Andersen, Danish model and actress\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Missy Peregrym, Canadian model and actress\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Armend Dallku, Albanian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Rick Nash, Canadian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Dan Ryckert, American writer and entertainer\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Steven Whittaker, Scottish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Rodrigo Defendi, Brazilian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Urby Emanuelson, Dutch footballer\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Fernando Muslera, Uruguayan footballer\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Diana DeGarmo, American singer-songwriter and actress\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Per Ciljan Skjelbred, Norwegian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Christian Tshimanga Kabeya, Belgian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Keshia Chante, Canadian singer\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Jermaine Gresham, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1990 – John Newman, English musician, singer, songwriter and record producer\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Joe McElderry, English singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Matt Moylan, Australian rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Vladimir Morozov, Russian swimmer\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Park Bo-gum, South Korean actor\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Gnash, American singer, songwriter, rapper, DJ and record producer\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Grete-Lilijane Küppas, Estonian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Rezar, Albanian professional wrestler\nBULLET::::- 1995 – Euan Aitken, Australian rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 1995 – Joseph Schooling, Singaporean swimmer\nBULLET::::- 1995 – Akira Ioane, New Zealand rugby Union player\nBULLET::::- 840 – Rorgon I, Frankish nobleman (or 839)\nBULLET::::- 924 – Li Cunshen, general of Later Tang (b. 862)\nBULLET::::- 956 – Hugh the Great, Frankish nobleman (b. 898)\nBULLET::::- 1185 – Richeza of Poland, queen of León (b. c. 1140)\nBULLET::::- 1286 – Hugh de Balsham, English bishop\nBULLET::::- 1332 – Adam de Brome, founder of Oriel College, Oxford\nBULLET::::- 1361 – Johannes Tauler, German mystic theologian\nBULLET::::- 1397 – Philip of Artois, Count of Eu, French soldier (b. 1358)\nBULLET::::- 1424 – Johannes Ambundii, archbishop of Riga\nBULLET::::- 1468 – Jean Le Fèvre de Saint-Remy, Burgundian historian and author (b. 1395)\nBULLET::::- 1487 – John de la Pole, 1st Earl of Lincoln (b. c. 1463)\nBULLET::::- 1540 – Konrad von Thüngen, German nobleman (b. c. 1466)\nBULLET::::- 1622 – Alexander Seton, 1st Earl of Dunfermline, Scottish lawyer, judge, and politician, Lord Chancellor of Scotland (b. 1555)\nBULLET::::- 1626 – Christian, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg-Wolfenbüttel, German Protestant military leader (b. 1599)\nBULLET::::- 1666 – Sir Richard Fanshawe, 1st Baronet, English poet and diplomat, English Ambassador to Spain (b. 1608)\nBULLET::::- 1722 – John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough, English general and politician, Lord Lieutenant of Oxfordshire (b. 1650)\nBULLET::::- 1743 – Louise-Françoise de Bourbon, eldest daughter of King Louis XIV of France (b. 1673)\nBULLET::::- 1752 – Joseph Butler, English bishop and philosopher (b. 1692)\nBULLET::::- 1762 – Anne Russell, Countess of Jersey (formerly Duchess of Bedford) (b. c.1705)\nBULLET::::- 1777 – Jean-Baptiste-Louis Gresset, French poet and playwright (b. 1709)\nBULLET::::- 1779 – Sir Francis Bernard, 1st Baronet, English lawyer and politician, Governor of the Province of Massachusetts Bay (b. 1712)\nBULLET::::- 1804 – Johann Adam Hiller, German composer and conductor (b. 1728)\nBULLET::::- 1824 – Charles-François Lebrun, duc de Plaisance, French lawyer and politician (b. 1739)\nBULLET::::- 1849 – Wilhelm Martin Leberecht de Wette, German theologian and scholar (b. 1780)\nBULLET::::- 1850 – William Lawson, English-Australian explorer and politician (b. 1774)\nBULLET::::- 1858 – John Snow, English epidemiologist and physician (b. 1813)\nBULLET::::- 1862 – Hidenoyama Raigorō, Japanese sumo wrestler, the 9th Yokozuna (b. 1808)\nBULLET::::- 1869 – Charles Sturt, Indian-English botanist and explorer (b. 1795)\nBULLET::::- 1872 – Norman MacLeod, Scottish minister and author (b. 1812)\nBULLET::::- 1878 – Crawford Long, American surgeon and pharmacist (b. 1815)\nBULLET::::- 1878 – Kikuchi Yōsai, Japanese painter (b. 1781)\nBULLET::::- 1881 – Josiah Mason, English businessman and philanthropist (b. 1795)\nBULLET::::- 1885 – Wilhelm Camphausen, German painter and academic (b. 1818)\nBULLET::::- 1886 – Alexander Stuart, Scottish-Australian politician, 9th Premier of New South Wales (b. 1824)\nBULLET::::- 1902 – Ernst Schröder, German mathematician and academic (b. 1841)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Chittaranjan Das, Indian lawyer and politician (b. 1870)\nBULLET::::- 1929 – Bramwell Booth, English 2nd General of The Salvation Army (b. 1856)\nBULLET::::- 1929 – Vernon Louis Parrington, American historian and scholar (b. 1871)\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Ezra Fitch, American lawyer and businessman, co-founded Abercrombie & Fitch (b. 1866)\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Elmer Ambrose Sperry, American inventor, co-invented the gyrocompass (b. 1860)\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Chick Webb, American drummer and bandleader (b. 1905)\nBULLET::::- 1940 – DuBose Heyward, American author (b. 1885)\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Marc Bloch, French historian and academic (b. 1886)\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Aris Velouchiotis, Greek general (b. 1905)\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Gordon Brewster, Irish cartoonist (b 1889)\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Andrew Lawson, Scottish-American geologist and academic (b. 1861)\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Margaret Bondfield, English politician, Secretary of State for Work and Pensions (b. 1873)\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Ozias Leduc, Canadian painter (b. 1864)\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Pál Maléter, Hungarian general and politician, Minister of Defence of Hungary (b. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Imre Nagy, Hungarian politician, 3rd Prime Minister of Hungary (b. 1895)\nBULLET::::- 1959 – George Reeves, American actor and director (b. 1914)\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Marcel Junod, Swiss physician and anesthesiologist (b. 1904)\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Reginald Denny, English actor (b. 1891)\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Harold Alexander, 1st Earl Alexander of Tunis, English field marshal and politician, 17th Governor General of Canada (b. 1891)\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Sydney Chapman, English mathematician and geophysicist (b. 1888)\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Brian Piccolo, American football player (b. 1943)\nBULLET::::- 1971 – John Reith, 1st Baron Reith, Scottish broadcaster, co-founded BBC (b. 1889)\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Amalie Sara Colquhoun, Australian landscape and portrait painter (b. 1894)\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Wernher von Braun, German-American physicist and engineer (b. 1912)\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Ignatius Kutu Acheampong, Ghanaian general and politician, 6th Head of state of Ghana (b. 1931)\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Nicholas Ray, American actor, director, and screenwriter (b. 1911)\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Thomas Playford IV, Australian politician, 33rd Premier of South Australia (b. 1896)\nBULLET::::- 1982 – James Honeyman-Scott, English guitarist and songwriter (b. 1956)\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Lew Andreas, American football player and coach (b. 1895)\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Erni Krusten, Estonian author and poet (b. 1900)\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Maurice Duruflé, French organist and composer (b. 1902)\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Marguerite de Angeli, American author and illustrator (b. 1889)\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Miguel Piñero, Puerto Rican-American actor and playwright (b. 1946)\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Lindsay Hassett, Australian cricketer and soldier (b. 1913)\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Kristen Pfaff, American bass player and songwriter (b. 1967)\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Mel Allen, American sportscaster and game show host (b. 1913)\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Dal Stivens, Australian soldier and author (b. 1911)\nBULLET::::- 1998 – Fred Wacker, American race car driver and engineer (b. 1918)\nBULLET::::- 1999 – Screaming Lord Sutch, English singer and activist (b. 1940)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Pierre Bourgault, Canadian journalist and politician (b. 1934)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Georg Henrik von Wright, Finnish–Swedish philosopher and author (b. 1916)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Thanom Kittikachorn, Thai field marshal and politician, 10th Prime Minister of Thailand (b. 1911)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Jacques Miquelon, Canadian lawyer and judge (b. 1911)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Enrique Laguerre, Puerto Rican-American author and critic (b. 1906)\nBULLET::::- 2008 – Mario Rigoni Stern, Italian soldier and author (b. 1921)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – Marc Bazin, Haitian lawyer and politician, 49th President of Haiti (b. 1932)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – Maureen Forrester, Canadian singer and academic (b. 1930)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – Ronald Neame, English director, producer, cinematographer, and screenwriter (b. 1911)\nBULLET::::- 2011 – Östen Mäkitalo, Swedish engineer and academic (b. 1938)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Nils Karlsson, Swedish skier (b. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Jorge Lankenau, Mexican banker and businessman (b. 1944)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Sławomir Petelicki, Polish general (b. 1946)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Susan Tyrrell, American actress (b. 1945)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Sam Farber, American businessman, co-founded OXO (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Hans Hass, Austrian biologist and diver (b. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Khondakar Ashraf Hossain, Bangladesh poet and academic (b. 1950)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Norman Ian MacKenzie, English journalist and author (b. 1921)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Ottmar Walter, German footballer (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Tony Gwynn, American baseball player and coach (b. 1960)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Cándido Muatetema Rivas, Equatoguinean politician and diplomat, Prime Minister of Equatorial Guinea (b. 1960)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Charles Correa, Indian architect and urban planner (b. 1930)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Jean Vautrin, French director, screenwriter, and critic (b. 1933)\nBULLET::::- 2016 – Jo Cox, English political activist and MP (b. 1974)\nBULLET::::- 2017 – Helmut Kohl, German politician, 6th Chancellor of Germany (b. 1930)\nBULLET::::- Birthday of Leonard P. Howell (Rastafari)\nBULLET::::- Bloomsday (Dublin, Ireland)\nBULLET::::- Christian feast days:\nBULLET::::- Aurelianus of Arles\nBULLET::::- Aureus of Mainz (and his sister Justina)\nBULLET::::- Benno\nBULLET::::- Cettin of Oran\nBULLET::::- Curig of Llanbadarn\nBULLET::::- Ferreolus and Ferrutio\nBULLET::::- George Berkeley and Joseph Butler (Episcopal Church)\nBULLET::::- Lutgardis\nBULLET::::- Quriaqos and Julietta\nBULLET::::- June 16 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)\nBULLET::::- Engineer's Day (Argentina)\nBULLET::::- Father's Day (Seychelles)\nBULLET::::- International Day of the African Child (Organisation of African Unity)\nBULLET::::- Martyrdom of Guru Arjan Dev (Sikhism)\nBULLET::::- Sussex Day (Sussex)\nBULLET::::- Youth Day (South Africa)\n\nBULLET::::- BBC: On This Day\nBULLET::::- Today in Canadian History\n"}
{"id": "15936", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15936", "title": "June 15", "text": "June 15\n\nBULLET::::- 763 BC – Assyrians record a solar eclipse that is later used to fix the chronology of Mesopotamian history.\nBULLET::::- 844 – Louis II is crowned as king of Italy at Rome by pope Sergius II.\nBULLET::::- 923 – Battle of Soissons: King Robert I of France is killed and King Charles the Simple is arrested by the supporters of Duke Rudolph of Burgundy.\nBULLET::::- 1184 – King Magnus V of Norway is killed at the Battle of Fimreite.\nBULLET::::- 1215 – King John of England puts his seal to Magna Carta.\nBULLET::::- 1219 – Northern Crusades: Danish victory at the Battle of Lindanise (modern-day Tallinn) establishes the Danish Duchy of Estonia.\nBULLET::::- 1246 – With the death of Frederick II, Duke of Austria, the Babenberg dynasty ends in Austria.\nBULLET::::- 1300 – The city of Bilbao is founded.\nBULLET::::- 1312 – At the Battle of Rozgony, King Charles I of Hungary wins a decisive victory over the family of Palatine Amade Aba.\nBULLET::::- 1389 – Battle of Kosovo: The Ottoman Empire defeats Serbs and Bosnians.\nBULLET::::- 1410 – In a decisive battle at Onon River, the Mongol forces of Oljei Temur were decimated by the Chinese armies of the Yongle Emperor.\nBULLET::::- 1502 – Christopher Columbus lands on the island of Martinique on his fourth voyage.\nBULLET::::- 1520 – Pope Leo X threatens to excommunicate Martin Luther in \"Exsurge Domine\".\nBULLET::::- 1648 – Margaret Jones is hanged in Boston for witchcraft in the first such execution for the Massachusetts Bay Colony.\nBULLET::::- 1667 – The first human blood transfusion is administered by Dr. Jean-Baptiste Denys.\nBULLET::::- 1670 – The first stone of Fort Ricasoli is laid down in Malta.\nBULLET::::- 1752 – Benjamin Franklin proves that lightning is electricity (traditional date, the exact date is unknown).\nBULLET::::- 1776 – Delaware Separation Day: Delaware votes to suspend government under the British Crown and separate officially from Pennsylvania.\nBULLET::::- 1800 – The Provisional Army of the United States is dissolved.\nBULLET::::- 1804 – New Hampshire approves the Twelfth Amendment to the United States Constitution, ratifying the document.\nBULLET::::- 1808 – Joseph Bonaparte becomes King of Spain.\nBULLET::::- 1836 – Arkansas is admitted as the 25th U.S. state.\nBULLET::::- 1844 – Charles Goodyear receives a patent for vulcanization, a process to strengthen rubber.\nBULLET::::- 1846 – The Oregon Treaty establishes the 49th parallel as the border between the United States and Canada, from the Rocky Mountains to the Strait of Juan de Fuca.\nBULLET::::- 1859 – Pig War: Ambiguity in the Oregon Treaty leads to the \"Northwestern Boundary Dispute\" between United States and British/Canadian settlers.\nBULLET::::- 1864 – American Civil War: The Second Battle of Petersburg begins.\nBULLET::::- 1864 – Arlington National Cemetery is established when of the Arlington estate (formerly owned by Confederate General Robert E. Lee) are officially set aside as a military cemetery by U.S. Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton.\nBULLET::::- 1877 – Henry Ossian Flipper becomes the first African American cadet to graduate from the United States Military Academy.\nBULLET::::- 1878 – Eadweard Muybridge takes a series of photographs to prove that all four feet of a horse leave the ground when it runs; the study becomes the basis of motion pictures.\nBULLET::::- 1888 – Crown Prince Wilhelm becomes Kaiser Wilhelm II; he will be the last Emperor of the German Empire. Due to the death of his predecessors Wilhelm I and Frederick III, 1888 is the Year of the Three Emperors.\nBULLET::::- 1896 – The deadliest tsunami in Japan's history kills more than 22,000 people.\nBULLET::::- 1904 – A fire aboard the steamboat in New York City's East River kills 1,000.\nBULLET::::- 1916 – United States President Woodrow Wilson signs a bill incorporating the Boy Scouts of America, making them the only American youth organization with a federal charter.\nBULLET::::- 1919 – John Alcock and Arthur Brown complete the first nonstop transatlantic flight when they reach Clifden, County Galway, Ireland.\nBULLET::::- 1920 – A new border treaty between Germany and Denmark gives northern Schleswig to Denmark.\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Bessie Coleman earns her pilot's license, becoming the first female pilot of African-American descent.\nBULLET::::- 1934 – The United States Great Smoky Mountains National Park is founded.\nBULLET::::- 1936 – First flight of the Vickers Wellington bomber.\nBULLET::::- 1937 – A German expedition led by Karl Wien loses sixteen members in an avalanche on Nanga Parbat. It is the worst single disaster to occur on an 8000m peak.\nBULLET::::- 1940 – World War II: Operation Ariel begins: Allied troops start to evacuate France, following Germany's takeover of Paris and most of the nation.\nBULLET::::- 1944 – World War II: Battle of Saipan: The United States invade Japanese-occupied Saipan.\nBULLET::::- 1944 – In the Saskatchewan general election, the CCF, led by Tommy Douglas, is elected and forms the first socialist government in North America.\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Charles Manson goes on trial for the Sharon Tate murders.\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Red Army Faction co-founder Ulrike Meinhof is captured by police in Langenhagen.\nBULLET::::- 1977 – After the death of dictator Francisco Franco in 1975, the first democratic elections took place in Spain on this day.\nBULLET::::- 1978 – King Hussein of Jordan marries American Lisa Halaby, who takes the name Queen Noor.\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Rembrandt's painting \"Danaë\" is attacked by a man (later judged insane) who throws sulfuric acid on the canvas and cuts it twice with a knife.\nBULLET::::- 1991 – In the Philippines, Mount Pinatubo erupts in the second largest volcanic eruption of the 20th century, killing over 800 people.\nBULLET::::- 1992 – The United States Supreme Court rules in \"United States v. Álvarez-Machaín\" that it is permissible for the United States to forcibly extradite suspects in foreign countries and bring them to the United States for trial, without approval from those other countries.\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Israel and Vatican City establish full diplomatic relations.\nBULLET::::- 1996 – The Troubles: The Provisional Irish Republican Army (IRA) detonates a powerful truck bomb in the middle of Manchester, England, devastating the city centre and injuring 200 people.\nBULLET::::- 2001 – Leaders of the People's Republic of China, Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan formed the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation.\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Nik Wallenda becomes the first person to successfully tightrope walk directly over Niagara Falls.\nBULLET::::- 2013 – A bomb explodes on a bus in the Pakistani city of Quetta, killing at least 25 people and wounding 22 others.\nBULLET::::- 1330 – Edward, the Black Prince of England (d. 1376)\nBULLET::::- 1423 – Gabriele Sforza, Archbishop of Milan (d. 1457)\nBULLET::::- 1479 – Lisa del Giocondo, Italian model, subject of the \"Mona Lisa\" (d. 1542)\nBULLET::::- 1519 – Henry FitzRoy, 1st Duke of Richmond and Somerset, English politician, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland (d. 1536)\nBULLET::::- 1542 – Richard Grenville, English captain and explorer (d. 1591)\nBULLET::::- 1549 – Elizabeth Knollys, English noblewoman (d. 1605)\nBULLET::::- 1553 – Archduke Ernest of Austria (d. 1595)\nBULLET::::- 1605 – Thomas Randolph, English poet and playwright (d. 1635)\nBULLET::::- 1618 – François Blondel, French architect (d. 1686)\nBULLET::::- 1623 – Cornelis de Witt, Dutch politician (d. 1672)\nBULLET::::- 1624 – Hiob Ludolf, German orientalist and philologist (d. 1704)\nBULLET::::- 1640 – Bernard Lamy, French mathematician and theologian (d. 1715)\nBULLET::::- 1645 – Sidney Godolphin, 1st Earl of Godolphin, English politician (d. 1712)\nBULLET::::- 1749 – Georg Joseph Vogler, German organist, composer, and theorist (d. 1814)\nBULLET::::- 1754 – Juan José Elhuyar, Spanish chemist and mineralogist (d. 1796)\nBULLET::::- 1755 – Antoine François, comte de Fourcroy, French chemist and entomologist (d. 1809)\nBULLET::::- 1763 – Franz Danzi, German cellist, composer, and conductor (d. 1826)\nBULLET::::- 1763 – Kobayashi Issa, Japanese priest and poet (d. 1827)\nBULLET::::- 1765 – Martin Baum, American businessman and politician, Mayor of Cincinnati (d. 1831)\nBULLET::::- 1765 – Johann Gottlieb Friedrich von Bohnenberger, German astronomer and mathematician (d. 1831)\nBULLET::::- 1767 – Rachel Jackson, American wife of Andrew Jackson (d. 1828)\nBULLET::::- 1777 – David Daniel Davis, Welsh physician and academic (d. 1841)\nBULLET::::- 1789 – Josiah Henson, American minister, author, and activist (d. 1883)\nBULLET::::- 1792 – Thomas Mitchell, Scottish-Australian colonel and explorer (d. 1855)\nBULLET::::- 1801 – Benjamin Wright Raymond, American merchant and politician, 3rd Mayor of Chicago (d. 1883)\nBULLET::::- 1805 – William B. Ogden, American businessman and politician, 1st Mayor of Chicago (d. 1877)\nBULLET::::- 1809 – François-Xavier Garneau, Canadian poet and historian (d. 1866)\nBULLET::::- 1835 – Adah Isaacs Menken, American actress, painter, and poet (d. 1868)\nBULLET::::- 1843 – Edvard Grieg, Norwegian pianist and composer (d. 1907)\nBULLET::::- 1848 – Gheevarghese Mar Gregorios of Parumala, Indian bishop and saint (d. 1902)\nBULLET::::- 1872 – Thomas William Burgess, English swimmer and water polo player (d. 1950)\nBULLET::::- 1875 – Herman Smith-Johannsen, Norwegian-Canadian skier (d. 1987)\nBULLET::::- 1878 – Margaret Abbott, Indian-American golfer (d. 1955)\nBULLET::::- 1881 – Kesago Nakajima, Japanese lieutenant general in the Imperial Japanese Army (d. 1945)\nBULLET::::- 1884 – Harry Langdon, American actor, director, and screenwriter (d. 1944)\nBULLET::::- 1886 – Frank Clement, British racing driver (d. 1970)\nBULLET::::- 1888 – Ramón López Velarde, Mexican poet and author (d. 1921)\nBULLET::::- 1890 – Georg Wüst, German oceanographer and academic (d. 1977)\nBULLET::::- 1894 – Robert Russell Bennett, American composer and conductor (d. 1981)\nBULLET::::- 1894 – Nikolai Chebotaryov, Ukrainian-Russian mathematician and theorist (d. 1947)\nBULLET::::- 1898 – Hubertus Strughold, German-American physiologist and academic (d. 1986)\nBULLET::::- 1900 – Gotthard Günther, German philosopher and academic (d. 1984)\nBULLET::::- 1900 – Otto Luening, German-American composer and conductor (d. 1996)\nBULLET::::- 1901 – Elmar Lohk, Russian-Estonian architect (d. 1963)\nBULLET::::- 1902 – Erik Erikson, German-American psychologist and psychoanalyst (d. 1994)\nBULLET::::- 1906 – Gordon Welchman, English-American mathematician and author (d. 1985)\nBULLET::::- 1906 – Léon Degrelle, Belgian SS officer (d. 1994)\nBULLET::::- 1907 – James Robertson Justice, English actor and educator (d. 1975)\nBULLET::::- 1909 – Elena Nikolaidi, Greek-American soprano and educator (d. 2002)\nBULLET::::- 1910 – David Rose, English-American pianist, composer, and conductor (d. 1990)\nBULLET::::- 1911 – Wilbert Awdry, English author, co-created Thomas the Tank Engine (d. 1997)\nBULLET::::- 1913 – Tom Adair, American songwriter, composer, and screenwriter (d. 1988)\nBULLET::::- 1914 – Yuri Andropov, Russian politician (d. 1984)\nBULLET::::- 1914 – Saul Steinberg, Romanian-American cartoonist (d. 1999)\nBULLET::::- 1914 – Hilda Terry, American cartoonist (d. 2006)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Nini Theilade, Danish ballet dancer, choreographer, and educator (d. 2018)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Thomas Huckle Weller, American biologist and virologist, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 2008)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Olga Erteszek, Polish-American fashion designer (d. 1989)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Horacio Salgán, Argentinian pianist, composer, and conductor (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Herbert A. Simon, American political scientist and economist, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 2001)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – John Fenn, American chemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 2010)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Michalis Genitsaris, Greek singer-songwriter (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Lash LaRue, American actor and producer (d. 1996)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – François Tombalbaye, Chadian politician, 1st President of Chad (d. 1975)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Keith Andrews, American racing driver (d. 1957)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Alla Kazanskaya, Russian actress (d. 2008)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Sam Sniderman, Canadian businessman, founded Sam the Record Man (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Alberto Sordi, Italian actor, director, and screenwriter (d. 2003)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Erroll Garner, American pianist and composer (d. 1977)\nBULLET::::- 1922 – Jaki Byard, American pianist and composer (d. 1999)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Erland Josephson, Swedish actor and director (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Ninian Stephen, English-Australian lieutenant, judge, and politician, 20th Governor-General of Australia (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Hédi Fried, Swedish author and psychologist\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Ezer Weizman, Israeli general and politician, 7th President of Israel (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Richard Baker, English journalist and author (d. 2018)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Attilâ İlhan, Turkish poet, author, and critic (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Alfred Duraiappah, Sri Lankan Tamil lawyer and politician (d. 1975)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Ross Andru, American illustrator (d. 1993)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Ibn-e-Insha, Indian-Pakistani poet and author (d. 1978)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Hugo Pratt, Italian author and illustrator (d. 1995)\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Miguel Méndez, American author and academic (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Marcel Pronovost, Canadian ice hockey player and coach (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Joseph Gilbert, English air marshal\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Brian Sewell, English art dealer and critic (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1932 – David Alliance, Baron Alliance, Iranian-English businessman and politician\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Mario Cuomo, American lawyer and politician, 52nd Governor of New York (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Zia Fariduddin Dagar, Indian singer (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Bernie Faloney, American-Canadian football player and sportscaster (d. 1999)\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Mohammad-Ali Rajai, Iranian politician, 2nd President of Iran (d. 1981)\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Predrag Koraksić Corax, Serbian political caricaturist\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Ruby Nash Garnett, American R&B singer (Ruby & the Romantics)\nBULLET::::- 1936 – William Levada, American cardinal\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Pierre Billon, Swiss-Canadian author and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Waylon Jennings, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 2002)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Billy Williams, American baseball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Ward Connerly, American activist and businessman, founded the American Civil Rights Institute\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Neal Adams, American illustrator\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Harry Nilsson, American singer-songwriter (d. 1994)\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Ian Greenberg, Canadian broadcaster, founded Astral Media\nBULLET::::- 1942 – John E. McLaughlin, American diplomat\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Peter Norman, Australian sprinter (d. 2006)\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Johnny Hallyday, French singer and actor (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Poul Nyrup Rasmussen, Danish politician, 38th Prime Minister of Denmark\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Robert D. Keppel, American police officer and academic\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Miriam Defensor Santiago, Filipino judge and politician (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Robert Sarah, Guinean cardinal\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Lawrence Wilkerson, American colonel\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Noddy Holder, English rock singer-songwriter, musician, and actor\nBULLET::::- 1946 – John Horner, American paleontologist and academic\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Demis Roussos, Egyptian-Greek singer-songwriter and bass player (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1947 – John Hoagland, American photographer and journalist (d. 1984)\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Mike Holmgren, American football player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Alan Huckle, English politician and diplomat, Governor of Anguilla\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Henry McLeish, Scottish footballer, academic, and politician, 2nd First Minister of Scotland\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Dusty Baker, American baseball player and manager\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Simon Callow, English actor and director\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Russell Hitchcock, Australian singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Jim Varney, American actor, comedian, and screenwriter (d. 2000)\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Uğur Erdener, Turkish ophthalmologist and professor\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Juliana Azumah-Mensah, Ghanaian nurse and politician\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Deney Terrio, American choreographer and host of the television musical variety series Dance Fever\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Lakshmi Mittal, Indian-English businessman\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Jane Amsterdam, American magazine and newspaper editor (\"Manhattan, inc.\", \"New York Post\")\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Vance A. Larson, American painter (d. 2000)\nBULLET::::- 1951 – John Redwood, English politician, Secretary of State for Wales\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Steve Walsh, American rock singer-songwriter and musician (Kansas)\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Satya Pal Jain, Indian lawyer and politician, Additional Solicitor General of India\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Vilma Bardauskienė, Lithuanian long jumper\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Marc Brickman, American lighting and production designer\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Eje Elgh, Swedish race car driver and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Xi Jinping, Chinese engineer and politician, General Secretary of the Communist Party and President of China\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Raphael Wallfisch, English cellist and educator\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Jim Belushi, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Terri Gibbs, American country music singer and keyboard player\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Paul Rusesabagina, Rwandan humanitarian\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Zdeňka Šilhavá, Czech discus thrower and shot putter\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Beverley Whitfield, Australian swimmer (d. 1996)\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Polly Draper, American actress, producer, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Julie Hagerty, American model and actress\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Yevgeny Kiselyov, Russian-Ukrainian journalist\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Lance Parrish, American baseball player, coach, and manager\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Brad Gillis, American guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Stephen Lloyd, Kenyan-English businessman and politician\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Wade Boggs, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Riccardo Paletti, Italian race car driver (d. 1982)\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Alan Brazil, Scottish footballer and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Eileen Davidson, American model and actress\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Michèle Laroque, French actress, producer, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Marieke van Doorn, Dutch field hockey player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Dave McAuley, Irish boxer and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Scott Norton, American wrestler\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Brad Armstrong, American wrestler (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Chris Morris, English actor, satirist, director, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Andrea Rost, Hungarian soprano\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Marina Azyabina, Russian hurdler\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Mario Gosselin, Canadian ice hockey player and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Helen Hunt, American actress, director, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Courteney Cox, American actress and producer\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Michael Laudrup, Danish footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Annelies Bredael, Belgian rower\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Karim Massimov, Kazakhstani politician, 7th Prime Minister of Kazakhstan\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Adam Smith, American lawyer and politician\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Raimonds Vējonis, Latvian politician, 9th President of Latvia\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Károly Güttler, Hungarian swimmer\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Jesse Bélanger, Canadian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Ice Cube, American rapper, producer, and actor\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Idalis DeLeón, American singer and actress\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Nasos Galakteros, Greek basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Oliver Kahn, German footballer and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Maurice Odumbe, Kenyan cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Cédric Pioline, French tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Christian Bauman, American soldier and author\nBULLET::::- 1970 – David Bayssari, Australian rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Gaëlle Méchaly, French soprano\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Leah Remini, American actress and producer\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Žan Tabak, Croatian basketball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Christos Myriounis, Greek basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Jake Busey, American actor, musician, and film producer\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Justin Leonard, American golfer\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Andy Pettitte, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Tore Andre Flo, Norwegian footballer and coach\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Neil Patrick Harris, American actor and singer\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Pia Miranda, Australian actress\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Jiří Ryba, Czech decathlete\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Michael Doleac, American basketball player and manager\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Wilfred Bouma, Dutch footballer\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Zach Day, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Yulia Nestsiarenka, Belarusian sprinter\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Christian Rahn, German footballer\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Charles Zwolsman, Jr., Dutch race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Craig Dietrich, Digital artist, scholar, and educator\nBULLET::::- 1980 – David Lyons, Australian rugby player\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Billy Martin, American guitarist, songwriter, and illustrator\nBULLET::::- 1981 – John Paintsil, Ghanaian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Jeremy Reed, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Katie Chapman, English footballer\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Mike Delany, New Zealand rugby player\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Abdur Razzak, Bangladeshi cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Julia Fischer, German violinist and pianist\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Laura Imbruglia, Australian singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Josh McGuire, Canadian fencer\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Luke Hodge, Australian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Eva Hrdinová, Czech tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Tim Lincecum, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Mauro Rizzo, Italian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Edison Toloza, Colombian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Ashley Nicole Black, American comedian, actress, and writer\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Nadine Coyle, Irish singer\nBULLET::::- 1986 – James Maloney, Australian rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Trevor Plouffe, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Ani Mijačika, Croatian tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Víctor Cabedo, Spanish cyclist (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Bryan Clauson, American racing driver (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Emily Harman, American tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Michał Kopczyński, Polish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Mohamed Salah, Egyptian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Dafne Schippers, Dutch heptathlete and sprinter\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Kanna Arihara, Japanese singer\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Irfan Hadžić, Bosnian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Vincent Janssen, Dutch footballer\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Inaki Williams, Basque footballer\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Aurora Aksnes, Norwegian singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Madison Kocian, American gymnast\nBULLET::::- 923 – Robert I of France (b. 866)\nBULLET::::- 948 – Romanos I Lekapenos, Byzantine Emperor (b. c. 870)\nBULLET::::- 952 – Murong Yanchao, Chinese general\nBULLET::::- 960 – Eadburh of Winchester, English princess and saint\nBULLET::::- 970 – Adalbert, bishop of Passau\nBULLET::::- 991 – Theophanu, Byzantine wife of Otto II, Holy Roman Emperor (b. 960)\nBULLET::::- 1073 – Emperor Go-Sanjō of Japan (b. 1034)\nBULLET::::- 1184 – Magnus Erlingsson, King of Norway (b. 1156)\nBULLET::::- 1189 – Minamoto no Yoshitsune, Japanese general (b. 1159)\nBULLET::::- 1246 – Frederick II, Duke of Austria (b. 1219)\nBULLET::::- 1337 – Angelo da Clareno, Italian Franciscan and leader of a group of Fraticelli (b. 1247)\nBULLET::::- 1341 – Andronikos III Palaiologos, Byzantine emperor (b. 1297)\nBULLET::::- 1381 – John Cavendish, English lawyer and judge (b. 1346)\nBULLET::::- 1381 – Wat Tyler, English rebel leader (b. 1341)\nBULLET::::- 1383 – John VI Kantakouzenos, Byzantine emperor (b. 1292)\nBULLET::::- 1383 – Matthew Kantakouzenos, Byzantine emperor\nBULLET::::- 1389 – Lazar of Serbia (b. 1329)\nBULLET::::- 1389 – Murad I, Ottoman Sultan (b. 1319)\nBULLET::::- 1389 – Miloš Obilić, Serbian knight.\nBULLET::::- 1416 – John, Duke of Berry (b. 1340)\nBULLET::::- 1467 – Philip III, Duke of Burgundy (b. 1396)\nBULLET::::- 1521 – Tamás Bakócz, Hungarian cardinal (b. 1442)\nBULLET::::- 1614 – Henry Howard, 1st Earl of Northampton, English courtier and politician, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports (b. 1540)\nBULLET::::- 1724 – Henry Sacheverell, English minister and politician (b. 1674)\nBULLET::::- 1768 – James Short, Scottish mathematician and optician (b. 1710)\nBULLET::::- 1772 – Louis-Claude Daquin, French organist and composer (b. 1694)\nBULLET::::- 1844 – Thomas Campbell, Scottish poet and academic (b. 1777)\nBULLET::::- 1849 – James K. Polk, American lawyer and politician, 11th President of the United States (b. 1795)\nBULLET::::- 1858 – Ary Scheffer, Dutch-French painter and academic (b. 1795)\nBULLET::::- 1888 – Frederick III, German Emperor (b. 1831)\nBULLET::::- 1889 – Mihai Eminescu, Romanian journalist, author, and poet (b. 1850)\nBULLET::::- 1890 – Unryū Kyūkichi, Japanese sumo wrestler, the 10th Yokozuna (b. 1822)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Kristian Birkeland, Norwegian physicist and academic (b. 1867)\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Alfred Bruneau, French cellist and composer (b. 1857)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Ernst Ludwig Kirchner, German painter and illustrator (b. 1880)\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Otfrid Foerster, German neurologist and physician (b. 1873)\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Evelyn Underhill, English mystic and author (b. 1875)\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Count Albert von Mensdorff-Pouilly-Dietrichstein, Austrian diplomat\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Giulio Cabianca, Italian race car driver (b. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Peyami Safa, Turkish journalist and author (b. 1899)\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Alfred Cortot, Swiss pianist and conductor (b. 1877)\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Tatu Kolehmainen, Finnish runner (b. 1885)\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Sam Crawford, American baseball player, coach, and umpire (b. 1880)\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Wes Montgomery, American guitarist and songwriter (b. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Wendell Meredith Stanley, American biochemist and virologist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1904)\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Jimmy Dykes, American baseball player, coach, and manager (b. 1896)\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Meredith Willson, American playwright, composer, and conductor (b. 1902)\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Andy Stanfield, American sprinter (b. 1927)\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Maurice Bellemare, Canadian lawyer and politician (b. 1912)\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Ray McAnally, Irish actor (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Happy Chandler, American businessman and politician, 49th Governor of Kentucky (b. 1898)\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Arthur Lewis, Saint Lucian economist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1915)\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Chuck Menville, American animator, producer, and screenwriter (b. 1940)\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Brett Whiteley, Australian painter (b. 1939)\nBULLET::::- 1993 – John Connally, American commander, lawyer, and politician, 61st United States Secretary of the Treasury (b. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 1993 – James Hunt, English race car driver and sportscaster (b. 1947)\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Manos Hatzidakis, Greek composer and theorist (b. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 1995 – John Vincent Atanasoff, American physicist and inventor, invented the Atanasoff–Berry computer (b. 1903)\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Ella Fitzgerald, American singer and actress (b. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Sir Fitzroy Maclean, 1st Baronet, Scottish general and politician (b. 1911)\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Dick Murdoch, American wrestler (b. 1946)\nBULLET::::- 1999 – Omer Côté, Canadian lawyer and politician (b. 1906)\nBULLET::::- 2000 – Jules Roy, French author, poet, and playwright (b. 1907)\nBULLET::::- 2001 – Henri Alekan, French cinematographer (b. 1909)\nBULLET::::- 2002 – Choi Hong Hi, South Korean general and martial artist, founded Taekwondo (b. 1918)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Hume Cronyn, Canadian-American actor (b. 1911)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Ahmet Piriştina, Turkish politician and mayor of İzmir (b. 1952)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Suzanne Flon, French actress (b. 1918)\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Raymond Devos, Belgian-French comedian and clown (b. 1922)\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Herb Pearson, New Zealand cricketer (b. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 2008 – Ray Getliffe, Canadian ice hockey player (b. 1914)\nBULLET::::- 2011 – Bill Haast, American herpetologist and academic (b. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Phillip D. Cagan, American economist and author (b. 1927)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Capitola Dickerson, American pianist and educator (b. 1913)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Barry MacKay, American tennis player and sportscaster (b. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Israel Nogueda Otero, Mexican economist and politician, 10th Governor of Guerrero (b. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Jerry Tubbs, American football player and coach (b. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Heinz Flohe, German footballer and manager (b. 1948)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – José Froilán González, Argentinian race car driver (b. 1922)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Dennis O'Rourke, Australian director and producer (b. 1945)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Kenneth G. Wilson, American physicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1936)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Jacques Bergerac, French actor and businessman (b. 1927)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Casey Kasem, American radio host, producer, and voice actor, co-created \"American Top 40\" (b. 1932)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Daniel Keyes, American short story writer and novelist (b. 1927)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Moise Safra, Brazilian businessman and philanthropist, co-founded Banco Safra (b. 1934)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Kirk Kerkorian, American businessman, founded the Tracinda Corporation (b. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 2016 – Lois Duncan, American author (b. 1934)\nBULLET::::- 2018 – Matt \"Guitar\" Murphy, American Blues guitarist (The Blues Brothers) (b. 1929)\nBULLET::::- 2019 – Franco Zeffirelli, Italian film director (b. 1923)\nBULLET::::- Arbor Day (Costa Rica)\nBULLET::::- Christian feast day:\nBULLET::::- Abraham of Clermont (or of St Cyriacus)\nBULLET::::- Alice (or Adelaide) of Schaerbeek\nBULLET::::- Augustine of Hippo (Eastern Orthodox Church)\nBULLET::::- Blessed Albertina Berkenbrock\nBULLET::::- Blessed Clement Vismara\nBULLET::::- Edburga of Winchester\nBULLET::::- Evelyn Underhill (Church of England and The Episcopal Church)\nBULLET::::- Germaine Cousin\nBULLET::::- Landelin (of Crespin or of Lobbes)\nBULLET::::- Trillo\nBULLET::::- Vitus (Guy), Modestus and Crescentia\nBULLET::::- June 15 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)\nBULLET::::- Day of Valdemar and Reunion Day (Flag Day) (Denmark)\nBULLET::::- Earliest day on which Father's Day can fall, while June 21 is the latest; celebrated on the third Sunday in June. (United States, and most other countries.)\nBULLET::::- Engineer's Day (Italy)\nBULLET::::- Global Wind Day (international)\nBULLET::::- National Beer Day (United Kingdom)\nBULLET::::- National Salvation Day (Azerbaijan)\n\nBULLET::::- BBC: On This Day\nBULLET::::- On This Day in Canada\n"}
{"id": "15937", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15937", "title": "Judit Polgár", "text": "Judit Polgár\n\nJudit Polgár (born 23 July 1976) is a Hungarian chess grandmaster. She is generally considered the strongest female chess player of all time. Since September 2015, she has been inactive. In 1991, Polgár achieved the title of Grandmaster at the age of 15 years and 4 months, at the time the youngest to have done so, breaking the record previously held by former World Champion Bobby Fischer. She was the youngest ever player to break into the FIDE Top 100 players rating list, ranking No. 55 in the January 1989 rating list, at the age of 12. She is the only woman to qualify for a World Championship tournament, having done so in 2005. She is the first, and to date only, woman to have surpassed 2700 Elo, reaching a career peak rating of 2735 and peak world ranking of No. 8, both achieved in 2005. She was the No. 1 rated woman in the world from January 1989 until the March 2015 rating list, when she was overtaken by Chinese player Hou Yifan; she was the No. 1 again in the August 2015 women's rating list, in her last appearance in the FIDE World Rankings.\n\nShe has won or shared first in the chess tournaments of Hastings 1993, Madrid 1994, León 1996, U.S. Open 1998, Hoogeveen 1999, Sigeman & Co 2000, Japfa 2000, and the Najdorf Memorial 2000.\n\nPolgár is the only woman to have won a game against a reigning world number one player, and has defeated eleven current or former world champions in either rapid or classical chess: Magnus Carlsen, Anatoly Karpov, Garry Kasparov, Vladimir Kramnik, Boris Spassky, Vasily Smyslov, Veselin Topalov, Viswanathan Anand, Ruslan Ponomariov, Alexander Khalifman, and Rustam Kasimdzhanov.\n\nOn 13 August 2014, she announced her retirement from competitive chess.\nIn June 2015, Polgár was elected as the new captain and head coach of the Hungarian national men's team.\nOn 20 August 2015, she received Hungary's highest decoration, the Grand Cross of the Order of Saint Stephen of Hungary.\n\nPolgár was born on 23 July 1976 in Budapest, to a Hungarian Jewish family. Polgár and her two older sisters, Grandmaster Susan and International Master Sofia, were part of an educational experiment carried out by their father László Polgár, in an attempt to prove that children could make exceptional achievements if trained in a specialist subject from a very early age. \"Geniuses are made, not born,\" was László's thesis. He and his wife Klára educated their three daughters at home, with chess as the specialist subject. László also taught his three daughters the international language Esperanto. They received resistance from Hungarian authorities as home-schooling was not a \"socialist\" approach. They also received criticism at the time from some western commentators for depriving the sisters of a normal childhood.\n\nTraditionally, chess had been a male-dominated activity, and women were often seen as weaker players, thus advancing the idea of a Women's World Champion. However, from the beginning, László was against the idea that his daughters had to participate in female-only events. \"Women are able to achieve results similar, in fields of intellectual activities, to that of men,\" he wrote. \"Chess is a form of intellectual activity, so this applies to chess. Accordingly, we reject any kind of discrimination in this respect.\" This put the Polgárs in conflict with the Hungarian Chess Federation of the day, whose policy was for women to play in women-only tournaments. Polgár's older sister, Susan, first fought the bureaucracy by playing in men's tournaments and refusing to play in women's tournaments. In 1985, when she was a 15-year-old International Master, Susan said that it was due to this conflict that she had not been awarded the Grandmaster title despite having made the norm eleven times.\n\nPolgár has rarely played in women's-specific tournaments or divisions and has never competed for the Women's World Championship: \"I always say that women should have the self-confidence that they are as good as male players, but only if they are willing to work and take it seriously as much as male players.\" While László Polgár has been credited with being an excellent chess coach, the Polgárs had also employed professional chessplayers to train their daughters, including Hungarian champion IM Tibor Florian, GM Pal Benko, and Russian GM Alexander Chernin. Susan Polgár, the eldest of the sisters, 5½ years older than Sophia and 7 years older than Judit, was the first of the sisters to achieve prominence in chess by winning tournaments, and by 1986, she was the world's top-rated female chess player. Initially, being the youngest, Judit was separated from her sisters while they were in training. However, this only served to increase Judit's curiosity. After learning the rules, they discovered Judit was able to find solutions to the problems they were studying, and she began to be invited into the group. One evening, Susan was studying an endgame with their trainer, a strong International Master. Unable to find the solution, they woke Judit, who was asleep in bed and carried her into the training room. Still half asleep, Judit showed them how to solve the problem, after which they put her back to bed. László Polgár's experiment would produce a family of one international master and two grandmasters and would strengthen the argument for nurture over nature, as well as prove women could be chess grandmasters.\n\nTrained in her early years by her sister Susan, who ultimately became Women's World Champion, Judit Polgár was a prodigy from an early age. At age 5, she defeated a family friend without looking at the board. After the game, the friend joked: \"You are good at chess, but I'm a good cook.\" Judit replied: \"Do you cook without looking at the stove?\" However, according to Susan, Judit was not the sister with the most talent, explaining: \"Judit was a slow starter, but very hard-working.\" Polgár described herself at that age as \"obsessive\" about chess. She first defeated an International Master, Dolfi Drimer, at age 10, and a grandmaster, Lev Gutman, at age 11.\n\nJudit started playing in tournaments at 6 years old, and by age 9, her rating with the Hungarian Chess Federation was 2080. She was a member of a chess club in Budapest, where she would get experience from master level players. In 1984, in Budapest, Sophia and Judit, at the time 9 and 7 years of age, respectively, played two games of blindfold chess against two masters, which they won. At one point, the girls complained that one of their opponents was playing too slowly and suggested a clock should be used.\n\nIn April 1986, 9-year-old Judit played in her first rated tournament in the U.S., finishing first in the unrated section of the New York Open, winning US$1,000. All three Polgár sisters competed. Susan, 16, competed in the grandmaster section and had a victory against GM Walter Browne and Sophia, 11, finished second in her section, but Judit gathered most of the attention in the tournament. Grandmasters would drop by to watch the serious, quiet child playing. She won her first seven games before drawing the final game. Although the unrated section had many of the weaker players in the Open, it also had players of expert strength, who were foreign to the United States and had not been rated yet. Milorad Boskovic related a conversation with Judit's sixth-round opponent, a Yugoslav player he knew to be a strong expert: \"He told me he took some chances in the game because he couldn't believe she was going to attack so well.\" Not able to speak English, her mother interpreted as she told a reporter her goal was to be a chess professional. When the reporter asked her if she would be world champion one day, Judit answered: \"I will try.\"\n\nIn late 1986, 10-year-old Judit defeated 52-year-old Romanian IM Dolfi Drimer in the Adsteam Lidums International Tournament in Adelaide, Australia. Edmar Mednis said he played his best game of the tournament in beating Judit: \"I was careful in that game...Grandmasters don't like to lose to 10-year-old girls, because then we make the front page of all the papers.\"\n\nIn April 1988, Polgár made her first International Master norm in the International B section of the New York Open. In August 1988, she won the under-12 \"Boys\" section of the World Youth Chess and Peace Festival in Timișoara, Romania. In October 1988, she finished first in a 10-player round-robin tournament in London, scoring 7–2, for a half point lead over Israeli GM Yair Kraidman. With these three results, she completed the requirements for the International Master title; at the time, she had been the youngest player ever to have achieved this distinction. Both Bobby Fischer and Garry Kasparov were 14 when they were awarded the title; Polgár was 12. It was during this time that former World Champion Mikhail Tal said Polgár had the potential to win the men's World Championship.\nJudit was asked about playing against boys instead of the girls' section of tournaments: \"These other girls are not serious about chess...I practice five or six hours a day, but they get distracted by cooking and work around the house.\"\n\nIn November 1988, Judit and her sisters, along with Ildikó Mádl, represented Hungary in the Women's section of the 28th Chess Olympiad in Thessaloniki. The International Chess Federation would not permit the Polgárs to play against men in team competitions. Prior to the tournament, Eduard Gufeld, Soviet GM and team coach for the Soviet women's team, dismissed the Polgárs: \"I believe that these girls are going to lose a good part of their quickly acquired image in the 28th Olympiad...Afterward we are going to know if the Hungarian sisters are geniuses or just women!\" However, Hungary's women's team won the championship, which marked the first time it was not won by the Soviet Union. Judit played board 2 and finished the tournament with the highest score of 12½–½ to win the individual gold medal. She also won the brilliancy prize for her game against Pavlina Angelova.\n\nIn the January 1989 Elo rating list, at the age of 12, she was rated 2555, which was number 55 in the world and 35 rating points ahead of the Women's World Champion Maia Chiburdanidze. In the 6 months since the previous list, she had gained a remarkable 190 rating points. Judit's quiet and modest demeanour at the board contrasted with the intensity of her playing style. David Norwood, British GM, in recalling Judit beating him when he was an established player and she was just a child, described her as \"this cute little auburn-haired monster who crushed you\". British journalist Dominic Lawson wrote about 12-year-old Judit's \"killer\" eyes and how she would stare at her opponent: \"The irises are so grey so dark they are almost indistinguishable from the pupils. Set against her long red hair, the effect is striking.\"\n\nBefore age 13, she had broken into the top 100 players in the world and the \"British Chess Magazine\" declared: \"Judit Polgár's recent results make the performances of Fischer and Kasparov at a similar age pale by comparison.\" British GM Nigel Short called Judit \"one of the three or four greatest chess prodigies in history\". The other great chess prodigies were Paul Morphy, José Capablanca, and Samuel Reshevsky. However, Kasparov expressed early doubts: \"She has fantastic chess talent, but she is, after all, a woman. It all comes down to the imperfections of the feminine psyche. No woman can sustain a prolonged battle.\" Later in life, however, after he had lost a rapid game against Polgár himself in 2002, Kasparov revised his opinion: \"The Polgárs showed that there are no inherent limitations to their aptitude—an idea that many male players refused to accept until they had unceremoniously been crushed by a twelve-year-old with a ponytail.\"\n\nIn 1989, Polgár tied with Boris Gelfand for third in the OHRA Open in Amsterdam.\n\nBy now, numerous books and articles had been written about the Polgár sisters, making them famous even outside of the world of chess. In 1989, American President George H. W. Bush and his wife Barbara met with the Polgárs during their visit to Hungary. Although not released until 1996, in 1990 a documentary about children playing chess, \"Chess Kids\", featuring Polgár, was filmed. The documentary did not include an interview with Polgár as her father required payment.\n\nIn 1990, Judit won the Boys section of the under-14 in the World Youth Chess Festival in Fond du Lac, Wisconsin. Also in 1990, Judit and her sisters represented Hungary in the Women's Olympiad winning the gold medal. It is the last women-only tournament in which Judit would ever participate.\n\nIn October 1991, Judit finished with 5½–3½, tied for third to fifth position with Zoltán Ribli and John Nunn, at a tournament in Vienna.\n\nIn December 1991, Polgár achieved the grandmaster title by winning the Hungarian National Championship, at the time the youngest ever at 15 years, 5 months to have achieved the title. This beat Fischer's record by a month. Hungary, one of the strongest chess-playing countries, had all but one of their strongest players participate in that year's championship, as only Zoltán Ribli was missing. Going into the last round, Polgár needed only a draw to achieve the GM title, but she won her game against GM Tibor Tolnai to finish first, with six points in nine games. In January 1991, Judit's sister Susan had also earned the GM title.\n\nIn 1992, Polgár tied for second, behind Anatoly Karpov at the Madrid International in Linares. She and Russian GM Vladimir Epishin finished with 5½–3½. In July 1992, she placed second in the Reshevsky Memorial in Manhattan finishing with four wins, five draws and no losses. In September 1992, Polgár participated in a tournament held in Aruba in which a team of senior men's players competed against a team of top women players. The men's team consisted of Lev Polugaevsky, Wolfgang Uhlmann, Oscar Panno, Efim Geller, Borislav Ivkov and Vasily Smyslov. The women's team consisted of Judit and Zsuzsa Polgár, Pia Cramling, Chiburdanidze, Ketevan Arakhamia and Alisa Galliamova. The men won the tournament 39–33. The overall high scorer was Polugaevsky, 57 years old with Polgár, 16, finishing second with 7½–4½.\nPolgár then tied for first in the Hastings tournament held over New Year's, 1992–93. Russian GM Evgeny Bareev, at the time ranked eighth in the world, led going into tournament's last round, but was defeated by Polgár in their second individual game, allowing her to share first. Immediately following the Hastings tournament, Polgár played an exhibition match in February against former World Champion, Boris Spassky. She won the match 5½–4½ and won the largest prize money to that point in her career of $110,000. Polgár also participated in the Melody Amber tournament in Monaco which featured a blindfold tournament of 12 grandmasters. Anand and Karpov finished first, Ljubojević third, while Polgár finished in clear fourth with 6½ points from 11 rounds, ahead of other strong GMs such as Ivanchuk, Short, Korchnoi and her sister Susan.\n\nIn 1993, Polgár became the first woman to ever qualify for a men's Interzonal tournament. In March, she finished in a four-way tie for second place in the Budapest Zonal and won the tiebreaking tournament. She then confirmed her status as one of the world's leading players, narrowly failing to qualify for the Candidates Tournaments at the rival FIDE and PCA Interzonal tournaments.\n\nIn the summer of 1993, Bobby Fischer stayed for a time in the Polgár household. He had been living in seclusion in Yugoslavia due to an arrest warrant issued by the United States for violating the U.N. blockade of Yugoslavia with his 1992 match against Spassky. Susan Polgár met Bobby with her family and persuaded him to come out of hiding \"in a cramped hotel room in a small Yugoslavian village\". During his stay, he played many games of Fischer Random Chess and helped the sisters analyse their games. Susan said, while he was friendly on a personal level and recalled mostly pleasant moments as their guest, there were conflicts due to his political views. On the suggestion of a friend of Fischer, a match of blitz chess between Fischer and Polgár was arranged and announced to the press. However, problems ensued between Fischer and László Polgár and Fischer cancelled the match, saying to a friend on whether the match would take place, \"No, they're Jewish.\"\n\nIn the summer of 1994, Polgár had the greatest success of her career to that point, when she won the Madrid International in Spain. Against a field which included Gata Kamsky, Evgeny Bareev, Valery Salov and Ivan Sokolov, she finished 7–2 and 1½ points ahead of second place. Her performance rating for the tournament was 2778 against an opposition rated at 2672.\n\nIn October 1994, she played in a tournament in Buenos Aires which was a tribute to an ailing Polugaevsky. Eight grandmasters participated, all considered contenders for the world championship: Karpov, Anand, Salov, Ivanchuk, Kamsky, Shirov, Ljubojević and Polgár. The tournament was unusual as Black in each game was required to play a Sicilian Defence, since Polugaevsky was considered the all-time authority on the opening. This was to Polgár's advantage as it was her favourite. Against the elite competition she finished tied for third with Ivanchuk.\n\nIn September 1995, Polgár finished third with a score of 7-4 in the Donner Memorial in Amsterdam, behind Jan Timman and Julio Granda Zuniga, who tied for first, and ahead of Yasser Seirawan, Alexander Huzman, Alexei Shirov, Alexander Khalifman, Alexander Morozevich and Valery Salov. She secured a clear third place with a 21-move win over Shirov in her last game. In the Antillean island of Aruba in November 1995, she played in a friendly match against Jeroen Piket of the Netherlands, at the time one of the top players in Europe. Despite being closely matched in ratings, Polgár won the match 6–2.\nIn 1995, the Isle of Lewis chess club in Scotland attempted to arrange a game between Polgár and Nigel Short in which the famous Lewis chessmen would be used. The Lewis chessmen is a chess set carved in the 12th century. However, the British Museum refused to release the set despite assurances that the players would wear gloves. Scottish member of parliament Calum MacDonald pointed out that the set would be safe, especially as chess was not a contact sport. In the end, the Museum allowed the chess set to be displayed at the Isle of Lewis festival tournament, but they were not used in any games. Polgár won the double round-robin tournament of four GMs, scoring five points in the six games and winning both her games against Short.\nAt Linares 1994, Polgár lost a controversial game to the World Champion Garry Kasparov. The tournament marked the first time the 17-year-old Polgár was invited to compete with the world's strongest players. After four games she had two points. During her game with Kasparov in the fifth round, Kasparov gradually outplayed her and had a clear advantage after 35 moves. On his 36th move, the World Champion reportedly changed his mind about the move of a knight, and moved the piece to a different square. According to chess rules, once a player has released a piece, the move must stand, so if Kasparov did remove his hand, he should have been required to play his original move. Polgár did not challenge Kasparov, in the moment, because, she stated, \"I was playing the World Champion and didn't want to cause unpleasantness during my first invitation to such an important event. I was also afraid that if my complaint was overruled I would be penalized on the clock when we were in time pressure.\" She did however look questioningly at the arbiter, Carlos Falcon, who witnessed the incident and took no action.\n\nThe incident was caught on tape by a crew from the Spanish television company PVS, and the videotape showed that Kasparov's fingers were free of the knight for about 1/25 of a second, or a single frame of the video. Tournament director Carlos Falcon did not forfeit Kasparov when the videotape evidence was made available to him. As U.S. chess journalist Shelby Lyman pointed out, in the majority of sports \"instant replays\" do not overrule a referee's original decision and chess is no exception. The video has never been publicly released, at the request of tournament sponsor Luis Rentero. At one point Polgár reportedly confronted Kasparov in the hotel bar, asking him, \"How could you do this to me?\" Following this incident, Kasparov bluntly told an interviewer \"... she just publicly said I was cheating. ... I think a girl of her age should be taught some good manners before making such statements.\" Subsequently, Kasparov refused to speak to her for three years. Kasparov told reporters that his conscience was clear, as he was not aware of his hand leaving the piece. Although Polgár recovered by the end of the tournament, she went into a slump over the next six rounds, gaining only half a point. The incident may also have had an effect on Kasparov, who turned out a subpar performance in the tournament.\n\nPolgár is considered the strongest female chess player of all time.\nIn August 1996, she participated in a very strong 10-player tournament in Vienna. There was a three-way tie for first between Karpov, Topalov and Boris Gelfand and a three-way tie for fourth between Kramnik, Polgár and Lékó. In December 1996, Polgár played a match in São Paulo against Brazil's champion Gilbert Milos. The four games were played at 30 moves an hour with 30 minutes for the remainder of the game. Polgár won two, drew one and lost one and won $12,000 in prize money.\n\nIn February 1997, she played in the Linares \"supertournament\" which Kasparov won by edging out Kramnik. Polgár finished in clear fifth position in the 12-GM tournament, ahead of Anand, Ivanchuk, Gelfand and Shirov. Her result was considered exceptional considering the strength of the tournament, average 2701, and she was praised for her tactical skills in her game against Ivanchuk. In April 1997, she played in the Dos Hermanas Chess tournament, a single-round robin category XIX event of 10 of the world's best players. She finished in sixth place with an even score of 4½–4½. In June 1997, she finished with an even score, 4½–4½, in the Madrid 10-player GM tournament won by Topalov. In July 1997, Polgár competed in the elite Dortmund International Tournament. She finished in fifth in the strong field of ten, ahead of players such as Anatoly Karpov. In the tournament, she won playing with the black pieces against Veselin Topalov, at the time ranked fourth in the world. Topalov had the advantage until Polgár executed a deep positional sacrifice. In October 1997, she tied for second in a double round-robin tournament of four grandmasters in the VAM International Tournament in Hoogeveen, the Netherlands.\n\n\"There has long been a lively debate about who is the strongest player of all\", wrote GM Robert Byrne in his \"New York Times\" column of Aug. 26, 1997. \"Prominent candidates are Bobby Fischer, Garry Kasparov, Jose Raul Capablanca, Alexander Alekhine or Emanuel Lasker. But there is no argument about the greatest female player: she is 21-year-old Judit Polgár.\"\nIn January 1998, she played in the category XVII event, the Hoogovens in Wijk aan Zee, Netherlands, in which 14 of the world's top grandmasters participated. She finished in the middle of the pack, tied for sixth–tenth position with Karpov, Topalov and Jeroen Piket and an even score of 6½ points in thirteen games. Polgár handed co-winner Vishwanathan Anand his only loss of the tournament. In June 1998 in Budapest, Polgár played an eight-game match of \"action\" chess, which is 30 minutes for the entire game, against Anatoly Karpov. She won the match 5–3 by winning two games with the remaining ending in draws. At the time Karpov was the FIDE World Champion. In August 1998, Polgár became the first woman to ever win the U.S. Open held at the Kona Surf Resort in Kailua-Kona, Hawaii. She shared the tournament victory with GM Boris Gulko as each scored 8–1. Typical of her aggressive style was her victory against GM Georgi Kacheishvili in which she sacrificed her queen for the attack. In October 1998, Polgár won the VAM four-grandmaster tournament in Hoogeveen, Netherlands by 1½ points over Jan Timman. In November 1998, Polgár played in the Wydra Memorial Rapid chess tournament in Israel. She tied for first with Viswanathan Anand as both scored 11½ out of the 14 games. Anand won the tournament in a tie-break game over Polgár.\n\nIn the two years since Polgár became the first woman to ever break into the top 10, her rating had dropped. Although she was in the top 20, this had the effect of her being invited less frequently to the strongest tournaments.\n\nIn October 1999, Polgár participated in the four-player GM section of the VAM Chess tournament in Hoogeveen, Netherlands. Jan Timman led early in the tournament, but Polgár staged a comeback scoring 3 points in the last 4 games to share first place. Anatoly Karpov finished in third and Darmen Sadvakasov last.\n\nIn January 2000, Polgár had, for her, a disappointing result in a tournament in Pamplona, Spain, which was won by Nigel Short. She finished with only 4 points from 9 games, tied for 6–7 place with Jan Timman, who had also played below his rating. Polgár had another disappointing result later in the month in the category XVIII tournament in Corus Wijk aan Zee which was won by Kasparov. She did not win her first game until the 11th round and finished with 5 points in 13 games, tied with Victor Korchnoi for 11–12 position among the fourteen GMs. However, in the European Teams Championship in Batumi, Georgia, also in January, she won the gold medal playing Board 2, scoring 6½–2½.\n\nIn April and May 2000, Polgár won one of the strongest tournaments ever held in Asia. The Japfa Classic in Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia, was a category XVI event of 10 players in which included Alexander Khalifman–at the time FIDE world champion– and Anatoly Karpov–his predecessor. Going into the last round four players, Polgár, Khalifman, Karpov and Gilberto Milos were tied, but Polgár won her game over Braziliam GM Milos while Khalifman and Karpov played against each other in a draw. Polgár finished clear first with 6½–2½, winning the $20,000 first place prize money. At the end of May, she won the Sigeman & Company International Tournament in Malmö, Sweden. She finished the four-player double round-robin tournament scoring 4 points, with Jan Timman at 3½ with Ulf Andersson and Tiger Hillarp-Persson finishing in that order. In June 2000, she played in the GM Tournament Mérida, State of Yucatán, finishing in second place a half point behind Alexei Shirov. In September 2000, she shared first place in the Najdorf Chess Festival with Viktor Bologan, ahead of Nigel Short and Anatoly Karpov. In October and November, she represented Hungary playing board 3 in the 34th Chess Olympiad. While the Hungarian team narrowly missed winning the Bronze medal, Polgár finished 10/13 for the second highest points total of any player in the Olympiad and a rated performance level of 2772.\n\nIn late February and early March 2001, Polgár played in the elite Linares double round-robin invitational of six of the world's strongest players. The tournament was Kasparov's triumph as he scored 7½ points in 10 games. The other five participants, Polgár, Karpov, Shirov, Grischuk and Lékó all finished with 4½ for second and last position. However, Polgár drew both her games with Kasparov, the first time in her career she had done this under tournament time controls. In March 2001, she reached the semifinals of the \"World Cup\" rapid play tournament in Cannes. She made it to the final four from the 16 grandmasters in the tournament. She lost the semifinal match to Evgeny Bareev, who in turn lost to Kasparov. In a quarterfinal playoff blitz game, she forced Joël Lautier, France's strongest player, to resign in 12 moves when she won his queen which resulted in the audience of several hundred bursting into applause. In June 2001, Polgár finished fourth in the European Championship in Ohrid, Macedonia, a 13-round Swiss-system tournament of 143 Grandmasters and 38 IMs. In October 2001, she tied for first with GM Loek van Wely in the Essent Tourney in Hoogeveen, the Netherlands.\n\nIn September 2002, in the \"Russia versus the Rest of the World Match\", Polgár finally defeated Garry Kasparov in a game. The tournament was played under rapid rules with 25 minutes per game and a 10-second bonus per move. She won the game with exceptional positional play. Kasparov with black chose the Berlin Defence instead of his usual Sicilian and Polgár proceeded with a line which Kasparov has used himself. Polgár was able to attack with her rooks on Kasparov's king which was still in the centre of the board and when he was two pawns down, Kasparov resigned. The game helped the World team win the match 52–48. Upon resigning, Kasparov immediately left by a passageway barred to journalists and photographers. Kasparov had once described Polgár as a \"circus puppet\" and asserted that women chess players should stick to having children. Polgár called the game \"one of the most remarkable moments of [her] career\". The game was historic as it was the first time in chess history that a female player beat the world's No. 1 player in competitive play. An interview with Polgár including video of the match was included in the BBC Witness radio program in 2016.\n\nIn October and November 2002, Polgár played on second board (with Péter Lékó on first) for Hungary in the 35th Chess Olympiad. While not having the stunning performance as she had in the 2000 Olympiad, she helped Hungary attain the silver medal for the event. While the Hungarians had the best win–loss record of the tournament as a team and lost only a single game of the 56 they played, they had won most of their matches by 2½–1½ scores, while the Russian team won gold as they piled up the points. However, Hungary gave the gold-winning Russian team its only defeat. Polgár's fourth-round game against Azerbaijan's Shakhriyar Mamedyarov included a brilliant 12.Nxf7, drawing his king into the center of the board.\n\nBy early 2003, Polgár had worked her way back into the top 10 rated players in the world. In 2003, Polgár scored one of her best results: an undefeated clear second place in the Category 19 Corus chess tournament in Wijk aan Zee, Netherlands, just a half-point behind future World Champion Viswanathan Anand, and a full point ahead of then-world champion Vladimir Kramnik. One of the highlight games of the tournament was Polgár's fourth round crushing victory over Anatoly Karpov. She played a novelty in the opening which she devised over the board. The game lasted 33 moves with Karpov down two pawns and his king exposed. Polgár admitted to \"enjoying herself\" by the end of the game. In April 2003, Polgár finished second in The Hunguest Hotels Super Tournament in Budapest behind Nigel Short. She appeared headed for a first-place victory in the tournament, but lost her game against compatriot Péter Lékó. In June 2003, Polgár finished tied for third with Boris Gelfand, in the Enghien-les-Bains International Tournament in France, scoring 5½–3½, behind Evgeny Bareev who won the tournament and GM Michael Adams. In August 2003, Polgár played an eight-game rapid chess match in Mainz, Germany against Viswanathan Anand, billed as the \"Battle of the Sexes\". After six games each player had won three games. Anand won the final two games to win the match. In October 2003, Polgár won the 4–grandmaster Essent tournament in Hoogeveen, Netherlands. In one of her games against Karpov, he blundered, allowing Polgár to utilize a famous double bishop sacrifice first employed by Emanuel Lasker against Bauer in 1889.\n\nIn 2004, Polgár took some time off from chess to give birth to her son, Olivér. She was consequently considered inactive and not listed on the January 2005 FIDE rating list. Her sister Susan reactivated her playing status during this period, and temporarily became the world's No. 1 ranked women's player again.\n\nPolgár returned to chess at the prestigious Corus chess tournament on 15 January 2005. The tournament, which was now considered by some as the most important in Europe, was won by fellow Hungarian Péter Lékó while Polgár scored 7/13 to tie for fourth with Alexander Grischuk, Michael Adams and Kramnik. She was therefore relisted in the April 2005 FIDE rating list, gaining a few rating points for her better-than-par performance at Corus. In May she also had a better-than-par performance at a strong tournament in Sofia, Bulgaria, finishing third. This brought her to her highest ever rating, 2735, in the July 2005 FIDE list and enabled her to retain her spot as the eighth ranked player in the world.\n\nIn September 2005, Polgár once again made history as she became the first woman to play for the World Championship, at the FIDE World Chess Championship 2005. However, she had a rare disappointing performance, coming last out of the eight competitors. Polgár \"was unrecognizable in her first-round encounter with Viswanathan Anand\", wrote GM Robert Byrne in his \"New York Times\" column, \"making more errors than she normally would in a dozen games\". However, in her game against Veselin Topalov, Polgár pushed the eventual tournament winner and world champion to a seven-hour marathon before succumbing.\n\nShe did not play at the 2006 Linares tournament because she was pregnant again. On 6 July 2006, she gave birth to a girl, Hanna.\n\nPolgár participitated in the FIDE world blitz championship on 5–7 September 2006 in Rishon Le Zion, Israel. Blitz chess is played with each player having only 5 minutes for all moves. The round-robin tournament of 16 of some of the strongest players in the world, concluded with Alexander Grischuk finally edging out Peter Svidler in a tie-break to win the tournament. Polgár finished tied for fifth/sixth place, winning $5,625 for the three-day tournament. Polgár tied with Boris Gelfand with 9½ points and won her individual game against Viswanathan Anand, at the time the world's No. 2 player. In October 2006, Polgár scored another excellent result: tied for first place in the Essent Chess Tournament, Hoogeveen, the Netherlands. She scored 4½ out of 6 in a double round-robin tournament that included two wins against the world's top-rated player, Veselin Topalov. In December 2006, Polgár played a six-game match of blindfold rapid chess against former FIDE world champion Veselin Topalov. Topalov won the match 3½–2½ with two wins to Polgár's one. Nearly 1,000 spectators attended the event.\n\nIn May–June 2007 she played in the Candidates Tournament for the FIDE World Chess Championship 2007. She was eliminated in the first round, losing 3½–2½ to Evgeny Bareev. Some chess pundits said she was unprepared for the tournament and appeared affected by the fact that she had played less chess in the last three years to concentrate on her two children. However, she was still credited with the most beautiful attack of the tournament in her fifth game victory. In July 2007, Polgár played in the Biel Chess Festival which was won by 16-year-old Magnus Carlsen. Polgár finished the 9 round tournament at 5–4 in a four-way tie for third to sixth place. A highlight game for her was actually a draw. Polgár was playing an endgame of knight against knight and two connected passed pawns of Alexander Grischuk, but she was able to eliminate both pawns. In October 2007, Polgár played in the Blindfold World Cup in Bilbao, Spain. Polgár finished in fourth place of the six players with three wins, four losses, and three draws. The tournament was won by Bu Xiangzhi of China, whose only loss was to Polgár. In November 2007, she took part in \"Chess Champions League – Playing for a Better World\" in Vitoria Gasteiz, Spain a tournament to raise funds for equipment for a Hospital in Mbuji-Mayi, Congo. Polgár finished tied for third in the strong six-player tournament and handed tournament winner Veselin Topalov his only loss.\nIn January 2008 she competed in the strong Corus Wijk aan Zee tournament, scoring a respectable 6/13 and tied 9–11 in the 14 player tournament. In November 2008, Polgár had a terrible result in The World Chess Blitz Championship in Almaty, Republic of Kazakhstan, finished last of the 16 players with only 2½ points. In November 2008, Polgár played the number 2 board for the Hungarian open (\"men's\") team in the 38th Chess Olympiad in Dresden, finishing 3½/8.\n\nIn November 2009, Polgár participated in the FIDE World Cup at Khanty Mansiysk in Siberia. Polgár made it to the third round of the knockout tournament until she was eliminated by tournament winner Boris Gelfand. She handed Gelfand his only loss of the tournament.\n\nIn 2010, Polgár began her return to competitive chess and would play more than she had in recent years. In March 2010, Polgár played a four-game match against GM Gregory Kaidanov at Hilton Head, South Carolina. It was required that each game begin with the Sicilian Defense. The match was drawn with each player winning two games. In April 2010, Polgár played an eight-game rapid chess match against Czech GM David Navara which was part of the ČEZ Chess Trophy 2010 festival of the Prague Chess Society. Despite slightly higher ranking, 2708 to Polgár's 2682, Navara lost the match 6–2. Polgár participated in the rapid chess tournament of the Presidential Chess Cup in Baku, Azerbaijan from 29 April to 1 May 2010. She finished with one win, two losses and four draws, tied for fifth position in the eight-player round robin. The tournament finished with a three-way tie for first with the winner, Kramnik being decided by Elo over Mamedyarov and Kamsky. In June 2010, it was reported Polgár was assisting GM Zoltán Almási in training for the Olympiad.\n\nIn September and October 2010, Polgár played 3rd board for the Hungarian Men's team in the 39th Chess Olympiad in Khanty-Mansiysk, Russia. The team finished in fourth place losing the Bronze medal to Israel on tie-break. Playing more in 2010 than in recent years, Polgár finished fourth overall among Board three players with a 6/10 score. The highlight for the Hungarian Men's team was a fifth-round victory over Russia I. In November 2010, Polgár won the four-player rapid tournament which was held to celebrate the National University of Mexico's 100th anniversary. Polgár won a close opening match against Vassily Ivanchuk. She then crushed Veselin Topalov, a former world champion and ranked No. 1 in the world in 2009, 3½–½ to win the tournament.\n\nOn 2 April 2011, Polgár finished in a four-way tie for first in the European Individual Chess Championship in Aix-les-Bains, France. The tournament, of 393 players of which 167 were Grandmasters, was won by Russian Vladimir Potkin on tie-break, GM Radosław Wojtaszek won the silver, while Polgár placed third, winning the bronze. Polgár was praised for her creative attacks and endgame technique. Polgár became the first woman ever to finish in the top three of the male championship. Continuing Polgár's return to competitive chess, in July 2011 she participated in the 39th Greek Team National Championship scoring 3½ out of 4 games. Also in July 2011, Polgár played Board 3 for Hungary in the World Team Championships. Hungary finished in fifth place of the ten teams and individually Polgár sixteenth of the fifty players.\n\nIn September 2011, Polgár competed in the Chess World Cup, a 128-player tournament with a large prize fund and qualification to the top three for the World Championship cycle. Polgár made it to the final 8 players before she was eliminated by Peter Svidler. A highlight for Polgár was her elimination of the tournament's No. 1 seed and world's fifth highest rated player, Sergey Karjakin. In October 2011, Polgár took part in the Unive 2011 competition. She finished last in the elite four-player Crown group, losing games to Vladimir Kramnik and Anish Giri.\n\nIn September 2011, Polgár finally returned to \"Super GM\" status with a FIDE rating of 2701 and by November she had raised it to 2710 and ranked 35 in the world.\n\nTo begin 2012, in January Polgár competed in the Tradewise Gibraltar tournament finishing with 7 points in 10 games. For the first time in 22 years since she lost to Nona Gaprindashvili on the 1990 Chess Olympiad, Polgár lost her first classical game to a female player as Women's World champion Hou Yifan won their individual game and tied for first before losing the playoff to Nigel Short.\nThe Winner of the honorary FIDE award of Caissa as the best female player of 2012. Chess Award of Caissa, designed and executed by artisans of the Lobortas Classic Jewelry House, was solemnly presented on October 2, 2013 within the framework of the 84th FIDE Congress in Tallinn.\n\nOn 5 October 2013, Polgár played Nigel Short in the eighteenth edition of Chess.com's Death Match. The final score was 17½-10½ in Polgár's favour. They played 28 games in total, separated into three stages of increasingly faster time controls, the first being 5+1, the second 3+1 and finally 1+1. Polgár later remarked on her Facebook page that \"it was great fun to play against Nigel...\" Nigel in turn tweeted in jest, \"Such bad chess. I should go and hang myself...\"\n\nIn 2014, in the World Rapid and Blitz Chess Championship, she came 26th in the Blitz championship and 56th in the Rapid championship.\n\nWhile having a strong understanding of positional play, Polgár excels in tactics and is known for an aggressive playing style, striving to maximize the initiative and actively pursuing complications. The former World Champion Garry Kasparov wrote that, based upon her games, \"if to 'play like a girl' meant anything in chess, it would mean relentless aggression.\" In her youth, she was especially popular with the fans due to her willingness to employ wild gambits and attacks. As a teenager, Polgár has been credited with contributing to the popularity of the opening variation King's Bishop's Gambit. Polgár prefers aggressive openings, playing 1.e4 as White and the Sicilian or King's Indian Defence with black, but she has also said her opening choices will also depend upon her trainer. Jennifer Shahade, writer and two-time U.S. women's chess champion, suggested that the influence of Polgár as a role model may be one of the reasons women play more aggressive chess than men. Describing an individual encounter with Polgár, former U.S. Champion Joel Benjamin said, \"It was all-out war for five hours. I was totally exhausted. She is a tiger at the chessboard. She absolutely has a killer instinct. You make one mistake and she goes right for the throat.\"\n\nPolgár is especially adept at faster time controls. When she was still a youth, \"Der Spiegel\" wrote of her, \"her tactical thunderstorms during blitz games have confounded many opponents, who are rated higher.\"\n\nPolgár has spoken of appreciating the psychological aspect of chess. She has stated preferring to learn an opponent's style so she can play intentionally against him or her rather than playing \"objective\" chess. In her 2002 victory (at 25 minutes time control) over Kasparov, she deliberately chose a line Kasparov had used against Vladimir Kramnik, employing the strategy of forcing the opponent to \"play against himself\". Kasparov's response was inadequate and he soon found himself in an inferior position. In an interview regarding playing against computers she said, \"Chess is 30 to 40% psychology. You don't have this when you play a computer. I can't confuse it.\"\n\n\"You have to be very selfish sometimes\", said Polgár in speaking of the life of a professional chess player. \"If you are in a tournament, you have to think of yourself—you can't think of your wife or children—only about yourself.\" When asked in 2002 if she still desired to win the world championship she said, \"Chess is my profession and of course I hope to improve. But I'm not going to give up everything to become world champion; I have my life.\"\n\nPolgár has said she does not have a permanent coach although she does have help from GM Lev Psakhis or GM Mihail Marin. She said she rarely uses a second and when she travels to tournaments it is usually her husband who accompanies her. Polgár said she has changed how she prepares for tournaments. \"I make more use of my experience now and try to work more efficiently so that my efforts aren't wasted\", she said in 2008.\n\nConcentrating on her two children left Polgár with little time to train and play competitively and her ranking dropped from eighth in 2005 to the mid-50s in 2009. She played in the 2009 Maccabiah Games in Israel, and was named the Outstanding Female Athlete of the Games. However, as of September 2010 Polgár remained the only woman in the top 100 and still the only woman to have ever made the top 10. Comparing motherhood to playing chess, Polgár has said that a chess tournament now \"feels like a vacation\". When asked why she came back to chess after taking time off to care for her children, she said, \"I cannot live without chess! It is an integral part of my life. I enjoy the game!\"\n\nDespite being the highest-rated woman for twenty years, Polgár has never competed for the women's world championship and in a 2011 interview was asked about this possibility. Polgár said that in the past she has never been interested in competing for it, but in recent years \"the mentality of a couple of the women players has changed\". Polgár said that for her to consider competing it would have to be a challenge and \"if I get an extremely nice offer just to play for the title\".\n\nPolgár authored a series of children's books on chess, \"Chess Playground\". Her sister Sofia provided illustrations.\n\nIn March 2013 she was awarded the Order of Merit of the Republic of Hungary Commander's Cross with Star, one of Hungary's highest awards, \"for her worldwide acknowledged life achievement as an athlete, for promoting the game of chess and for her efforts to promote the educational benefits of chess\". In August 2015, she received the Order of Saint Stephen of Hungary, the highest state Order that can be made to a Hungarian civilian.\n\nSeveral members of Polgár's family perished in the Holocaust and her grandmother was a survivor of Auschwitz concentration camp.\n\nIn August 2000, Polgár married Hungarian veterinary surgeon Gusztáv Font. They have two children, a boy named Olivér and a girl named Hanna.\nWhile Judit remained in Hungary, the rest of her family eventually emigrated: Sofia and her parents to Israel and later to Canada, and Susan to the United States.\n\nBULLET::::- J. Polgár vs. V. Anand, Dos Hermanas 1999 Sicilian Defense: Scheveningen Variation. Delayed Keres Attack Perenyi Gambit (B90) · 1–0 Former trainer for the Polgárs, IM Tibor Károlyi, called this the most beautiful game ever played by a woman.\nBULLET::::- Judit Polgár vs. Ferenc Berkes, Hunguest Hotels Super Chess Tournament 2003 · French Defense: Classical. Burn Variation Main Line (C11) · 1–0 Polgár's opponent falls for a clever , expecting her to play 14.Bxa8 and he would reply with 14...g4, but she springs 14.g4\nBULLET::::- Alexey Shirov vs. Judit Polgar, Buenos Aires ARG 1994 · Sicilian Defense: Paulsen. Normal Variation (B45) · 0–1 Polgár uses a to break up Shirov's pawn front. She used only 48 minutes to win this game.\nBULLET::::- Polgár vs. Garry Kasparov, Russia vs. The Rest of the World match, Moscow 2002 Spanish Game: Berlin Defense. l'Hermet Variation (C67) · 1–0 Polgár makes history when, for the first time ever, a woman defeats the world's No. 1 chess player in a game.\n\n\nBULLET::::- 2012 Interview of Judit Polgár\nBULLET::::- Judit Polgar's perfect weekend\nBULLET::::- Interview for BBC Radio 4 Woman's Hour\n"}
{"id": "15940", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15940", "title": "January 22", "text": "January 22\n\nBULLET::::- 613 – Eight-month-old Constantine is crowned as co-emperor (\"Caesar\") by his father Heraclius at Constantinople.\nBULLET::::- 871 – Battle of Basing: The West Saxons led by King Æthelred I are defeated by the Danelaw Vikings at Basing.\nBULLET::::- 1506 – The first contingent of 150 Swiss Guards arrives at the Vatican.\nBULLET::::- 1517 – The Ottoman Empire under Selim I defeats the Mamluk Sultanate and captures present-day Egypt at the Battle of Ridaniya.\nBULLET::::- 1555 – The Ava Kingdom falls to the Taungoo Dynasty in what is now Myanmar.\nBULLET::::- 1689 – The Convention Parliament convenes to determine whether James II and VII, the last Roman Catholic monarch of England, Ireland and Scotland, had vacated the thrones of England and Ireland when he fled to France in 1688.\nBULLET::::- 1808 – The Portuguese royal family arrives in Brazil after fleeing the French army's invasion of Portugal two months earlier.\nBULLET::::- 1824 – The Ashantis defeat British forces in the Gold Coast.\nBULLET::::- 1849 – Second Anglo-Sikh War: The Siege of Multan ends after nine months when the last Sikh defenders of Multan, Punjab, surrender.\nBULLET::::- 1863 – The January Uprising breaks out in Poland, Lithuania and Belarus. The aim of the national movement is to regain Polish–Lithuanian–Ruthenian Commonwealth from occupation by Russia.\nBULLET::::- 1879 – The Battle of Isandlwana during the Anglo-Zulu War results in a British defeat.\nBULLET::::- 1879 – The Battle of Rorke's Drift, also during the Anglo-Zulu War and just some 15 km away from Isandlwana, results in a British victory.\nBULLET::::- 1889 – Columbia Phonograph is formed in Washington, D.C.\nBULLET::::- 1890 – The United Mine Workers of America is founded in Columbus, Ohio.\nBULLET::::- 1901 – Edward VII is proclaimed King after the death of his mother, Queen Victoria.\nBULLET::::- 1905 – Bloody Sunday in Saint Petersburg, beginning of the 1905 revolution.\nBULLET::::- 1906 – runs aground on rocks on Vancouver Island, British Columbia, killing more than 130.\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Over 600 people are killed in Guadalajara, Mexico, when a train plunges off the tracks into a deep canyon.\nBULLET::::- 1917 – World War I: President Woodrow Wilson of the still-neutral United States calls for \"peace without victory\" in Europe.\nBULLET::::- 1919 – Act Zluky is signed, unifying the Ukrainian People's Republic and the West Ukrainian National Republic.\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Ramsay MacDonald becomes the first Labour Prime Minister of the United Kingdom.\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Teddy Wakelam gives the first live radio commentary of a football match anywhere in the world, between Arsenal F.C. and Sheffield United at Highbury.\nBULLET::::- 1941 – World War II: British and Commonwealth troops capture Tobruk from Italian forces during Operation Compass.\nBULLET::::- 1943 – World War II: Australian and American forces defeat Japanese army and navy units in the bitterly-fought Battle of Buna–Gona.\nBULLET::::- 1944 – World War II: The Allies commence Operation Shingle, an assault on Anzio and Nettuno, Italy.\nBULLET::::- 1946 – In Iran, Qazi Muhammad declares the independent people's Republic of Mahabad at Chahar Cheragh Square in the Kurdish city of Mahabad; he becomes the new president and Haji Baba Sheikh becomes the prime minister.\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Creation of the \"Central Intelligence Group\", forerunner of the Central Intelligence Agency.\nBULLET::::- 1947 – KTLA, the first commercial television station west of the Mississippi River, begins operation in Hollywood.\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Israel withdraws from the Sinai Peninsula.\nBULLET::::- 1957 – The New York City \"Mad Bomber\", George P. Metesky, is arrested in Waterbury, Connecticut and charged with planting more than 30 bombs.\nBULLET::::- 1963 – The Élysée Treaty of cooperation between France and Germany is signed by Charles de Gaulle and Konrad Adenauer.\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Apollo 5 lifts off carrying the first Lunar module into space.\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Operation Igloo White, a US electronic surveillance system to stop communist infiltration into South Vietnam begins installation.\nBULLET::::- 1970 – The Boeing 747, the world's first \"jumbo jet\", enters commercial service for launch customer Pan American Airways with its maiden voyage from John F. Kennedy International Airport to London Heathrow Airport.\nBULLET::::- 1971 – The Singapore Declaration, one of the two most important documents to the uncodified constitution of the Commonwealth of Nations, is issued.\nBULLET::::- 1973 – The Supreme Court of the United States delivers its decisions in \"Roe v. Wade\" and \"Doe v. Bolton\", legalizing elective abortion in all fifty states.\nBULLET::::- 1973 – The crew of Apollo 17 addresses a joint session of Congress after the completion of the final Apollo moon landing mission.\nBULLET::::- 1973 – A chartered Boeing 707 explodes in flames upon landing at Kano Airport, Nigeria, killing 176.\nBULLET::::- 1973 – In a bout for the world heavyweight boxing championship in Kingston, Jamaica, challenger George Foreman knocks down champion Joe Frazier six times in the first two rounds before the fight is stopped by referee Arthur Mercante.\nBULLET::::- 1984 – The Apple Macintosh, the first consumer computer to popularize the computer mouse and the graphical user interface, is introduced during a Super Bowl XVIII television commercial.\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Philippine security forces open fire on a crowd of 10,000–15,000 demonstrators at Malacañang Palace, Manila, killing 13.\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Rebel forces occupy Zaire's national radio station in Kinshasa and broadcast a demand for the government's resignation.\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Space Shuttle program: Dr. Roberta Bondar becomes the first Canadian woman and the first neurologist in space.\nBULLET::::- 1995 – Israeli–Palestinian conflict: Beit Lid massacre: In central Israel, near Netanya, two Gazans blow themselves up at a military transit point, killing 19 Israelis.\nBULLET::::- 1999 – Australian missionary Graham Staines and his two sons are burned alive by radical Hindus while sleeping in their car in Eastern India.\nBULLET::::- 2002 – Kmart becomes the largest retailer in United States history to file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Evo Morales is inaugurated as President of Bolivia, becoming the country's first indigenous president.\nBULLET::::- 2007 – At least 88 people are killed when two car bombs explode in the Bab Al-Sharqi market in central Baghdad, Iraq.\nBULLET::::- 2015 – An explosion near a civilian trolley-bus in Donetsk kills at least thirteen people.\n\nBULLET::::- 826 – Emperor Montoku of Japan (d. 858)\nBULLET::::- 1263 – Ibn Taymiyyah, Syrian scholar and theologian (d. 1328)\nBULLET::::- 1440 – Ivan III of Russia (d. 1505)\nBULLET::::- 1522 – Charles II de Valois, Duke of Orléans, (d. 1545)\nBULLET::::- 1552 – Walter Raleigh, English poet, soldier, courtier, and explorer (d. 1618)\nBULLET::::- 1561 – Francis Bacon, English philosopher and politician, Attorney General for England and Wales (d. 1626)\nBULLET::::- 1570 – Sir Robert Cotton, 1st Baronet, of Connington, English historian and politician, founded the Cotton library (d. 1631)\nBULLET::::- 1573 – John Donne, English poet and cleric in the Church of England, wrote the Holy Sonnets. (d. 1631)\nBULLET::::- 1592 – Pierre Gassendi, French mathematician, astronomer, and philosopher (d. 1655)\nBULLET::::- 1645 – William Kidd, Scottish sailor and pirate hunter (d. 1701)\nBULLET::::- 1654 – Richard Blackmore, English physician and poet (d. 1729)\nBULLET::::- 1690 – Nicolas Lancret, French painter (d. 1743)\nBULLET::::- 1729 – Gotthold Ephraim Lessing, German philosopher and author (d. 1781)\nBULLET::::- 1733 – Philip Carteret, English admiral and explorer (d. 1796)\nBULLET::::- 1740 – Noah Phelps, American soldier, lawyer, and judge (d. 1809)\nBULLET::::- 1781 – François Habeneck, French violinist and conductor (d. 1849)\nBULLET::::- 1788 – Lord Byron, English poet and playwright (d. 1824)\nBULLET::::- 1792 – Lady Lucy Whitmore, English noblewoman, hymn writer (d. 1840)\nBULLET::::- 1796 – Karl Ernst Claus, Estonian-Russian chemist, botanist, and academic (d. 1864)\nBULLET::::- 1797 – Maria Leopoldina of Austria (d. 1826)\nBULLET::::- 1799 – Ludger Duvernay, Canadian journalist, publisher, and politician (d. 1852)\nBULLET::::- 1802 – Richard Upjohn, English-American architect (d. 1878)\nBULLET::::- 1828 – Dayrolles Eveleigh-de-Moleyns, 4th Baron Ventry, Irish hereditary peer (d. 1914)\nBULLET::::- 1831 – Prince Christian of Schleswig-Holstein (d. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 1840 – Ernest Wilberforce, English bishop (d. 1907)\nBULLET::::- 1849 – August Strindberg, Swedish novelist, poet, and playwright (d. 1912)\nBULLET::::- 1858 – Beatrice Webb, English sociologist and economist (d. 1943)\nBULLET::::- 1861 – George Fuller, Australian politician, 22nd Premier of New South Wales (d. 1940)\nBULLET::::- 1865 – Wilbur Scoville, American chemist and pharmacist (d. 1942)\nBULLET::::- 1867 – Gisela Januszewska, Jewish-Austrian physician (d. 1943)\nBULLET::::- 1869 – José Vicente de Freitas, Portuguese colonel and politician, 97th Prime Minister of Portugal (d. 1952)\nBULLET::::- 1874 – Edward Harkness, American philanthropist (d. 1940)\nBULLET::::- 1874 – Jay Hughes, American baseball player and coach (d. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 1875 – D. W. Griffith, American director, producer, and screenwriter (d. 1948)\nBULLET::::- 1877 – Tom Jones, American baseball player and manager (d. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 1879 – Francis Picabia, French painter and poet (d. 1953)\nBULLET::::- 1880 – Bill O'Neill, Canadian-American baseball player (d. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 1880 – Frigyes Riesz, Hungarian mathematician and academic (d. 1956)\nBULLET::::- 1881 – Ira Thomas, American baseball player and manager (d. 1958)\nBULLET::::- 1886 – John J. Becker, American pianist, composer, and conductor (d. 1961)\nBULLET::::- 1887 – Helen Hoyt, American poet and author (d. 1972)\nBULLET::::- 1889 – Henri Pélissier, French cyclist (d. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 1889 – Amos Strunk, American baseball player and manager (d. 1979)\nBULLET::::- 1890 – Fred M. Vinson, American judge and politician, 13th Chief Justice of the United States (d. 1953)\nBULLET::::- 1891 – Antonio Gramsci, Italian philosopher and politician (d. 1937)\nBULLET::::- 1892 – Marcel Dassault, French businessman, founded Dassault Aviation (d. 1986)\nBULLET::::- 1893 – Conrad Veidt, German-American actor, director, and producer (d. 1943)\nBULLET::::- 1897 – Rosa Ponselle, American operatic soprano (d. 1981)\nBULLET::::- 1897 – Dilipkumar Roy, a Bengali Indian musician, musicologist, novelist, poet and essayist. (d. 1980)\nBULLET::::- 1898 – Ross Barnett, American lawyer and politician, 52nd Governor of Mississippi (d. 1987)\nBULLET::::- 1898 – Sergei Eisenstein, Russian director and screenwriter (d. 1948)\nBULLET::::- 1898 – Denise Legeay, French actress (d. 1968)\nBULLET::::- 1899 – Martti Haavio, Finnish poet and mythologist (d. 1973)\nBULLET::::- 1900 – Ernst Busch, German actor and singer (d. 1980)\nBULLET::::- 1902 – Daniel Kinsey, American hurdler, coach, and academic (d. 1970)\nBULLET::::- 1903 – Fritz Houtermans, Polish-German physicist and academic (d. 1966)\nBULLET::::- 1904 – George Balanchine, Georgian-American dancer, choreographer, and director, co-founded the New York City Ballet (d. 1983)\nBULLET::::- 1904 – Arkady Gaidar, Russian journalist and author (d. 1941)\nBULLET::::- 1905 – Willy Hartner, German physicist, historian, and academic (d. 1981)\nBULLET::::- 1906 – Robert E. Howard, American author and poet (d. 1936)\nBULLET::::- 1907 – Douglas Corrigan, American pilot and engineer (d. 1995)\nBULLET::::- 1907 – Dixie Dean, English footballer (d. 1980)\nBULLET::::- 1908 – Lev Landau, Azerbaijani-Russian physicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1968)\nBULLET::::- 1908 – Prince Oana, American baseball player and manager (d. 1976)\nBULLET::::- 1909 – Porfirio Rubirosa, Dominican race car driver, polo player, and diplomat (d. 1965)\nBULLET::::- 1909 – Ann Sothern, American actress and singer (d. 2001)\nBULLET::::- 1909 – U Thant, Burmese educator and diplomat, 3rd United Nations Secretary-General (d. 1974)\nBULLET::::- 1911 – Bruno Kreisky, Austrian lawyer and politician, 22nd Chancellor of Austria (d. 1990)\nBULLET::::- 1913 – Henry Bauchau, Belgian psychoanalyst and author (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1913 – William Conway, Irish cardinal (d. 1977)\nBULLET::::- 1913 – Carl F. H. Henry, American theologian and publisher (d. 2003)\nBULLET::::- 1914 – Dimitris Dragatakis, Greek violinist and composer (d. 2001)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Heinrich Albertz, German theologian and politician, Mayor of Berlin (d. 1993)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Bill Durnan, Canadian ice hockey player and coach (d. 1972)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Henri Dutilleux, French pianist, composer, and educator (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Harilal Upadhyay, Indian author, poet, and astrologist (d. 1994)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Elmer Lach, Canadian ice hockey player and coach (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1919 – Diomedes Olivo, Dominican baseball player and scout (d. 1977)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Irving Kristol, American journalist, author, and academic, founded \"The National Interest\" (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Alf Ramsey, English footballer and coach (d. 1999)\nBULLET::::- 1922 – Howard Moss, American poet, playwright and critic (d. 1987)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Diana Douglas, British-American actress (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – J. J. Johnson, American trombonist and composer (d. 2001)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Ján Chryzostom Korec, Slovak cardinal (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Charles Lisanby, American production designer and art director (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Johnny Bucha, American baseball player (d. 1996)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Bobby Young, American baseball player (d. 1985)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Lou Creekmur, American football player and sportscaster (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Joe Perry, American footballer (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Yoshihiko Amino, Japanese historian, author, and academic (d. 2004)\nBULLET::::- 1929 – Petr Eben, Czech composer, organist and choirmaster (d. 2007)\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Mariví Bilbao, Spanish actress (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Éamon de Buitléar, Irish accordion player and director (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Sam Cooke, American singer-songwriter (d. 1964)\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Galina Zybina, Russian shot putter and javelin thrower\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Berthold Grünfeld, Norwegian psychiatrist and academic (d. 2007)\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Piper Laurie, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Yuri Chesnokov, Russian volleyball player and coach (d. 2010)\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Vijay Anand, Indian actor, director, producer, and screenwriter (d. 2004)\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Bill Bixby, American actor and director (d. 1993)\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Graham Kerr, English chef and author\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Alexander Men, Russian priest and scholar (d. 1990)\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Ong Teng Cheong, Singaporean architect and politician, 5th President of Singapore (d. 2002)\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Alan J. Heeger, American physicist and chemist, Nobel Prize laureate\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Edén Pastora, Nicaraguan politician\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Joseph Wambaugh, American police officer and author\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Peter Beard, Australian photographer and author\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Joe Esposito, American author (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Altair Gomes de Figueiredo, Brazilian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Jørgen Garde, Danish admiral (d. 1996)\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Alfredo Palacio, Ecuadoran physician and politician, President of Ecuador\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Luigi Simoni, Italian footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1939 – J. C. Tremblay, Canadian ice hockey player and scout (d. 1994)\nBULLET::::- 1940 – John Hurt, English actor (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1940 – George Seifert, American football player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Gillian Shephard, English educator and politician, Secretary of State for Education\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Jaan Kaplinski, Estonian poet, philosopher, and critic\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Mimis Domazos, Greek footballer\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Michael Spicer, English journalist and politician\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Khosrow Golsorkhi, Iranian journalist, poet, and activist (d. 1974)\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Uto Ughi, Italian violinist and conductor\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Jophery Brown, American baseball player, actor, and stuntman (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Jean-Pierre Nicolas, French race car driver and manager\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Christoph Schönborn, Austrian cardinal\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Alojz Uran, Slovenian archbishop\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Malcolm McLaren, English singer-songwriter and manager (d. 2010)\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Serge Savard, Canadian ice hockey player and manager\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Vladimir Oravsky, Czech-Swedish author and director\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Gilbert Levine, American conductor and academic\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Mike Caldwell, American baseball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1949 – J.P. Pennington, American country-rock singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Steve Perry, American singer-songwriter and producer\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Paul Bew, Northern Irish historian and academic\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Frank Schade, American basketball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Ondrej Nepela, Slovak figure skater and coach (d. 1989)\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Leon Roberts, American baseball player and manager\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Ramón Avilés, Puerto Rican-American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Winfried Berkemeier, German footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Myung-whun Chung, South Korean pianist and conductor\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Jim Jarmusch, American director and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Thomas David Jones, American captain, pilot, and astronaut\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Timothy R. Ferguson, American politician\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Steve Riley, American drummer\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Mike Bossy, Canadian ice hockey player and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Brian Dayett, American baseball player and manager\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Godfrey Thoma, Nauruan politician\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Francis Wheen, English journalist and author\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Nikos Anastopoulos, Greek footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Filiz Koçali, Turkish journalist and politician\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Linda Blair, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Michael Hutchence, Australian singer-songwriter (d. 1997)\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Quintin Dailey, American basketball player (d. 2010)\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Daniel Johnston, American musician\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Jimmy Herring, American guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Huw Irranca-Davies, Welsh lawyer and politician\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Mizan Zainal Abidin of Terengganu, Yang di-Pertuan Agong of Malaysia\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Nigel Benn, English-Australian boxer\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Stojko Vranković, Croatian basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Steven Adler, American rock drummer\nBULLET::::- 1965 – DJ Jazzy Jeff, American DJ and producer\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Diane Lane, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Andrew Roachford, English singer-songwriter and keyboard player\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Craig Salvatori, Australian rugby league player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Nick Gillingham, English swimmer\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Guy Fieri, American chef, author, and television host\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Heath, Japanese singer-songwriter and bass player\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Frank Leboeuf, French footballer, sportscaster, and actor\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Mauricio Serna, Colombian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Olivia d'Abo, English-American singer-songwriter and actress\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Keith Gordon, American baseball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Jason Lowrie, New Zealand rugby league player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Abraham Olano, Spanish cyclist\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Stan Collymore, English footballer and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Terry Hill, Australian rugby league player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Rogério Ceni, Brazilian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Cameron McConville, Australian race car driver and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Joseph Muscat, Maltese journalist and politician, 13th Prime Minister of Malta\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Jimmy Anderson, American baseball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1976 – James Dearth, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Mario Domm, Mexican singer-songwriter, pianist, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Anna Linkova, Russian tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Hidetoshi Nakata, Japanese footballer\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Luciano Andrade Rissutt, Brazilian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Chone Figgins, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Aidan Burley, New Zealand-English politician\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Carlos Ruiz, Panamanian baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Chor Boogie, American artist\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Jonathan Woodgate, English footballer\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Willa Ford, American singer-songwriter, producer, and actress\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Beverley Mitchell, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Ben Moody, American singer-songwriter, guitarist, producer, and actor\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Ibrahima Sonko, French footballer\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Guy Wilks, English race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Fabricio Coloccini, Argentinian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Shaun Cody, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Ben Eager, Canadian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Ubaldo Jiménez, Dominican baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Leon Powe, American basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Maceo Rigters, Dutch footballer\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Fotios Papoulis, Greek footballer\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Maher Magri, Tunisian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Matt Simon, Australian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Astrid Jacobsen, Norwegian skier\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Shane Long, Irish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Ray Rice, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Asher Allen, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Greg Oden, American basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Marcel Schmelzer, German footballer\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Theo Robinson, English-Jamaican footballer\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Alizé Cornet, French tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Dean Whare, New Zealand rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Logic, American rapper\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Phil Wang, British-Malaysian comedian\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Marcus Canty, American singer and dancer\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Stefan Kolb, German footballer\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Alex MacDowall, English race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Rio Haryanto, Indonesian race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Joshua Ho-Sang, Canadian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1998 – Silento, American rapper, singer and songwriter\nBULLET::::- 239 – Cao Rui, Chinese emperor (b. 205)\nBULLET::::- 628 – Anastasius of Persia, monk\nBULLET::::- 906 – He, empress of the Tang Dynasty\nBULLET::::- 935 – Ma, empress of Southern Han\nBULLET::::- 1051 – Ælfric Puttoc, archbishop of York\nBULLET::::- 1170 – Wang Chongyang, Chinese Daoist and co-founder of the Quanzhen School (b. 1113)\nBULLET::::- 1188 – Ferdinand II of León (b. 1137)\nBULLET::::- 1341 – Louis I, Duke of Bourbon (b. 1279)\nBULLET::::- 1517 – Hadım Sinan Pasha, Ottoman politician, 32nd Grand Vizier of the Ottoman Empire (b. ?)\nBULLET::::- 1536 – Bernhard Knipperdolling, German religious leader (b. 1495)\nBULLET::::- 1536 – John of Leiden, Anabaptist leader from the Dutch city of Leiden (b. 1509)\nBULLET::::- 1552 – Edward Seymour, 1st Duke of Somerset, English general and politician, Lord High Treasurer of England (b. 1500)\nBULLET::::- 1560 – Wang Zhi, Chinese pirate\nBULLET::::- 1575 – James Hamilton, Duke of Châtellerault (b. 1516)\nBULLET::::- 1599 – Cristofano Malvezzi, Italian organist and composer (b. 1547)\nBULLET::::- 1666 – Shah Jahan, Mughal emperor (b. 1592)\nBULLET::::- 1750 – Franz Xaver Josef von Unertl, Bavarian politician (b. 1675)\nBULLET::::- 1763 – John Carteret, 2nd Earl Granville, English politician, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland (b. 1690)\nBULLET::::- 1767 – Johann Gottlob Lehmann, German meteorologist and geologist (b. 1719)\nBULLET::::- 1779 – Jeremiah Dixon, English surveyor and astronomer (b. 1733)\nBULLET::::- 1779 – Claudius Smith, American guerrilla leader (b. 1736)\nBULLET::::- 1798 – Lewis Morris, American judge and politician (b. 1726)\nBULLET::::- 1840 – Johann Friedrich Blumenbach, German physician, physiologist, and anthropologist (b. 1752)\nBULLET::::- 1850 – Vincent Pallotti, Italian missionary and saint (b. 1795)\nBULLET::::- 1879 – Anthony Durnford, Irish colonel (b. 1830)\nBULLET::::- 1879 – Henry Pulleine, English colonel (b. 1838)\nBULLET::::- 1892 – Joseph P. Bradley, American lawyer and jurist (b. 1813)\nBULLET::::- 1900 – David Edward Hughes, Welsh-American physicist, co-invented the microphone (b. 1831)\nBULLET::::- 1901 – Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom (b. 1819)\nBULLET::::- 1901 – Emil Erlenmeyer, German chemist and academic (b. 1825)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – George Streeter, American captain and businessman (b. 1837)\nBULLET::::- 1922 – Fredrik Bajer, Danish educator and politician, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1837)\nBULLET::::- 1922 – Pope Benedict XV (b. 1854)\nBULLET::::- 1922 – Camille Jordan, French mathematician and academic (b. 1838)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Fanny Bullock Workman, American geographer and mountain climber (b. 1859)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – James Ford Rhodes, American historian and author (b. 1848)\nBULLET::::- 1929 – R. C. Lehmann, English journalist, author, and politician (b. 1856)\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Stephen Mather, American businessman and conservationist, co-founded the Thorkildsen-Mather Borax Company (b. 1867)\nBULLET::::- 1931 – László Batthyány-Strattmann, Hungarian physician and ophthalmologist (b. 1870)\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Else Lasker-Schüler, German poet and playwright (b. 1869)\nBULLET::::- 1949 – William Thomas Walsh, American author, poet, and playwright (b. 1891)\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Alan Hale, Sr., American actor and director (b. 1892)\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Lawson Robertson, Scottish-American sprinter and high jumper (b. 1883)\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Ralph Barton Perry, American philosopher and academic (b. 1876)\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Mike Hawthorn, English race car driver (b. 1929)\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Marc Blitzstein, American pianist and composer (b. 1905)\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Herbert Marshall, English actor (b. 1890)\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Duke Kahanamoku, American swimmer and water polo player (b. 1890)\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Harry Frank Guggenheim, American businessman and publisher, co-founded \"Newsday\" (b. 1890)\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Lyndon B. Johnson, American lieutenant and politician, 36th President of the United States (b. 1908)\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Andrew George Burry, Swiss-American businessman and philanthropist (b. 1873)\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Ibrahim bin Abdullah Al Suwaiyel, Saudi Arabian diplomat (b. 1916)\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Oliver Leese, English general (b. 1894)\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Herbert Sutcliffe, English cricketer and soldier (b. 1894)\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Ali Hassan Salameh, Palestinian rebel leader (b. 1940)\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Yitzhak Baer, German-Israeli historian and academic (b. 1888)\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Ishtiaq Hussain Qureshi, Pakistani historian and academic (b. 1903)\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Eduardo Frei Montalva, Chilean lawyer and politician, 28th President of Chile (b. 1911)\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Arthur Bryant, English historian and journalist (b. 1899)\nBULLET::::- 1987 – R. Budd Dwyer, American educator and politician, 30th Treasurer of Pennsylvania (b. 1939)\nBULLET::::- 1989 – S. Vithiananthan, Sri Lankan author and academic (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Robert Choquette, Canadian author, poet and diplomat (b. 1905)\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Kōbō Abe, Japanese playwright and photographer (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Jean-Louis Barrault, French actor and director (b. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Telly Savalas, American actor (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Israel Eldad, Polish-Israeli philosopher and author (b. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Billy Mackenzie, Scottish singer-songwriter (b. 1957)\nBULLET::::- 1999 – Graham Staines, Australian-Indian missionary and translator (b. 1941)\nBULLET::::- 2000 – Craig Claiborne, American journalist, author, and critic (b. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 2000 – Anne Hébert, Canadian author and poet (b. 1916)\nBULLET::::- 2001 – Tommie Agee, American baseball player (b. 1942)\nBULLET::::- 2001 – Roy Brown, American clown and puppeteer (b. 1932)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Bill Mauldin, American soldier and cartoonist (b. 1921)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Billy May, American trumpet player and composer (b. 1916)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Tom Mead, Australian journalist and politician (b. 1918)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Ann Miller, American actress, singer, and dancer (b. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – César Gutiérrez, Venezuelan baseball player, coach, and manager (b. 1943)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Carlo Orelli, Italian soldier (b. 1894)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Consuelo Velázquez, Mexican pianist and songwriter (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Aydın Güven Gürkan, Turkish academic and politician, Turkish Minister of Labor and Social Security (b. 1941)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Ngô Quang Trưởng, Vietnamese general (b. 1929)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Abbé Pierre, French priest and activist (b. 1912)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Liz Renay, American actress, author and performer (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 2008 – Heath Ledger, Australian actor and director (b. 1979)\nBULLET::::- 2008 – Miles Lerman, Polish Holocaust survivor and activist (b. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 2009 – Billy Werber, American baseball player (b. 1908)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – Louis R. Harlan, American historian and author (b. 1922)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – Jean Simmons, English-American actress (b. 1929)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Simon Marsden, English photographer and author (b. 1948)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Joe Paterno, American football player and coach (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Clarence Tillenius, Canadian painter and environmentalist (b. 1913)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Dick Tufeld, American actor, announcer, narrator and voice actor (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Robert Bonnaud, French historian and academic (b. 1929)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Hinton Mitchem, American businessman and politician (b. 1938)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Maziar Partow, Iranian cinematographer (b. 1933)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Fabrizio de Miranda, Italian engineer and academic, co-designed the Rande Bridge (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Wendell H. Ford, American lieutenant and politician, 53rd Governor of Kentucky (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Margaret Bloy Graham, Canadian author and illustrator (b. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 2016 – Homayoun Behzadi, Iranian footballer and coach (b. 1942)\nBULLET::::- 2016 – Cecil Parkinson, English politician (b. 1931)\nBULLET::::- 2016 – Lois Ramsey, Australian actress (b. 1922)\nBULLET::::- 2016 – Kamer Genç, Turkish politician (b. 1940)\nBULLET::::- 2017 – Masaya Nakamura, Japanese businessman (b. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 2017 – Yordano Ventura, Dominican baseball player (b. 1991)\nBULLET::::- 2018 – Ursula K. Le Guin, American sci-fi and fantasy novelist (b. 1929)\nBULLET::::- Christian feast day:\nBULLET::::- Anastasius of Persia\nBULLET::::- Gaudentius of Novara\nBULLET::::- László Batthyány-Strattmann\nBULLET::::- Laura Vicuna\nBULLET::::- Vincent Pallotti\nBULLET::::- Vincent of Saragossa\nBULLET::::- Vincent, Orontius, and Victor\nBULLET::::- Blessed William Joseph Chaminade\nBULLET::::- January 22 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)\nBULLET::::- Day of Unity of Ukraine (Ukraine)\nBULLET::::- Grandfather's Day (Poland)\n\nBULLET::::- BBC: On This Day\nBULLET::::- Today in Canadian History\n"}
{"id": "15941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15941", "title": "Jean-Jacques Rousseau", "text": "Jean-Jacques Rousseau\n\nJean-Jacques Rousseau (, ; ; 28 June 1712 – 2 July 1778) was a Genevan philosopher, writer and composer. His political philosophy influenced the progress of the Enlightenment throughout Europe, as well as aspects of the French Revolution and the development of modern political, economic and educational thought.\n\nHis \"Discourse on Inequality\" and \"The Social Contract\" are cornerstones in modern political and social thought. Rousseau's sentimental novel \"Julie, or the New Heloise\" (1761) was important to the development of preromanticism and romanticism in fiction. His \"Emile, or On Education\" (1762) is an educational treatise on the place of the individual in society. Rousseau's autobiographical writings—the posthumously published \"Confessions\" (composed in 1769), which initiated the modern autobiography, and the unfinished \"Reveries of a Solitary Walker\" (composed 1776–1778)—exemplified the late-18th-century \"\", and featured an increased focus on subjectivity and introspection that later characterized modern writing.\n\nRousseau befriended fellow philosophy writer Denis Diderot in 1742, and would later write about Diderot's romantic troubles in his \"Confessions\". During the period of the French Revolution, Rousseau was the most popular of the philosophers among members of the Jacobin Club. He was interred as a national hero in the Panthéon in Paris, in 1794, 16 years after his death.\n\nRousseau was born in Geneva, which was at the time a city-state and a Protestant associate of the Swiss Confederacy. Since 1536, Geneva had been a Huguenot republic and the seat of Calvinism. Five generations before Rousseau, his ancestor Didier, a bookseller who may have published Protestant tracts, had escaped persecution from French Catholics by fleeing to Geneva in 1549, where he became a wine merchant.\nRousseau was proud that his family, of the \"moyen\" order (or middle-class), had voting rights in the city. Throughout his life, he generally signed his books \"Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Citizen of Geneva\".\n\nGeneva, in theory, was governed \"democratically\" by its male voting \"citizens\". The citizens were a minority of the population when compared to the immigrants, referred to as \"inhabitants\", whose descendants were called \"natives\" and continued to lack suffrage. In fact, rather than being run by vote of the \"citizens\", the city was ruled by a small number of wealthy families that made up the \"Council of Two Hundred\"; these delegated their power to a 25-member executive group from among them called the \"Little Council\".\n\nThere was much political debate within Geneva, extending down to the tradespeople. Much discussion was over the idea of the sovereignty of the people, of which the ruling class oligarchy was making a mockery. In 1707, a democratic reformer named Pierre Fatio protested this situation, saying \"a sovereign that never performs an act of sovereignty is an imaginary being\". He was shot by order of the Little Council. Jean-Jacques Rousseau's father, Isaac, was not in the city at this time, but Jean-Jacques's grandfather supported Fatio and was penalized for it.\n\nThe trade of watchmaking had become a family tradition by the time of Rousseau's father, Isaac Rousseau. Isaac followed his grandfather, father and brothers into the business, except for a short stint teaching dance as a dance master. Isaac, notwithstanding his artisan status, was well educated and a lover of music. \"A Genevan watchmaker\", Rousseau wrote, \"is a man who can be introduced anywhere; a Parisian watchmaker is only fit to talk about watches\".\n\nIn 1699, Isaac ran into political difficulty by entering a quarrel with visiting English officers, who in response drew their swords and threatened him. After local officials stepped in, it was Isaac who was punished, as Geneva was concerned with maintaining its ties to foreign powers.\n\nRousseau's mother, Suzanne Bernard Rousseau, was from an upper-class family. She was raised by her uncle Samuel Bernard, a Calvinist preacher. He cared for Suzanne after her father Jacques (who had run into trouble with the legal and religious authorities for fornication and having a mistress) died in his early 30s. In 1695, Suzanne had to answer charges that she had attended a street theater disguised as a peasant woman so she could gaze upon M. Vincent Sarrasin, whom she fancied despite his continuing marriage. After a hearing, she was ordered by the Genevan Consistory to never interact with him again. She married Rousseau's father at the age of 31. Isaac's sister had married Suzanne's brother eight years earlier, after she had become pregnant and they had been chastised by the Consistory. The child died at birth. Later, the young Rousseau was told a romantic fairy-tale about the situation by the adults in his family—a tale where young love was denied by a disapproving patriarch but that prevailed by sibling loyalty that, in the story, resulted in love conquering all and two marriages uniting the families on the same day. Rousseau never learnt the truth.\n\nRousseau was born on 28 June 1712, and he would later relate: \"I was born almost dying, they had little hope of saving me\". He was baptized on 4 July 1712, in the great cathedral. His mother died of puerperal fever nine days after his birth, which he later described as \"the first of my misfortunes\".\n\nHe and his older brother François were brought up by their father and a paternal aunt, also named Suzanne. When Rousseau was five, his father sold the house that the family had received from his mother's relatives. While the idea was that his sons would inherit the principal when grown up and he would live off the interest in the meantime, in the end the father took most of the substantial proceeds. With the selling of the house, the Rousseau family moved out of the upper-class neighborhood and moved into an apartment house in a neighborhood of craftsmen—silversmiths, engravers, and other watchmakers. Growing up around craftsmen, Rousseau would later contrast them favorably to those who produced more aesthetic works, writing \"those important persons who are called artists rather than artisans, work solely for the idle and rich, and put an arbitrary price on their baubles\". Rousseau was also exposed to class politics in this environment, as the artisans often agitated in a campaign of resistance against the privileged class running Geneva.\n\nRousseau had no recollection of learning to read, but he remembered how when he was five or six his father encouraged his love of reading:\n\nWitnessing the local townsfolk participate in militias made a big impression on Rousseau. Throughout his life, he would recall one scene where, after the volunteer militia had finished its manoeuvres, they began to dance around a fountain and most of the people from neighboring buildings came out to join them, including him and his father. Rousseau would always see militias as the embodiment of popular spirit in opposition to the armies of the rulers, whom he saw as disgraceful mercenaries.\n\nWhen Rousseau was ten, his father, an avid hunter, got into a legal quarrel with a wealthy landowner on whose lands he had been caught trespassing. To avoid certain defeat in the courts, he moved away to Nyon in the territory of Bern, taking Rousseau's aunt Suzanne with him. He remarried, and from that point Jean-Jacques saw little of him. Jean-Jacques was left with his maternal uncle, who packed him, along with his own son, Abraham Bernard, away to board for two years with a Calvinist minister in a hamlet outside Geneva. Here, the boys picked up the elements of mathematics and drawing. Rousseau, who was always deeply moved by religious services, for a time even dreamed of becoming a Protestant minister.\n\nVirtually all our information about Rousseau's youth has come from his posthumously published \"Confessions\", in which the chronology is somewhat confused, though recent scholars have combed the archives for confirming evidence to fill in the blanks. At age 13, Rousseau was apprenticed first to a notary and then to an engraver who beat him. At 15, he ran away from Geneva (on 14 March 1728) after returning to the city and finding the city gates locked due to the curfew.\n\nIn adjoining Savoy he took shelter with a Roman Catholic priest, who introduced him to Françoise-Louise de Warens, age 29. She was a noblewoman of Protestant background who was separated from her husband. As professional lay proselytizer, she was paid by the King of Piedmont to help bring Protestants to Catholicism. They sent the boy to Turin, the capital of Savoy (which included Piedmont, in what is now Italy), to complete his conversion. This resulted in his having to give up his Genevan citizenship, although he would later revert to Calvinism in order to regain it.\n\nIn converting to Catholicism, both De Warens and Rousseau were likely reacting to Calvinism's insistence on the total depravity of man. Leo Damrosch writes: \"An eighteenth-century Genevan liturgy still required believers to declare 'that we are miserable sinners, born in corruption, inclined to evil, incapable by ourselves of doing good'\". De Warens, a deist by inclination, was attracted to Catholicism's doctrine of forgiveness of sins.\n\nFinding himself on his own, since his father and uncle had more or less disowned him, the teenage Rousseau supported himself for a time as a servant, secretary, and tutor, wandering in Italy (Piedmont and Savoy) and France. During this time, he lived on and off with De Warens, whom he idolized and called his \"\"maman\"\". Flattered by his devotion, De Warens tried to get him started in a profession, and arranged formal music lessons for him. At one point, he briefly attended a seminary with the idea of becoming a priest.\n\nWhen Rousseau reached 20, De Warens took him as her lover, while intimate also with the steward of her house. The sexual aspect of their relationship (a \"ménage à trois\") confused Rousseau and made him uncomfortable, but he always considered De Warens the greatest love of his life. A rather profligate spender, she had a large library and loved to entertain and listen to music. She and her circle, comprising educated members of the Catholic clergy, introduced Rousseau to the world of letters and ideas. Rousseau had been an indifferent student, but during his 20s, which were marked by long bouts of hypochondria, he applied himself in earnest to the study of philosophy, mathematics, and music. At 25, he came into a small inheritance from his mother and used a portion of it to repay De Warens for her financial support of him. At 27, he took a job as a tutor in Lyon.\n\nIn 1742, Rousseau moved to Paris in order to present the Académie des Sciences with a new system of numbered musical notation he believed would make his fortune. His system, intended to be compatible with typography, is based on a single line, displaying numbers representing intervals between notes and dots and commas indicating rhythmic values. Believing the system was impractical, the Academy rejected it, though they praised his mastery of the subject, and urged him to try again. He befriended Denis Diderot that year, connecting over the discussion of literary endeavors.\nFrom 1743 to 1744, Rousseau had an honorable but ill-paying post as a secretary to the Comte de Montaigue, the French ambassador to Venice. This awoke in him a lifelong love for Italian music, particularly opera:\nRousseau's employer routinely received his stipend as much as a year late and paid his staff irregularly. After 11 months, Rousseau quit, taking from the experience a profound distrust of government bureaucracy.\n\nReturning to Paris, the penniless Rousseau befriended and became the lover of Thérèse Levasseur, a seamstress who was the sole support of her mother and numerous ne'er-do-well siblings. At first, they did not live together, though later Rousseau took Thérèse and her mother in to live with him as his servants, and himself assumed the burden of supporting her large family. According to his \"Confessions\", before she moved in with him, Thérèse bore him a son and as many as four other children (there is no independent verification for this number).\n\nRousseau wrote that he persuaded Thérèse to give each of the newborns up to a foundling hospital, for the sake of her \"honor\". \"Her mother, who feared the inconvenience of a brat, came to my aid, and she [Thérèse] allowed herself to be overcome\" (\"Confessions\"). In his letter to Madame de Francueil in 1751, he first pretended that he wasn't rich enough to raise his children, but in Book IX of the \"Confessions\" he gave the true reasons of his choice: \"I trembled at the thought of intrusting them to a family ill brought up, to be still worse educated. The risk of the education of the foundling hospital was much less\".\n\nTen years later, Rousseau made inquiries about the fate of his son, but no record could be found. When Rousseau subsequently became celebrated as a theorist of education and child-rearing, his abandonment of his children was used by his critics, including Voltaire and Edmund Burke, as the basis for \"ad hominem\" attacks.\n\nBeginning with some articles on music in 1749, Rousseau contributed numerous articles to Diderot and D'Alembert's great \"Encyclopédie\", the most famous of which was an article on political economy written in 1755.\n\nRousseau's ideas were the result of an almost obsessive dialogue with writers of the past, filtered in many cases through conversations with Diderot. In 1749, Rousseau was paying daily visits to Diderot, who had been thrown into the fortress of Vincennes under a \"lettre de cachet\" for opinions in his \"\"Lettre sur les aveugles\"\", that hinted at materialism, a belief in atoms, and natural selection. According to science historian Conway Zirkle, Rousseau saw the concept of natural selection \"as an agent for improving the human species.\"\n\nRousseau had read about an essay competition sponsored by the Académie de Dijon to be published in the \"Mercure de France\" on the theme of whether the development of the arts and sciences had been morally beneficial. He wrote that while walking to Vincennes (about three miles from Paris), he had a revelation that the arts and sciences were responsible for the moral degeneration of mankind, who were basically good by nature. Rousseau's 1750 \"Discourse on the Arts and Sciences\" was awarded the first prize and gained him significant fame.\n\nRousseau continued his interest in music. He wrote both the words and music of his opera \"Le devin du village\" (\"The Village Soothsayer\"), which was performed for King Louis XV in 1752. The king was so pleased by the work that he offered Rousseau a lifelong pension. To the exasperation of his friends, Rousseau turned down the great honor, bringing him notoriety as \"the man who had refused a king's pension\". He also turned down several other advantageous offers, sometimes with a brusqueness bordering on truculence that gave offense and caused him problems. The same year, the visit of a troupe of Italian musicians to Paris, and their performance of Giovanni Battista Pergolesi's \"La serva padrona\", prompted the Querelle des Bouffons, which pitted protagonists of French music against supporters of the Italian style. Rousseau as noted above, was an enthusiastic supporter of the Italians against Jean-Philippe Rameau and others, making an important contribution with his \"Letter on French Music\".\n\nOn returning to Geneva in 1754, Rousseau reconverted to Calvinism and regained his official Genevan citizenship. In 1755, Rousseau completed his second major work, the \"Discourse on the Origin and Basis of Inequality Among Men\" (the \"Discourse on Inequality\"), which elaborated on the arguments of the \"Discourse on the Arts and Sciences\".\n\nHe also pursued an unconsummated romantic attachment with the 25-year-old Sophie d'Houdetot, which partly inspired his epistolary novel, \"Julie, ou la nouvelle Héloïse\" (also based on memories of his idyllic youthful relationship with Mme de Warens). Sophie was the cousin and houseguest of Rousseau's patroness and landlady Madame d'Épinay, whom he treated rather highhandedly. He resented being at Mme. d'Épinay's beck and call and detested the insincere conversation and shallow atheism of the \"Encyclopedistes\" whom he met at her table. Wounded feelings gave rise to a bitter three-way quarrel between Rousseau and Madame d'Épinay; her lover, the journalist Grimm; and their mutual friend, Diderot, who took their side against Rousseau. Diderot later described Rousseau as being \"false, vain as Satan, ungrateful, cruel, hypocritical, and wicked... He sucked ideas from me, used them himself, and then affected to despise me\".\n\nRousseau's break with the \"Encyclopedistes\" coincided with the composition of his three major works, in all of which he emphasized his fervent belief in a spiritual origin of man's soul and the universe, in contradistinction to the materialism of Diderot, La Mettrie and D'Holbach. During this period, Rousseau enjoyed the support and patronage of Charles François Frédéric de Montmorency-Luxembourg and the Prince de Conti, two of the richest and most powerful nobles in France. These men truly liked Rousseau and enjoyed his ability to converse on any subject, but they also used him as a way of getting back at Louis XV and the political faction surrounding his mistress, Madame de Pompadour. Even with them, however, Rousseau went too far, courting rejection when he criticized the practice of tax farming, in which some of them engaged.\n\nRousseau's 800-page novel of sentiment, \"Julie, ou la nouvelle Héloïse\", was published in 1761 to immense success. The book's rhapsodic descriptions of the natural beauty of the Swiss countryside struck a chord in the public and may have helped spark the subsequent nineteenth-century craze for Alpine scenery. In 1762, Rousseau published \"Du Contrat Social, Principes du droit politique\" (in English, literally \"Of the Social Contract, Principles of Political Right\") in April. Even his friend Antoine-Jacques Roustan felt impelled to write a polite rebuttal of the chapter on Civil Religion in the \"Social Contract\", which implied that the concept of a Christian republic was paradoxical since Christianity taught submission rather than participation in public affairs. Rousseau helped Roustan find a publisher for the rebuttal.\n\nRousseau published \"Emile, or On Education\" in May. A famous section of \"Emile\", \"The Profession of Faith of a Savoyard Vicar\", was intended to be a defense of religious belief. Rousseau's choice of a Catholic vicar of humble peasant background (plausibly based on a kindly prelate he had met as a teenager) as a spokesman for the defense of religion was in itself a daring innovation for the time. The vicar's creed was that of Socinianism (or Unitarianism as it is called today). Because it rejected original sin and divine revelation, both Protestant and Catholic authorities took offense.\n\nMoreover, Rousseau advocated the opinion that, insofar as they lead people to virtue, all religions are equally worthy, and that people should therefore conform to the religion in which they have been brought up. This religious indifferentism caused Rousseau and his books to be banned from France and Geneva. He was condemned from the pulpit by the Archbishop of Paris, his books were burned and warrants were issued for his arrest. Former friends such as Jacob Vernes of Geneva could not accept his views, and wrote violent rebuttals.\n\nA sympathetic observer, David Hume \"professed no surprise when he learned that Rousseau's books were banned in Geneva and elsewhere\". Rousseau, he wrote, \"has not had the precaution to throw any veil over his sentiments; and, as he scorns to dissemble his contempt for established opinions, he could not wonder that all the zealots were in arms against him. The liberty of the press is not so secured in any country... as not to render such an open attack on popular prejudice somewhat dangerous.\"\n\nAfter Rousseau's \"Emile\" had outraged the French parliament, an arrest order was issued by parliament against him, causing him to flee to Switzerland. Subsequently, when the Swiss authorities also proved unsympathetic to him—condemning both \"Emile\", and also \"The Social Contract\"—Voltaire issued an invitation to Rousseau to come and reside with him, commenting that: \"I shall always love the author of the 'Vicaire savoyard' whatever he has done, and whatever he may do...Let him come here [to Ferney]! He must come! I shall receive him with open arms. He shall be master here more than I. I shall treat him like my own son.\"\n\nRousseau later expressed regret that he had not replied to Voltaire's invitation. In July 1762, after Rousseau was informed that he could not continue to reside in Bern, d'Alembert advised him to move to the Principality of Neuchâtel, ruled by Frederick the Great of Prussia. Subsequently, Rousseau accepted an invitation to reside in Môtiers, fifteen miles from Neuchâtel. On 11 July 1762, Rousseau wrote to Frederick, describing how he had been driven from France, from Geneva, and from Bern; and seeking Frederick's protection. He also mentioned that he had criticized Frederick in the past and would continue to be critical of Frederick in the future, stating however: \"Your Majesty may dispose of me as you like.\" Frederick, still in the middle of the Seven Years' War, then wrote to the local governor of Neuchatel, Marischal Keith who was a mutual friend of theirs:\nRousseau, touched by the help he received from Frederick, stated that from then onwards he took a keen interest in Frederick's activities. As the Seven Years' War was about to end, Rousseau wrote to Frederick again, thanking him for the help received and urging him to put an end to military activities and to endeavor to keep his subjects happy instead. Frederick made no known reply, but commented to Keith that Rousseau had given him a \"scolding\".\n\nFor more than two years (1762–1765) Rousseau lived at Môtiers, spending his time in reading and writing and meeting visitors such as James Boswell (December 1764). In the meantime, the local ministers had become aware of the apostasies in some of his writings, and resolved not to let him stay in the vicinity. The Neuchâtel Consistory summoned Rousseau to answer a charge of blasphemy. He wrote back asking to be excused due to his inability to sit for a long time due to his ailment. Subsequently, Rousseau's own pastor, Frédéric-Guillaume de Montmollin, started denouncing him publicly as the Antichrist. In one inflammatory sermon, Montmollin quoted Proverbs 15:8: \"The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, but the prayer of the upright is his delight\"; this was interpreted by everyone to mean that Rousseau's taking communion was detested by the Lord. The ecclesiastical attacks inflamed the parishioners, who proceeded to pelt Rousseau with stones when he would go out for walks. Around midnight of 6–7 September 1765, stones were thrown at the house Rousseau was staying in, and some glass windows were shattered. When a local official, Martinet, arrived at Rousseau's residence he saw so many stones on the balcony that he exclaimed \"My God, it's a quarry!\" At this point, Rousseau's friends in Môtiers advised him to leave the town.\n\nSince he wanted to remain in Switzerland, Rousseau decided to accept an offer to move to a tiny island, the Ile de St.-Pierre, having a solitary house. Although it was within the Canton of Bern, from where he had been expelled two years previously, he was informally assured that he could move into this island house without fear of arrest, and he did so (10 September 1765). However, on 17 October 1765, the Senate of Bern ordered Rousseau to leave the island and all Bernese territory within fifteen days. He replied, requesting permission to extend his stay, and offered to be incarcerated in any place within their jurisdiction with only a few books in his possession and permission to walk occasionally in a garden while living at his own expense. The Senate's response was to direct Rousseau to leave the island, and all Bernese territory, within twenty four hours. On 29 October 1765 he left the Ile de St.-Pierre and moved to Strasbourg. At this point:\n\nHe subsequently decided to accept Hume's invitation to go to England.\n\nOn 9 December 1765, having secured a passport from the French government to come to Paris, Rousseau left Strasbourg for Paris where he arrived after a week, and lodged in a palace of his friend, the Prince of Conti. Here he met Hume, and also numerous friends, and well wishers, and became a very conspicuous figure in the city. At this time, Hume wrote: \n\nOne significant meeting could have taken place at this time: Diderot wanted to reconcile and make amends with Rousseau. However, since both Diderot and Rousseau wanted the other person to take the initiative in this respect, no meeting between the two took place.\n\nBULLET::::- Walpole's Letter\nOn 1 January 1766, Grimm wrote a report to his clientele, in which he included a letter said to have been written by Frederick the Great to Rousseau. This letter had actually been composed by Horace Walpole as a playful hoax. Walpole had never met Rousseau, but he was well acquainted with Diderot and Grimm. The letter soon found wide publicity; Hume is believed to have been present, and to have participated in its creation. On 16 February 1766, Hume wrote to the Marquise de Brabantane: \"The only pleasantry I permitted myself in connection with the pretended letter of the King of Prussia was made by me at the dinner table of Lord Ossory.\" This letter was one of the reasons for the later rupture in Hume's relations with Rousseau.\n\nOn 4 January 1766, Rousseau left Paris along with Hume, the merchant De Luze, who was an old friend of Rousseau, and Rousseau's pet dog Sultan. After a four-day journey to Calais, where they stayed for two nights, the travelers embarked on a ship to Dover. On 13 January 1766 they arrived in London. Soon after their arrival, David Garrick arranged a box at the Drury Lane Theatre for Hume and Rousseau on a night when the King and Queen were also present. Garrick was himself performing in a comedy by himself, and also a tragedy by Voltaire. Rousseau became so excited during the performance that he leaned too far and almost fell out of the box; Hume observed that the King and Queen were looking at Rousseau more than at the performance. Afterwards, Garrick served supper for Rousseau who commended Garrick's acting: \"Sir, you have made me shed tears at your tragedy, and smile at your comedy, though I scarce understood a word of your language.\"\n\nAt this time, Hume had a favorable opinion of Rousseau; in a letter to Madame de Brabantane, Hume wrote that after observing Rousseau carefully he had concluded that he had never met a more affable and virtuous person. According to Hume, Rousseau was \"gentle, modest, affectionate, disinterested, of extreme sensitivity.\" Initially, Rousseau was lodged by Hume in the house of Madam Adams in London, but he began receiving so many visitors that he soon wanted to move to a quieter location. An offer came to lodge him in a Welsh monastery, and he was inclined to accept it, but Hume persuaded him to move to Chiswick. He now asked for Thérèse to rejoin him.\n\nMeanwhile, James Boswell was in Paris, and offered to escort Thérèse to Rousseau. (Boswell had earlier met Rousseau and Therese at Motiers; he had subsequently also sent Therese a garnet necklace and written to Rousseau seeking permission to occasionally communicate with her). Hume foresaw what was going to happen: \"I dread some event fatal to our friend's honor.\" Boswell and Therese were together for more than a week, and as per notes in Boswell's diary they consummated the relationship, having intercourse several times. On one occasion, Therese told Boswell: \"Don't imagine you are a better lover than Rousseau.\"\n\nSince Rousseau was keen to relocate to a more remote location, Richard Davenport—a wealthy and elderly widower who spoke French—offered to accommodate Thérèse and Rousseau at Wootton Hall. On 22 March, Rousseau and Therese set forth for Wootton, against Hume's advice. Hume and Rousseau would never meet again. Initially Rousseau was pleased with his new accommodation at Wootton Hall, and wrote favorably about the natural beauty of the place, and how he was feeling reborn, forgetting past sorrows.\n\nBULLET::::- Quarrel with Hume\nOn 3 April 1766, the letter featuring Horace Walpole's hoax on Rousseau was published in a British daily without mention of Walpole being the actual author; that the editor of the publication was Hume's personal friend compounded Rousseau's grief. Gradually articles critical of Rousseau started appearing in the British press; Rousseau felt that Hume, as his host, ought to have defended him. Moreover, in Rousseau's estimate, some of the public criticism contained details which only Hume was privy to. Further, Rousseau was aggrieved to find that Hume had been lodging in London with François Tronchin, son of Rousseau's enemy in Geneva.\n\nAbout this time, Voltaire anonymously published his \"Letter to Dr. J.-J. Pansophe\" in which he gave extracts from many of Rousseau's prior statements critical of the British; the most damaging portions of Voltaire's writeup were reprinted in a London periodical. Rousseau now decided that there was a conspiracy afoot to defame him. A further cause for Rousseau's displeasure was his concern that Hume was tampering with his mail. The misunderstanding had arisen because Rousseau tired of receiving voluminous correspondence whose postage he had to pay. Hume offered to open Rousseau's mail himself and forward the important letters to Rousseau; this offer was accepted. However, there is some evidence of Hume intercepting even Rousseau's outgoing mail.\n\nAfter some correspondence with Rousseau, which included an eighteen-page letter from Rousseau describing the reasons for his resentment, Hume concluded that Rousseau was losing his mental balance. On learning that Rousseau had denounced him to his Parisian friends, Hume sent a copy of Rousseau's long letter to Madame de Boufflers. She replied stating that Hume's alleged participation in the composition of Horace Walpole's \"faux\" letter was the reason for Rousseau's anger in her estimate.\n\nWhen Hume learnt that Rousseau was writing the \"Confessions\", he assumed that the present dispute would feature in the book. Adam Smith, Turgot, Marischal Keith, Horace Walpole, and Mme de Boufflers advised Hume not to make his quarrel with Rousseau public; however, many members of D'Holbach's Coterie—particularly, d'Alembert—urged him to reveal his version of the events. In October 1766, Hume's version of the quarrel was translated into French and published in France; in November it was published in England. Grimm included it in his \"correspondance\"; ultimately, \n\nAfter the dispute became public, due in part to comments from notable publishers like Andrew Millar, Walpole told Hume that quarrels such as this only end up becoming a source of amusement for Europe. Diderot took a charitable view of the mess: \"I knew these two philosophers well. I could write a play about them that would make you weep, and it would excuse them both.\" Amidst the controversy surrounding his quarrel with Hume, Rousseau maintained a public silence; but, he resolved now to return to France. To encourage him to do so swiftly, Thérèse advised him that the servants at Wootton Hall sought to poison him. On 22 May 1767, Rousseau and Thérèse embarked from Dover to Calais.\n\nOn 22 May 1767, Rousseau reentered France even though an arrest warrant against him was still in place. He had taken an assumed name, but was recognized, and a banquet in his honor was held by the city of Amiens. Many French nobles offered him a residence at this time. Initially, Rousseau decided to stay in an estate near Paris belonging to Mirabeau. Subsequently, on 21 June 1767, he moved to a chateau of the Prince of Conti in Trie.\n\nAround this time, Rousseau started developing feelings of paranoia, anxiety, and of a conspiracy against him. Most of this was just his imagination at work, but on 29 January 1768, the theatre at Geneva was destroyed through burning, and Voltaire mendaciously accused Rousseau of being the culprit. In June 1768, Rousseau left Trie, leaving Therese behind, and went first to Lyon, and subsequently to Bourgoin. He now invited Therese to this place and \"married\" her under his alias \"Renou\" in a faux civil ceremony in Bourgoin on 30 August 1768.\n\nIn January 1769, Rousseau and Thérèse went to live in a farmhouse near Grenoble. Here he practiced botany and completed the \"Confessions\". At this time he expressed regret for placing his children in an orphanage. On 10 April 1770, Rousseau and Therese left for Lyon where he befriended Horace Coignet, a fabric designer and amateur musician. At Rousseau's suggestion, Coignet composed musical interludes for Rousseau's prose poem \"Pygmalion\"; this was performed in Lyon together with Rousseau's romance \"The Village Soothsayer\" to public acclaim. On 8 June, Rousseau and Therese left Lyon for Paris; they reached Paris on 24 June.\n\nIn Paris, Rousseau and Therese lodged in an unfashionable neighborhood of the city, the Rue Platrière—now called the Rue Jean-Jacques Rousseau. He now supported himself financially by copying music, and continued his study of botany. At this time also, he wrote his \"Letters on the Elements of Botany\". These consisted of a series of letters Rousseau wrote to Mme Delessert in Lyon to help her daughters learn the subject. These letters received widespread acclaim when they were eventually published posthumously. \"It's a true pedagogical model, and it complements \"Emile\",\" commented Goethe.\n\nFor defending his reputation against hostile gossip, Rousseau had begun writing the \"Confessions\" in 1765. In November 1770, these were completed, and although he did not wish to publish them at this time, he began to offer group readings of certain portions of the book. Between December 1770, and May 1771, Rousseau made at least four group readings of his book with the final reading lasting seventeen hours. A witness to one of these sessions, Claude Joseph Dorat, wrote: \n\nAfter May 1771, there were no more group readings because Madame d'Épinay wrote to the chief of police, who was her friend, to put a stop to Rousseau's readings so as to safeguard her privacy. The police called on Rousseau, who agreed to stop the readings. The \"Confessions\" were finally published posthumously in 1782.\n\nIn 1772, Rousseau was invited to present recommendations for a new constitution for the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, resulting in the \"Considerations on the Government of Poland\", which was to be his last major political work.\n\nAlso in 1772, Rousseau began writing his \"\", which was another attempt to reply to his critics. He completed writing it in 1776. The book is in the form of three dialogues between two characters; a \"Frenchman\" and \"Rousseau\" who argue about the merits and demerits of a third character—an author called \"Jean-Jacques\". It has been described as his most unreadable work; in the foreword to the book, Rousseau admits that it may be repetitious and disorderly, but he begs the reader's indulgence on the grounds that he needs to defend his reputation from slander before he dies.\n\nIn 1766, Rousseau had impressed Hume with his physical prowess by spending ten hours at night on the deck in severe weather during the journey by ship from Calais to Dover while Hume was confined to his bunk. \"When all the seamen were almost frozen to death...he caught no harm...He is one of the most robust men I have ever known,\" Hume noted. By 1770, Rousseau's urinary disease had also been greatly alleviated after he stopped listening to the advice of doctors. At that time, notes Damrosch, it was often better to let nature take its own course rather than subject oneself to medical procedures. his general health had also improved. However, on 24 October 1776, as he was walking on a narrow street in Paris a nobleman's carriage came rushing by from the opposite direction; flanking the carriage was a galloping Great Dane belonging to the nobleman. Rousseau was unable to dodge both the carriage and the dog, and was knocked down by the Great Dane. He seems to have suffered a concussion and neurological damage. His health began to decline; Rousseau's friend Corancez described the appearance of certain symptoms which indicate that Rousseau started suffering from epileptic seizures after the accident.\n\nIn 1777, Rousseau received a royal visitor, when the Holy Roman Emperor Joseph II came to meet him. His free entry to the Opera had been renewed by this time and he would go there occasionally. At this time also (1777–78), he composed one of his finest works, \"Reveries of a Solitary Walker\".\n\nIn the spring of 1778, the Marquis Girardin invited Rousseau to live in a cottage in his château at Ermenonville. Rousseau and Thérèse went there on 20 May. Rousseau spent his time at the château in collecting botanical specimens, and teaching botany to Girardin's son. He ordered books from Paris on grasses, mosses and mushrooms, and made plans to complete his unfinished \"Emile and Sophie\" and \"Daphnis and Chloe\".\n\nOn 1 July, a visitor commented that \"men are wicked\", to which Rousseau replied with \"men are wicked, yes, but man is good\"; in the evening there was a concert in the château in which Rousseau played on the piano his own composition of the Willow Song from \"Othello\". On this day also, he had a hearty meal with Girardin's family; the next morning, as he was about to go teach music to Girardin's daughter, he died of cerebral bleeding resulting in an apoplectic stroke. It is now believed that repeated falls, including the accident involving the Great Dane, may have contributed to Rousseau's stroke.\n\nFollowing his death, Grimm, Madame de Staël and others spread the false news that Rousseau had committed suicide; according to other gossip, Rousseau was insane when he died. All those who met him in his last days agree that he was in a serene frame of mind at this time.\n\nOn 4 July 1778, Rousseau was buried on the , which became a place of pilgrimage for his many admirers. On 11 October 1794, his remains were moved to the Panthéon, where they were placed near the remains of Voltaire.\n\nIn common with other philosophers of the day, Rousseau looked to a hypothetical \"state of nature\" as a normative guide.\n\nRousseau criticized Hobbes for asserting that since man in the \"state of nature... has no idea of goodness he must be naturally wicked; that he is vicious because he does not know virtue\". On the contrary, Rousseau holds that \"uncorrupted morals\" prevail in the \"state of nature\" and he especially praised the admirable moderation of the Caribbeans in expressing the sexual urge despite the fact that they live in a hot climate, which \"always seems to inflame the passions\".\n\nRousseau asserted that the stage of human development associated with what he called \"savages\" was the best or optimal in human development, between the less-than-optimal extreme of brute animals on the one hand and the extreme of decadent civilization on the other. \"...[N]othing is so gentle as man in his primitive state, when placed by nature at an equal distance from the stupidity of brutes and the fatal enlightenment of civil man\". Referring to the stage of human development which Rousseau associates with savages, Rousseau writes:\nThe perspective of many of today's environmentalists can be traced back to Rousseau who believed that the more men deviated from the state of nature, the worse off they would be. Espousing the belief that all degenerates in men's hands, Rousseau taught that men would be free, wise, and good in the state of nature and that instinct and emotion, when not distorted by the unnatural limitations of civilization, are nature's voices and instructions to the good life. Rousseau's \"noble savage\" stands in direct opposition to the man of culture.\n\nBULLET::::- Stages of human development\n\nRousseau believed that the savage stage was not the first stage of human development, but the third stage. Rousseau held that this third savage stage of human societal development was an optimum, between the extreme of the state of brute animals and animal-like \"ape-men\" on the one hand and the extreme of decadent civilized life on the other. This has led some critics to attribute to Rousseau the invention of the idea of the noble savage, which Arthur Lovejoy conclusively showed misrepresents Rousseau's thought. Rousseau's view was that morality was not embued by society, but rather \"natural\" in the sense of \"innate\". It could be seen as an outgrowth from man's instinctive disinclination to witness suffering, from which arise emotions of compassion or empathy. These are sentiments shared with animals, and whose existence even Hobbes acknowledged.\n\nRousseau's ideas of human development were highly interconnected with forms of mediation, or the processes that individual humans use to interact with themselves and others while using an alternate perspective or thought process. According to Rousseau, these were developed through the innate perfectibility of humanity. These include a sense of self, morality, pity, and imagination. Rousseau's writings are purposely ambiguous concerning the formation of these processes to the point that mediation is always intrinsically part of humanity's development. An example of this is the notion that as an individual, one needs an alternative perspective to come to the realization that they are a 'self'.\n\nIn Rousseau's philosophy, society's negative influence on men centers on its transformation of \"amour de soi\", a positive self-love, into \"amour-propre\", or pride. \"Amour de soi\" represents the instinctive human desire for self-preservation, combined with the human power of reason. In contrast, \"amour-propre\" is artificial and encourages man to compare himself to others, thus creating unwarranted fear and allowing men to take pleasure in the pain or weakness of others. Rousseau was not the first to make this distinction. It had been invoked by Vauvenargues, among others.\n\nIn the \"Discourse on the Arts and Sciences\" Rousseau argues that the arts and sciences have not been beneficial to humankind, because they arose not from authentic human needs but rather as a result of pride and vanity. Moreover, the opportunities they create for idleness and luxury have contributed to the corruption of man. He proposed that the progress of knowledge had made governments more powerful and had crushed individual liberty; and he concluded that material progress had actually undermined the possibility of true friendship by replacing it with jealousy, fear, and suspicion.\n\nIn contrast to the optimistic view of other Enlightenment figures, for Rousseau, progress has been inimical to the well-being of humanity, that is, unless it can be counteracted by the cultivation of civic morality and duty. Only in civil society can man be ennobled—through the use of reason:\nSociety corrupts men only insofar as the Social Contract has not \"de facto\" succeeded, as we see in contemporary society as described in the \"Discourse on Inequality\" (1754). In this essay, which elaborates on the ideas introduced in the \"Discourse on the Arts and Sciences\", Rousseau traces man's social evolution from a primitive state of nature to modern society. The earliest solitary humans possessed a basic drive for self-preservation and a natural disposition to compassion or pity. They differed from animals, however, in their capacity for free will and their potential perfectibility. As they began to live in groups and form clans they also began to experience family love, which Rousseau saw as the source of the greatest happiness known to humanity.\n\nAs long as differences in wealth and status among families were minimal, the first coming together in groups was accompanied by a fleeting golden age of human flourishing. The development of agriculture, metallurgy, private property, and the division of labour and resulting dependency on one another, however, led to economic inequality and conflict. As population pressures forced them to associate more and more closely, they underwent a psychological transformation: they began to see themselves through the eyes of others and came to value the good opinion of others as essential to their self-esteem.\n\nRousseau posits that the original, deeply flawed Social Contract (i.e., that of Hobbes), which led to the modern state, was made at the suggestion of the rich and powerful, who tricked the general population into surrendering their liberties to them and instituted inequality as a fundamental feature of human society. Rousseau's own conception of the Social Contract can be understood as an alternative to this fraudulent form of association.\n\nAt the end of the \"Discourse on Inequality\", Rousseau explains how the desire to have value in the eyes of others comes to undermine personal integrity and authenticity in a society marked by interdependence, and hierarchy. In the last chapter of the \"Social Contract\", Rousseau would ask 'What is to be done?' He answers that now all men can do is to cultivate virtue in themselves and submit to their lawful rulers. To his readers, however, the inescapable conclusion was that a new and more equitable Social Contract was needed.\n\nLike other Enlightenment philosophers, Rousseau was critical of the Atlantic slave trade.\n\n\"The Social Contract\" outlines the basis for a legitimate political order within a framework of classical republicanism. Published in 1762, it became one of the most influential works of political philosophy in the Western tradition. It developed some of the ideas mentioned in an earlier work, the article \"Économie Politique\" (\"Discourse on Political Economy\"), featured in Diderot's \"Encyclopédie\". The treatise begins with the dramatic opening lines, \"Man is born free, and everywhere he is in chains. Those who think themselves the masters of others are indeed greater slaves than they.\"\n\nRousseau claimed that the state of nature was a primitive condition without law or morality, which human beings left for the benefits and necessity of cooperation. As society developed, the division of labor and private property required the human race to adopt institutions of law. In the degenerate phase of society, man is prone to be in frequent competition with his fellow men while also becoming increasingly dependent on them. This double pressure threatens both his survival and his freedom.\n\nAccording to Rousseau, by joining together into civil society through the social contract and abandoning their claims of natural right, individuals can both preserve themselves and remain free. This is because submission to the authority of the general will of the people as a whole guarantees individuals against being subordinated to the wills of others and also ensures that they obey themselves because they are, collectively, the authors of the law.\n\nAlthough Rousseau argues that sovereignty (or the power to make the laws) should be in the hands of the people, he also makes a sharp distinction between the sovereign and the government. The government is composed of magistrates, charged with implementing and enforcing the general will. The \"sovereign\" is the rule of law, ideally decided on by direct democracy in an assembly.\n\nRousseau opposed the idea that the people should exercise sovereignty via a representative assembly (Book III, Chapter XV). He approved the kind of republican government of the city-state, for which Geneva provided a model—or would have done if renewed on Rousseau's principles. France could not meet Rousseau's criterion of an ideal state because it was too big. Much subsequent controversy about Rousseau's work has hinged on disagreements concerning his claims that citizens constrained to obey the general will are thereby rendered free:\nThe notion of the general will is wholly central to Rousseau's theory of political legitimacy. … It is, however, an unfortunately obscure and controversial notion. Some commentators see it as no more than the dictatorship of the proletariat or the tyranny of the urban poor (such as may perhaps be seen in the French Revolution). Such was not Rousseau's meaning. This is clear from the \"Discourse on Political Economy\", where Rousseau emphasizes that the general will exists to protect individuals against the mass, not to require them to be sacrificed to it. He is, of course, sharply aware that men have selfish and sectional interests which will lead them to try to oppress others. It is for this reason that loyalty to the good of all alike must be a supreme (although not exclusive) commitment by everyone, not only if a truly general will is to be heeded but also if it is to be formulated successfully in the first place\".\n\nRousseau's philosophy of education concerns itself not with particular techniques of imparting information and concepts, but rather with developing the pupil's character and moral sense, so that he may learn to practice self-mastery and remain virtuous even in the unnatural and imperfect society in which he will have to live. The hypothetical boy, Émile, is to be raised in the countryside, which, Rousseau believes, is a more natural and healthy environment than the city, under the guardianship of a tutor who will guide him through various learning experiences arranged by the tutor. Today we would call this the disciplinary method of \"natural consequences\". Rousseau felt that children learn right and wrong through experiencing the consequences of their acts rather than through physical punishment. The tutor will make sure that no harm results to Émile through his learning experiences.\n\nRousseau became an early advocate of developmentally appropriate education; his description of the stages of child development mirrors his conception of the evolution of culture. He divides childhood into stages:\nBULLET::::1. the first to the age of about 12, when children are guided by their emotions and impulses\nBULLET::::2. during the second stage, from 12 to about 16, reason starts to develop\nBULLET::::3. finally the third stage, from the age of 16 onwards, when the child develops into an adult\n\nRousseau recommends that the young adult learn a manual skill such as carpentry, which requires creativity and thought, will keep him out of trouble, and will supply a fallback means of making a living in the event of a change of fortune (the most illustrious aristocratic youth to have been educated this way may have been Louis XVI, whose parents had him learn the skill of locksmithing). The sixteen-year-old is also ready to have a companion of the opposite sex.\n\nAlthough his ideas foreshadowed modern ones in many ways, in one way they do not: Rousseau was a believer in the moral superiority of the patriarchal family on the antique Roman model. Sophie, the young woman Émile is destined to marry, as his representative of ideal womanhood, is educated to be governed by her husband while Émile, as his representative of the ideal man, is educated to be self-governing. This is not an accidental feature of Rousseau's educational and political philosophy; it is essential to his account of the distinction between private, personal relations and the public world of political relations. The private sphere as Rousseau imagines it depends on the subordination of women, in order for both it and the public political sphere (upon which it depends) to function as Rousseau imagines it could and should. Rousseau anticipated the modern idea of the bourgeois nuclear family, with the mother at home taking responsibility for the household and for childcare and early education.\n\nFeminists, beginning in the late 18th century with Mary Wollstonecraft in 1792, have criticized Rousseau for his confinement of women to the domestic sphere—unless women were domesticated and constrained by modesty and shame, he feared \"men would be tyrannized by women… For, given the ease with which women arouse men's senses—men would finally be their victims…\" His contemporaries saw it differently because Rousseau thought that mothers should breastfeed their children. Marmontel wrote that his wife thought, \"One must forgive something,\" she said, \"in one who has taught us to be mothers.\"\n\nRousseau's ideas have influenced progressive \"child-centered\" education. John Darling's 1994 book \"Child-Centered Education and its Critics\" portrays the history of modern educational theory as a series of footnotes to Rousseau, a development he regards as bad. Good or bad, the theories of educators such as Rousseau's near contemporaries Pestalozzi, Mme. de Genlis and, later, Maria Montessori and John Dewey, which have directly influenced modern educational practices, do have significant points in common with those of Rousseau.\n\nHaving converted to Roman Catholicism early in life and returned to the austere Calvinism of his native Geneva as part of his period of moral reform, Rousseau maintained a profession of that religious philosophy and of John Calvin as a modern lawgiver throughout the remainder of his life. Unlike many of the more agnostic Enlightenment philosophers, Rousseau affirmed the necessity of religion. His views on religion presented in his works of philosophy, however, may strike some as discordant with the doctrines of both Catholicism and Calvinism.\n\nRousseau's strong endorsement of religious toleration, as expounded in \"Émile\", was interpreted as advocating indifferentism, a heresy, and led to the condemnation of the book in both Calvinist Geneva and Catholic Paris. Although he praised the Bible, he was disgusted by the Christianity of his day. Rousseau's assertion in \"The Social Contract\" that true followers of Christ would not make good citizens may have been another reason for his condemnation in Geneva. He also repudiated the doctrine of original sin, which plays a large part in Calvinism. In his \"Letter to Beaumont\", Rousseau wrote, \"there is no original perversity in the human heart.\"\n\nIn the 18th century, many deists viewed God merely as an abstract and impersonal creator of the universe, likened to a giant machine. Rousseau's deism differed from the usual kind in its emotionality. He saw the presence of God in the creation as good, and separate from the harmful influence of society. Rousseau's attribution of a spiritual value to the beauty of nature anticipates the attitudes of 19th-century Romanticism towards nature and religion. (Historians—notably William Everdell, Graeme Garrard, and Darrin McMahon—have additionally situated Rousseau within the Counter-Enlightenment.) Rousseau was upset that his deism was so forcefully condemned, while those of the more atheistic philosophers were ignored. He defended himself against critics of his religious views in his \"Letter to Mgr de Beaumont, the Archbishop of Paris\", \"in which he insists that freedom of discussion in religious matters is essentially more religious than the attempt to impose belief by force.\"\n\nRousseau's idea of the \"volonté générale\" (\"general will\") was not original with him but rather belonged to a well-established technical vocabulary of juridical and theological writings in use at the time. The phrase was used by Diderot and also by Montesquieu (and by his teacher, the Oratorian friar Nicolas Malebranche). It served to designate the common interest embodied in legal tradition, as distinct from and transcending people's private and particular interests at any particular time. It displayed a rather democratic ideology, as it declared that the citizens of a given nation should carry out whatever actions they deem necessary in their own sovereign assembly.\n\nThe concept was also an important aspect of the more radical 17th-century republican tradition of Spinoza, from whom Rousseau differed in important respects, but not in his insistence on the importance of equality:\nRobespierre and Saint-Just, during the Reign of Terror, regarded themselves to be principled egalitarian republicans, obliged to do away with superfluities and corruption; in this they were inspired most prominently by Rousseau. According to Robespierre, the deficiencies in individuals were rectified by upholding the 'common good' which he conceptualized as the collective will of the people; this idea was derived from Rousseau's \"General Will\". The revolutionaries were also inspired by Rousseau to introduce Deism as the new official civil religion of France:\n\nRousseau's influence on the French Revolution was noted by Edmund Burke, who critiqued Rousseau in \"Reflections on the Revolution in France,\" and this critique reverberated throughout Europe, leading Catherine the Great to ban his works. This connection between Rousseau and the French Revolution (especially the Terror) persisted through the next century. As François Furet notes that “we can see that for the whole of the nineteenth century Rousseau was at the heart of the interpretation of the Revolution for both its admirers and its critics.\"\n\nAccording to some scholars, Rousseau exercised minimal influence on the Founding Fathers of the United States, despite similarities between their ideas. They shared beliefs regarding the self-evidence that \"all men are created equal,\" and the conviction that citizens of a republic be educated at public expense. A parallel can be drawn between the United States Constitution's concept of the \"general welfare\" and Rousseau's concept of the \"general will\". Further commonalities exist between Jeffersonian democracy and Rousseau's praise of Switzerland and Corsica's economies of isolated and independent homesteads, and his endorsement of a well-regulated militia, such as those of the Swiss cantons.\n\nHowever, Will and Ariel Durant have opined that Rousseau had a definite political influence on America. According to them: \n\nOne of Rousseau's most important American followers was textbook writer Noah Webster (1758–1843), who was influenced by Rousseau's ideas on pedagogy in \"Emile\" (1762). Webster structured his \"Speller\" in accord with Rousseau's ideas about the stages of a child's intellectual development.\n\nRousseau's writings perhaps had an indirect influence on American literature through the writings of Wordsworth and Kant, whose works were important to the New England transcendentalist Ralph Waldo Emerson, as well as on Unitarians such as theologian William Ellery Channing. \"The Last of the Mohicans\" and other American novels reflect republican and egalitarian ideals present alike in Thomas Paine and in English Romantic primitivism.\n\nThe first to criticize Rousseau were his fellow \"Philosophes\", above all, Voltaire. According to Jacques Barzun, Voltaire was annoyed by the first discourse, and outraged by the second. Voltaire's reading of the second discourse was that Rousseau would like the reader to \"walk on all fours\" befitting a savage.\n\nSamuel Johnson told Boswell, \"I think him one of the worst of men; a rascal, who ought to be hunted out of society, as he has been\".\n\nJean-Baptiste Blanchard was his leading Catholic opponent. Blanchard rejects Rousseau's negative education, in which one must wait until a child has grown to develop reason. The child would find more benefit from learning in his earliest years. He also disagreed with his ideas about female education, declaring that women are a dependent lot. So removing them from their motherly path is unnatural, as it would lead to the unhappiness of both men and women.\n\nBarzun states that, contrary to myth, Rousseau was no primitivist; for him:The model man is the independent farmer, free of superiors and self-governing. This was cause enough for the \"philosophes\"' hatred of their former friend. Rousseau's unforgivable crime was his rejection of the graces and luxuries of civilized existence. Voltaire had sung \"The superfluous, that most necessary thing.\" For the high bourgeois standard of living Rousseau would substitute the middling peasant's. It was the country versus the city—an exasperating idea for them, as was the amazing fact that every new work of Rousseau's was a huge success, whether the subject was politics, theater, education, religion, or a novel about love.\n\nAs early as 1788, Madame de Staël published her \"Letters on the works and character of J.-J. Rousseau\". In 1819, in his famous speech \"On Ancient and Modern Liberty\", the political philosopher Benjamin Constant, a proponent of constitutional monarchy and representative democracy, criticized Rousseau, or rather his more radical followers (specifically the Abbé de Mably), for allegedly believing that \"everything should give way to collective will, and that all restrictions on individual rights would be amply compensated by participation in social power.\"\n\nFrederic Bastiat severely criticized Rousseau in several of his works, most notably in \"The Law\", in which, after analyzing Rousseau's own passages, he stated that:\n\nBastiat believed that Rousseau wished to ignore forms of social order created by the people—viewing them as a thoughtless mass to be shaped by philosophers. Bastiat, who is considered by thinkers associated with the Austrian School of Economics to be one of the precursors of the \"spontaneous order\", presented his own vision of what he considered to be the \"Natural Order\" in a simple economic chain in which multiple parties might interact without necessarily even knowing each other, cooperating and fulfilling each other's needs in accordance with basic economic laws such as supply and demand. In such a chain, in order to produce clothing, multiple parties have to act independently—\"e.g.\" farmers to fertilize and cultivate land to produce fodder for the sheep, people to shear them, transport the wool, turn it into cloth, and another to tailor and sell it. Those persons engage in economic exchange by nature, and don't need to be ordered to, nor do their efforts need to be centrally coordinated. Such chains are present in every branch of human activity, in which individuals produce or exchange goods and services, and together, naturally create a complex social order that does not require external inspiration, central coordination of efforts, or bureaucratic control to benefit society as a whole. This, according to Bastiat, is a proof that humanity itself is capable of creating a complex socioeconomic order that might be superior to an arbitrary vision of a philosopher.\n\nBastiat also believed that Rousseau contradicted himself when presenting his views concerning human nature; if nature is \"sufficiently invincible to regain its empire\", why then would it need philosophers to direct it back to a natural state? Conversely, he believed that humanity would choose what it would have without philosophers to guide it, in accordance with the laws of economy and human nature itself. Another point of criticism Bastiat raised was that living purely in nature would doom mankind to suffer unnecessary hardships.\n\nThe Marquis de Sade's \"Justine, or the Misfortunes of Virtue\" (1791) partially parodied and used as inspiration Rousseau's sociological and political concepts in the \"Discourse on Inequality\" and \"The Social Contract\". Concepts such as the state of nature, civilization being the catalyst for corruption and evil, and humans \"signing\" a contract to mutually give up freedoms for the protection of rights, particularly referenced. The Comte de Gernande in \"Justine\", for instance, after Thérèse asks him how he justifies abusing and torturing women, states: The necessity mutually to render one another happy cannot legitimately exist save between two persons equally furnished with the capacity to do one another hurt and, consequently, between two persons of commensurate strength: such an association can never come into being unless a contract [\"un pacte\"] is immediately formed between these two persons, which obligates each to employ against each other no kind of force but what will not be injurious to either. . . [W]hat sort of a fool would the stronger have to be in order to subscribe to such an agreement?\n\nEdmund Burke formed an unfavorable impression of Rousseau when the latter visited England with Hume and later drew a connection between Rousseau's egoistic philosophy and his personal vanity, saying Rousseau \"entertained no principle... but vanity. With this vice he was possessed to a degree little short of madness\".\n\nCharles Dudley Warner wrote about Rousseau in his essay, \"Equality\"; \"Rousseau borrowed from Hobbes as well as from Locke in his conception of popular sovereignty; but this was not his only lack of originality. His discourse on primitive society, his unscientific and unhistoric notions about the original condition of man, were those common in the middle of the eighteenth century.\"\n\nIn 1919, Irving Babbitt, founder of a movement called the \"New Humanism\", wrote a critique of what he called \"sentimental humanitarianism\", for which he blamed Rousseau. Babbitt's depiction of Rousseau was countered in a celebrated and much reprinted essay by A.O. Lovejoy in 1923. In France, fascist theorist Charles Maurras, founder of \"Action Française\", \"had no compunctions in laying the blame for both \"Romantisme et Révolution\" firmly on Rousseau in 1922.\"\n\nDuring the Cold War, Rousseau was criticized for his association with nationalism and its attendant abuses, for example in . This came to be known among scholars as the \"totalitarian thesis\". Political scientist J.S. Maloy states that \"the twentieth century added Nazism and Stalinism to Jacobinism on the list of horrors for which Rousseau could be blamed. […] Rousseau was considered to have advocated just the sort of invasive tampering with human nature which the totalitarian regimes of mid-century had tried to instantiate.\" But he adds that \"The totalitarian thesis in Rousseau studies has, by now, been discredited as an attribution of real historical influence.\" Arthur Melzer, however, while conceding that Rousseau would not have approved of modern nationalism, observes that his theories do contain the \"seeds of nationalism\", insofar as they set forth the \"politics of identification\", which are rooted in sympathetic emotion. Melzer also believes that in admitting that people's talents are unequal, Rousseau therefore tacitly condones the tyranny of the few over the many. Others counter, however, that Rousseau was concerned with the concept of equality under the law, not equality of talents. For Stephen T. Engel, on the other hand, Rousseau's nationalism anticipated modern theories of \"imagined communities\" that transcend social and religious divisions within states.\n\nOn similar grounds, one of Rousseau's strongest critics during the second half of the 20th century was political philosopher Hannah Arendt. Using Rousseau's thought as an example, Arendt identified the notion of sovereignty with that of the general will. According to her, it was this desire to establish a single, unified will based on the stifling of opinion in favor of public passion that contributed to the excesses of the French Revolution.\n\nThe book \"Rousseau and Revolution\", by Will and Ariel Durant, begins with the following words about Rousseau:\n\nThe German writers Goethe, Schiller, and Herder have stated that Rousseau's writings inspired them. Herder regarded Rousseau to be his \"guide\", and Schiller compared Rousseau to Socrates. Goethe, in 1787, stated: \"\"Emile\" and its sentiments had a universal influence on the cultivated mind.\"\nThe elegance of Rousseau's writing is held to have inspired a significant transformation in French poetry and drama—freeing them from rigid literary norms. Other writers who were influenced by Rousseau's writings included Leopardi in Italy; Pushkin and Tolstoy in Russia; Wordsworth, Southey, Coleridge, Byron, Shelley, and Keats in England; and Hawthorne and Thoreau in America. According to Tolstoy: \"At fifteen I carried around my neck, instead of the usual cross, a medallion with Rousseau's portrait.\"\n\nRousseau's \"Discourse on the Arts and Sciences\", emphasizing individualism and repudiating \"civilization\", was appreciated by, among others, Thomas Paine, William Godwin, Shelley, Tolstoy, and Edward Carpenter. Rousseau's contemporary Voltaire appreciated the section in Emile titled \"Profession of Faith of the Savoyard Vicar\".\n\nModern admirers of Rousseau include John Dewey and Claude Lévi-Strauss. According to Matthew Josephson, Rousseau has remained controversial for more than two centuries, and has continued to gain admirers and critics down to the present time. However, in their own way, both critics and admirers have served to underscore the significance of the man, while those who have evaluated him with fairness have agreed that he was the finest thinker of his time on the question of civilization.\n\nRousseau was a successful composer of music, who wrote seven operas as well as music in other forms, and made contributions to music as a theorist. As a composer, his music was a blend of the late Baroque style and the emergent Classical fashion, and he belongs to the same generation of transitional composers as Christoph Willibald Gluck and C. P. E. Bach. One of his more well-known works is the one-act opera \"The Village Soothsayer\", containing the duet \"\"Non, Colette n'est point trompeuse\"\" which was later rearranged as a standalone song by Beethoven. He also composed several noted motets, some of which were sung at the Concert Spirituel in Paris. Rousseau's Aunt Suzanne was passionate about music and heavily influenced Rousseau's interest in music. In his \"Confessions\", Rousseau claims he is \"indebted\" to her for his passion of music. Rousseau took formal instruction in music at the house of Francoise-Louise de Warens. She housed Rousseau on and off for about 13 years, giving him jobs and responsibilities. In 1742, Rousseau developed a system of musical notation that was compatible with typography and numbered. He presented his invention to the Academie Des Sciences, but they rejected it, praising his efforts and pushing him to try again. In 1743, Rousseau wrote his first opera, \"\", which was first performed in 1745.\n\nRousseau and Jean-Philippe Rameau argued over the superiority of Italian music over French. Rousseau argued that Italian music was superior based on the principle that melody must have priority over harmony. Rameau argued that Italian music was superior based on the principle that harmony must have priority over melody. Rousseau's plead for melody introduced the idea that in art, the free expression of a creative person is more important than the strict adherence to traditional rules and procedures. This is now known today as a characteristic of Romanticism. Rousseau argued for musical freedom, and changed people's attitudes towards music. His works were acknowledged by composers such as Christoph Willibald Gluck and Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. After composing \"The Village Soothsayer\" in 1752, Rousseau felt he could not go on working for the theater because he was a moralist who had decided to break from worldly values.\n\nBULLET::::- Musical compositions\nBULLET::::- \"Les Muses Galantes\" (1743)\nBULLET::::- \"Les Fetes de Remire\" (1745)\nBULLET::::- \"Symphonie à Cors de Chasse\" (1751)\nBULLET::::- \"Le Devin du village\" (1752) – opera in 1 act\nBULLET::::- \"Salve Regina\" (1752) – antiphone\nBULLET::::- \"Chansons de Bataille\" (1753)\nBULLET::::- \"Pygmalion \" (1762) – melodrama\nBULLET::::- \"Avril\" – aire a poesía de Rémy Belleau\nBULLET::::- \"Les Consolations des Miseres de Ma Vie\" (1781)\nBULLET::::- \"Daphnis et Chloé\"\nBULLET::::- \"Que le jour me dure!\"\nBULLET::::- \"Le Printemps de Vivaldi\"\n\nBULLET::::- \"Dissertation sur la musique moderne\", 1736\nBULLET::::- \"Discourse on the Arts and Sciences\" (\"Discours sur les sciences et les arts\"), 1750\nBULLET::::- \"Narcissus, or The Self-Admirer: A Comedy\", 1752\nBULLET::::- \"Le devin du village: an opera\", 1752,\nBULLET::::- \"Discourse on the Origin and Basis of Inequality Among Men\" (\"Discours sur l'origine et les fondements de l'inégalité parmi les hommes\"), 1754\nBULLET::::- \"Letter on French Music\", 1753 (\"Lettre sur la musique francaise\")\nBULLET::::- \"Discourse on Political Economy\", 1755\nBULLET::::- \"Letter to M. D'Alembert on Spectacles\", 1758 (\"Lettre à d'Alembert sur les spectacles\")\nBULLET::::- \"Julie, or the New Heloise\" (\"Julie, ou la nouvelle Héloïse\"), 1761\nBULLET::::- \"Emile, or On Education\" (\"Émile, ou de l'éducation\"), 1762\nBULLET::::- \"The Creed of a Savoyard Priest\", 1762 (in \"Émile\")\nBULLET::::- \"The Social Contract, or Principles of Political Right\" (\"Du contrat social\"), 1762\nBULLET::::- \"Four Letters to M. de Malesherbes\", 1762\nBULLET::::- \"Pygmalion: a Lyric Scene\", 1762\nBULLET::::- \"Letters Written from the Mountain\", 1764 (\"Lettres de la montagne\")\nBULLET::::- \"Dictionary of Music. 1767 (\"Dictionnarie de la Musique\")\nBULLET::::- \"Confessions of Jean-Jacques Rousseau\" (\"Les Confessions\"), 1770, published 1782\nBULLET::::- \"Constitutional Project for Corsica\", 1772\nBULLET::::- \"Considerations on the Government of Poland\", 1772\nBULLET::::- \"Letters on the Elements of Botany\"\nBULLET::::- \"Essay on the Origin of Languages\", published 1781 (\"Essai sur l'origine des langues\")\nBULLET::::- \"\", published 1782\nBULLET::::- \"Reveries of a Solitary Walker\", incomplete, published 1782 (\"Rêveries du promeneur solitaire\")\n\nBULLET::::- \"Basic Political Writings\", trans. Donald A. Cress. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing, 1987.\nBULLET::::- \"Collected Writings\", ed. Roger Masters and Christopher Kelly, Dartmouth: University Press of New England, 1990–2010, 13 vols.\nBULLET::::- \"The Confessions\", trans. Angela Scholar. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.\nBULLET::::- \"Emile, or On Education\", trans. with an introd. by Allan Bloom, New York: Basic Books, 1979.\nBULLET::::- \"On the Origin of Language\", trans. John H. Moran. In \"On the Origin of Language: Two Essays\". Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986.\nBULLET::::- \"Reveries of a Solitary Walker\", trans. Peter France. London: Penguin Books, 1980.\nBULLET::::- \" 'The Discourses' and Other Early Political Writings\", trans. Victor Gourevitch. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.\nBULLET::::- \" 'The Social Contract' and Other Later Political Writings\", trans. Victor Gourevitch. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.\nBULLET::::- \" 'The Social Contract\", trans. Maurice Cranston. Penguin: Penguin Classics Various Editions, 1968–2007.\nBULLET::::- \"The Political writings of Jean-Jacques Rousseau\", edited from the original MCS and authentic editions with introduction and notes by C.E.Vaughan, Blackwell, Oxford, 1962. (In French but the introduction and notes are in English).\nBULLET::::- \"Rousseau on Women, Love, and Family\" (2009), an anthology of Rosseau's writings some of which were translated by the editors for this volume\n\nBULLET::::- Anarchism\nBULLET::::- Anarcho-primitivism\nBULLET::::- Eat the Rich (disambiguation), a saying attributed to Rousseau\nBULLET::::- Georges Hébert, a physical culturist influenced by Rousseau's teachings\nBULLET::::- Let them eat cake, a saying of Rousseau's\nBULLET::::- List of abolitionist forerunners\nBULLET::::- Rousseau Institute\nBULLET::::- Rousseau's educational philosophy\nBULLET::::- Schutterij – civil militia\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- Cooper, Laurence (1999).\" Rousseau, Nature and the Problem of the Good Life\". Pennsylvania: Pennsylvania State University Press.\nBULLET::::- Cranston, Maurice (1982). \"Jean-Jacques: The Early Life and Work\". New York: Norton.\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- Dent, Nicholas J. H. (1988). \"Rousseau : An Introduction to his Psychological, Social, and Political Theory\". Oxford: Blackwell.\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- Derathé, Robert (1948)\". Le Rationalism de J.-J. Rousseau\". Press Universitaires de France.\nBULLET::::- Derrida, Jacques (1976). \"Of Grammatology\", trans. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.\nBULLET::::- Einaudi, Mario (1968). \"Early Rousseau\". Ithaca: Cornell University Press.\nBULLET::::- Ellingson, Ter (2001). \"The Myth of the Noble Savage\". Berkeley: University of California Press.\nBULLET::::- Farrell, John (2006). \"Paranoia and Modernity: Cervantes to Rousseau.\" New York: Cornell University Press.\nBULLET::::- Garrard, Graeme (2003). \"Rousseau's Counter-Enlightenment: A Republican Critique of the Philosophes\". Albany: State University of New York Press.\nBULLET::::- Gauthier, David (2006). \"Rousseau: The Sentiment of Existence\". Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.\nBULLET::::- Hendel, Charles W. (1934). \"Jean-Jacques Rousseau: Moralist\". 2 Vols. (1934) Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs Merrill.\nBULLET::::- Israel, Jonathan I., \"Radical Enlightenment: Philosophy and the Making of Modernity\" (Oxford University Press, 2002).\nBULLET::::- Kateb, George (1961). \"Aspects of Rousseau's Political Thought\", \"Political Science Quarterly\", December 1961.\nBULLET::::- Kitsikis, Dimitri (2006).\"Jean-Jacques Rousseau et les origines françaises du fascisme\". Nantes: Ars Magna Editions.\nBULLET::::- LaFreniere, Gilbert F. (1990). \"Rousseau and the European Roots of Environmentalism.\" \"Environmental History Review\" 14 (No. 4): 41–72\nBULLET::::- Lange, Lynda (2002). \"Feminist Interpretations of Jean-Jacques Rousseau\". University Park: Penn State University Press.\nBULLET::::- Lovejoy, Arthur O. ([1923] 1948). \"The Supposed Primitivism of Rousseau's 'Discourse on Inequality'\". \"Modern Philology\": XXI: 165–86. Reprinted in \"Essays in the History of Ideas\" (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press). \"A classic treatment of the \"Second Discourse\"\" – Nicholas Dent.\nBULLET::::- Maguire, Matthew (2006). \"The Conversion of the Imagination: from Pascal through Rousseau to Tocqueville\". Harvard University Press.\nBULLET::::- Marks, Jonathan (2005). \"Perfection and Disharmony in the Thought of Jean-Jacques Rousseau\". Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.\nBULLET::::- Roger Masters (ed.), 1964. \"The First and Second Discourses by Jean-Jacques Rousseau\", translated by Roger D Masters and Judith R Masters. New York: St. Martin's Press.\nBULLET::::- Roger Masters, 1968. \"The Political Philosophy of Rousseau\". Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press (), also available in French ().\nBULLET::::- Melzer, Arthur (1990). \"The Natural Goodness of Man: On the System of Rousseau's Thought\". Chicago: University of Chicago Press.\nBULLET::::- Pateman, Carole (1979). \"The Problem of Political Obligation: A Critical Analysis of Liberal Theory\". Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- Riley, Patrick (ed.) (2001). \"The Cambridge Companion to Rousseau\". Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.\nBULLET::::- Robinson, Dave & Groves, Judy (2003). \"Introducing Political Philosophy\". Icon Books. .\nBULLET::::- Schaeffer, Denise. (2014) \"Rousseau on Education, Freedom, and Judgment\". Pennsylvania State University Press.\nBULLET::::- Simpson, Matthew (2006). \"Rousseau's Theory of Freedom\". London: Continuum Books.\nBULLET::::- Starobinski, Jean (1988). \"Jean-Jacques Rousseau: Transparency and Obstruction\". Chicago: University of Chicago Press.\nBULLET::::- Strauss, Leo (1953). \"Natural Right and History\". Chicago: University of Chicago Press, chap. 6A.\nBULLET::::- Strong, Tracy B. (2002). \"Jean Jacques Rousseau and the Politics of the Ordinary\". Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.\nBULLET::::- Talmon, Jacob R. (1952). \"The Origins of Totalitarian Democracy\". New York: W. W. Norton.\nBULLET::::- Williams, David Lay (2007). \"Rousseau's Platonic Enlightenment\". Pennsylvania State University Press.\nBULLET::::- Wokler, Robert. (1995). \"Rousseau\". Oxford: Oxford University Press.\nBULLET::::- Wraight, Christopher D. (2008), \"Rousseau's The Social Contract: A Reader's Guide\". London: Continuum Books.\n\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- , slightly modified for easier reading.\nBULLET::::- devoted to the study of Rousseau's life and works\nBULLET::::- A Discourse on the Moral Effects of the Arts and Sciences English translation\nBULLET::::- Confessions of Jean-Jacques Rousseau English translation, as published by Project Gutenberg, 2004 [EBook #3913]\nBULLET::::- Considerations on the Government of Poland English translation\nBULLET::::- Constitutional Project for Corsica English translation\nBULLET::::- Discourse on Political Economy English translation\nBULLET::::- Discourse on the Origin and Basis of Inequality Among Men English translation\nBULLET::::- The Social Contract, Or Principles of Political Right English translation\nBULLET::::- English translation\nBULLET::::- Full Ebooks of Rousseau in French on the website 'La philosophie'\nBULLET::::- Mondo Politico Library's presentation of Jean-Jacques Rousseau's book, \"The Social Contract\" (G.D.H. Cole translation; full text)\nBULLET::::- Narcissus, or The Self-Admirer: A Comedy English translation\nBULLET::::- French text and English translation, archived from the original on 2008-12-20\nBULLET::::- Texts of J.-J. Rousseau and biography at athena.unige.ch\nBULLET::::- Full Text of J.-J. Rousseau\n"}
{"id": "15942", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15942", "title": "John von Neumann", "text": "John von Neumann\n\nJohn von Neumann (; , ; December 28, 1903 – February 8, 1957) was a Hungarian-American mathematician, physicist, computer scientist, and polymath. Von Neumann was generally regarded as the foremost mathematician of his time and said to be \"the last representative of the great mathematicians\"; who integrated both pure and applied sciences.\n\nHe made major contributions to a number of fields, including mathematics (foundations of mathematics, functional analysis, ergodic theory, representation theory, operator algebras, geometry, topology, and numerical analysis), physics (quantum mechanics, hydrodynamics, and quantum statistical mechanics), economics (game theory), computing (Von Neumann architecture, linear programming, self-replicating machines, stochastic computing), and statistics.\n\nHe was a pioneer of the application of operator theory to quantum mechanics in the development of functional analysis, and a key figure in the development of game theory and the concepts of cellular automata, the universal constructor and the digital computer.\n\nHe published over 150 papers in his life: about 60 in pure mathematics, 60 in applied mathematics, 20 in physics, and the remainder on special mathematical subjects or non-mathematical ones. His last work, an unfinished manuscript written while he was in hospital, was later published in book form as \"The Computer and the Brain\".\n\nHis analysis of the structure of self-replication preceded the discovery of the structure of DNA. In a short list of facts about his life he submitted to the National Academy of Sciences, he stated, \"The part of my work I consider most essential is that on quantum mechanics, which developed in Göttingen in 1926, and subsequently in Berlin in 1927–1929. Also, my work on various forms of operator theory, Berlin 1930 and Princeton 1935–1939; on the ergodic theorem, Princeton, 1931–1932.\"\n\nDuring World War II, von Neumann worked on the Manhattan Project with theoretical physicist Edward Teller, mathematician Stanisław Ulam and others, problem solving key steps in the nuclear physics involved in thermonuclear reactions and the hydrogen bomb. He developed the mathematical models behind the explosive lenses used in the implosion-type nuclear weapon, and coined the term \"kiloton\" (of TNT), as a measure of the explosive force generated.\n\nAfter the war, he served on the General Advisory Committee of the United States Atomic Energy Commission, and consulted for a number of organizations, including the United States Air Force, the Army's Ballistic Research Laboratory, the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project, and the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. As a Hungarian émigré, concerned that the Soviets would achieve nuclear superiority, he designed and promoted the policy of mutually assured destruction to limit the arms race.\n\nVon Neumann was born Neumann János Lajos to a wealthy, acculturated and non-observant Jewish family (in Hungarian the family name comes first. His given names equate to John Louis in English).\n\nVon Neumann was born in Budapest, Kingdom of Hungary, which was then part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. He was the eldest of three brothers; his two younger siblings were Mihály (English: Michael von Neumann; 1907–1989) and Miklós (Nicholas von Neumann, 1911–2011). His father, Neumann Miksa (Max von Neumann, 1873–1928) was a banker, who held a doctorate in law. He had moved to Budapest from Pécs at the end of the 1880s. Miksa's father and grandfather were both born in Ond (now part of the town of Szerencs), Zemplén County, northern Hungary. John's mother was Kann Margit (English: Margaret Kann); her parents were Jakab Kann and Katalin Meisels. Three generations of the Kann family lived in spacious apartments above the Kann-Heller offices in Budapest; von Neumann's family occupied an 18-room apartment on the top floor.\n\nOn February 20, 1913, Emperor Franz Joseph elevated John's father to the Hungarian nobility for his service to the Austro-Hungarian Empire. The Neumann family thus acquired the hereditary appellation \"Margittai\", meaning \"of Margitta\" (today Marghita, Romania). The family had no connection with the town; the appellation was chosen in reference to Margaret, as was their chosen coat of arms depicting three marguerites. Neumann János became margittai Neumann János (John Neumann de Margitta), which he later changed to the German Johann von Neumann.\n\nVon Neumann was a child prodigy. When he was six years old, he could divide two eight-digit numbers in his head and could converse in Ancient Greek. When the six-year-old von Neumann caught his mother staring aimlessly, he asked her, \"What are you calculating?\"\n\nChildren did not begin formal schooling in Hungary until they were ten years of age; governesses taught von Neumann, his brothers and his cousins. Max believed that knowledge of languages in addition to Hungarian was essential, so the children were tutored in English, French, German and Italian. By the age of eight, von Neumann was familiar with differential and integral calculus, but he was particularly interested in history. He read his way through Wilhelm Oncken's 46-volume \"Allgemeine Geschichte in Einzeldarstellungen\". A copy was contained in a private library Max purchased. One of the rooms in the apartment was converted into a library and reading room, with bookshelves from ceiling to floor.\n\nVon Neumann entered the Lutheran Fasori Evangélikus Gimnázium in 1911. Eugene Wigner was a year ahead of von Neumann at the Lutheran School and soon became his friend. This was one of the best schools in Budapest and was part of a brilliant education system designed for the elite. Under the Hungarian system, children received all their education at the one gymnasium. The Hungarian school system produced a generation noted for intellectual achievement, which included Theodore von Kármán (born 1881), George de Hevesy (born 1885), Michael Polanyi (born 1891), Leó Szilárd (born 1898), Dennis Gabor (born 1900), Eugene Wigner (born 1902), Edward Teller (born 1908), and Paul Erdős (born 1913). Collectively, they were sometimes known as \"The Martians\".\n\n! colspan=3 style=\"text-align:center\"  First few von Neumann ordinals\n\nAlthough Max insisted von Neumann attend school at the grade level appropriate to his age, he agreed to hire private tutors to give him advanced instruction in those areas in which he had displayed an aptitude. At the age of 15, he began to study advanced calculus under the renowned analyst Gábor Szegő. On their first meeting, Szegő was so astounded with the boy's mathematical talent that he was brought to tears. Some of von Neumann's instant solutions to the problems that Szegő posed in calculus are sketched out on his father's stationery and are still on display at the von Neumann archive in Budapest. By the age of 19, von Neumann had published two major mathematical papers, the second of which gave the modern definition of ordinal numbers, which superseded Georg Cantor's definition. At the conclusion of his education at the gymnasium, von Neumann sat for and won the Eötvös Prize, a national prize for mathematics.\n\nAccording to his friend Theodore von Kármán, von Neumann's father wanted John to follow him into industry and thereby invest his time in a more financially useful endeavor than mathematics. In fact, his father requested Theodore von Kármán to persuade his son not to take mathematics as his major. Von Neumann and his father decided that the best career path was to become a chemical engineer. This was not something that von Neumann had much knowledge of, so it was arranged for him to take a two-year, non-degree course in chemistry at the University of Berlin, after which he sat for the entrance exam to the prestigious ETH Zurich, which he passed in September 1923. At the same time, von Neumann also entered Pázmány Péter University in Budapest, as a Ph.D. candidate in mathematics. For his thesis, he chose to produce an axiomatization of Cantor's set theory. He graduated as a chemical engineer from ETH Zurich in 1926 (although Wigner says that von Neumann was never very attached to the subject of chemistry), and passed his final examinations for his Ph.D. in mathematics simultaneously with his chemical engineering degree, of which Wigner wrote, \"Evidently a Ph.D. thesis and examination did not constitute an appreciable effort.\" He then went to the University of Göttingen on a grant from the Rockefeller Foundation to study mathematics under David Hilbert.\n\nVon Neumann's habilitation was completed on December 13, 1927, and he started his lectures as a \"Privatdozent\" at the University of Berlin in 1928, being the youngest person ever elected \"Privatdozent\" in the university's history in any subject. By the end of 1927, von Neumann had published twelve major papers in mathematics, and by the end of 1929, thirty-two papers, at a rate of nearly one major paper per month. His reputed powers of memorization and recall allowed him to quickly memorize the pages of telephone directories, and recite the names, addresses and numbers therein. In 1929, he briefly became a \"Privatdozent\" at the University of Hamburg, where the prospects of becoming a tenured professor were better, but in October of that year a better offer presented itself when he was invited to Princeton University in Princeton, New Jersey.\n\nOn New Year's Day in 1930, von Neumann married Marietta Kövesi, who had studied economics at Budapest University. Von Neumann and Marietta had one child, a daughter, Marina, born in 1935. As of 2017, she is a distinguished professor of business administration and public policy at the University of Michigan. The couple divorced in 1937. In October 1938, von Neumann married Klara Dan, whom he had met during his last trips back to Budapest prior to the outbreak of World War II.\n\nPrior to his marriage to Marietta, von Neumann was baptized a Catholic in 1930. \nVon Neumann's father, Max, had died in 1929. None of the family had converted to Christianity while Max was alive, but all did afterward.\n\nIn 1933, he was offered a lifetime professorship on the faculty of the Institute for Advanced Study in New Jersey when that institution's plan to appoint Hermann Weyl fell through. He remained a mathematics professor there until his death, although he had announced his intention to resign and become a professor at large at the University of California, Los Angeles. His mother, brothers and in-laws followed von Neumann to the United States in 1939. Von Neumann anglicized his first name to John, keeping the German-aristocratic surname of von Neumann. His brothers changed theirs to \"Neumann\" and \"Vonneumann\". Von Neumann became a naturalized citizen of the United States in 1937, and immediately tried to become a lieutenant in the United States Army's Officers Reserve Corps. He passed the exams easily, but was ultimately rejected because of his age. His prewar analysis of how France would stand up to Germany is often quoted: \"Oh, France won't matter.\"\n\nKlara and John von Neumann were socially active within the local academic community. His white clapboard house at 26 Westcott Road was one of the largest private residences in Princeton. He took great care of his clothing and would always wear formal suits. He once wore a three-piece pinstripe when he rode down the Grand Canyon astride a mule. Hilbert is reported to have asked \"Pray, who is the candidate's tailor?\" at von Neumann's 1926 doctoral exam, as he had never seen such beautiful evening clothes.\n\nVon Neumann held a lifelong passion for ancient history, being renowned for his prodigious historical knowledge. A professor of Byzantine history at Princeton once said that von Neumann had greater expertise in Byzantine history than he did.\n\nVon Neumann liked to eat and drink; his wife, Klara, said that he could count everything except calories. He enjoyed Yiddish and \"off-color\" humor (especially limericks). He was a non-smoker. In Princeton, he received complaints for regularly playing extremely loud German march music on his gramophone, which distracted those in neighboring offices, including Albert Einstein, from their work. Von Neumann did some of his best work in noisy, chaotic environments, and once admonished his wife for preparing a quiet study for him to work in. He never used it, preferring the couple's living room with its television playing loudly. Despite being a notoriously bad driver, he nonetheless enjoyed driving—frequently while reading a book—occasioning numerous arrests as well as accidents. When Cuthbert Hurd hired him as a consultant to IBM, Hurd often quietly paid the fines for his traffic tickets.\n\nVon Neumann's closest friend in the United States was mathematician Stanisław Ulam. A later friend of Ulam's, Gian-Carlo Rota, wrote, \"They would spend hours on end gossiping and giggling, swapping Jewish jokes, and drifting in and out of mathematical talk.\" When von Neumann was dying in the hospital, every time Ulam visited, he came prepared with a new collection of jokes to cheer him up. Von Neumann believed that much of his mathematical thought occurred intuitively; he would often go to sleep with a problem unsolved and know the answer immediately upon waking up. Ulam noted that von Neumann's way of thinking might not be visual, but more aural.\n\nThe axiomatization of mathematics, on the model of Euclid's \"Elements\", had reached new levels of rigour and breadth at the end of the 19th century, particularly in arithmetic, thanks to the axiom schema of Richard Dedekind and Charles Sanders Peirce, and in geometry, thanks to Hilbert's axioms. But at the beginning of the 20th century, efforts to base mathematics on naive set theory suffered a setback due to Russell's paradox (on the set of all sets that do not belong to themselves). The problem of an adequate axiomatization of set theory was resolved implicitly about twenty years later by Ernst Zermelo and Abraham Fraenkel. Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory provided a series of principles that allowed for the construction of the sets used in the everyday practice of mathematics, but they did not explicitly exclude the possibility of the existence of a set that belongs to itself. In his doctoral thesis of 1925, von Neumann demonstrated two techniques to exclude such sets—the \"axiom of foundation\" and the notion of \"class.\"\n\nThe axiom of foundation proposed that every set can be constructed from the bottom up in an ordered succession of steps by way of the principles of Zermelo and Fraenkel. If one set belongs to another then the first must necessarily come before the second in the succession. This excludes the possibility of a set belonging to itself. To demonstrate that the addition of this new axiom to the others did not produce contradictions, von Neumann introduced a method of demonstration, called the \"method of inner models\", which later became an essential instrument in set theory.\n\nThe second approach to the problem of sets belonging to themselves took as its base the notion of class, and defines a set as a class which belongs to other classes, while a \"proper class\" is defined as a class which does not belong to other classes. Under the Zermelo–Fraenkel approach, the axioms impede the construction of a set of all sets which do not belong to themselves. In contrast, under the von Neumann approach, the class of all sets which do not belong to themselves can be constructed, but it is a \"proper class\" and not a set.\n\nWith this contribution of von Neumann, the axiomatic system of the theory of sets avoided the contradictions of earlier systems, and became usable as a foundation for mathematics, despite the lack of a proof of its consistency. The next question was whether it provided definitive answers to all mathematical questions that could be posed in it, or whether it might be improved by adding stronger axioms that could be used to prove a broader class of theorems. A strongly negative answer to whether it was definitive arrived in September 1930 at the historic mathematical Congress of Königsberg, in which Kurt Gödel announced his first theorem of incompleteness: the usual axiomatic systems are incomplete, in the sense that they cannot prove every truth which is expressible in their language. Moreover, every consistent extension of these systems would necessarily remain incomplete.\n\nLess than a month later, von Neumann, who had participated at the Congress, communicated to Gödel an interesting consequence of his theorem: that the usual axiomatic systems are unable to demonstrate their own consistency. However, Gödel had already discovered this consequence, now known as his second incompleteness theorem, and he sent von Neumann a preprint of his article containing both incompleteness theorems. Von Neumann acknowledged Gödel's priority in his next letter. He never thought much of \"the American system of claiming personal priority for everything.\"\n\nBuilding on the work of Felix Hausdorff, in 1924 Stefan Banach and Alfred Tarski proved that given a solid ball in 3‑dimensional space, there exists a decomposition of the ball into a finite number of disjoint subsets, that can be reassembled together in a different way to yield two identical copies of the original ball. Banach and Tarski proved that, using isometric transformations, the result of taking apart and reassembling a two-dimensional figure would necessarily have the same area as the original. This would make creating two unit squares out of one impossible. However, in a 1929 paper, von Neumann proved that paradoxical decompositions could use a group of transformations that include as a subgroup a free group with two generators. The group of area-preserving transformations contains such subgroups, and this opens the possibility of performing paradoxical decompositions using these subgroups. The class of groups isolated by von Neumann in his work on Banach–Tarski decompositions subsequently was very important for many areas of mathematics, including von Neumann's own later work in measure theory (see below).\n\nIn a series of papers published in 1932, von Neumann made foundational contributions to ergodic theory, a branch of mathematics that involves the states of dynamical systems with an invariant measure. Of the 1932 papers on ergodic theory, Paul Halmos writes that even \"if von Neumann had never done anything else, they would have been sufficient to guarantee him mathematical immortality\". By then von Neumann had already written his articles on operator theory, and the application of this work was instrumental in the von Neumann mean ergodic theorem.\n\nVon Neumann introduced the study of rings of operators, through the von Neumann algebras. A von Neumann algebra is a *-algebra of bounded operators on a Hilbert space that is closed in the weak operator topology and contains the identity operator. The von Neumann bicommutant theorem shows that the analytic definition is equivalent to a purely algebraic definition as being equal to the bicommutant. Von Neumann embarked in 1936, with the partial collaboration of F.J. Murray, on the general study of factors classification of von Neumann algebras. The six major papers in which he developed that theory between 1936 and 1940 \"rank among the masterpieces of analysis in the twentieth century\". The direct integral was later introduced in 1949 by John von Neumann.\n\nIn measure theory, the \"problem of measure\" for an -dimensional Euclidean space may be stated as: \"does there exist a positive, normalized, invariant, and additive set function on the class of all subsets of ?\" The work of Felix Hausdorff and Stefan Banach had implied that the problem of measure has a positive solution if or and a negative solution (because of the Banach–Tarski paradox) in all other cases. Von Neumann's work argued that the \"problem is essentially group-theoretic in character\": the existence of a measure could be determined by looking at the properties of the transformation group of the given space. The positive solution for spaces of dimension at most two, and the negative solution for higher dimensions, comes from the fact that the Euclidean group is a solvable group for dimension at most two, and is not solvable for higher dimensions. \"Thus, according to von Neumann, it is the change of group that makes a difference, not the change of space.\"\n\nIn a number of von Neumann's papers, the methods of argument he employed are considered even more significant than the results. In anticipation of his later study of dimension theory in algebras of operators, von Neumann used results on equivalence by finite decomposition, and reformulated the problem of measure in terms of functions. In his 1936 paper on analytic measure theory, he used the Haar theorem in the solution of Hilbert's fifth problem in the case of compact groups. In 1938, he was awarded the Bôcher Memorial Prize for his work in analysis.\n\nVon Neumann founded the field of continuous geometry. It followed his path-breaking work on rings of operators. In mathematics, continuous geometry is a substitute of complex projective geometry, where instead of the dimension of a subspace being in a discrete set 0, 1, ..., \"n\", it can be an element of the unit interval [0,1]. Earlier, Menger and Birkhoff had axiomatized complex projective geometry in terms of the properties of its lattice of linear subspaces. Von Neumann, following his work on rings of operators, weakened those axioms to describe a broader class of lattices, the continuous geometries.\nWhile the dimensions of the subspaces of projective geometries are a discrete set (the non-negative integers), the dimensions of the elements of a continuous geometry can range continuously across the unit interval [0,1]. Von Neumann was motivated by his discovery of von Neumann algebras with a dimension function taking a continuous range of dimensions, and the first example of a continuous geometry other than projective space was the projections of the hyperfinite type II factor.\n\nBetween 1937 and 1939, von Neumann worked on lattice theory, the theory of partially ordered sets in which every two elements have a greatest lower bound and a least upper bound. Garrett Birkhoff writes: \"John von Neumann's brilliant mind blazed over lattice theory like a meteor\".\n\nVon Neumann provided an abstract exploration of dimension in completed complemented modular topological lattices (properties that arise in the lattices of subspaces of inner product spaces): \"Dimension is determined, up to a positive linear transformation, by the following two properties. It is conserved by perspective mappings (\"perspectivities\") and ordered by inclusion. The deepest part of the proof concerns the equivalence of perspectivity with \"projectivity by decomposition\"—of which a corollary is the transitivity of perspectivity.\"\n\nAdditionally, \"[I]n the general case, von Neumann proved the following basic representation theorem. Any complemented modular lattice having a \"basis\" of pairwise perspective elements, is isomorphic with the lattice of all principal right-ideals of a suitable regular ring . This conclusion is the culmination of 140 pages of brilliant and incisive algebra involving entirely novel axioms. Anyone wishing to get an unforgettable impression of the razor edge of von Neumann's mind, need merely try to pursue this chain of exact reasoning for himself—realizing that often five pages of it were written down before breakfast, seated at a living room writing-table in a bathrobe.\"\n\nVon Neumann was the first to establish a rigorous mathematical framework for quantum mechanics, known as the Dirac–von Neumann axioms, with his 1932 work \"Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics\". After having completed the axiomatization of set theory, he began to confront the axiomatization of quantum mechanics. He realized, in 1926, that a state of a quantum system could be represented by a point in a (complex) Hilbert space that, in general, could be infinite-dimensional even for a single particle. In this formalism of quantum mechanics, observable quantities such as position or momentum are represented as linear operators acting on the Hilbert space associated with the quantum system.\n\nThe \"physics\" of quantum mechanics was thereby reduced to the \"mathematics\" of Hilbert spaces and linear operators acting on them. For example, the uncertainty principle, according to which the determination of the position of a particle prevents the determination of its momentum and vice versa, is translated into the \"non-commutativity\" of the two corresponding operators. This new mathematical formulation included as special cases the formulations of both Heisenberg and Schrödinger. When Heisenberg was informed von Neumann had clarified the difference between an unbounded operator that was a self-adjoint operator and one that was merely symmetric, Heisenberg replied \"Eh? What is the difference?\"\n\nVon Neumann's abstract treatment permitted him also to confront the foundational issue of determinism versus non-determinism, and in the book he presented a proof that the statistical results of quantum mechanics could not possibly be averages of an underlying set of determined \"hidden variables,\" as in classical statistical mechanics. In 1935, Grete Hermann published a paper arguing that the proof contained a conceptual error and was therefore invalid. Hermann's work was largely ignored until after John S. Bell made essentially the same argument in 1966. However, in 2010, Jeffrey Bub argued that Bell had misconstrued von Neumann's proof, and pointed out that the proof, though not valid for all hidden variable theories, does rule out a well-defined and important subset. Bub also suggests that von Neumann was aware of this limitation, and that von Neumann did not claim that his proof completely ruled out hidden variable theories. The validity of Bub's argument is, in turn, disputed. In any case, Gleason's Theorem of 1957 fills the gaps in von Neumann's approach.\n\nVon Neumann's proof inaugurated a line of research that ultimately led, through the work of Bell in 1964 on Bell's theorem, and the experiments of Alain Aspect in 1982, to the demonstration that quantum physics either requires a \"notion of reality\" substantially different from that of classical physics, or must include nonlocality in apparent violation of special relativity.\n\nIn a chapter of \"The Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics\", von Neumann deeply analyzed the so-called measurement problem. He concluded that the entire physical universe could be made subject to the universal wave function. Since something \"outside the calculation\" was needed to collapse the wave function, von Neumann concluded that the collapse was caused by the consciousness of the experimenter. Von Neumann argued that the mathematics of quantum mechanics allows the collapse of the wave function to be placed at any position in the causal chain from the measurement device to the \"subjective consciousness\" of the human observer. Although this view was accepted by Eugene Wigner, the Von Neumann–Wigner interpretation never gained acceptance amongst the majority of physicists). The Von Neumann–Wigner interpretation has been summarized as follows:\n\nThe rules of quantum mechanics are correct but there is only one system which may be treated with quantum mechanics, namely the entire material world. There exist external observers which cannot be treated within quantum mechanics, namely human (and perhaps animal) \"minds\", which perform measurements on the brain causing wave function collapse.\nThough theories of quantum mechanics continue to evolve to this day, there is a basic framework for the mathematical formalism of problems in quantum mechanics which underlies the majority of approaches and can be traced back to the mathematical formalisms and techniques first used by von Neumann. In other words, discussions about interpretation of the theory, and extensions to it, are now mostly conducted on the basis of shared assumptions about the mathematical foundations.\n\nVon Neumann entropy is extensively used in different forms (conditional entropies, relative entropies, etc.) in the framework of quantum information theory. Entanglement measures are based upon some quantity directly related to the von Neumann entropy. Given a statistical ensemble of quantum mechanical systems with the density matrix formula_1, it is given by formula_2 Many of the same entropy measures in classical information theory can also be generalized to the quantum case, such as Holevo entropy and the conditional quantum entropy.\n\nQuantum information theory is largely concerned with the interpretation and uses of von Neumann entropy. The von Neumann entropy is the cornerstone in the development of quantum information theory, while the Shannon entropy applies to classical information theory. This is considered a historical anomaly, as it might have been expected that Shannon entropy was discovered prior to Von Neumann entropy, given the latter's more widespread application to quantum information theory. However, the historical reverse occurred. Von Neumann first discovered von Neumann entropy, and applied it to questions of statistical physics. Decades later, Shannon developed an information-theoretic formula for use in classical information theory, and asked von Neumann what to call it, with von Neumman telling him to call it Shannon entropy, as it was a special case of von Neumann entropy.\n\nThe formalism of density operators and matrices was introduced by von Neumann in 1927 and independently, but less systematically by Lev Landau and Felix Bloch in 1927 and 1946 respectively. The density matrix is an alternative way in which to represent the state of a quantum system, which could otherwise be represented using the wavefunction. The density matrix allows the solution of certain time-dependent problems in quantum mechanics.\n\nThe von Neumann measurement scheme, the ancestor of quantum decoherence theory, represents measurements projectively by taking into account the measuring apparatus which is also treated as a quantum object. The 'projective measurement' scheme introduced by von Neumann, led to the development of quantum decoherence theories.\n\nVon Neumann first proposed a quantum logic in his 1932 treatise \"Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics\", where he noted that projections on a Hilbert space can be viewed as propositions about physical observables. The field of quantum logic was subsequently inaugurated, in a famous paper of 1936 by von Neumann and Garrett Birkhoff, the first work ever to introduce quantum logics, wherein von Neumann and Birkhoff first proved that quantum mechanics requires a propositional calculus substantially different from all classical logics and rigorously isolated a new algebraic structure for quantum logics. The concept of creating a propositional calculus for quantum logic was first outlined in a short section in von Neumann's 1932 work, but in 1936, the need for the new propositional calculus was demonstrated through several proofs. For example, photons cannot pass through two successive filters that are polarized perpendicularly (\"e.g.\", one horizontally and the other vertically), and therefore, \"a fortiori\", it cannot pass if a third filter polarized diagonally is added to the other two, either before or after them in the succession, but if the third filter is added \"in between\" the other two, the photons will, indeed, pass through. This experimental fact is translatable into logic as the \"non-commutativity\" of conjunction formula_3. It was also demonstrated that the laws of distribution of classical logic, formula_4 and formula_5, are not valid for quantum theory.\n\nThe reason for this is that a quantum disjunction, unlike the case for classical disjunction, can be true even when both of the disjuncts are false and this is, in turn, attributable to the fact that it is frequently the case, in quantum mechanics, that a pair of alternatives are semantically determinate, while each of its members are necessarily indeterminate. This latter property can be illustrated by a simple example. Suppose we are dealing with particles (such as electrons) of semi-integral spin (spin angular momentum) for which there are only two possible values: positive or negative. Then, a principle of indetermination establishes that the spin, relative to two different directions (e.g., \"x\" and \"y\") results in a pair of incompatible quantities. Suppose that the state ɸ of a certain electron verifies the proposition \"the spin of the electron in the \"x\" direction is positive.\" By the principle of indeterminacy, the value of the spin in the direction \"y\" will be completely indeterminate for ɸ. Hence, ɸ can verify neither the proposition \"the spin in the direction of \"y\" is positive\" nor\nthe proposition \"the spin in the direction of \"y\" is negative.\" Nevertheless, the disjunction of the propositions \"the spin in the direction of \"y\" is positive or the spin in the direction of \"y\" is negative\" must be true for ɸ.\nIn the case of distribution, it is therefore possible to have a situation in which \"formula_6\", while formula_7.\n\nAs Hilary Putnam writes, von Neumann replaced classical logic with a logic constructed in orthomodular lattices (isomorphic to the lattice of subspaces of the Hilbert space of a given physical system).\n\nVon Neumann founded the field of game theory as a mathematical discipline. Von Neumann proved his minimax theorem in 1928. This theorem establishes that in zero-sum games with perfect information (i.e. in which players know at each time all moves that have taken place so far), there exists a pair of strategies for both players that allows each to minimize his maximum losses, hence the name minimax. When examining every possible strategy, a player must consider all the possible responses of his adversary. The player then plays out the strategy that will result in the minimization of his maximum loss.\n\nSuch strategies, which minimize the maximum loss for each player, are called optimal. Von Neumann showed that their minimaxes are equal (in absolute value) and contrary (in sign). Von Neumann improved and extended the minimax theorem to include games involving imperfect information and games with more than two players, publishing this result in his 1944 \"Theory of Games and Economic Behavior\" (written with Oskar Morgenstern). Morgenstern wrote a paper on game theory and thought he would show it to von Neumann because of his interest in the subject. He read it and said to Morgenstern that he should put more in it. This was repeated a couple of times, and then von Neumann became a coauthor and the paper became 100 pages long. Then it became a book. The public interest in this work was such that \"The New York Times\" ran a front-page story. In this book, von Neumann declared that economic theory needed to use functional analytic methods, especially convex sets and topological fixed-point theorem, rather than the traditional differential calculus, because the maximum-operator did not preserve differentiable functions.\n\nIndependently, Leonid Kantorovich's functional analytic work on mathematical economics also focused attention on optimization theory, non-differentiability, and vector lattices. Von Neumann's functional-analytic techniques—the use of duality pairings of real vector spaces to represent prices and quantities, the use of supporting and separating hyperplanes and convex sets, and fixed-point theory—have been the primary tools of mathematical economics ever since.\n\nVon Neumann raised the intellectual and mathematical level of economics in several influential publications. For his model of an expanding economy, von Neumann proved the existence and uniqueness of an equilibrium using his generalization of the Brouwer fixed-point theorem. Von Neumann's model of an expanding economy considered the matrix pencil \" A − λB\" with nonnegative matrices A and B; von Neumann sought probability vectors \"p\" and \"q\" and a positive number \"λ\" that would solve the complementarity equation\nalong with two inequality systems expressing economic efficiency. In this model, the (transposed) probability vector \"p\" represents the prices of the goods while the probability vector q represents the \"intensity\" at which the production process would run. The unique solution \"λ\" represents the growth factor which is 1 plus the rate of growth of the economy; the rate of growth equals the interest rate.\n\nVon Neumann's results have been viewed as a special case of linear programming, where von Neumann's model uses only nonnegative matrices. The study of von Neumann's model of an expanding economy continues to interest mathematical economists with interests in computational economics. This paper has been called the greatest paper in mathematical economics by several authors, who recognized its introduction of fixed-point theorems, linear inequalities, complementary slackness, and saddlepoint duality. In the proceedings of a conference on von Neumann's growth model, Paul Samuelson said that many mathematicians had developed methods useful to economists, but that von Neumann was unique in having made significant contributions to economic theory itself.\nVon Neumann's famous 9-page paper started life as a talk at Princeton and then became a paper in German, which was eventually translated into English. His interest in economics that led to that paper began as follows: When lecturing at Berlin in 1928 and 1929 he spent his summers back home in Budapest, and so did the economist Nicholas Kaldor, and they hit it off. Kaldor recommended that von Neumann read a book by the mathematical economist Léon Walras. Von Neumann found some faults in that book and corrected them, for example, replacing equations by inequalities. He noticed that Walras's General Equilibrium Theory and Walras' Law, which led to systems of simultaneous linear equations, could produce the absurd result that the profit could be maximized by producing and selling a negative quantity of a product. He replaced the equations by inequalities, introduced dynamic equilibria, among other things, and eventually produced the paper.\n\nBuilding on his results on matrix games and on his model of an expanding economy, von Neumann invented the theory of duality in linear programming when George Dantzig described his work in a few minutes, and an impatient von Neumann asked him to get to the point. Then, Dantzig listened dumbfounded while von Neumann provided an hour lecture on convex sets, fixed-point theory, and duality, conjecturing the equivalence between matrix games and linear programming.\n\nLater, von Neumann suggested a new method of linear programming, using the homogeneous linear system of Paul Gordan (1873), which was later popularized by Karmarkar's algorithm. Von Neumann's method used a pivoting algorithm between simplices, with the pivoting decision determined by a nonnegative least squares subproblem with a convexity constraint (projecting the zero-vector onto the convex hull of the active simplex). Von Neumann's algorithm was the first interior point method of linear programming.\n\nVon Neumann made fundamental contributions to mathematical statistics. In 1941, he derived the exact distribution of the ratio of the mean square of successive differences to the sample variance for independent and identically normally distributed variables. This ratio was applied to the residuals from regression models and is commonly known as the Durbin–Watson statistic for testing the null hypothesis that the errors are serially independent against the alternative that they follow a stationary first order autoregression.\n\nSubsequently, Denis Sargan and Alok Bhargava extended the results for testing if the errors on a regression model follow a Gaussian random walk (\"i.e.\", possess a unit root) against the alternative that they are a stationary first order autoregression.\n\nVon Neumann made fundamental contributions in the field of fluid dynamics.\n\nVon Neumann's contributions to fluid dynamics included his discovery of the classic flow solution to blast waves, and the co-discovery (independently of Yakov Borisovich Zel'dovich and Werner Döring) of the ZND detonation model of explosives. During the 1930s, von Neumann became an authority on the mathematics of shaped charges.\n\nLater with Robert D. Richtmyer, von Neumann developed an algorithm defining \"artificial viscosity\" that improved the understanding of shock waves. When computers solved hydrodynamic or aerodynamic problems, they tried to put too many computational grid points at regions of sharp discontinuity (shock waves). The mathematics of \"artificial viscosity\" smoothed the shock transition without sacrificing basic physics.\n\nVon Neumann soon applied computer modelling to the field, developing software for his ballistics research. During WW2, he arrived one day at the office of R.H. Kent, the Director of the US Army's Ballistic Research Laboratory, with a computer program he had created for calculating a one-dimensional model of 100 molecules to simulate a shock wave. Von Neumann then gave a seminar on his computer program to an audience which included his friend Theodore von Kármán. After von Neumann had finished, von Kármán said \"Well, Johnny, that's very interesting. Of course you realize Lagrange also used digital models to simulate continuum mechanics.\" It was evident from von Neumann's face, that he had been unaware of Lagrange's Mécanique analytique.\n\nStan Ulam, who knew von Neumann well, described his mastery of mathematics this way: \"Most mathematicians know one method. For example, Norbert Wiener had mastered Fourier transforms. Some mathematicians have mastered two methods and might really impress someone who knows only one of them. John von Neumann had mastered three methods.\" He went on to explain that the three methods were:\nBULLET::::- A facility with the symbolic manipulation of linear operators;\nBULLET::::- An intuitive feeling for the logical structure of any new mathematical theory;\nBULLET::::- An intuitive feeling for the combinatorial superstructure of new theories.\nEdward Teller wrote that \"Nobody knows all science, not even von Neumann did. But as for mathematics, he contributed to every part of it except number theory and topology. That is, I think, something unique.\"\n\nVon Neumann was asked to write an essay for the layman describing what mathematics is, and produced a beautiful analysis. He explained that mathematics straddles the world between the empirical and logical, arguing that geometry was originally empirical, but Euclid constructed a logical, deductive theory. However, he argued, that there is always the danger of straying too far from the real world and becoming irrelevant sophistry.\n\nBeginning in the late 1930s, von Neumann developed an expertise in explosions—phenomena that are difficult to model mathematically. During this period, von Neumann was the leading authority of the mathematics of shaped charges. This led him to a large number of military consultancies, primarily for the Navy, which in turn led to his involvement in the Manhattan Project. The involvement included frequent trips by train to the project's secret research facilities at the Los Alamos Laboratory in a remote part of New Mexico.\n\nVon Neumann made his principal contribution to the atomic bomb in the concept and design of the explosive lenses that were needed to compress the plutonium core of the Fat Man weapon that was later dropped on Nagasaki. While von Neumann did not originate the \"implosion\" concept, he was one of its most persistent proponents, encouraging its continued development against the instincts of many of his colleagues, who felt such a design to be unworkable. He also eventually came up with the idea of using more powerful shaped charges and less fissionable material to greatly increase the speed of \"assembly\".\n\nWhen it turned out that there would not be enough uranium-235 to make more than one bomb, the implosive lens project was greatly expanded and von Neumann's idea was implemented. Implosion was the only method that could be used with the plutonium-239 that was available from the Hanford Site. He established the design of the explosive lenses required, but there remained concerns about \"edge effects\" and imperfections in the explosives. His calculations showed that implosion would work if it did not depart by more than 5% from spherical symmetry. After a series of failed attempts with models, this was achieved by George Kistiakowsky, and the construction of the Trinity bomb was completed in July 1945.\n\nIn a visit to Los Alamos in September 1944, von Neumann showed that the pressure increase from explosion shock wave reflection from solid objects was greater than previously believed if the angle of incidence of the shock wave was between 90° and some limiting angle. As a result, it was determined that the effectiveness of an atomic bomb would be enhanced with detonation some kilometers above the target, rather than at ground level.\nVon Neumann, four other scientists, and various military personnel were included in the target selection committee that was responsible for choosing the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki as the first targets of the atomic bomb. Von Neumann oversaw computations related to the expected size of the bomb blasts, estimated death tolls, and the distance above the ground at which the bombs should be detonated for optimum shock wave propagation and thus maximum effect. The cultural capital Kyoto, which had been spared the bombing inflicted upon militarily significant cities, was von Neumann's first choice, a selection seconded by Manhattan Project leader General Leslie Groves. However, this target was dismissed by Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson.\n\nOn July 16, 1945, von Neumann and numerous other Manhattan Project personnel were eyewitnesses to the first test of an atomic bomb detonation, which was code-named Trinity. The event was conducted as a test of the implosion method device, at the bombing range near Alamogordo Army Airfield, southeast of Socorro, New Mexico. Based on his observation alone, von Neumann estimated the test had resulted in a blast equivalent to but Enrico Fermi produced a more accurate estimate of 10 kilotons by dropping scraps of torn-up paper as the shock wave passed his location and watching how far they scattered. The actual power of the explosion had been between 20 and 22 kilotons. It was in von Neumann's 1944 papers that the expression \"kilotons\" appeared for the first time. After the war, Robert Oppenheimer remarked that the physicists involved in the Manhattan project had \"known sin\". Von Neumann's response was that \"sometimes someone confesses a sin in order to take credit for it.\"\n\nVon Neumann continued unperturbed in his work and became, along with Edward Teller, one of those who sustained the hydrogen bomb project. He collaborated with Klaus Fuchs on further development of the bomb, and in 1946 the two filed a secret patent on \"Improvement in Methods and Means for Utilizing Nuclear Energy\", which outlined a scheme for using a fission bomb to compress fusion fuel to initiate nuclear fusion. The Fuchs–von Neumann patent used radiation implosion, but not in the same way as is used in what became the final hydrogen bomb design, the Teller–Ulam design. Their work was, however, incorporated into the \"George\" shot of Operation Greenhouse, which was instructive in testing out concepts that went into the final design. The Fuchs–von Neumann work was passed on to the Soviet Union by Fuchs as part of his nuclear espionage, but it was not used in the Soviets' own, independent development of the Teller–Ulam design. The historian Jeremy Bernstein has pointed out that ironically, \"John von Neumann and Klaus Fuchs, produced a brilliant invention in 1946 that could have changed the whole course of the development of the hydrogen bomb, but was not fully understood until after the bomb had been successfully made.\"\n\nFor his wartime services, von Neumann was awarded the Navy Distinguished Civilian Service Award in July 1946, and the Medal for Merit in October 1946.\n\nIn 1950, von Neumann became a consultant to the Weapons Systems Evaluation Group (WSEG), whose function was to advise the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the United States Secretary of Defense on the development and use of new technologies. He also became an adviser to the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project (AFSWP), which was responsible for the military aspects on nuclear weapons. Over the following two years, he became a consultant to the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), a member of the influential General Advisory Committee of the Atomic Energy Commission, a consultant to the newly established Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, and a member of the Scientific Advisory Group of the United States Air Force.\n\nIn 1955, von Neumann became a commissioner of the AEC. He accepted this position and used it to further the production of compact hydrogen bombs suitable for Intercontinental ballistic missile delivery. He involved himself in correcting the severe shortage of tritium and lithium 6 needed for these compact weapons, and he argued against settling for the intermediate-range missiles that the Army wanted. He was adamant that H-bombs delivered into the heart of enemy territory by an ICBM would be the most effective weapon possible, and that the relative inaccuracy of the missile wouldn't be a problem with an H-bomb. He said the Russians would probably be building a similar weapon system, which turned out to be the case. Despite his disagreement with Oppenheimer over the need for a crash program to develop the hydrogen bomb, he testified on the latter's behalf at the 1954 Oppenheimer security hearing, at which he asserted that Oppenheimer was loyal, and praised him for his helpfulness once the program went ahead.\n\nShortly before his death from cancer, von Neumann headed the United States government's top secret ICBM committee, which would sometimes meet in his home. Its purpose was to decide on the feasibility of building an ICBM large enough to carry a thermonuclear weapon. Von Neumann had long argued that while the technical obstacles were sizable, they could be overcome in time. The SM-65 Atlas passed its first fully functional test in 1959, two years after his death. The feasibility of an ICBM owed as much to improved, smaller warheads as it did to developments in rocketry, and his understanding of the former made his advice invaluable.\n\nVon Neumann is credited with developing the equilibrium strategy of mutual assured destruction (MAD). He also \"moved heaven and earth\" to bring MAD about. His goal was to quickly develop ICBMs and the compact hydrogen bombs that they could deliver to the USSR, and he knew the Soviets were doing similar work because the CIA interviewed German rocket scientists who were allowed to return to Germany, and von Neumann had planted a dozen technical people in the CIA. The Soviets considered that bombers would soon be vulnerable, and they shared von Neumann's view that an H-bomb in an ICBM was the ne plus ultra of weapons; they believed that whoever had superiority in these weapons would take over the world, without necessarily using them. He was afraid of a \"missile gap\" and took several more steps to achieve his goal of keeping up with the Soviets:\nBULLET::::- He modified the ENIAC by making it programmable and then wrote programs for it to do the H-bomb calculations verifying that the Teller-Ulam design was feasible and to develop it further.\nBULLET::::- Through the Atomic Energy Commission, he promoted the development of a compact H-bomb that would fit in an ICBM.\nBULLET::::- He personally interceded to speed up the production of lithium-6 and tritium needed for the compact bombs.\nBULLET::::- He caused several separate missile projects to be started, because he felt that competition combined with collaboration got the best results.\nVon Neumann's assessment that the Soviets had a lead in missile technology, considered pessimistic at the time, was soon proven correct in the Sputnik crisis.\n\nVon Neumann entered government service primarily because he felt that, if freedom and civilization were to survive, it would have to be because the United States would triumph over totalitarianism from Nazism, Fascism and Soviet Communism. During a Senate committee hearing he described his political ideology as \"violently anti-communist, and much more militaristic than the norm\". He was quoted in 1950 remarking, \"If you say why not bomb [the Soviets] tomorrow, I say, why not today? If you say today at five o'clock, I say why not one o'clock?\"\n\nOn February 15, 1956, von Neumann was presented with the Medal of Freedom by President Dwight D. Eisenhower. His citation read:\n\nVon Neumann was a founding figure in computing. Von Neumann was the inventor, in 1945, of the merge sort algorithm, in which the first and second halves of an array are each sorted recursively and then merged.\nVon Neumann wrote the 23 pages long sorting program for the EDVAC in ink. On the first page, traces of the phrase \"TOP SECRET\", which was written in pencil and later erased, can still be seen. He also worked on the philosophy of artificial intelligence with Alan Turing when the latter visited Princeton in the 1930s.\n\nVon Neumann's hydrogen bomb work was played out in the realm of computing, where he and Stanisław Ulam developed simulations on von Neumann's digital computers for the hydrodynamic computations. During this time he contributed to the development of the Monte Carlo method, which allowed solutions to complicated problems to be approximated using random numbers. \nVon Neumann's algorithm for simulating a fair coin with a biased coin is used in the \"software whitening\" stage of some hardware random number generators. Because using lists of \"truly\" random numbers was extremely slow, von Neumann developed a form of making pseudorandom numbers, using the middle-square method. Though this method has been criticized as crude, von Neumann was aware of this: he justified it as being faster than any other method at his disposal, writing that \"Anyone who considers arithmetical methods of producing random digits is, of course, in a state of sin.\" Von Neumann also noted that when this method went awry it did so obviously, unlike other methods which could be subtly incorrect.\n\nWhile consulting for the Moore School of Electrical Engineering at the University of Pennsylvania on the EDVAC project, von Neumann wrote an incomplete \"First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC\". The paper, whose premature distribution nullified the patent claims of EDVAC designers J. Presper Eckert and John Mauchly, described a computer architecture in which the data and the program are both stored in the computer's memory in the same address space. This architecture is the basis of most modern computer designs, unlike the earliest computers that were \"programmed\" using a separate memory device such as a paper tape or plugboard. Although the single-memory, stored program architecture is commonly called von Neumann architecture as a result of von Neumann's paper, the architecture was based on the work of Eckert and Mauchly, inventors of the ENIAC computer at the University of Pennsylvania.\n\nJohn von Neumann consulted for the Army's Ballistic Research Laboratory, most notably on the ENIAC project, as a member of its Scientific Advisory Committee.\nThe electronics of the new ENIAC ran at one-sixth the speed, but this in no way degraded the ENIAC's performance, since it was still entirely I/O bound. Complicated programs could be developed and debugged in days rather than the weeks required for plugboarding the old ENIAC. Some of von Neumann's early computer programs have been preserved.\n\nThe next computer that von Neumann designed was the IAS machine at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey. He arranged its financing, and the components were designed and built at the RCA Research Laboratory nearby. John von Neumann recommended that the IBM 701, nicknamed \"the defense computer\", include a magnetic drum. It was a faster version of the IAS machine and formed the basis for the commercially successful IBM 704.\n\nStochastic computing was first introduced in a pioneering paper by von Neumann in 1953.\nHowever, the theory could not be implemented until advances in computing of the 1960s.\n\nVon Neumann's rigorous mathematical analysis of the structure of self-replication (of the semiotic relationship between constructor, description and that which is constructed), preceded the discovery of the structure of DNA.\n\nVon Neumann created the field of cellular automata without the aid of computers, constructing the first self-replicating automata with pencil and graph paper.\nThe detailed proposal for a physical non-biological self-replicating system was first put forward in lectures von Neumann delivered in 1948 and 1949, when he first only proposed a kinematic self-reproducing automaton. While qualitatively sound, von Neumann was evidently dissatisfied with this model of a self-replicator due to the difficulty of analyzing it with mathematical rigor. He went on to instead develop a more abstract model self-replicator based on his original concept of cellular automata.\n\nSubsequently, the concept of the Von Neumann universal constructor based on the von Neumann cellular automaton was fleshed out in his posthumously published lectures \"Theory of Self Reproducing Automata\". \nUlam and von Neumann created a method for calculating liquid motion in the 1950s. The driving concept of the method was to consider a liquid as a group of discrete units and calculate the motion of each based on its neighbors' behaviors. Like Ulam's lattice network, von Neumann's cellular automata are two-dimensional, with his self-replicator implemented algorithmically. The result was a universal copier and constructor working within a cellular automaton with a small neighborhood (only those cells that touch are neighbors; for von Neumann's cellular automata, only orthogonal cells), and with 29 states per cell. Von Neumann gave an existence proof that a particular pattern would make infinite copies of itself within the given cellular universe by designing a 200,000 cell configuration that could do so.\n\nVon Neumann addressed the evolutionary growth of complexity amongst his self-replicating machines. His \"proof-of-principle\" designs showed how it is logically possible, by using a general purpose programmable (\"universal\") constructor, to exhibit an indefinitely large class of self-replicators, spanning a wide range of complexity, interconnected by a network of potential mutational pathways, including pathways from the most simple to the most complex. This is an important result, as prior to that it might have been conjectured that there is a fundamental logical barrier to the existence of such pathways; in which case, biological organisms, which do support such pathways, could not be \"machines\", as conventionally understood. Von Neumman considers the potential for conflict between his self-reproducing machines, stating that \"our models lead to such conflict situations\", indicating it as a field of further study.\n\nThe cybernetics movement highlighted the question of what it takes for self-reproduction to occur autonomously, and in 1952, John von Neumann designed an elaborate 2D cellular automaton that would automatically make a copy of its initial configuration of cells. The von Neumann neighborhood, in which each cell in a two-dimensional grid has the four orthogonally adjacent grid cells as neighbors, continues to be used for other cellular automata. Von Neumann proved that the most effective way of performing large-scale mining operations such as mining an entire moon or asteroid belt would be by using self-replicating spacecraft, taking advantage of their exponential growth.\n\nVon Neumann investigated the question of whether modelling evolution on a digital computer could solve the complexity problem in programming.\n\nBeginning in 1949, von Neumann's design for a self-reproducing computer program is considered the world's first computer virus, and he is considered to be the theoretical father of computer virology.\n\nAs part of his research into weather forecasting, von Neumann founded the \"Meteorological Program\" in Princeton in 1946, securing funding for his project from the US Navy. Von Neumann and his appointed assistant on this project, Jule Gregory Charney, wrote the world's first climate modelling software, and used it to perform the world's first numerical weather forecasts on the ENIAC computer; von Neumann and his team published the results as \"Numerical Integration of the Barotropic Vorticity Equation\" in 1950. Together they played a leading role in efforts to integrate sea-air exchanges of energy and moisture into the study of climate. Von Neumann proposed as the research program for climate modeling: \"The approach is to first try short-range forecasts, then long-range forecasts of those properties of the circulation that can perpetuate themselves over arbitrarily long periods of time, and only finally to attempt forecast for medium-long time periods which are too long to treat by simple hydrodynamic theory and too short to treat by the general principle of equilibrium theory.\"\n\nVon Neumann's research into weather systems and meteorological prediction led him to propose manipulating the environment by spreading colorants on the polar ice caps to enhance absorption of solar radiation (by reducing the albedo), thereby inducing global warming. Von Neumann proposed a theory of global warming as a result of the activity of humans, noting that the Earth was only colder during the last glacial period, he wrote in 1955: \"Carbon dioxide released into the atmosphere by industry's burning of coal and oil - more than half of it during the last generation - may have changed the atmosphere's composition sufficiently to account for a general warming of the world by about one degree Fahrenheit.\" However, von Neumann urged a degree of caution in any program of intentional human weather manufacturing: \"What \"could\" be done, of course, is no index to what \"should\" be done... In fact, to evaluate the ultimate consequences of either a general cooling or a general heating would be a complex matter. Changes would affect the level of the seas, and hence the habitability of the continental coastal shelves; the evaporation of the seas, and hence general precipitation and glaciation levels; and so on... But there is little doubt that one \"could\" carry out the necessary analyses needed to predict the results, intervene on any desired scale, and ultimately achieve rather fantastic results.\"\n\nThe first use of the concept of a in the technological context is attributed to von Neumann, who according to Ulam discussed the \"ever accelerating progress of technology and changes in the mode of human life, which gives the appearance of approaching some essential singularity in the history of the race beyond which human affairs, as we know them, could not continue.\" This concept was fleshed out later in the book \"Future Shock\" by Alvin Toffler.\n\nNobel Laureate Hans Bethe said \"I have sometimes wondered whether a brain like von Neumann's does not indicate a species superior to that of man\", and later Bethe wrote that \"[von Neumann's] brain indicated a new species, an evolution beyond man\". Seeing von Neumann's mind at work, Eugene Wigner wrote, \"one had the impression of a perfect instrument whose gears were machined to mesh accurately to a thousandth of an inch.\" Paul Halmos states that \"von Neumann's speed was awe-inspiring.\" Israel Halperin said: \"Keeping up with him was ... impossible. The feeling was you were on a tricycle chasing a racing car.\" Edward Teller admitted that he \"never could keep up with him\". Teller also said \"von Neumann would carry on a conversation with my 3-year-old son, and the two of them would talk as equals, and I sometimes wondered if he used the same principle when he talked to the rest of us.\" Peter Lax wrote \"Von Neumann was addicted to thinking, and in particular to thinking about mathematics\".\n\nWhen George Dantzig brought von Neumann an unsolved problem in linear programming \"as I would to an ordinary mortal\", on which there had been no published literature, he was astonished when von Neumann said \"Oh, that!\", before offhandedly giving a lecture of over an hour, explaining how to solve the problem using the hitherto unconceived theory of duality.\n\nLothar Wolfgang Nordheim described von Neumann as the \"fastest mind I ever met\", and Jacob Bronowski wrote \"He was the cleverest man I ever knew, without exception. He was a genius.\" George Pólya, whose lectures at ETH Zürich von Neumann attended as a student, said \"Johnny was the only student I was ever afraid of. If in the course of a lecture I stated an unsolved problem, the chances were he'd come to me at the end of the lecture with the complete solution scribbled on a slip of paper.\" Eugene Wigner writes: \"'Jancsi,' I might say, 'Is angular momentum always an integer of \"h?\" ' He would return a day later with a decisive answer: 'Yes, if all particles are at rest.'... We were all in awe of Jancsi von Neumann\". Enrico Fermi told physicist Herbert L. Anderson: \"You know, Herb, Johnny can do calculations in his head ten times as fast as I can! And I can do them ten times as fast as you can, Herb, so you can see how impressive Johnny is!\"\n\nHalmos recounts a story told by Nicholas Metropolis, concerning the speed of von Neumann's calculations, when somebody asked von Neumann to solve the famous fly puzzle:\n\nEugene Wigner told a similar story, only with a swallow instead of a fly, and says it was Max Born who posed the question to von Neumann in the 1920s.\n\nVon Neumann was also noted for his eidetic memory (sometimes called photographic memory). Herman Goldstine wrote:\n\nVon Neumann was reportedly able to memorize the pages of telephone directories. He entertained friends by asking them to randomly call out page numbers; he then recited the names, addresses and numbers therein.\n\n\"It seems fair to say that if the influence of a scientist is interpreted broadly enough to include impact on fields beyond science proper, then John von Neumann was probably the most influential mathematician who ever lived,\" wrote Miklós Rédei in \"John von Neumann: Selected Letters\". James Glimm wrote: \"he is regarded as one of the giants of modern mathematics\". The mathematician Jean Dieudonné said that von Neumann \"may have been the last representative of a once-flourishing and numerous group, the great mathematicians who were equally at home in pure and applied mathematics and who throughout their careers maintained a steady production in both directions\", while Peter Lax described him as possessing the \"most scintillating intellect of this century\". In the foreword of Miklós Rédei's \"Selected Letters\", Peter Lax wrote, \"To gain a measure of von Neumann's achievements, consider that had he lived a normal span of years, he would certainly have been a recipient of a Nobel Prize in economics. And if there were Nobel Prizes in computer science and mathematics, he would have been honored by these, too. So the writer of these letters should be thought of as a triple Nobel laureate or, possibly, a -fold winner, for his work in physics, in particular, quantum mechanics\".\n\nIn 1955, von Neumann was diagnosed with what was either bone, pancreatic cancer or prostate cancer. He was not able to accept the proximity of his own demise, and the shadow of impending death instilled great fear in him. He invited a Catholic priest, Father Anselm Strittmatter, O.S.B., to visit him for consultation. Von Neumann reportedly said, \"So long as there is the possibility of eternal damnation for nonbelievers it is more logical to be a believer at the end\", essentially saying that Pascal had a point, referring to Pascal's Wager. He had earlier confided to his mother, \"There probably has to be a God. Many things are easier to explain if there is than if there isn't.\" Father Strittmatter administered the last rites to him. Some of von Neumann's friends (such as Abraham Pais and Oskar Morgenstern) said they had always believed him to be \"completely agnostic\". Of this deathbed conversion, Morgenstern told Heims, \"He was of course completely agnostic all his life, and then he suddenly turned Catholic—it doesn't agree with anything whatsoever in his attitude, outlook and thinking when he was healthy.\" Father Strittmatter recalled that even after his conversion, von Neumann did not receive much peace or comfort from it, as he still remained terrified of death.\n\nVon Neumann was on his deathbed when he entertained his brother by reciting by heart and word-for-word the first few lines of each page of Goethe's \"Faust\". He died at age 53 on February 8, 1957, at the Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington, D.C., under military security lest he reveal military secrets while heavily medicated. He was buried at Princeton Cemetery in Princeton, Mercer County, New Jersey.\n\nBULLET::::- The John von Neumann Theory Prize of the Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS, previously TIMS-ORSA) is awarded annually to an individual (or group) who have made fundamental and sustained contributions to theory in operations research and the management sciences.\nBULLET::::- The IEEE John von Neumann Medal is awarded annually by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) \"for outstanding achievements in computer-related science and technology.\"\nBULLET::::- The John von Neumann Lecture is given annually at the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) by a researcher who has contributed to applied mathematics, and the chosen lecturer is also awarded a monetary prize.\nBULLET::::- The crater von Neumann on the Moon is named after him.\nBULLET::::- Asteroid 22824 von Neumann was named in his honor.\nBULLET::::- The John von Neumann Center in Plainsboro Township, New Jersey, was named in his honor.\nBULLET::::- The professional society of Hungarian computer scientists, John von Neumann Computer Society, is named after von Neumann. It was closed in April 1989.\nBULLET::::- On May 4, 2005, the United States Postal Service issued the \"American Scientists\" commemorative postage stamp series, a set of four 37-cent self-adhesive stamps in several configurations designed by artist Victor Stabin. The scientists depicted were von Neumann, Barbara McClintock, Josiah Willard Gibbs, and Richard Feynman.\nBULLET::::- The John von Neumann Award of the Rajk László College for Advanced Studies was named in his honor, and has been given every year since 1995 to professors who have made an outstanding contribution to the exact social sciences and through their work have strongly influenced the professional development and thinking of the members of the college.\nBULLET::::- John von Neumann University () was established in Kecskemét, Hungary in 2016, as a successor to Kecskemét College.\n\nBULLET::::- 1923. \"On the introduction of transfinite numbers\", 346–54.\nBULLET::::- 1925. \"An axiomatization of set theory\", 393–413.\nBULLET::::- 1932. \"Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics\", Beyer, R. T., trans., Princeton Univ. Press. 1996 edition: .\nBULLET::::- 1937.\nBULLET::::- 1944. \"Theory of Games and Economic Behavior\", with Morgenstern, O., Princeton Univ. Press, online at archive.org. 2007 edition: .\nBULLET::::- 1945. \"First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC\"\nBULLET::::- 1948. \"The general and logical theory of automata,\" in \"Cerebral Mechanisms in Behavior: The Hixon Symposium,\" Jeffress, L.A. ed., John Wiley & Sons, New York, N. Y, 1951, pp. 1–31, MR 0045446.\nBULLET::::- 1960.\nBULLET::::- 1963. \"Collected Works of John von Neumann\", Taub, A. H., ed., Pergamon Press.\nBULLET::::- 1966. \"Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata\", Burks, A. W., ed., University of Illinois Press.\n\nBULLET::::- \"John von Neumann\" (sculpture), Eugene, Oregon\nBULLET::::- John von Neumann Award\nBULLET::::- List of things named after John von Neumann\nBULLET::::- List of pioneers in computer science\nBULLET::::- Self-replicating spacecraft\nBULLET::::- Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory\nBULLET::::- Von Neumann algebra\nBULLET::::- Von Neumann architecture\nBULLET::::- Von Neumann bicommutant theorem\nBULLET::::- Von Neumann conjecture\nBULLET::::- Von Neumann entropy\nBULLET::::- Von Neumann programming languages\nBULLET::::- Von Neumann regular ring\nBULLET::::- Von Neumann universal constructor\nBULLET::::- Von Neumann universe\nBULLET::::- Von Neumann's trace inequality\nBULLET::::- The Martians (scientists)\nPhD students\nBULLET::::- Donald B. Gillies, Ph.D. student\nBULLET::::- Israel Halperin, Ph.D. student\n\n\n Books\n\nPopular periodicals\nBULLET::::- \"Good Housekeeping Magazine\", September 1956, \"Married to a Man Who Believes the Mind Can Move the World\"\n\nVideo\nBULLET::::- \"John von Neumann, A Documentary\" (60 min.), Mathematical Association of America\nBULLET::::- von Neumann's profile at Google Scholar\nBULLET::::- Oral history interview with Alice R. Burks and Arthur W. Burks, Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis. Alice Burks and Arthur Burks describe ENIAC, EDVAC, and IAS computers, and John von Neumann's contribution to the development of computers.\nBULLET::::- Oral history interview with Eugene P. Wigner, Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis.\nBULLET::::- Oral history interview with Nicholas C. Metropolis, Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota.\nBULLET::::- Von Neumann vs. Dirac – from \"Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy\"\n"}
{"id": "15943", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15943", "title": "John Newton", "text": "John Newton\n\nJohn Newton (; – 21 December 1807) was an English Anglican clergyman and abolitionist who was forced to serve as a sailor in the Royal Navy for a period. He was first a slave of Princess Peye, a black princess of the Sherbro people and then, years after, He became the captain of slave ships. He became ordained as an evangelical Anglican cleric, served Olney, Buckinghamshire, for two decades, and also wrote hymns, known for \"Amazing Grace\" and \"Glorious Things of Thee Are Spoken\".\n\nNewton started his career at sea at a young age, and worked on slave ships in the slave trade for several years. After experiencing a period of Christian conversion Newton eventually renounced his trade and became a prominent supporter of abolitionism, living to see the UK's abolition of the African slave trade in 1807, just before his death.\n\nJohn Newton was born in Wapping, London, in 1725, the son of John Newton Sr., a shipmaster in the Mediterranean service, and Elizabeth (née Scatliff). Elizabeth was the only daughter of Simon Scatliff, an instrument maker from London (the marriage register records her maiden name as Seatcliffe). Elizabeth was brought up as a Nonconformist. She died of tuberculosis (then called consumption) in July 1732, about two weeks before John's seventh birthday. Newton spent two years at boarding school before going to live in Aveley in Essex, the home of his father's new wife.\n\nAt age eleven he first went to sea with his father. Newton sailed six voyages before his father retired in 1742. At that time, Newton's father made plans for him to work at a sugarcane plantation in Jamaica. Instead, Newton signed on with a merchant ship sailing to the Mediterranean Sea.\n\nIn 1743, while going to visit friends, Newton was captured and pressed into the naval service by the Royal Navy. He became a midshipman aboard HMS \"Harwich\". At one point Newton tried to desert and was punished in front of the crew of 350. Stripped to the waist and tied to the grating, he received a flogging of eight dozen lashes and was reduced to the rank of a common seaman.\n\nFollowing that disgrace and humiliation, Newton initially contemplated murdering the captain and committing suicide by throwing himself overboard. He recovered, both physically and mentally. Later, while \"Harwich\" was en route to India, he transferred to \"Pegasus\", a slave ship bound for West Africa. The ship carried goods to Africa and traded them for slaves to be shipped to the colonies in the Caribbean and North America.\n\nNewton did not get along with the crew of \"Pegasus\". In 1745 they left him in West Africa with Amos Clowe, a slave dealer. Clowe took Newton to the coast and gave him to his wife, Princess Peye of the Sherbro people. She abused and mistreated Newton just as much as she did her other slaves. Newton later recounted this period as the time he was \"once an infidel and libertine, a servant of slaves in West Africa.\"\n\nEarly in 1748 he was rescued by a sea captain who had been asked by Newton's father to search for him, and returned to England on the merchant ship \"Greyhound\", which was carrying beeswax and dyer's wood, now referred to as camwood.\n\nDuring his 1748 voyage to England after his rescue, Newton had a spiritual conversion. The ship encountered a severe storm off the coast of Donegal, Ireland and almost sank.\n\nHe began to read the Bible and other religious literature. By the time he reached Britain, he had accepted the doctrines of evangelical Christianity. The date was 10 March 1748, an anniversary he marked for the rest of his life. From that point on, he avoided profanity, gambling and drinking. Although he continued to work in the slave trade, he had gained sympathy for the slaves during his time in Africa. He later said that his true conversion did not happen until some time later: \"I cannot consider myself to have been a believer in the full sense of the word, until a considerable time afterwards.\"\n\nNewton returned in 1748 to Liverpool, England, a major port for the Triangle Trade. Partly due to the influence of his father's friend Joseph Manesty, he obtained a position as first mate aboard the slave ship \"Brownlow,\" bound for the West Indies via the coast of Guinea.\n\nIt was when returning to England aboard the ship \"Greyhound\" in 1748, [he] awoke to find the ship caught in a violent storm and about to sink. He prayed for God's mercy, the storm died down. After four more weeks at sea the \"Greyhound\" made it to port in Lough Swilly, Ireland. This experience marked the beginning of his conversion to Christianity.\n\nNewton continued to work in the slave trade. After his return to England in 1750, he made three voyages as captain of the slave ships \"Duke of Argyle\" (1750) and \"African\" (1752–53 and 1753–54). After suffering a severe stroke in 1754, he gave up seafaring and slave-trading activities, but continued to invest in Manesty's slaving operations.\n\nIn 1780 Newton moved to the City of London as rector of St Mary Woolnoth Church, where he contributed to the work of the Committee for the Abolition of the Slave Trade, formed in 1787. During this time he wrote \"Thoughts Upon the African Slave Trade\". In it he states; \"So much light has been thrown upon the subject, by many able pens; and so many respectable persons have already engaged to use their utmost influence, for the suppression of a traffic, which contradicts the feelings of humanity; that it is hoped, this stain of our National character will soon be wiped out.\" \n\nIn 1750 Newton married his childhood sweetheart, Mary Catlett, in St. Margaret's Church, Rochester.\n\nNewton adopted his two orphaned nieces, Elizabeth Cunningham and Eliza Catlett, both from the Catlett side of the family. Newton's niece Alys Newton later married Mehul, a prince from India.\n\nIn 1755 Newton was appointed as tide surveyor (a tax collector) of the Port of Liverpool, again through the influence of Manesty. In his spare time, he studied Greek, Hebrew, and Syriac, preparing for serious religious study. He became well known as an evangelical lay minister. In 1757, he applied to be ordained as a priest in the Church of England, but it was more than seven years before he was eventually accepted.\n\nDuring this period, he also applied to the Methodists, Independents and Presbyterians. He mailed applications directly to the Bishops of Chester and Lincoln and the Archbishops of Canterbury and York.\n\nEventually, in 1764, he was introduced by Thomas Haweis to William Legge, 2nd Earl of Dartmouth, who was influential in recommending Newton to William Markham, Bishop of Chester. Haweis suggested Newton for the living of Olney, Buckinghamshire. On 29 April 1764 Newton received deacon's orders, and finally was ordained as a priest on 17 June.\n\nAs curate of Olney, Newton was partly sponsored by John Thornton, a wealthy merchant and evangelical philanthropist. He supplemented Newton's stipend of £60 a year with £200 a year \"for hospitality and to help the poor\". Newton soon became well known for his pastoral care, as much as for his beliefs. His friendship with Dissenters and evangelical clergy led to his being respected by Anglicans and Nonconformists alike. He spent sixteen years at Olney. His preaching was so popular that the congregation added a gallery to the church to accommodate the many persons who flocked to hear him.\n\nSome five years later, in 1772, Thomas Scott took up the curacy of the neighbouring parishes of Stoke Goldington and Weston Underwood. Newton was instrumental in converting Scott from a cynical ‘career priest’ to a true believer, a conversion which Scott related in his spiritual autobiography \"The Force Of Truth\" (1779). Later Scott became a biblical commentator and co-founder of the Church Missionary Society.\n\nIn 1779 Newton was invited by John Thornton to become Rector of St Mary Woolnoth, Lombard Street, London, where he officiated until his death. The church had been built by Nicholas Hawksmoor in 1727 in the fashionable Baroque style. Newton was one of only two evangelical Anglican priests in the capital, and he soon found himself gaining in popularity amongst the growing evangelical party. He was a strong supporter of evangelicalism in the Church of England. He remained a friend of Dissenters (such as Methodists and Baptists) as well as Anglicans.\n\nYoung churchmen and people struggling with faith sought his advice, including such well-known social figures as the writer and philanthropist Hannah More, and the young William Wilberforce, a Member of Parliament who had recently suffered a crisis of conscience and religious conversion while contemplating leaving politics. The younger man consulted with Newton, who encouraged Wilberforce to stay in Parliament and \"serve God where he was\".\n\nIn 1792, Newton was presented with the degree of Doctor of Divinity by the College of New Jersey (now Princeton University).\n\nIn 1788, 34 years after he had retired from the slave trade, Newton broke a long silence on the subject with the publication of a forceful pamphlet \"Thoughts Upon the Slave Trade\", in which he described the horrific conditions of the slave ships during the Middle Passage. He apologised for \"a confession, which ... comes too late ... It will always be a subject of humiliating reflection to me, that I was once an active instrument in a business at which my heart now shudders.\" He had copies sent to every MP, and the pamphlet sold so well that it swiftly required reprinting.\n\nNewton became an ally of William Wilberforce, leader of the Parliamentary campaign to abolish the African slave trade. He lived to see the British passage of the Slave Trade Act 1807, which enacted this event.\nNewton came to believe that during the first five of his nine years as a slave trader he had not been a Christian in the full sense of the term. In 1763 he wrote: \"I was greatly deficient in many respects ... I cannot consider myself to have been a believer in the full sense of the word, until a considerable time afterwards.\"\n\nIn 1767 William Cowper, the poet, moved to Olney. He worshipped in Newton's church, and collaborated with the priest on a volume of hymns; it was published as \"Olney Hymns\" in 1779. This work had a great influence on English hymnology. The volume included Newton's well-known hymns: \"Glorious Things of Thee Are Spoken,\" \"How Sweet the Name of Jesus Sounds!,\" \"Let Us Love, and Sing, and Wonder,\" \"Come, My Soul, Thy Suit Prepare,\" \"Approach, My Soul, the Mercy-seat\", and \"Faith's Review and Expectation,\" which has come to be known by its opening phrase, \"Amazing Grace\".\nMany of Newton's (as well as Cowper's) hymns are preserved in the \"Sacred Harp,\" a hymnal used in the American South during the Second Great Awakening. Hymns were scored according to the tonal scale for shape note singing. Easily learnt and incorporating singers into four-part harmony, shape note music was widely used by evangelical preachers to reach new congregants.\n\nIn 1776 Newton contributed a preface to an annotated version of John Bunyan's \"The Pilgrim's Progress\".\n\nNewton also contributed to the Cheap Repository Tracts. He wrote an autobiography entitled\n\"An Authentic Narrative of Some Remarkable And Interesting Particulars in the Life of ------ Communicated, in a Series of Letters, to the Reverend T. Haweiss,\" which he published anonymously. It was later described as \"written in an easy style, distinguished by great natural shrewdness, and sanctified by the Lord God and prayer\".\n\nNewton's wife Mary Catlett died in 1790, after which he published \"Letters to a Wife\" (1793), in which he expressed his grief. Plagued by ill health and failing eyesight, Newton died on 21 December 1807 in London. He was buried beside his wife in St. Mary Woolnoth in London. Both were reinterred at the Church of St. Peter and Paul in Olney in 1893.\n\nBULLET::::- Newton is memorialized with his self-penned epitaph on his tomb at Olney: JOHN NEWTON. Clerk. Once an infidel and libertine a servant of slaves in Africa was by the rich mercy of our LORD and SAVIOUR JESUS CHRIST preserved, restored, pardoned and appointed to preach the faith he had long laboured to destroy. Near 16 years as Curate of this parish and 28 years as Rector of St. Mary Woolnoth.\nBULLET::::- When he was initially interred in London, a memorial plaque to Newton, containing his self-penned epitaph, was installed on the wall of St Mary Woolnoth. At the bottom of the plaque are the words: \"The above Epitaph was written by the Deceased who directed it to be inscribed on a plain Marble Tablet. He died on Dec. the 21st, 1807. Aged 82 Years, and his mortal Remains are deposited in the Vault beneath this Church.\"\nBULLET::::- The town of Newton, Sierra Leone is named after him. To this day his former town of Olney provides philanthropy for the African town.\nBULLET::::- In 1982, Newton was recognised for his influential hymns by the Gospel Music Association when he was inducted into the Gospel Music Hall of Fame.\n\nBULLET::::- The film \"Amazing Grace\" (2006) highlights Newton's influence on William Wilberforce. Albert Finney portrays Newton, Ioan Gruffudd is Wilberforce, and the film was directed by Michael Apted. The film portrays Newton as a penitent haunted by the ghosts of 20,000 slaves.\nBULLET::::- The Nigerian film \"The Amazing Grace\" (2006), the creation of Nigerian director/writer/producer Jeta Amata, provides an African perspective on the slave trade. Nigerian actors Joke Silva, Mbong Odungide, and Fred Amata (brother of the director) portray Africans who are captured and taken away from their homeland by slave traders. Newton is played by Nick Moran.\nBULLET::::- The 2014 film \"Freedom\" tells the story of an American slave (Samuel Woodward, played by Cuba Gooding, Jr.) escaping to freedom via the Underground Railroad. A parallel earlier story depicts John Newton (played by Bernhard Forcher) as the captain of a slave ship bound for America carrying Samuel's grandfather. Newton's conversion is explored as well.\nBULLET::::- The documentary, Amazing Grace with Bill Moyers, focuses on the hymn but also includes discussion about John Newton.\n\nBULLET::::- \"African Snow\" (2007), a play by Murray Watts, takes place in the mind of John Newton. It was first produced at the York Theatre Royal as a co-production with Riding Lights Theatre Company, transferring to the Trafalgar Studios in London's West End and a National Tour. Newton was played by Roger Alborough and Olaudah Equiano by Israel Oyelumade.\nBULLET::::- The musical \"Amazing Grace\" is a dramatisation of Newton's life. The 2014 pre-Broadway and 2015 Broadway productions starred Josh Young as Newton.\nBULLET::::- In 2015, Puritan Productions in the Dallas, Texas area premiered \"A Wretch Like Me\", a dramatisation of John Newton's life story with ballet and chorus accompaniment.\nBULLET::::- In 2018, Puritan Productions presented \"Amazing Grace\", a newly revised dramatisation of John Newton's life story with dance and chorus accompaniment which was directed by and featured Andreas Robichaux, as John Newton.\n\nBULLET::::- Newton is portrayed by actor John Castle in the British television miniseries, \"The Fight Against Slavery\" (1975).\n\nBULLET::::- Caryl Phillips' novel, \"Crossing the River\" (1993), includes nearly verbatim excerpts of Newton's logs from his \"Journal of a Slave Trader\".\nBULLET::::- In the chapter 'Blind, But Now I See' of the novel Jerusalem by Alan Moore (2016), an African-American whose favourite hymn is 'Amazing Grace' visits Olney where a local churchman relates the facts of Newman's life to him. He is disturbed by Newton's involvement in the slave trade. Newton's life and circumstances, and the lyrics of 'Amazing Grace' are described in detail.\nBULLET::::- \"The Infidel\" by Joe Musser, a novel based on the life of Newton.\n\n\n\nBULLET::::- The John Newton Project\nBULLET::::- Biography & Articles on Newton\nBULLET::::- John Newton Papers Collection from the Digital Library of Georgia\nBULLET::::- John Newton on Poeticous\n"}
{"id": "15944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15944", "title": "Jet engine", "text": "Jet engine\n\nA jet engine is a type of reaction engine discharging a fast-moving jet that generates thrust by jet propulsion. While this broad definition can include rocket, water jet, and hybrid propulsion, the term \"jet engine\" typically refers to an airbreathing jet engine such as a turbojet, turbofan, ramjet, or pulse jet. In general, jet engines are combustion engines.\n\nAirbreathing jet engines typically feature a rotating air compressor powered by a turbine, with the leftover power providing thrust through the propelling nozzle – this process is known as the Brayton thermodynamic cycle. Jet aircraft use such engines for long-distance travel. Early jet aircraft used turbojet engines that were relatively inefficient for subsonic flight. Most modern subsonic jet aircraft use more complex high-bypass turbofan engines. They give higher speed and greater fuel efficiency than piston and propeller aeroengines over long distances. A few air-breathing engines made for high speed applications (ramjets and scramjets) use the ram effect of the vehicle's speed instead of a mechanical compressor.\n\nThe thrust of a typical jetliner engine went from (de Havilland Ghost turbojet) in the 1950s to (General Electric GE90 turbofan) in the 1990s, and their reliability went from 40 in-flight shutdowns per 100,000 engine flight hours to less than 1 per 100,000 in the late 1990s. This, combined with greatly decreased fuel consumption, permitted routine transatlantic flight by twin-engined airliners by the turn of the century, where before a similar journey would have required multiple fuel stops.\n\nA rudimentary form of jet power dates back to the aeolipile, a device described by Hero of Alexandria in 1st-century Roman Egypt. This device directed steam power through two nozzles to cause a sphere to spin rapidly on its axis. It was seen as a curiosity.\n\nThe first practical applications of jet propulsion appeared with the invention of the gunpowder-powered rocket by the Chinese in the 13th century. It was initially a type of firework, and gradually progressed to propel formidable weaponry. The principles used by the Chinese to send their rockets and fireworks was similar to that of a jet engine.\n\nIn 1551, Taqi ad-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf in Ottoman Egypt invented a steam jack, driven by a steam turbine, describing a method for rotating a spit by means of a jet of steam playing on rotary vanes around the periphery of a wheel. It was the first practical steam jet device. A similar device was later described by John Wilkins in 1648.\n\nThe earliest report of an attempted jet flight also dates back to the Ottoman Empire. In 1633, the Ottoman soldier Lagâri Hasan Çelebi reportedly used a cone-shaped rocket.\n\nThe earliest attempts at airbreathing jet engines were hybrid designs in which an external power source first compressed air, which was then mixed with fuel and burned for jet thrust. The Caproni Campini N.1, and the Japanese Tsu-11 engine intended to power Ohka kamikaze planes towards the end of World War II were unsuccessful. \nEven before the start of World War II, engineers were beginning to realize that engines driving propellers were approaching limits due to issues related to propeller efficiency, which declined as blade tips approached the speed of sound. If aircraft performance were to increase beyond such a barrier, a different propulsion mechanism was necessary. This was the motivation behind the development of the gas turbine engine, the most common form of jet engine.\n\nThe key to a practical jet engine was the gas turbine, extracting power from the engine itself to drive the compressor. The gas turbine was not a new idea: the patent for a stationary turbine was granted to John Barber in England in 1791. The first gas turbine to successfully run self-sustaining was built in 1903 by Norwegian engineer Ægidius Elling. Such engines did not reach manufacture due to issues of safety, reliability, weight and, especially, sustained operation.\n\nThe first patent for using a gas turbine to power an aircraft was filed in 1921 by Maxime Guillaume. His engine was an axial-flow turbojet, but was never constructed, as it would have required considerable advances over the state of the art in compressors. Alan Arnold Griffith published \"An Aerodynamic Theory of Turbine Design\" in 1926 leading to experimental work at the RAE.\nIn 1928, RAF College Cranwell cadet Frank Whittle formally submitted his ideas for a turbojet to his superiors. In October 1929 he developed his ideas further. On 16 January 1930 in England, Whittle submitted his first patent (granted in 1932). The patent showed a two-stage axial compressor feeding a single-sided centrifugal compressor. Practical axial compressors were made possible by ideas from A.A.Griffith in a seminal paper in 1926 (\"An Aerodynamic Theory of Turbine Design\"). Whittle would later concentrate on the simpler centrifugal compressor only. Whittle was unable to interest the government in his invention, and development continued at a slow pace.\nIn 1935 Hans von Ohain started work on a similar design in Germany, both compressor and turbine being radial, on opposite sides of the same disc, initially unaware of Whittle's work. Von Ohain's first device was strictly experimental and could run only under external power, but he was able to demonstrate the basic concept. Ohain was then introduced to Ernst Heinkel, one of the larger aircraft industrialists of the day, who immediately saw the promise of the design. Heinkel had recently purchased the Hirth engine company, and Ohain and his master machinist Max Hahn were set up there as a new division of the Hirth company. They had their first HeS 1 centrifugal engine running by September 1937. Unlike Whittle's design, Ohain used hydrogen as fuel, supplied under external pressure. Their subsequent designs culminated in the gasoline-fuelled HeS 3 of , which was fitted to Heinkel's simple and compact He 178 airframe and flown by Erich Warsitz in the early morning of August 27, 1939, from Rostock-Marienehe aerodrome, an impressively short time for development. The He 178 was the world's first jet plane. Heinkel applied for a US patent covering the Aircraft Power Plant by Hans Joachim Pabst von Ohain in May 31, 1939; patent number US2256198, with M Hahn referenced as inventor.\nAustrian Anselm Franz of Junkers' engine division (\"Junkers Motoren\" or \"Jumo\") introduced the axial-flow compressor in their jet engine. Jumo was assigned the next engine number in the RLM 109-0xx numbering sequence for gas turbine aircraft powerplants, \"004\", and the result was the Jumo 004 engine. After many lesser technical difficulties were solved, mass production of this engine started in 1944 as a powerplant for the world's first jet-fighter aircraft, the Messerschmitt Me 262 (and later the world's first jet-bomber aircraft, the Arado Ar 234). A variety of reasons conspired to delay the engine's availability, causing the fighter to arrive too late to improve Germany's position in World War II, however this was the first jet engine to be used in service.\nMeanwhile, in Britain the Gloster E28/39 had its maiden flight on 15 May 1941 and the Gloster Meteor finally entered service with the RAF in July 1944. These were powered by turbojet engines from Power Jets Ltd., set up by Frank Whittle. The first two operational turbojet aircraft, the Messerschmitt Me 262 and then the Gloster Meteor entered service within three months of each other in 1944.\n\nFollowing the end of the war the German jet aircraft and jet engines were extensively studied by the victorious allies and contributed to work on early Soviet and US jet fighters. The legacy of the axial-flow engine is seen in the fact that practically all jet engines on fixed-wing aircraft have had some inspiration from this design.\n\nBy the 1950s the jet engine was almost universal in combat aircraft, with the exception of cargo, liaison and other specialty types. By this point some of the British designs were already cleared for civilian use, and had appeared on early models like the de Havilland Comet and Avro Canada Jetliner. By the 1960s all large civilian aircraft were also jet powered, leaving the piston engine in low-cost niche roles such as cargo flights.\n\nThe efficiency of turbojet engines was still rather worse than piston engines, but by the 1970s, with the advent of high-bypass turbofan jet engines (an innovation not foreseen by the early commentators such as Edgar Buckingham, at high speeds and high altitudes that seemed absurd to them), fuel efficiency was about the same as the best piston and propeller engines.\n\nJet engines power jet aircraft, cruise missiles and unmanned aerial vehicles. In the form of rocket engines they power fireworks, model rocketry, spaceflight, and military missiles.\n\nJet engines have propelled high speed cars, particularly drag racers, with the all-time record held by a rocket car. A turbofan powered car, ThrustSSC, currently holds the land speed record.\n\nJet engine designs are frequently modified for non-aircraft applications, as industrial gas turbines or marine powerplants. These are used in electrical power generation, for powering water, natural gas, or oil pumps, and providing propulsion for ships and locomotives. Industrial gas turbines can create up to 50,000 shaft horsepower. Many of these engines are derived from older military turbojets such as the Pratt & Whitney J57 and J75 models. There is also a derivative of the P&W JT8D low-bypass turbofan that creates up to 35,000 HP.\n\nJet engines are also sometimes developed into, or share certain components such as engine cores, with turboshaft and turboprop engines, which are forms of gas turbine engines that are typically used to power helicopters and some propeller-driven aircraft.\n\nThere are a large number of different types of jet engines, all of which achieve forward thrust from the principle of \"jet propulsion\".\n\nCommonly aircraft are propelled by airbreathing jet engines. Most airbreathing jet engines that are in use are turbofan jet engines, which give good efficiency at speeds just below the speed of sound.\n\nGas turbines are rotary engines that extract energy from a flow of combustion gas. They have an upstream compressor coupled to a downstream turbine with a combustion chamber in-between. In aircraft engines, those three core components are often called the \"gas generator\". There are many different variations of gas turbines, but they all use a gas generator system of some type.\n\nA turbojet engine is a gas turbine engine that works by compressing air with an inlet and a compressor (axial, centrifugal, or both), mixing fuel with the compressed air, burning the mixture in the combustor, and then passing the hot, high pressure air through a turbine and a nozzle. The compressor is powered by the turbine, which extracts energy from the expanding gas passing through it. The engine converts internal energy in the fuel to kinetic energy in the exhaust, producing thrust. All the air ingested by the inlet is passed through the compressor, combustor, and turbine, unlike the turbofan engine described below.\n\nTurbofans differ from turbojets in that they have an additional fan at the front of the engine, which accelerates air in a duct bypassing the core gas turbine engine. Turbofans are the dominant engine type for medium and long-range airliners.\n\nTurbofans are usually more efficient than turbojets at subsonic speeds, but at high speeds their large frontal area generates more drag. Therefore, in supersonic flight, and in military and other aircraft where other considerations have a higher priority than fuel efficiency, fans tend to be smaller or absent.\n\nBecause of these distinctions, turbofan engine designs are often categorized as low-bypass or high-bypass, depending upon the amount of air which bypasses the core of the engine. Low-bypass turbofans have a bypass ratio of around 2:1 or less.\n\nRam compression jet engines are airbreathing engines similar to gas turbine engines and they both follow the Brayton cycle. Gas turbine and ram powered engines differ, however, in how they compress the incoming airflow. Whereas gas turbine engines use axial or centrifugal compressors to compress incoming air, ram engines rely only on air compressed through the inlet or diffuser. A ram engine thus requires a substantial initial forward airspeed before it can function. Ram powered engines are considered the most simple type of air breathing jet engine because they can contain no moving parts.\n\nRamjets are ram powered jet engines. They are mechanically simple, and operate less efficiently than turbojets except at very high speeds.\n\nScramjets differ mainly in the fact that the air does not slow to subsonic speeds. Rather, they use supersonic combustion. They are efficient at even higher speed. Very few have been built or flown. \n\n!Type\n!Description\n!Advantages\n!Disadvantages\n!Motorjet\nWorks like a turbojet but instead of a turbine driving the compressor a piston engine drives it.\nHigher exhaust velocity than a propeller, offering better thrust at high speed\nHeavy, inefficient and underpowered. Example: Caproni Campini N.1.\n!Pulsejet\nAir is compressed and combusted intermittently instead of continuously. Some designs use valves.\nVery simple design, used for the V-1 flying bomb and more recently on model aircraft\nNoisy, inefficient (low compression ratio), works poorly on a large scale, valves on valved designs wear out quickly\n!Pulse detonation engine\nSimilar to a pulsejet, but combustion occurs as a detonation instead of a deflagration, may or may not need valves\nMaximum theoretical engine efficiency\nExtremely noisy, parts subject to extreme mechanical fatigue, hard to start detonation, not practical for current use\n\nThe rocket engine uses the same basic physical principles of thrust as a form of reaction engine, but is distinct from the jet engine in that it does not require atmospheric air to provide oxygen; the rocket carries all components of the reaction mass. However some definitions treat it as a form of jet propulsion.\n\nBecause rockets do not breathe air, this allows them to operate at arbitrary altitudes and in space.\n\nThis type of engine is used for launching satellites, space exploration and manned access, and permitted landing on the moon in 1969.\n\nRocket engines are used for high altitude flights, or anywhere where very high accelerations are needed since rocket engines themselves have a very high thrust-to-weight ratio.\n\nHowever, the high exhaust speed and the heavier, oxidizer-rich propellant results in far more propellant use than turbofans. Even so, at extremely high speeds they become energy-efficient.\n\nAn approximate equation for the net thrust of a rocket engine is:\n\nWhere formula_2 is the net thrust, formula_3 is the specific impulse, formula_4 is a standard gravity, formula_5 is the propellant flow in kg/s, formula_6 is the cross-sectional area at the exit of the exhaust nozzle, and formula_7 is the atmospheric pressure.\n\n! Type\n! Description\n! Advantages\n! Disadvantages\n!Rocket\nCarries all propellants and oxidants on board, emits jet for propulsion\nVery few moving parts. Mach 0 to Mach 25+; efficient at very high speed (> Mach 5.0 or so). Thrust/weight ratio over 100. No complex air inlet. High compression ratio. Very high-speed (hypersonic) exhaust. Good cost/thrust ratio. Fairly easy to test. Works in a vacuum; indeed, works best outside the atmosphere, which is kinder on vehicle structure at high speed. Fairly small surface area to keep cool, and no turbine in hot exhaust stream. Very high-temperature combustion and high expansion-ratio nozzle gives very high efficiency, at very high speeds.\nNeeds lots of propellant. Very low specific impulse – typically 100–450 seconds. Extreme thermal stresses of combustion chamber can make reuse harder. Typically requires carrying oxidizer on-board which increases risks. Extraordinarily noisy.\n\nCombined-cycle engines simultaneously use two or more different principles of jet propulsion.\n!Type\n!Description\n!Advantages\n!Disadvantages\n!Turborocket\nA turbojet where an additional oxidizer such as oxygen is added to the airstream to increase maximum altitude\nVery close to existing designs, operates in very high altitude, wide range of altitude and airspeed\nAirspeed limited to same range as turbojet engine, carrying oxidizer like LOX can be dangerous. Much heavier than simple rockets.\n!Air-augmented rocket\nEssentially a ramjet where intake air is compressed and burnt with the exhaust from a rocket\nMach 0 to Mach 4.5+ (can also run exoatmospheric), good efficiency at Mach 2 to 4\nSimilar efficiency to rockets at low speed or exoatmospheric, inlet difficulties, a relatively undeveloped and unexplored type, cooling difficulties, very noisy, thrust/weight ratio is similar to ramjets.\n!Precooled jets / LACE\nIntake air is chilled to very low temperatures at inlet in a heat exchanger before passing through a ramjet and/or turbojet and/or rocket engine.\nEasily tested on ground. Very high thrust/weight ratios are possible (~14) together with good fuel efficiency over a wide range of airspeeds, Mach 0–5.5+; this combination of efficiencies may permit launching to orbit, single stage, or very rapid, very long distance intercontinental travel.\nExists only at the lab prototyping stage. Examples include RB545, Reaction Engines SABRE, ATREX. Requires liquid hydrogen fuel which has very low density and requires heavily insulated tankage.\n\nA water jet, or pump-jet, is a marine propulsion system that utilizes a jet of water. The mechanical arrangement may be a ducted propeller with nozzle, or a centrifugal compressor and nozzle. The pump-jet must be driven by a separate engine such as a Diesel or gas turbine.\n!Type\n!Description\n!Advantages\n!Disadvantages\n!Water jet\nFor propelling water rockets and jetboats; squirts water out the back through a nozzle\nIn boats, can run in shallow water, high acceleration, no risk of engine overload (unlike propellers), less noise and vibration, highly maneuverable at all boat speeds, high speed efficiency, less vulnerable to damage from debris, very reliable, more load flexibility, less harmful to wildlife\nCan be less efficient than a propeller at low speed, more expensive, higher weight in boat due to entrained water, will not perform well if boat is heavier than the jet is sized for\n\nAll jet engines are reaction engines that generate thrust by emitting a jet of fluid rearwards at relatively high speed. The forces on the inside of the engine needed to create this jet give a strong thrust on the engine which pushes the craft forwards.\n\nJet engines make their jet from propellant from tankage that is attached to the engine (as in a 'rocket') as well as in duct engines (those commonly used on aircraft) by ingesting an external fluid (very typically air) and expelling it at higher speed.\n\nThe propelling nozzle is the key component of all jet engines as it creates the exhaust jet. Propelling nozzles turn internal and pressure energy into high velocity kinetic energy. The total pressure and temperature don't change through the nozzle but their static values drop as the gas speeds up.\n\nThe velocity of the air entering the nozzle is low, about Mach 0.4, a prerequisite for minimizing pressure losses in the duct leading to the nozzle. The temperature entering the nozzle may be as low as sea level ambient for a fan nozzle in the cold air at cruise altitudes. It may be as high as the 1000K exhaust gas temperature for a supersonic afterburning engine or 2200K with afterburner lit. The pressure entering the nozzle may vary from 1.5 times the pressure outside the nozzle, for a single stage fan, to 30 times for the fastest manned aircraft at mach 3+.\n\nConvergent nozzles are only able to accelerate the gas up to local sonic (Mach 1) conditions. To reach high flight speeds, even greater exhaust velocities are required, and so a convergent-divergent nozzle is often used on high-speed aircraft.\n\nThe nozzle thrust is highest if the static pressure of the gas reaches the ambient value as it leaves the nozzle. This only happens if the nozzle exit area is the correct value for the nozzle pressure ratio (npr). Since the npr changes with engine thrust setting and flight speed this is seldom the case. Also at supersonic speeds the divergent area is less than required to give complete internal expansion to ambient pressure as a trade-off with external body drag. Whitford gives the F-16 as an example. Other underexpanded examples were the XB-70 and SR-71.\n\nThe nozzle size, together with the area of the turbine nozzles, determines the operating pressure of the compressor.\n\nThis overview highlights where energy losses occur in complete jet aircraft powerplants or engine installations.\n\nA jet engine at rest, as on a test stand, sucks in fuel and generates thrust. How well it does this is judged by how much fuel it uses and what force is required to restrain it. This is a measure of its efficiency. If something deteriorates inside the engine (known as performance deterioration) it will be less efficient and this will show when the fuel produces less thrust. If a change is made to an internal part which allows the air/combustion gases to flow more smoothly the engine will be more efficient and use less fuel. A standard definition is used to assess how different things change engine efficiency and also to allow comparisons to be made between different engines. This definition is called specific fuel consumption, or how much fuel is needed to produce one unit of thrust. For example, it will be known for a particular engine design that if some bumps in a bypass duct are smoothed out the air will flow more smoothly giving a pressure loss reduction of x% and y% less fuel will be needed to get the take-off thrust, for example. This understanding comes under the engineering discipline Jet engine performance. How efficiency is affected by forward speed and by supplying energy to aircraft systems is mentioned later.\n\nThe efficiency of the engine is controlled primarily by the operating conditions inside the engine which are the pressure produced by the compressor and the temperature of the combustion gases at the first set of rotating turbine blades. The pressure is the highest air pressure in the engine. The turbine rotor temperature is not the highest in the engine but is the highest at which energy transfer takes place ( higher temperatures occur in the combustor). The above pressure and temperature are shown on a Thermodynamic cycle diagram.\n\nThe efficiency is further modified by how smoothly the air and the combustion gases flow through the engine, how well the flow is aligned (known as incidence angle) with the moving and stationary passages in the compressors and turbines. Non-optimum angles, as well as non-optimum passage and blade shapes can cause thickening and separation of Boundary layers and formation of Shock waves. It is important to slow the flow (lower speed means less pressure losses or Pressure drop) when it travels through ducts connecting the different parts. How well the individual components contribute to turning fuel into thrust is quantified by measures like efficiencies for the compressors, turbines and combustor and pressure losses for the ducts. These are shown as lines on a Thermodynamic cycle diagram.\n\nThe engine efficiency, or thermal efficiency, known as formula_8. is dependent on the Thermodynamic cycle parameters, maximum pressure and temperature, and on component efficiencies, formula_9, formula_10 and formula_11 and duct pressure losses.\n\nThe engine needs compressed air for itself just to run successfully. This air comes from its own compressor and is called secondary air. It does not contribute to making thrust so makes the engine less efficient. It is used to preserve the mechanical integrity of the engine, to stop parts overheating and to prevent oil escaping from bearings for example. Only some of this air taken from the compressors returns to the turbine flow to contribute to thrust production. Any reduction in the amount needed improves the engine efficiency. Again, it will be known for a particular engine design that a reduced requirement for cooling flow of x% will reduce the specific fuel consumption by y%. In other words, less fuel will be required to give take-off thrust, for example. The engine is more efficient.\n\nAll of the above considerations are basic to the engine running on its own and, at the same time, doing nothing useful, i.e. it is not moving an aircraft or supplying energy for the aircraft's electrical, hydraulic and air systems. In the aircraft the engine gives away some of its thrust-producing potential, or fuel, to power these systems. These requirements, which cause installation losses, reduce its efficiency. It is using some fuel that does not contribute to the engine's thrust.\n\nFinally, when the aircraft is flying the propelling jet itself contains wasted kinetic energy after it has left the engine. This is quantified by the term propulsive, or Froude, efficiency formula_12 and may be reduced by redesigning the engine to give it bypass flow and a lower speed for the propelling jet, for example as a turboprop or turbofan engine. At the same time forward speed increases the formula_8 by increasing the Overall pressure ratio.\n\nThe overall efficiency of the engine at flight speed is defined as formula_14.\n\nThe formula_15 at flight speed depends on how well the intake compresses the air before it is handed over to the engine compressors. The intake compression ratio, which can be as high as 32:1 at Mach 3, adds to that of the engine compressor to give the Overall pressure ratio and formula_8 for the Thermodynamic cycle. How well it does this is defined by its pressure recovery or measure of the losses in the intake. Mach 3 manned flight has provided an interesting illustration of how these losses can increase dramatically in an instant. The North American XB-70 Valkyrie and Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird at Mach 3 each had pressure recoveries of about 0.8, due to relatively low losses during the compression process, i.e. through systems of multiple shocks. During an 'unstart' the efficient shock system would be replaced by a very inefficient single shock beyond the inlet and an intake pressure recovery of about 0.3 and a correspondingly low pressure ratio.\n\nThe propelling nozzle at speeds above about Mach 2 usually has extra internal thrust losses because the exit area is not big enough as a trade-off with external afterbody drag.\n\nAlthough a bypass engine improves propulsive efficiency it incurs losses of its own inside the engine itself. Machinery has to be added to transfer energy from the gas generator to a bypass airflow. The low loss from the propelling nozzle of a turbojet is added to with extra losses due to inefficiencies in the added turbine and fan. These may be included in a transmission, or transfer, efficiency formula_17. However, these losses are more than made up by the improvement in propulsive efficiency. There are also extra pressure losses in the bypass duct and an extra propelling nozzle.\n\nWith the advent of turbofans with their loss-making machinery what goes on inside the engine has been separated by Bennett, for example, between gas generator and transfer machinery giving formula_18.\nThe energy efficiency (formula_15) of jet engines installed in vehicles has two main components:\nBULLET::::- \"propulsive efficiency\" (formula_12): how much of the energy of the jet ends up in the vehicle body rather than being carried away as kinetic energy of the jet.\nBULLET::::- \"cycle efficiency\" (formula_8): how efficiently the engine can accelerate the jet\n\nEven though overall energy efficiency formula_15 is:\n\nfor all jet engines the \"propulsive efficiency\" is highest as the exhaust jet velocity gets closer to the vehicle speed as this gives the smallest residual kinetic energy. For an airbreathing engine an exhaust velocity equal to the vehicle velocity, or a formula_12 equal to one, gives zero thrust with no net momentum change. The formula for air-breathing engines moving at speed formula_25 with an exhaust velocity formula_26, and neglecting fuel flow, is:\n\nAnd for a rocket:\n\nIn addition to propulsive efficiency, another factor is \"cycle efficiency\"; a jet engine is a form of heat engine. Heat engine efficiency is determined by the ratio of temperatures reached in the engine to that exhausted at the nozzle. This has improved constantly over time as new materials have been introduced to allow higher maximum cycle temperatures. For example, composite materials, combining metals with ceramics, have been developed for HP turbine blades, which run at the maximum cycle temperature. The efficiency is also limited by the overall pressure ratio that can be achieved. Cycle efficiency is highest in rocket engines (~60+%), as they can achieve extremely high combustion temperatures. Cycle efficiency in turbojet and similar is nearer to 30%, due to much lower peak cycle temperatures.\n\nThe combustion efficiency of most aircraft gas turbine engines at sea level takeoff conditions\nis almost 100%. It decreases nonlinearly to 98% at altitude cruise conditions. Air-fuel ratio ranges from 50:1 to 130:1. For any type of combustion chamber there is a \"rich\" and \"weak limit\" to the air-fuel ratio, beyond which the flame is extinguished. The range of air-fuel ratio between the rich and weak limits is reduced with an increase of air velocity. If the\nincreasing air mass flow reduces the fuel ratio below certain value, flame extinction occurs.\n\nA closely related (but different) concept to energy efficiency is the rate of consumption of propellant mass. Propellant consumption in jet engines is measured by Specific Fuel Consumption, Specific impulse or Effective exhaust velocity. They all measure the same thing. Specific impulse and effective exhaust velocity are strictly proportional, whereas specific fuel consumption is inversely proportional to the others.\n\nFor airbreathing engines such as turbojets, energy efficiency and propellant (fuel) efficiency are much the same thing, since the propellant is a fuel and the source of energy. In rocketry, the propellant is also the exhaust, and this means that a high energy propellant gives better propellant efficiency but can in some cases actually give \"lower\" energy efficiency.\n\nIt can be seen in the table (just below) that the subsonic turbofans such as General Electric's CF6 turbofan use a lot less fuel to generate thrust for a second than did the Concorde's Rolls-Royce/Snecma Olympus 593 turbojet. However, since energy is force times distance and the distance per second was greater for the Concorde, the actual power generated by the engine for the same amount of fuel was higher for the Concorde at Mach 2 than the CF6. Thus, the Concorde's engines were more efficient in terms of energy per mile.\n\nThe thrust-to-weight ratio of jet engines with similar configurations varies with scale, but is mostly a function of engine construction technology. For a given engine, the lighter the engine, the better the thrust-to-weight is, the less fuel is used to compensate for drag due to the lift needed to carry the engine weight, or to accelerate the mass of the engine.\n\nAs can be seen in the following table, rocket engines generally achieve much higher thrust-to-weight ratios than duct engines such as turbojet and turbofan engines. This is primarily because rockets almost universally use dense liquid or solid reaction mass which gives a much smaller volume and hence the pressurization system that supplies the nozzle is much smaller and lighter for the same performance. Duct engines have to deal with air which is two to three orders of magnitude less dense and this gives pressures over much larger areas, which in turn results in more engineering materials being needed to hold the engine together and for the air compressor.\n\nPropeller engines handle larger air mass flows, and give them smaller acceleration, than jet engines. Since the increase in air speed is small, at high flight speeds the thrust available to propeller-driven aeroplanes is small. However, at low speeds, these engines benefit from relatively high propulsive efficiency.\n\nOn the other hand, turbojets accelerate a much smaller mass flow of intake air and burned fuel, but they then reject it at very high speed. When a de Laval nozzle is used to accelerate a hot engine exhaust, the outlet velocity may be locally supersonic. Turbojets are particularly suitable for aircraft travelling at very high speeds.\n\nTurbofans have a mixed exhaust consisting of the bypass air and the hot combustion product gas from the core engine. The amount of air that bypasses the core engine compared to the amount flowing into the engine determines what is called a turbofan's bypass ratio (BPR).\n\nWhile a turbojet engine uses all of the engine's output to produce thrust in the form of a hot high-velocity exhaust gas jet, a turbofan's cool low-velocity bypass air yields between 30% and 70% of the total thrust produced by a turbofan system.\n\nThe net thrust (F) generated by a turbofan can also be expanded as:\n\nwhere:\n\nalign=\"right\"ṁ\nalign=\"left\"= the mass rate of hot combustion exhaust flow from the core engine\nalign=rightṁ\nalign=left= the mass rate of total air flow entering the turbofan = ṁ + ṁ\nalign=rightṁ\nalign=left= the mass rate of intake air that flows to the core engine\nalign=rightṁ\nalign=left= the mass rate of intake air that bypasses the core engine\nalign=rightv\nalign=left= the velocity of the air flow bypassed around the core engine\nalign=rightv\nalign=left= the velocity of the hot exhaust gas from the core engine\nalign=rightv\nalign=left= the velocity of the total air intake = the true airspeed of the aircraft\nalign=leftBPR\nalign-right= Bypass Ratio\n\nRocket engines have extremely high exhaust velocity and thus are best suited for high speeds (hypersonic) and great altitudes. At any given throttle, the thrust and efficiency of a rocket motor improves slightly with increasing altitude (because the back-pressure falls thus increasing net thrust at the nozzle exit plane), whereas with a turbojet (or turbofan) the falling density of the air entering the intake (and the hot gases leaving the nozzle) causes the net thrust to decrease with increasing altitude. Rocket engines are more efficient than even scramjets above roughly Mach 15.\n\nWith the exception of scramjets, jet engines, deprived of their inlet systems can only accept air at around half the speed of sound. The inlet system's job for transonic and supersonic aircraft is to slow the air and perform some of the compression.\n\nThe limit on maximum altitude for engines is set by flammability – at very high altitudes the air becomes too thin to burn, or after compression, too hot. For turbojet engines altitudes of about 40 km appear to be possible, whereas for ramjet engines 55 km may be achievable. Scramjets may theoretically manage 75 km. Rocket engines of course have no upper limit.\n\nAt more modest altitudes, flying faster compresses the air at the front of the engine, and this greatly heats the air. The upper limit is usually thought to be about Mach 5–8, as above about Mach 5.5, the atmospheric nitrogen tends to react due to the high temperatures at the inlet and this consumes significant energy. The exception to this is scramjets which may be able to achieve about Mach 15 or more, as they avoid slowing the air, and rockets again have no particular speed limit.\n\nThe noise emitted by a jet engine has many sources. These include, in the case of gas turbine engines, the fan, compressor, combustor, turbine and propelling jet/s.\n\nThe propelling jet produces jet noise which is caused by the violent mixing action of the high speed jet with the surrounding air. In the subsonic case the noise is produced by eddies and in the supersonic case by Mach waves. The sound power radiated from a jet varies with the jet velocity raised to the eighth power for velocities up to 2,000 ft/sec and varies with the velocity cubed above 2,000 ft/sec. Thus, the lower speed exhaust jets emitted from engines such as high bypass turbofans are the quietest, whereas the fastest jets, such as rockets, turbojets, and ramjets, are the loudest. For commercial jet aircraft the jet noise has reduced from the turbojet through bypass engines to turbofans as a result of a progressive reduction in propelling jet velocities. For example, the JT8D, a bypass engine, has a jet velocity of 1450 ft/sec whereas the JT9D, a turbofan, has jet velocities of 885 ft/sec (cold) and 1190 ft/sec (hot).\n\nThe advent of the turbofan replaced the very distinctive jet noise with another sound known as \"buzz saw\" noise. The origin is the shockwaves originating at the supersonic fan blades at takeoff thrust.\n\nAdequate heat transfer away from the working parts of the jet engine is critical to maintaining strength of engine materials and ensuring long life for the engine.\n\nAfter 2016, research is ongoing in the development of transpiration cooling techniques to jet engine components.\n\nIn a jet engine, each major rotating section usually has a separate gauge devoted to monitoring its speed of rotation. \nDepending on the make and model, a jet engine may have an N gauge that monitors the low-pressure compressor section and/or fan speed in turbofan engines. The gas generator section may be monitored by an N gauge, while triple spool engines may have an N gauge as well. Each engine section rotates at many thousands RPM. Their gauges therefore are calibrated in percent of a nominal speed rather than actual RPM, for ease of display and interpretation.\n\nBULLET::::- Air turboramjet\nBULLET::::- Balancing machine\nBULLET::::- Components of jet engines\nBULLET::::- Gas turbine\nBULLET::::- Jet engine performance\nBULLET::::- Jetboat\nBULLET::::- Pulsejet\nBULLET::::- Reaction engine\nBULLET::::- Rocket engine nozzle\nBULLET::::- Rocket turbine engine\nBULLET::::- Spacecraft propulsion\nBULLET::::- Thrust reversal\nBULLET::::- Turbofan\nBULLET::::- Turbojet\nBULLET::::- Turbojet development at the RAE\nBULLET::::- Turboprop\nBULLET::::- Turboshaft\nBULLET::::- Variable cycle engine\nBULLET::::- Water injection (engine)\n\n\nBULLET::::- Media about jet engines from Rolls-Royce\nBULLET::::- How Stuff Works article on how a Gas Turbine Engine works\nBULLET::::- Influence of the Jet Engine on the Aerospace Industry\nBULLET::::- \"An Overview of Military Jet Engine History\", Appendix B, pp. 97–120, in \"Military Jet Engine Acquisition\" (Rand Corp., 24 pp, PDF)\nBULLET::::- Basic jet engine tutorial (QuickTime Video)\nBULLET::::- An article on how reaction engine works\n"}
{"id": "15947", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15947", "title": "July 16", "text": "July 16\n\nBULLET::::- 622 – The beginning of the Islamic calendar.\nBULLET::::- 997 – Battle of Spercheios: Bulgarian forces of Tsar Samuel are defeated by a Byzantine army under general Nikephoros Ouranos at the Spercheios River in Greece.\nBULLET::::- 1054 – Three Roman legates break relations between Western and Eastern Christian Churches through the act of placing an invalidly-issued Papal bull of Excommunication on the altar of Hagia Sophia during Saturday afternoon divine liturgy. Historians frequently describe the event as the start of the East–West Schism.\nBULLET::::- 1212 – Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa: After Pope Innocent III calls European knights to a crusade, forces of Kings Alfonso VIII of Castile, Sancho VII of Navarre, Peter II of Aragon and Afonso II of Portugal defeat those of the Berber Muslim leader Almohad, thus marking a significant turning point in the \"Reconquista\" and in the medieval history of Spain.\nBULLET::::- 1232 – The Spanish town of Arjona declares independence and names its native Muhammad ibn Yusuf as ruler. This marks the Muhammad's first rise to prominence; he would later establish the Nasrid Emirate of Granada, the last independent Muslim state in Spain.\nBULLET::::- 1377 – King Richard II of England is crowned.\nBULLET::::- 1661 – The first banknotes in Europe are issued by the Swedish bank Stockholms Banco.\nBULLET::::- 1683 – Manchu Qing dynasty naval forces under traitorous commander Shi Lang defeat the Kingdom of Tungning in the Battle of Penghu near the Pescadores Islands.\nBULLET::::- 1769 – Father Junípero Serra founds California's first mission, Mission San Diego de Alcalá. Over the following decades, it evolves into the city of San Diego, California.\nBULLET::::- 1779 – American Revolutionary War: Light infantry of the Continental Army seize a fortified British Army position in a midnight bayonet attack at the Battle of Stony Point.\nBULLET::::- 1790 – The District of Columbia is established as the capital of the United States after signature of the Residence Act.\nBULLET::::- 1809 – The city of La Paz, in what is today Bolivia, declares its independence from the Spanish Crown during the La Paz revolution and forms the Junta Tuitiva, the first independent government in Spanish America, led by Pedro Domingo Murillo.\nBULLET::::- 1849 – Antonio María Claret y Clará founds the Congregation of the Missionary Sons of the Immaculate Heart of Mary, popularly known as the Claretians in Vic, in the province of Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.\nBULLET::::- 1861 – American Civil War: At the order of President Abraham Lincoln, Union troops begin a 25-mile march into Virginia for what will become the First Battle of Bull Run, the first major land battle of the war.\nBULLET::::- 1862 – American Civil War: David Farragut is promoted to rear admiral, becoming the first officer in United States Navy to hold an admiral rank.\nBULLET::::- 1909 – Persian Constitutional Revolution: Mohammad Ali Shah Qajar is forced out as Shah of Persia and is replaced by his son Ahmad Shah Qajar.\nBULLET::::- 1910 – John Robertson Duigan makes the first flight of the Duigan pusher biplane, the first aircraft built in Australia.\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Henry James becomes a British citizen to highlight his commitment to Britain during the first World War.\nBULLET::::- 1915 – At Treasure Island on the Delaware River in the United States, the First Order of the Arrow ceremony takes place and the Order of the Arrow is founded to honor American Boy Scouts who best exemplify the Scout Oath and Law.\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Augusto César Sandino leads a raid on U.S. Marines and Nicaraguan Guardia Nacional that had been sent to apprehend him in the village of Ocotal, but is repulsed by one of the first dive-bombing attacks in history.\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Emperor Haile Selassie signs the first constitution of Ethiopia.\nBULLET::::- 1935 – The world's first parking meter is installed in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Joe DiMaggio hits safely for the 56th consecutive game, a streak that still stands as an MLB record.\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Holocaust: Vel' d'Hiv Roundup (\"Rafle du Vel' d'Hiv\"): The government of Vichy France orders the mass arrest of 13,152 Jews who are held at the Vélodrome d'Hiver in Paris before deportation to Auschwitz.\nBULLET::::- 1945 – World War II: The heavy cruiser leaves San Francisco with parts for the atomic bomb \"Little Boy\" bound for Tinian Island.\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Manhattan Project: The Atomic Age begins when the United States successfully detonates a plutonium-based test nuclear weapon near Alamogordo, New Mexico.\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Following token resistance, the city of Nazareth, revered by Christians as the hometown of Jesus, capitulates to Israeli troops during Operation Dekel in the 1948 Arab–Israeli War.\nBULLET::::- 1948 – The storming of the cockpit of the \"Miss Macao\" passenger seaplane, operated by a subsidiary of the Cathay Pacific Airways, marks the first aircraft hijacking of a commercial plane.\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Chaplain–Medic massacre: American POWs are massacred by North Korean Army.\nBULLET::::- 1951 – King Leopold III of Belgium abdicates in favor of his son, Baudouin I of Belgium.\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey Circus closes its last \"Big Tent\" show in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; due to changing economics all subsequent circus shows will be held in arenas.\nBULLET::::- 1965 – The Mont Blanc Tunnel linking France and Italy opens.\nBULLET::::- 1965 – South Vietnamese Colonel Phạm Ngọc Thảo, a formerly undetected communist spy and double agent, is hunted down and killed by unknown individuals after being sentenced to death \"in absentia\" for a February 1965 coup attempt against Nguyễn Khánh.\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Apollo program: \"Apollo 11\", the first mission to land astronauts on the Moon, is launched from the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Kennedy, Florida.\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Iraqi President Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr resigns and is replaced by Saddam Hussein.\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Sikorsky S-61 disaster: A helicopter crashes off the Isles of Scilly, causing 20 fatalities.\nBULLET::::- 1990 – The Luzon earthquake strikes the Philippines with an intensity of 7.7, affecting Benguet, Pangasinan, Nueva Ecija, La Union, Aurora, Bataan, Zambales and Tarlac.\nBULLET::::- 1990 – The Parliament of the Ukrainian SSR declares state sovereignty over the territory of the Ukrainian SSR.\nBULLET::::- 1999 – John F. Kennedy Jr., his wife, Carolyn, and her sister, Lauren Bessette, died when the Piper Saratoga PA-32R aircraft he was piloting crashed into the Atlantic Ocean off the coast of Martha's Vineyard.\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Millennium Park, considered Chicago's first and most ambitious early 21st-century architectural project, is opened to the public by Mayor Richard M. Daley.\nBULLET::::- 2007 – An earthquake of magnitude 6.8 and 6.6 aftershock occurs off the Niigata coast of Japan killing eight people, injuring at least 800 and damaging a nuclear power plant.\nBULLET::::- 2013 – As many as 27 children die and 25 others are hospitalized after eating lunch served at their school in eastern India.\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Four U.S. Marines and one gunman die in a shooting spree targeting military installations in Chattanooga, Tennessee.\nBULLET::::- 2019 – 100 years old building in Mumbai, India, collapsed, killing at least 10 people and many remaining trapped.\n\nBULLET::::- 1194 – Clare of Assisi, Italian nun and saint (d. 1253)\nBULLET::::- 1486 – Andrea del Sarto, Italian painter (d. 1530)\nBULLET::::- 1517 – Frances Grey, Duchess of Suffolk, English duchess (d. 1559)\nBULLET::::- 1529 – Petrus Peckius the Elder, Dutch jurist, writer on international maritime law (d. 1589)\nBULLET::::- 1611 – Cecilia Renata of Austria (d. 1644)\nBULLET::::- 1661 – Pierre Le Moyne d'Iberville, Canadian captain, explorer, and politician (d. 1706)\nBULLET::::- 1714 – Marc René, marquis de Montalembert, French engineer and author (d. 1800)\nBULLET::::- 1722 – Joseph Wilton, English sculptor and academic (d. 1803)\nBULLET::::- 1723 – Joshua Reynolds, English painter and academic (d. 1792)\nBULLET::::- 1731 – Samuel Huntington, American jurist and politician, 18th Governor of Connecticut (d. 1796)\nBULLET::::- 1749 – Cyrus Griffin, American lawyer, judge, and politician, 16th President of the Continental Congress (d. 1810)\nBULLET::::- 1796 – Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot, French painter and etcher (d. 1875)\nBULLET::::- 1821 – Mary Baker Eddy, American religious leader and author, founded Christian Science (d. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 1841 – Nikolai von Glehn, Estonian-German architect and activist (d. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 1858 – Eugène Ysaÿe, Belgian violinist, composer, and conductor (d. 1931)\nBULLET::::- 1862 – Ida B. Wells, American journalist and activist (d. 1931)\nBULLET::::- 1863 – Anderson Dawson, Australian politician, 14th Premier of Queensland (d. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 1870 – Lambert McKenna, Irish priest, lexicographer, and scholar (d. 1956)\nBULLET::::- 1871 – John Maxwell, American golfer (d. 1906)\nBULLET::::- 1872 – Roald Amundsen, Norwegian pilot and explorer (d. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 1872 – Frank Cooper, Australian politician, 25th Premier of Queensland (d. 1949)\nBULLET::::- 1880 – Kathleen Norris, American journalist and author (d. 1966)\nBULLET::::- 1882 – Violette Neatley Anderson, American judge (d. 1937)\nBULLET::::- 1883 – Charles Sheeler, American photographer and painter (d. 1965)\nBULLET::::- 1884 – Anna Vyrubova, Russian author (d. 1964)\nBULLET::::- 1887 – Shoeless Joe Jackson, American baseball player and manager (d. 1951)\nBULLET::::- 1888 – Percy Kilbride, American actor (d. 1964)\nBULLET::::- 1888 – Frits Zernike, Dutch physicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1966)\nBULLET::::- 1889 – Arthur Bowie Chrisman, American author (d. 1953)\nBULLET::::- 1895 – Wilfrid Hamel, Canadian businessman and politician, 35th Mayor of Quebec City (d. 1968)\nBULLET::::- 1896 – Otmar Freiherr von Verschuer, German biologist and eugenicist (d. 1969)\nBULLET::::- 1896 – Trygve Lie, Norwegian trade union leader and politician, 1st Secretary-General of the United Nations (d. 1968)\nBULLET::::- 1902 – Alexander Luria, Russian psychologist and physician (d. 1977)\nBULLET::::- 1902 – Mary Philbin, American actress (d. 1993)\nBULLET::::- 1903 – Fritz Bauer, German lawyer and judge (d. 1968)\nBULLET::::- 1903 – Carmen Lombardo, Canadian singer-songwriter (d. 1971)\nBULLET::::- 1903 – Irmgard Flügge-Lotz, German mathematician and engineer (d. 1974)\nBULLET::::- 1904 – Goffredo Petrassi, Italian composer and conductor (d. 2003)\nBULLET::::- 1906 – Vincent Sherman, American actor, director, and screenwriter (d. 2006)\nBULLET::::- 1907 – Frances Horwich, American educator and television host (d. 2001)\nBULLET::::- 1907 – Orville Redenbacher, American farmer and businessman, founded Orville Redenbacher's (d. 1995)\nBULLET::::- 1907 – Barbara Stanwyck, American actress (d. 1990)\nBULLET::::- 1910 – Stan McCabe, Australian cricketer (d. 1968)\nBULLET::::- 1910 – Gordon Prange, American historian, author, and academic (d. 1980)\nBULLET::::- 1911 – Ginger Rogers, American actress, singer, and dancer (d. 1995)\nBULLET::::- 1911 – Sonny Tufts, American actor (d. 1970)\nBULLET::::- 1912 – Milt Bocek, American baseball player (d. 2007)\nBULLET::::- 1912 – Amy Patterson, Argentine composer, singer, poet, and teacher\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Barnard Hughes, American actor (d. 2006)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Elaine Barrie, American actress (d. 2003)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Denis Edward Arnold, English soldier (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Paul Farnes, famed World War II Royal Air Force (RAF) fighter pilot and one of \"The Few\" surviving pilots of the Battle of Britain\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Samuel Victor Perry, English biochemist and rugby player (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1919 – Hermine Braunsteiner, Austrian SS officer (d. 1999)\nBULLET::::- 1919 – Choi Kyu-hah, South Korean politician, 4th President of South Korea (d. 2006)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Anatole Broyard, American critic and editor (d. 1990)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Chris Argyris, American psychologist, theorist, and academic (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Bola Sete, Brazilian guitarist (d. 1987)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – James L. Greenfield, American journalist and politician\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Bess Myerson, American model, actress, game show panelist, and politician, Miss America 1945 (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Rupert Deese, Northern Mariana Islander ceramic artist (d. 2010)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Frank Jobe, American sergeant and surgeon (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Rosita Quintana, Argentine actress\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Cal Tjader, American jazz musician (d. 1982)\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Ivica Horvat, Croatian footballer and manager (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Irwin Rose, American biologist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Pierre F. Côté, Canadian lawyer and civil servant (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Shirley Hughes, English author and illustrator\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Derek Hawksworth, English footballer\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Anita Brookner, English novelist and art historian (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Bella Davidovich, Soviet-American pianist\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Robert Sheckley, American author and screenwriter (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Jim Rathmann, American race car driver (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Dave Treen, American lawyer and politician, 51st Governor of Louisiana (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Andrzej Zawada, Polish mountaineer and author (d. 2000)\nBULLET::::- 1929 – Charles Ray Hatcher, American serial killer (d. 1984)\nBULLET::::- 1929 – Sheri S. Tepper, American author and poet (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1929 – Gaby Tanguy, French swimmer\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Guy Béart, Egyptian-French singer-songwriter (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Michael Bilirakis, American lawyer and politician\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Bert Rechichar, American football defensive back and kicker\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Fergus Gordon Kerr, Scottish Roman Catholic priest of the English Dominican Province\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Norm Sherry, American former catcher, manager, and coach in Major League Baseball\nBULLET::::- 1932 – John Chilton, English trumpet player and composer (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Max McGee, American football player and sportscaster (d. 2007)\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Dick Thornburgh, American lawyer and politician, 76th United States Attorney General\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Julian A. Brodsky, American businessman\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Tomás Eloy Martínez, Argentine journalist (d. 2010)\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Katherine D. Ortega, 38th Treasurer of the United States\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Donald M. Payne, American educator and politician (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Carl Epting Mundy Jr., American general (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Lynn Wyatt, American socialite and philanthropist\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Yasuo Fukuda, Japanese politician, 91st Prime Minister of Japan\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Buddy Merrill, American guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Jerry Norman, American sinologist and linguist (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Venkataraman Subramanya, Indian-Australian cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Richard Bryan, American lawyer and politician, 25th Governor of Nevada\nBULLET::::- 1937 – John Daly, English director, producer, and screenwriter (d. 2008)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Cynthia Enloe, American author and academic\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Tony Jackson, English singer and bass player (d. 2003)\nBULLET::::- 1939 – William Bell, American singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Lido Vieri, Italian football manager and football player\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Denise LaSalle, American singer-songwriter and producer (d. 2018)\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Ruth Perry, president of Liberia (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Shringar Nagaraj, Indian actor and producer (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Corin Redgrave, English actor and activist (d. 2010)\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Mariele Ventre, Italian singer and conductor (d. 1995)\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Desmond Dekker, Jamaican singer-songwriter (d. 2006)\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Dag Solstad, Norwegian author and playwright\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Hans Wiegel, Dutch journalist and politician, Deputy Prime Minister of the Netherlands\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Sir George Young, 6th Baronet, English banker and politician, Secretary of State for Transport\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Margaret Court, Australian tennis player and minister\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Reinaldo Arenas, Cuban-American author, poet, and playwright (d. 1990)\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Vernon Bogdanor, English political scientist and academic\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Jimmy Johnson, American football player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Angharad Rees, English-Welsh actress and jewellery designer (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Louise Fréchette, Canadian civil servant and diplomat, Deputy Secretary-General of the United Nations\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Barbara Lee, American politician\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Ron Yary, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Don Burke, Australian television host and producer\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Alexis Herman, American businesswoman and politician, 23rd United States Secretary of Labor\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Assata Shakur, American-Cuban criminal and activist\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Rubén Blades, Panamanian singer-songwriter, guitarist, and actor\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Lars Lagerbäck, Swedish footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Kevin McKenzie, South African cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Pinchas Zukerman, Israeli violinist and conductor\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Alan Fitzgerald, American guitarist and keyboardist\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Pierre Paradis, Canadian lawyer and politician\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Dennis Priestley, English darts player\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Frances Spalding, English historian and academic\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Tom Terrell, American journalist and photographer (d. 2007)\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Jean-Luc Mongrain, Canadian journalist\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Che Rosli, Malaysian politician\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Stewart Copeland, American drummer and songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Richard Egielski, American author and illustrator\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Marc Esposito, French director and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Ken McEwan, South African cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Douglas J. Feith, American lawyer and politician, Under Secretary of Defense for Policy\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Jeanette Mott Oxford, American politician\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Susan Wheeler, American poet and academic\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Saw Swee Leong, Malaysian badminton player\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Tony Kushner, American playwright and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Faye Grant, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Alexandra Marinina, Ukrainian-Russian colonel and author\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Mick Cornett, American politician, and former mayor of Oklahoma City.\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Michael Flatley, American-Irish dancer and choreographer\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Mike Rogers, American politician\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Gary Anderson, South African-American football player\nBULLET::::- 1959 – James MacMillan, Scottish composer and conductor\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Zoran Jolevski, Macedonian economist, politician, and diplomat, Macedonian Ambassador to the United States\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Jürgen Ligi, Estonian economist and politician, 25th Estonian Minister of Defence\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Terry Pendleton, American baseball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Grigory Leps, Russian singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Phoebe Cates, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Srečko Katanec, Slovenian footballer and coach\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Mikael Pernfors, Swedish tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Phil Hellmuth, American poker player\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Miguel Induráin, Spanish cyclist\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Michel Desjoyeaux, French sailor\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Claude Lemieux, Canadian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Sherri Stoner, American actress, producer, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Jyrki Lumme, Finnish ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Will Ferrell, American actor, comedian, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Dhanraj Pillay, Indian field hockey player and manager\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Barry Sanders, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Larry Sanger, American philosopher and businessman, co-founded Wikipedia and Citizendium\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Michael Searle, Australian rugby league player and businessman\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Robert Sherman, American songwriter and businessman\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Olga Souza, Brazilian singer and dancer\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Jules De Martino, English singer-songwriter and bass player\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Kathryn Harby-Williams, Australian netball player and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Raimonds Miglinieks, Latvian basketball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Apichatpong Weerasethakul, Thai director, producer, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Corey Feldman, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Ed Kowalczyk, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (Live)\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Ben Cahoon, American-Canadian football player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1972 – François Drolet, Canadian speed skater\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Shaun Pollock, South African cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Graham Robertson, American director and producer\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Tim Ryan, American politician\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Jeremy Enigk, American singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Maret Maripuu, Estonian politician, Estonian Minister of Social Affairs\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Ryan McCombs, American singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Wendell Sailor, Australian rugby player\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Bas Leinders, Belgian race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Tomasz Kuchar, Polish race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Carlos Humberto Paredes, Paraguayan footballer\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Anna Smashnova, Belarusian-Israeli tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Bryan Budd, Northern Ireland-born English soldier, Victoria Cross recipient (d. 2006)\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Chris Mihm, American basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Mai Nakamura, Japanese swimmer\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Kim Rhode, American sport shooter\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Nathan Rogers, Canadian singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Konstantin Skrylnikov, Russian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Adam Scott, Australian golfer\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Giuseppe Di Masi, Italian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Robert Kranjec, Slovenian ski jumper\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Zach Randolph, American basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Vicente Rodríguez, Spanish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1982 – André Greipel, German cyclist\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Carli Lloyd, American soccer player\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Michael Umaña, Costa Rican footballer\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Duncan Keith, Canadian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Hayanari Shimoda, Japanese race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Attila Szabó, Hungarian decathlete\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Mārtiņš Kravčenko, Latvian basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Dustin Boyd, Canadian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Misako Uno, Japanese actress, singer, and fashion designer\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Mousa Dembélé, Belgian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1987 – AnnaLynne McCord, American actress and producer\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Sergio Busquets, Spanish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Gareth Bale, Welsh footballer\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Bureta Faraimo, New Zealand rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Wizkid, Nigerian singer and songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Johann Zarco, French motorcycle racer\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Nate Schmidt, American ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Andros Townsend, English footballer\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Daniel Pearson, English actor and presenter\nBULLET::::- 784 – Fulrad, Frankish diplomat and saint (b. 710)\nBULLET::::- 866 – Irmgard, Frankish abbess\nBULLET::::- 1212 – William de Brus, 3rd Lord of Annandale\nBULLET::::- 1216 – Pope Innocent III (b. 1160)\nBULLET::::- 1324 – Emperor Go-Uda of Japan (b. 1267)\nBULLET::::- 1342 – Charles I of Hungary (b. 1288)\nBULLET::::- 1344 – An-Nasir Ahmad, Sultan of Egypt (b. 1316)\nBULLET::::- 1509 – João da Nova, Portuguese explorer (b. 1460)\nBULLET::::- 1546 – Anne Askew, English author and poet (b. 1520)\nBULLET::::- 1557 – Anne of Cleves (b. 1515)\nBULLET::::- 1576 – Isabella de' Medici, Italian noble (b. 1542)\nBULLET::::- 1647 – Masaniello, Italian rebel (b. 1622)\nBULLET::::- 1664 – Andreas Gryphius, German poet and playwright (b. 1616)\nBULLET::::- 1686 – John Pearson, English bishop and scholar (b. 1612)\nBULLET::::- 1691 – François-Michel le Tellier, Marquis de Louvois, French politician, French Secretary of State for War (b. 1641)\nBULLET::::- 1729 – Johann David Heinichen, German composer and theorist (b. 1683)\nBULLET::::- 1747 – Giuseppe Crespi, Italian painter (b. 1665)\nBULLET::::- 1770 – Francis Cotes, English painter and academic (b. 1726)\nBULLET::::- 1796 – George Howard, English field marshal and politician (b. 1718)\nBULLET::::- 1831 – Louis Alexandre Andrault de Langeron, French-Russian general (b. 1763)\nBULLET::::- 1849 – Sarah Allen, African-American missionary for the African Methodist Episcopal Church (b. 1764)\nBULLET::::- 1868 – Dmitry Pisarev, Russian author and critic (b. 1840)\nBULLET::::- 1879 – Edward Deas Thomson, Scottish-Australian politician, 3rd Chief Secretary of New South Wales (b. 1800)\nBULLET::::- 1882 – Mary Todd Lincoln, First Lady of the United States 1861-1865 (b. 1818)\nBULLET::::- 1886 – Ned Buntline, American journalist and author (b. 1823)\nBULLET::::- 1896 – Edmond de Goncourt, French critic and publisher, founded Académie Goncourt (b. 1822)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Ellen G. White, American theologian and author (b. 1827)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Philipp Scharwenka, German composer and educator (b. 1847)\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Bartholomeus Roodenburch, Dutch swimmer (b. 1866)\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Vyacheslav Ivanov, Russian poet and playwright (b. 1866)\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Hilaire Belloc, French-born British writer and historian (b. 1870)\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Herms Niel, German soldier, trombonist, and composer (b. 1888)\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Albert Kesselring, German field marshal (b. 1881)\nBULLET::::- 1960 – John P. Marquand, American author (b. 1893)\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Rauf Orbay, Turkish colonel and politician, Prime Minister of Turkey (b. 1881)\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Boris Artzybasheff, Ukrainian-American illustrator (b.1899)\nBULLET::::- 1969 – James Scott Douglas, English-born Scottish race car driver and 6th Baronet Douglas (b. 1930)\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Harry Chapin, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (b. 1942)\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Charles Robberts Swart, South African lawyer and politician, 1st State President of South Africa (b. 1894)\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Heinrich Böll, German novelist and short story writer, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Wayne King, American saxophonist, songwriter, and bandleader (b. 1901)\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Herbert von Karajan, Austrian conductor and manager (b. 1908)\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Robert Blackburn, Irish educator (b. 1927)\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Miguel Muñoz, Spanish footballer and manager (b. 1922)\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Meindert DeJong, Dutch-American soldier and author (b. 1906)\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Robert Motherwell, American painter and academic (b. 1915)\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Frank Rizzo, American police officer and politician, 93rd Mayor of Philadelphia (b. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Buck Buchanan, American football player and coach (b. 1940)\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Julian Schwinger, American physicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1918)\nBULLET::::- 1995 – May Sarton, American playwright and novelist (b. 1912)\nBULLET::::- 1995 – Stephen Spender, English author and poet (b. 1909)\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Adolf von Thadden, German lieutenant and politician (b. 1921)\nBULLET::::- 1998 – John Henrik Clarke, American historian and scholar (b. 1915)\nBULLET::::- 1999 – John F. Kennedy Jr., American lawyer and publisher (b. 1960)\nBULLET::::- 1999 – Alan Macnaughton, Canadian lawyer and politician, Speaker of the Canadian House of Commons (b. 1903)\nBULLET::::- 2001 – Morris, Belgian cartoonist (b. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 2002 – John Cocke, American computer scientist and engineer (b. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Celia Cruz, Cuban-American singer and actress (b. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Carol Shields, American-Canadian novelist and short story writer (b. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – George Busbee, American lawyer and politician, 77th Governor of Georgia (b. 1927)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Charles Sweeney, American general and pilot (b. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Pietro Consagra, Italian sculptor (b. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Camillo Felgen, Luxembourgian singer-songwriter and radio host (b. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Winthrop Paul Rockefeller, American businessman and politician, 13th Lieutenant Governor of Arkansas (b. 1948)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Caterina Bueno, Italian singer and historian (b. 1943)\nBULLET::::- 2008 – Jo Stafford, American singer (b. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 2008 – Lindsay Thompson, Australian politician, 40th Premier of Victoria (b. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 2011 – Forrest Blue, American football player (b. 1944)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – William Asher, American director, producer, and screenwriter (b. 1921)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Stephen Covey, American businessman and author (b. 1932)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Gilbert Esau, American businessman and politician (b. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Ed Lincoln, Brazilian bassist, pianist, and composer (b. 1932)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Masaharu Matsushita, Japanese businessman (b. 1913)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Kitty Wells, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (b. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Alex Colville, Canadian painter and academic (b. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Marv Rotblatt, American baseball player (1927)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Karl Albrecht, German businessman, co-founded Aldi (b. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Mary Ellen Otremba, American educator and politician (b. 1950)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Johnny Winter, American singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer (b. 1944)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Heinz Zemanek, Austrian computer scientist and academic (b. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Denis Avey, English soldier, engineer, and author (b. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Evelyn Ebsworth, English chemist and academic (b. 1933)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Alcides Ghiggia, Uruguayan footballer and manager (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Jack Goody, English anthropologist, author, and academic (b. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 2017 – George Romero, American filmmaker (b. 1940)\nBULLET::::- Christian feast day:\nBULLET::::- Gondulphus of Tongeren\nBULLET::::- Helier\nBULLET::::- Our Lady of Mount Carmel\nBULLET::::- Fiesta de La Tirana (Tarapacá Region, Chile)\nBULLET::::- Reineldis\nBULLET::::- July 16 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)\nBULLET::::- Engineer's Day (Honduras)\nBULLET::::- Holocaust Memorial Day (France)\n\nBULLET::::- BBC: On This Day\nBULLET::::- On This Day in Canada\n"}
{"id": "15948", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15948", "title": "Jack L. Chalker", "text": "Jack L. Chalker\n\nJack Laurence Chalker (December 17, 1944 – February 11, 2005) was an American science fiction author. Chalker was also a Baltimore City Schools history teacher in Maryland for 12 years, retiring during 1978 to write full-time. He also was a member of the Washington Science Fiction Association and was involved in the founding of the Baltimore Science Fiction Society.\n\nChalker was born and raised in Baltimore, Maryland. Some of his books said that he was born in Norfolk, Virginia although he later claimed that was a mistake; he attended high school at the Baltimore City College. Chalker earned a BA degree in English from Towson University in Towson, Maryland, where he was a theater critic for the school newspaper, The Towerlight. During 2003, Towson University named Chalker their Liberal Arts Alumnus of the Year. He received a Master of Arts in Liberal Studies from Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore.\n\nChalker intended to become a lawyer, but financial problems caused him to become a teacher instead. He taught history and geography in the Baltimore City Public Schools from 1966 to 1978, most notably at Baltimore City College and the now defunct Southwest Senior High School. Chalker lectured on science fiction and technology at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C., the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland, and numerous universities.\n\nChalker was married in 1978 and had two children, David, a game designer, and Samantha, a computer security consultant.\n\nChalker's hobbies included esoteric audio, travel, and working on science-fiction convention committees. He also had a great interest in ferryboats; at his fiancée's suggestion, their marriage was performed on the Roaring Bull boat, part of the Millersburg Ferry, in the middle of the Susquehanna River in Pennsylvania.\nChalker joined the Washington Science Fiction Association during 1958, and during 1963 he and two friends founded the Baltimore Science Fiction Society. Chalker attended every World Science Fiction Convention, except one, from 1965 until 2004. He published an amateur SF journal, \"Mirage\", from 1960 to 1971 (a Hugo nominee during 1963 for Best Fanzine), producing ten issues. Another journal, \"Interjection\", was published 1968–1987 in association with the Fantasy Amateur Press Association. Chalker also initiated a publishing house, Mirage Press, Ltd., for releasing nonfiction and bibliographic works concerning science fiction and fantasy.\n\nChalker's awards included the Daedalus Award (1983), The Gold Medal of the West Coast Review of Books (1984), Skylark Award (1980), and the Hamilton-Brackett Memorial Award (1979). He was a nominee for the John W. Campbell Award twice and for the Hugo Award twice. Chalker was posthumously awarded the Phoenix Award by the Southern Fandom Confederation on April 9, 2005.\n\nChalker was a three-term treasurer of the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America. Chalker was also the co-author (with Mark Owings) of \"The Science Fantasy Publishers\" (third edition during 1991, updated annually), published by Mirage Press, Ltd, a bibliographic guide to genre small press publishers which was a Hugo Award nominee during 1992. The Maryland Young Writers Contest, sponsored by the Baltimore Science Fiction Society, was renamed \"'The Jack L. Chalker Young Writers Contest\" effective April 8, 2006.\n\nChalker is best known for his \"Well World\" series of novels, but he also wrote many other novels (most, but not all, part of a series, or large novels which were split into 'series' by the publishers), and at least nine short stories.\n\nMany of Chalker's works involve some physical transformation of the main characters. For instance, in the \"Well World\" novels, immigrants to the Well World are transformed from their original form to become a member of one of the 1,560 sentient species that inhabit that artificial planet. Another example would be that the \"Wonderland Gambit\" series resembles traditional Buddhist jataka-type reincarnation stories set in a science fiction environment. Samantha Chalker announced that \"Wonderland Gambit\" might be made into a movie, but supposedly its close resemblance to \"The Matrix\" resulted in the project being canceled.\n\nAt the time of his death, Chalker left one unfinished novel, \"Chameleon\". He was planning to write another novel, \"Ripsaw\", after \"Chameleon\".\nOn September 18, 2003, during Hurricane Isabel, Chalker passed out and was rushed to the hospital with a diagnosis of a coronary occlusion. He was later released, but was severely weakened. On December 6, 2004, he was again rushed to hospital with breathing problems and disorientation, and was diagnosed with congestive heart failure and a pneumothorax. Chalker was hospitalized in critical condition, then upgraded to stable condition on December 9, though he did not regain consciousness until December 15. After several more weeks in deteriorating condition and in a persistent vegetative state, with several transfers to different hospitals, Chalker died on February 11, 2005, of kidney failure and sepsis at Bon Secours Hospital in Baltimore, Maryland.\n\nSome of Chalker's remains are interred in the family plot at Loudon Park Cemetery in Baltimore. The remainder were distributed off a ferry near Hong Kong, the ferry between Hainan Island and the Chinese mainland, a ferry in Vietnam, White's Ferry on the Potomac River in Virginia on Father's Day 2007, and on author H. P. Lovecraft's grave in Providence, Rhode Island on December 17, 2005.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Midnight at the Well of Souls\", Del Rey, 1977 ()\nBULLET::::- \"Exiles at the Well of Souls\", Del Rey, 1978 ()\nBULLET::::- \"Quest for the Well of Souls\", Del Rey, 1978 ()\nBULLET::::- \"The Return of Nathan Brazil\", Del Rey, 1980 ()\nBULLET::::- \"Twilight at the Well of Souls\", Del Rey, 1980 ()\nBULLET::::- \"The Sea is Full of Stars\", December 1999 ()\nBULLET::::- \"Ghost of the Well of Souls\", 2000 ()\n\nBULLET::::- \"Echoes of the Well of Souls\", Del Rey, trade paperback, May 1993 ()\nBULLET::::- \"Shadow of the Well of Souls\", Del Rey, February 1994 ()\nBULLET::::- \"Gods of the Well of Souls\", Del Rey, 1994 ()\nBULLET::::- \"The Watchers at the Well\", Science Fiction Book Club (omnibus edition), 1994\n\nBULLET::::- \"\", Del Rey, 1981 ()\nBULLET::::- \"\", Del Rey, 1982 ()\nBULLET::::- \"\", Del Rey, 1982 ()\nBULLET::::- \"\", Del Rey, 1983 ()\nBULLET::::- \"The Four Lords of the Diamond\", The Science Fiction Book Club (omnibus edition), 1983\n\nBULLET::::- \"The River of Dancing Gods\", Del Rey, 1984 ()\nBULLET::::- \"Demons of the Dancing Gods\", Del Rey, 1984 ()\nBULLET::::- \"Vengeance of the Dancing Gods\", Del Rey, July 1985 ()\nBULLET::::- \"Songs of the Dancing Gods\", Del Rey, August 1990 ()\nBULLET::::- \"Horrors of the Dancing Gods\", 1994 ()\nBULLET::::- \"The Dancing Gods: Part One\", Del Rey, November 1995 (). This is an omnibus volume containing \"The River of Dancing Gods\" and \"Demons of the Dancing Gods\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Dancing Gods II\", Del Rey, September 1996 (). This is an omnibus volume containing \"Vengeance of the Dancing Gods\" and \"Songs of the Dancing Gods\"\n\nBULLET::::- \"Spirits of Flux and Anchor\", Tor Books, 1984 () 2nd in Chronology\nBULLET::::- \"Empires of Flux and Anchor\", Tor Books, 1984 () 3rd in Chronology\nBULLET::::- \"Masters of Flux and Anchor\", Tor Books, January 1985 () 4th in Chronology\nBULLET::::- \"The Birth of Flux and Anchor\", Tor Books, 1985 () 1st in Chronology\nBULLET::::- \"Children of Flux and Anchor\", Tor Books, September 1986 () 5th in Chronology\n\nBULLET::::- \"Lords of the Middle Dark\", Del Rey Books, May 1986 ()\nBULLET::::- \"Pirates of the Thunder\", Del Rey Books, March 1987 ()\nBULLET::::- \"Warriors of the Storm\", Del Rey Books, August 1987 ()\nBULLET::::- \"Masks of the Martyrs\", Del Rey, February 1988 ()\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Labyrinth of Dreams\", Tor Books, March 1987 ()\nBULLET::::- \"The Shadow Dancers\", Tor Books, July 1987 ()\nBULLET::::- \"The Maze in the Mirror\", Tor Books, January 1989 ()\n\nBULLET::::- \"When the Changewinds Blow\", Ace-Putnam's, September 1987\nBULLET::::- \"Riders of the Winds\", Ace Books, May 1988\nBULLET::::- \"War of the Maelstrom\", Ace-Putnam's, October 1988 ()\nBULLET::::- \"Changewinds\", Baen (omnibus edition), August 1996\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Demons at Rainbow Bridge\", Ace-Putnam's, hardcover, September 1989 ()\nBULLET::::- \"The Run to Chaos Keep\", Ace-Putnam's, May 1991 ()\nBULLET::::- \"The Ninety Trillion Fausts\" (a.k.a. \"90 Trillion Fausts\"), Ace-Putnam's, October 1991 ()\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Cybernetic Walrus\", Del Rey, trade pb in November 1995\nBULLET::::- \"The March Hare Network\", 1996\nBULLET::::- \"The Hot-Wired Dodo\", Del Rey, Feb. 1997\n\nBULLET::::- \"Balshazzar's Serpent\", Baen Books 1999\nBULLET::::- \"Melchior's Fire\", Baen Books, 2001\nBULLET::::- \"Kaspar's Box\", 2003\n\nBULLET::::- \"A Jungle of Stars\", Ballantine, Del Rey, 1976 ()\nBULLET::::- \"The Web of the Chozen\", Del Rey, 1978 ()\nBULLET::::- \"And the Devil Will Drag You Under\", Del Rey, 1979 ()\nBULLET::::- \"A War of Shadows\", Ace: An Analog Book, 1979\nBULLET::::- \"Dancers in the Afterglow\", Del Rey, 1979, 1982 ()\nBULLET::::- \"The Devil's Voyage\", Doubleday, 1980\nBULLET::::- \"The Identity Matrix\", Timescape: Pocket Books, 1982 ()\nBULLET::::- \"Downtiming the Night Side\", Tor Books, May 1985 ()\nBULLET::::- \"The Messiah Choice\", St. Martins - Blue Jay, May 1985\nBULLET::::- \"The Red Tape War\" (with Mike Resnick and George Alec Effinger). Tor hardcover, April 1991\nBULLET::::- \"Priam's Lens\", Del Rey, 1997 ()\nBULLET::::- \"The Moreau Factor\", Del Rey, Feb. 2000\nBULLET::::- \"Chameleon\" (partially completed at time of death)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Dance Band on the Titanic\", Del Rey Books, July 1988 (short stories)\nBULLET::::- \"Hotel Andromeda\" (editor), Ace, 1994 ()\n\nBesides the short stories included in \"Dance Band on the Titanic\", Chalker wrote at least one other short story:\n\nBULLET::::- \"And Now Falls the Cold, Cold Night\". \"Alternate Presidents\", ed. Mike Resnick, Tor 1992.\n\nBULLET::::- \"An Informal Biography of Scrooge McDuck\", Mirage, 1974.\n\nBULLET::::- Jack L. Chalker Young Writers' Contest\n"}
{"id": "15949", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15949", "title": "James Blish", "text": "James Blish\n\nJames Benjamin Blish (May 23, 1921 – July 30, 1975) was an American science fiction and fantasy writer. He is best known for his \"Cities in Flight\" novels, and his series of \"Star Trek\" novelizations written with his wife, J. A. Lawrence. He is credited with creating the term \"gas giant\" to refer to large planetary bodies.\n\nBlish was a member of the Futurians. His first published stories appeared in \"Super Science Stories\" and \"Amazing Stories\".\n\nBlish wrote literary criticism of science fiction using the pen name William Atheling Jr. His other pen names included Donald Laverty, John MacDougal, and Arthur Lloyd Merlyn.\nBlish was born on May 23, 1921 at East Orange, New Jersey. While in high school, Blish self-published a fanzine using a hectograph, called \"The Planeteer\". The fanzine ran for six issues. Blish attended meetings of the Futurian Science Fiction Society in New York City during this period.\n\nFuturian members Damon Knight and Cyril M. Kornbluth became close friends. However, Blish's relationships with other members were often bitter. A personal target was fellow member Judith Merril, with whom he would debate politics. Merril would frequently dismiss Blish's self-description of being a \"paper fascist\". She wrote in \"Better to Have Loved\" (2002), \"Of course [Blish] was not fascist, antisemitic, or any of those terrible things, but every time he used the phrase, I saw red.\"\nBlish studied microbiology at Rutgers University, graduating in 1942. He was drafted into Army service, and he served briefly as a medical laboratory technician. The United States Army discharged him for refusing orders to clean a grease trap in 1944. Following discharge, Blish entered Columbia University as a masters student of zoology. He did not complete the program, opting to write fiction full-time.\n\nIn 1947, he married Virginia Kidd, a fellow Futurian. They divorced in 1963. Blish then married artist J. A. Lawrence in 1968, moving to England that same year.\n\nFrom 1962 to 1968, Blish worked for the Tobacco Institute, as a writer and critic. Much of his work for the institute went uncredited.\n\nBlish died on July 30, 1975 from complications related to lung cancer. He was buried in Holywell Cemetery, Oxford. The Bodleian Library at Oxford is the custodian of Blish's papers. The library also has a complete catalog of Blish's published works.\nThroughout the 1940s, Blish published most of his stories in the few pulp magazines still in circulation. His first story was sold to fellow Futurian Frederik Pohl for \"Super Science Stories\" (1940), called \"Emergency Refueling\". Other stories were published intermittently, but with little circulation. Blish's \"Chaos, Co-Ordinated\", co-written with Robert A. W. Lowndes, was sold to \"Astounding Science Fiction\", appearing in the October 1946 issue, earning Blish national circulation for the first time.\n\nBlish was what Andrew Litpack called a \"practical writer\". He would revisit, revise, and often expand on previously written stories. An example is \"Sunken Universe\" published in \"Super Science Stories\" in 1942. The story reappeared in \"Galaxy Science Fiction\" as \"Surface Tension\", in an altered form in 1952. The premise emphasised Blish's understanding of microbiology, and featured microscopic humans engineered to live on a hostile planet's shallow pools of water. The story proved to be among Blish's more popular, and was anthologized in \"The Science Fiction Hall of Fame, Volume One, 1929–1964\", edited by Robert Silverberg.\n\nThe world of microscopic humans continued in \"The Thing in the Attic\" in 1954, and \"Watershed\" the following year. The fourth entry, \"A Time to Survive\", was published by \"The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction\" in 1957. The stories were collected, edited together, and released as the fix-up \"The Seedling Stars\" (1956) from Gnome Press. John Clute said of all of Blish's \"deeply felt work\" explored \"confronting the Faustian (or Frankensteinian) man\".\n\n\"The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction\" asserts that it was not until the 1950s, and the Okie sequence of stories beginning their run, \"did it become clear [Blish] would become a [science fiction] writer of unusual depth\". The stories were loosely based on the Okie migration following the Dust Bowl of the 1930s, and were influenced by Oswald Spengler's two-part \"Der Untergang des Abendlandes\" (\"The Decline of the West\")\".\"\n\nThe stories detail the life of the Okies, humans who migrate throughout space looking for work in vast city-ships, powered by spindizzies, a type of anti-gravity engine. The premise and plot reflected Blish's feelings on the state of western civilization, and his personal politics. The first two stories, \"Okie\", and \"Bindlestiff\", were published in 1950, by \"Astounding\". \"Sargasso of Lost Cities\" appeared in \"Two Complete Science-Adventure Books\" in April 1953. \"Earthman, Come Home\" followed a few months later, published by \"Astounding\". In 1955, Blish collected the four stories together into an omnibus titled \"Earthman, Come Home\", published by Putnam.\n\nMore stories followed: In 1956, \"They Shall Have Stars\", which edited together \"Bridge\" and \"At Death’s End\", and in 1958, Blish released \"The Triumph of Time\". Four years later, he published a new Okies novel, \"A Life for the Stars\". The Okies sequence was edited together and published as \"Cities In Flight\" (1970).\n\nClute notes, \"the brilliance of \"Cities in Flight\" does not lie in the assemblage of its parts, but in the momentum of the ideas embodied in it (albeit sometimes obscurely).\"\nBlish continued to rework older stories, and did so for one of his best known works, \"A Case of Conscience\" (1958). The novel originated as a novella, originally published in an issue of \"If\", in 1953. The story follows a Jesuit priest, Ramon Ruiz-Sanchez, who visits the planet Lithia as a technical member of an expedition. While on the planet they discover a race of bipedal reptilians that have perfected morality in what Ruiz-Sanchez says is \"the absence of God\", and theological complications ensue. The book is one of the first major works in the genre to explore religion and its implications. It was the first of a series including \"Doctor Mirabilis\" (1964) and the two-part story \"Black Easter\" (1968), and \"The Day After Judgment\" (1971). The latter two were collected as \"The Devil's Day\" (1980). An omnibus of all four entries in the series was released by Legend in 1991, titled \"After Such Knowledge\".\n\n\"A Case of Conscience\" won the 1959 Hugo Award for Best Novel, and was collected as part of Library of America’s omnibus \"American Science Fiction: Five Classic Novels 1956-1958\".\n\nBlish was commissioned by Bantam Books to adapt episodes of \"\". The adapted short stories were generally based on draft scripts, and contained differing plot elements, and situations present in the aired television episodes.\n\nThe stories were collected into twelve volumes, and published as a title series of the same name from 1967 to 1977. The adaptations were largely written by Blish, however, his declining health during this period proved problematic. His wife, J. A. Lawrence, wrote a number of installments, however, her work remained uncredited until the final volume, \"Star Trek 12\" released in 1977, two years after Blish's death.\n\nThe original novel based on the television series, \"Spock Must Die!\" (1970), was also written by Blish, and he planned to release more. According to Lawrence, two episodes featuring popular character Harry Mudd, \"I, Mudd\" and \"Mudd's Women\", were held back by Blish for adaptation to be included in the follow-up to \"Spock Must Die!\". However, Blish died before a novel could be completed. Lawrence did eventually adapt the two episodes, as \"Mudd's Angels\" (1978), which included an original novella \"Business, as Usual, During Altercations\" by Lawrence.\n\nBlish credited his financial stability later in life to the \"Star Trek\" commission, and the advance he received for \"Spock Must Die!\".\n\nBlish was among the first literary critics of science fiction, and he judged works in the genre by the standards applied to \"serious\" literature. He took to task his fellow authors for deficiencies, such as bad grammar and a misunderstanding of scientific concepts, and the magazine editors, who accepted and published such material without editorial intervention. His critiques were published in \"fanzines\" in the 1950s under the pseudonym William Atheling Jr.\n\nThe essays were collected in \"The Issue at Hand\" (1964) and \"More Issues at Hand\" (1970). Reviewing \"The Issue at Hand\", Algis Budrys said that Atheling had, along with Damon Knight, \"transformed the reviewer's trade in this field\". He described the persona of Atheling as \"acidulous, assertive, categorical, conscientious and occasionally idiosyncratic\".\n\nBlish was a fan of the works of James Branch Cabell, and for a time edited \"Kalki\", the journal of the Cabell Society.\n\nIn his works of science fiction, James Blish developed many ideas and terms which have influenced other writers and on occasion have been adopted more widely, such as faster than light communication via the dirac computer, introduced in the short story \"Beep\" (1954). The dirac is comparable to Ursula K. Le Guin's ansible.\n\nBlish is also credited with coining the term gas giant', in the story \"Solar Plexus\" as it appeared in the anthology \"Beyond Human Ken\", edited by Judith Merril. The story was originally published in 1941, but did not contain the term. Blish reworked the story, changing the description of a large magnetic field to \"a magnetic field of some strength nearby, one that didn't belong to the invisible gas giant revolving half a million miles away\".\n\nThe British Science Fiction Foundation inaugurated the James Blish Award for science fiction criticism in 1977, recognizing Brian W. Aldiss. The Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame inducted him in 2002.\n\nBULLET::::- 1959 Hugo Award for Best Novel, for \"A Case of Conscience.\"\nBULLET::::- 1965 Nebula Award nomination for Best Novelette, for \"The Shipwrecked Hotel\", with Norman L. Knight.\nBULLET::::- 1968 Nebula Award nomination for Best Novel, for \"Black Easter\".\nBULLET::::- 1970 Hugo Award nomination for Best Novella, for \"We All Die Naked\".\nBULLET::::- 1970 Nebula Award nomination for Best Novella, for \"A Style in Treason\".\n\nBULLET::::- 2001 [1951] Retro-Hugo Award nomination for Best Novelette, for \"Okie\".\nBULLET::::- 2004 [1954] Retro-Hugo Award for Best Novella, for \"A Case of Conscience\".\nBULLET::::- 2004 [1954] Retro-Hugo Award for Best Novelette, for \"Earthman, Come Home\".\n\nBULLET::::- 1960 Guest of Honor, 18th World Science Fiction Convention.\nBULLET::::- 1970 Guest of Honor, Scicon 70.\n\nBlish's work was released by a variety of publishers in the United Kingdom and the United States, often with variations between editions and different titles. Blish also expanded and re-released his older work on several occasions. His work continued to be published after his death.\n\nThe Bodleian Library's catalog of Blish's works, and are the sources for this bibliography.\n\nNote: Very few of Blish's first editions were assigned ISBN numbers.\n\nNovels published in complete form, or serialized, in fiction magazines are included for completeness, and to avoid confusion.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Neptunian Refuge\" (November 1935)\nBULLET::::- \"Mad Vision\" (December 1935)\nBULLET::::- \"Pursuit into Nowhere\" (January 1936)\nBULLET::::- \"Threat from Copernicus\" (February 1936)\nBULLET::::- \"Trail of the Comet\" (March 1936)\nBULLET::::- \"Bat-Shadow Shroud\" (April 1936)\nBULLET::::- \"Emergency Refueling\" (March 1940)\nBULLET::::- \"Bequest of the Angel\" (May 1940)\nBULLET::::- \"Sunken Universe\" (May 1942),rewritten as \"Surface Tension\" (1952)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Citadel of Thought\" (February 1941)\nBULLET::::- \"Callistan Cabal\" (April 1941)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Weapon Out of Time\" (April 1941)\nBULLET::::- \"When Anteros Came\" (December 1941)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Phoenix Planet\" (May 1941)\nBULLET::::- \"The Real Thrill\" (July 1941)\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Topaz Gate\" (August 1941)\nBULLET::::- \"The Solar Comedy\" (June 1942)\nBULLET::::- \"The Air Whale\" (August 1942)\nBULLET::::- \"Struggle in the Womb\" (May 1950)\nBULLET::::- \"The Secret People\" (November 1950)\nBULLET::::- \"Elixir\" (September 1951)\nBULLET::::- \"Testament of Andros\" (January 1953)\nBULLET::::- \"Solar Plexus\" (September 1941)\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Bounding Crown\" (December 1944)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Knell\", as by Arthur Lloyd Merlyn (January 1946)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Chaos, Co-Ordinated\" as by John MacDougal, with Robert A. W. Lowndes (October 1946)\nBULLET::::- \"Tiger Ride\" with Damon Knight (October 1948)\nBULLET::::- \"Okie\" (April 1950)\nBULLET::::- \"Bindlestiff\" (December 1950)\nBULLET::::- \"Bridge\" (February 1952)\nBULLET::::- \"Earthman, Come Home\" (November 1953)\nBULLET::::- \"At Death's End\" (May 1954)\nBULLET::::- \"One-Shot\" (August 1955)\nBULLET::::- \"Tomb Tapper\" (July 1956)\nBULLET::::- \"Get Out of My Sky\" (January 1957),included in \"Get out of My Sky\" Panther ed. (1980)\nBULLET::::- \"Mistake Inside\" (April 1948)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Against the Stone Beasts\" (August 1948)\nBULLET::::- \"Blackout in Cygni\" (July 1951)\n\nBULLET::::- \"No Winter, No Summer\" as by Donald Laverty, with Damon Knight (October 1948)\nBULLET::::- \"The Weakness of RVOG\" (February 1949),expanded as \"VOR\" (1958)\nBULLET::::- \"The Box\" (April 1949)\nBULLET::::- \"The Homesteader\" (June 1949)\nBULLET::::- \"Let the Finder Beware\" (December 1949)\nBULLET::::- \"There Shall Be No Darkness\" (April 1950),included in \"Get Out of My Sky\" Panther ed. (1980)\nBULLET::::- \"Serpent's Fetish\" (December 1948)\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Bore\" (July 1950)\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Void Is My Coffin\" (June 1951)\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Warriors of Day\" (August 1951)\nBULLET::::- \"Sargasso of Lost Cities\" (April 1953)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Nightride and Sunrise\" with Jerome Bixby (June 1952)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Surface Tension\" (August 1952),collected in \"The Seedling Stars\" (1957)\nBULLET::::- \"Beep\" (February 1954),expanded as \"The Quincunx of Time\" (1973)\nBULLET::::- \"The Writing of the Rat\" (July 1956)\nBULLET::::- \"The Genius Heap\" (August 1956)\nBULLET::::- \"On the Wall of the Lodge\" with Virginia Kidd (June 1962)\nBULLET::::- \"The Shipwrecked Hotel\" with Norman L. Knight, (August 1965),expanded as \"A Torrent of Faces\" (1967)\nBULLET::::- \"The Piper of Dis\" with Norman L. Knight, (August 1966),expanded as \"A Torrent of Faces\" (1967)\nBULLET::::- \"Our Binary Brothers\" (February 1969)\nBULLET::::- \"The City That Was the World\" (July 1969)\nBULLET::::- \"A Style in Treason\" (May 1970)\nBULLET::::- \"The Day After Judgment\" (September 1970),collected in \"The Devil's Day\" (1990)\nBULLET::::- \"Darkside Crossing\" (December 1970)\nBULLET::::- \"The Glitch\" (June 1974)\nBULLET::::- \"The Art of the Sneeze\" (November 1982)\nBULLET::::- \"Turn of a Century\" (March 1953)\nBULLET::::- \"The Duplicated Man\" with Robert A. W. Lowndes (August 1953)\n\nBULLET::::- \"A Case of Conscience\" (September 1953),expanded as \"A Case of Conscience\" (1958)\nBULLET::::- \"The Thing in the Attic\" (July 1954),collected in \"The Seedling Stars\" (1957)\nBULLET::::- \"Watershed\" (May 1955),collected in \"The Seedling Stars\" (1957)\nBULLET::::- \"To Pay the Piper\" (February 1956)\nBULLET::::- \"Welcome to Mars\" (July 1966)\nBULLET::::- \"Black Easter\" (August 1967),collected in \"The Devil's Day\" (1990)\nBULLET::::- \"Now That Man Is Gone\" (November 1968)\n\nBULLET::::- \"F.Y.I.\" (December 1953)\n\nBULLET::::- \"First Strike\" (June 1953)\nBULLET::::- \"The Book of Your Life\" (March 1955)\nBULLET::::- \"With Malice to Come (3 vignettes)\" (May 1955)\nBULLET::::- \"A Time to Survive\" (February 1956),collected in \"The Seedling Stars\" Signet ed. (1959)\nBULLET::::- \"This Earth of Hours\" (June 1959)\nBULLET::::- \"The Masks\" (November 1959)\nBULLET::::- \"The Oath\" (October 1960)\nBULLET::::- \"Who's in Charge Here?\" (May 1962)\nBULLET::::- \"No Jokes on Mars\" (October 1965)\nBULLET::::- \"Midsummer Century\" (November 1982)\nBULLET::::- \"Translation\" (March 1955)\n\nBULLET::::- \"King of the Hill\" (November 1955)\nBULLET::::- \"Sponge Dive\" (June 1956)\nBULLET::::- \"Detour to the Stars\" (December 1956)\nBULLET::::- \"Nor Iron Bars\" (November 1957),expanded as \"Galactic Cluster\" (1959)\n\nBULLET::::- \"A Work of Art\" (July 1956)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Two Worlds in Peril\" (February 1957)\n\nBULLET::::- \"… And All the Stars a Stage\" (June 1960)\nBULLET::::- \"And Some Were Savages\" (November 1960)\nBULLET::::- \"A Dusk of Idols\" (March 1961)\n\nBULLET::::- \"A Hero's Life\" (March 1966)\n\nBULLET::::- \"To Love Another\" (April 1967),expanded as \"A Torrent of Faces\" (1967)\nBULLET::::- \"Skysign\" with Norman L. Knight, (May 1968)\n\nBULLET::::- \"A Light to Fight by\" (June 1972)\n\nBULLET::::- \"The White Empire\" (September 1986)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Beanstalk\", \"Future Tense\" (1952), ed. Kendell Foster Crossen. Greenberger.Expanded in \"Titan's Daughter\" (1961).\nBULLET::::- \"Common Time\", \"Shadows of Tomorrow\" (August 1953), ed. Frederik Pohl. Permabooks #P236.\nBULLET::::- \"A Matter of Energy\", \"The Best from Fantasy and Science Fiction, Fifth Series\" (January 1956), ed. Anthony Boucher. Doubleday.\nBULLET::::- \"Nor Iron Bars\" (expanded), \"Galactic Cluster\" (October 1959), ed. James Blish. Signet #S1719.\nBULLET::::- \"The Abattoir Effect\", \"So Close to Home\" (), ed. James Blish. Ballantine Books #465K.\nBULLET::::- \"None So Blind\", \"Anywhen\" (July 1970), ed. James Blish. Doubleday.\nBULLET::::- \"How Beautiful With Banners\", \"Orbit 1\" (1966), ed. Damon Knight. Whiting & Wheaton.\nBULLET::::- \"We All Die Naked\", \"Three for Tomorrow\" (August 1969), ed. uncredited. Meredith Press.\nBULLET::::- \"More Light\", \"Alchemy and Academe\"(November 1970), ed. Anne McCaffrey. Doubleday.\nBULLET::::- \"Statistician's Day\", \"Science Against Man\" (December 1970), ed. Anthony Cheetham. Avon #V2374.\nBULLET::::- \"Getting Along\", \"Again, Dangerous Visions\" (), ed. Harlan Ellison. Doubleday.\nBULLET::::- \"A True Bill: A Chancel Drama in One Act\", \"Ten Tomorrows\" (September 1973), ed. Roger Elwood. Fawcett Gold Medal #M2820.\nBULLET::::- \"The Price of a Drink\", \"The Beserkers\" (January 1974), ed. Roger Eldwood. Trident .\nBULLET::::- \"Making Waves\", \"Works of Art\" (). NESFA Press .\n\nBULLET::::- \"Jack of Eagles\" (1952). Greenberg.\nBULLET::::- \"The Frozen Year\" (). Ballantine Books #197. Also released as \"Fallen Star\" (1957). Faber & Faber.\nBULLET::::- \"VOR\" (April 1958). Avon #T-238.\nBULLET::::- \"The Duplicated Man\" (1959). Avalon Books.\nBULLET::::- \"A Torrent of Faces\" (1967), with Norman L. Knight. Doubleday.\nBULLET::::- \"The Warriors of Day\" (1967). Lancer Books #73-580.\nBULLET::::- \"The Star Dwellers\" (1961). G. P. Putnam's Sons.\nBULLET::::- \"Titan's Daughter\" (March 1961). Berkley Medallion #G507.\nBULLET::::- \"The Night Shapes\" (October 1962). Ballantine Books #F647.\nBULLET::::- \"Mission to the Heart Stars\" (). Faber & Faber.\nBULLET::::- \"Welcome to Mars\" (July 1966). G. P. Putnam's Sons.\nBULLET::::- \"The Vanished Jet\" (1968). Weybright and Talley.\nBULLET::::- \"… And All the Stars a Stage\" (July 1971). Doubleday.\nBULLET::::- \"Midsummer Century\" (May 1972). Doubleday.Included in \"Midsummer Century\" Daw ed. (1974).\nBULLET::::- \"The Quincunx of Time\" (October 1973). Dell #07244.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Earthman, Come Home\" (1955). G. P. Putnam's Sons.\nBULLET::::- \"They Shall Have Stars\" (1956). Faber & Faber.\nBULLET::::- \"The Triumph of Time\" (October 1958). Avon #T-279.Also released as \"A Clash of Cymbals\" (1959). Faber & Faber.\nBULLET::::- \"A Life for the Stars\" (1962). G. P. Putnam's Sons.\n\nBULLET::::- \"A Case of Conscience\" (April 1958). Ballantine Books #256.\nBULLET::::- \"Doctor Mirabilis\" (1964). Faber & Faber #55198.\nBULLET::::- \"The Devil's Day\" (February 1990). Baen .\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Seedling Stars\" (1957). Gnome Press.\nBULLET::::- \"The Seedling Stars\" (February 1959). Signet #S1622.\nBULLET::::- \"Best Science Fiction Stories of James Blish\" (1965). Faber & Faber.\nBULLET::::- \"Midsummer Century\" (February 1974). Daw #UQ1094.\nBULLET::::- \"The Best of James Blish\" (August 1979). Ballantine/Del Ray .Also released as \"The Testament of Andros\" (August 1977). Arrow Books .\nBULLET::::- \"Get Out of My Sky\" (April 1980). Panther .\nBULLET::::- \"A Work of Art and Other Stories\" (July 1993). Severn House .\nBULLET::::- \"With All Love: Selected Poems\" (March 1995). Anamnesis Press .\nBULLET::::- \"A Dusk of Idols and Other Stories\" (May 1996). Severn House .\nBULLET::::- \"In This World, or Another\" (). Five Star .\nBULLET::::- \"Works of Art\" (). NESFA Press .\nBULLET::::- \"Flights of Eagles\" (). NESFA Press .\n\nBULLET::::- \"Galactic Cluster\" (October 1959). Signet #S1719.\nBULLET::::- \"So Close to Home\" (). Ballantine Books #465K.\nBULLET::::- \"New Dreams This Morning\" (October 1966). Ballantine Books #U233.\nBULLET::::- \"Anywhen\" (1970). Doubleday.\nBULLET::::- \"Nebula Award Stories 5\" (1970). Gollancz.\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Issue at Hand\" (1964), as by William Atheling Jr. Advent Publishers.\nBULLET::::- \"More Issues at Hand\" (December 1970), as by William Atheling Jr. Advent Publishers .\nBULLET::::- \"The Tale That Wags the God\" (July 1987). Advent Publishers .\n\nBULLET::::- \"Star Trek\" (January 1967). Bantam Books #F3459.\nBULLET::::- \"Star Trek 2\" (February 1968). Bantam Books #F3439.\nBULLET::::- \"Star Trek 3\" (April 1969). Bantam Books #F4371.\nBULLET::::- \"Spock Must Die!\" (February 1970). Bantam Books #H5515.\nBULLET::::- \"Star Trek 4\" (July 1971). Bantam Books #S7009.\nBULLET::::- \"Star Trek 5\" (February 1972). Bantam Books #S7300.\nBULLET::::- \"Star Trek 6\" (April 1972). Bantam Books #S7364.\nBULLET::::- \"Star Trek 7\" (July 1972). Bantam Books #S7480.\nBULLET::::- \"Star Trek 8\" (November 1972). Bantam Books #SP7550.\nBULLET::::- \"Star Trek 9\" (August 1973). Bantam Books #SP7808.\nBULLET::::- \"Star Trek 10\" (February 1974). Bantam Books #SP8401.\nBULLET::::- \"Star Trek 11\" (April 1975). Bantam Books #Q8717.Also released as \"The Day of the Dove\" (October 1985). Spectra .\nBULLET::::- \"Star Trek 12\" (November 1977), with J. A. Lawrence. Bantam Books .\n\nBULLET::::- \"Cities in Flight\" (February 1970). Avon #W187.\nBULLET::::- \"After Such Knowledge\" (July 1991). Legend ).\nBULLET::::- \"The Seedling Stars / Galactic Cluster\" (April 1983). Signet .\nBULLET::::- \"Black Easter / The Day After Judgement / The Seedling Stars\" () .\n\nBULLET::::- \"Imprisoned in a Tesseract: The Life and Work of James Blish\" (1987), by David Ketterer. Kent State University Press\nBULLET::::- \"Special James Blish Issue\" (April 1972) \"The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction\". .\n\nBULLET::::- Official author website\nBULLET::::- Audio of Blish giving the Guest of Honour speech at Eastercon 1970\n"}
{"id": "15950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15950", "title": "James Madison", "text": "James Madison\n\nJames Madison Jr. (March 16, 1751 – June 28, 1836) was an American statesman, lawyer, diplomat, philosopher and Founding Father who served as the fourth president of the United States from 1809 to 1817. He is hailed as the \"Father of the Constitution\" for his pivotal role in drafting and promoting the Constitution of the United States and the United States Bill of Rights. He co-wrote \"The Federalist Papers\", co-founded the Democratic-Republican Party, and served as the fifth United States secretary of State from 1801 to 1809.\n\nBorn into a prominent Virginia planter family, Madison served as a member of the Virginia House of Delegates and the Continental Congress during and after the American Revolutionary War. He became dissatisfied with the weak national government established by the Articles of Confederation and helped organize the Constitutional Convention, which produced a new constitution to supplant the Articles of Confederation. Madison's Virginia Plan served as the basis for the Constitutional Convention's deliberations, and he was one of the most influential individuals at the convention. Madison became one of the leaders in the movement to ratify the Constitution, and he joined with Alexander Hamilton and John Jay in writing \"The Federalist Papers\", a series of pro-ratification essays that is widely considered to be one of the most influential works of political science in American history.\n\nAfter the ratification of the Constitution, Madison emerged as an important leader in the United States House of Representatives and served as a close adviser to President George Washington. He was the main force behind the ratification of the United States Bill of Rights, which enshrines guarantees of personal freedoms and rights within the Constitution. During the early 1790s, Madison came to oppose the economic program and accompanying centralization of power favored by Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton. Along with Thomas Jefferson, Madison organized the Democratic-Republican Party, which was, alongside Hamilton's Federalist Party, one of the nation's first major political parties. After Jefferson won the 1800 presidential election, Madison served as secretary of State from 1801 to 1809. In that position, he supervised the Louisiana Purchase, which doubled the size of the United States.\n\nMadison succeeded Jefferson with a victory in the 1808 presidential election. After diplomatic protests and a trade embargo failed to end British attacks against American shipping, he led the United States into the War of 1812. The war was an administrative morass and ended inconclusively, but many Americans saw it as a successful \"second war of independence\" against Britain. The war convinced Madison of the necessity of a stronger federal government, and he presided over the creation of the Second Bank of the United States and the enactment of the protective Tariff of 1816. He retired from public office in 1817 and died in 1836. Madison is considered to be one of the most important Founding Fathers of the United States, and historians have generally ranked him as an above-average president.\n\nJames Madison Jr. was born on March 16, 1751, (March 5, 1750, Old Style, Julian calendar) at Belle Grove Plantation near Port Conway, Virginia, to James Madison Sr. and Nelly Conway Madison. He grew up as the oldest of twelve children, with seven brothers and four sisters, though only six of his siblings would live to adulthood. His father was a tobacco planter who grew up on a plantation, then called Mount Pleasant, which he had inherited upon reaching adulthood. With numerous slaves and a plantation, Madison's father was the largest landowner and a leading citizen in the Piedmont. Madison's maternal grandfather was a prominent planter and tobacco merchant. In the early 1760s, the Madison family moved into a newly built house, which they named Montpelier.\n\nFrom age 11 to 16, Madison was sent to study under Donald Robertson, a Scottish instructor who served as a tutor for a number of prominent planter families in the South. Madison learned mathematics, geography, and modern and classical languages—he became especially proficient in Latin. At age 16, Madison returned to Montpelier, where he began a two-year course of study under the Reverend Thomas Martin in preparation for college. Unlike most college-bound Virginians of his day, Madison did not attend the College of William and Mary, where the lowland Williamsburg climate - thought to be more likely to harbor infectious disease - might have strained his delicate health. Instead, in 1769, he enrolled at the College of New Jersey (now Princeton University).\n\nHis studies at Princeton included Latin, Greek, theology, and the works of the Enlightenment. Great emphasis was placed on both speech and debate; Madison was a leading member of the American Whig Society, in direct competition to the Cliosophian Society. During his time at Princeton, his closest friend was future Attorney General William Bradford. Along with another classmate, Madison undertook an intense program of study and completed Princeton's three-year bachelor of arts degree in just two years, graduating in 1771. He remained at Princeton to study Hebrew and political philosophy under President John Witherspoon before returning home to Montpelier in early 1772. His ideas on philosophy and morality were strongly shaped by Witherspoon, who converted Madison to the philosophy, values, and modes of thinking of the Age of Enlightenment. Biographer Terence Ball says that at Princeton:\n\nAfter returning to Montpelier, Madison, who had not yet decided on a specific career, served as a tutor to his younger siblings. In the early 1770s the relationship between the American colonies and Britain deteriorated over the issue of British taxation, culminating in the American Revolutionary War, which began in 1775. Madison believed that the British Parliament had overstepped its bounds by imposing taxation on the American colonies, and he sympathized with those who resisted British rule. He also favored de-establishing the Anglican Church in Virginia; Madison believed that an established religion was detrimental not only for restricting freedom of religion, but also because it encouraged closed-mindedness and unquestioning obedience to the authority of the state.\n\nIn 1774, Madison took a seat on the local Committee of Safety, a pro-revolution group that oversaw the local militia. In October 1775, he was commissioned as the colonel of the Orange County militia, serving as his father's second-in-command until his election as a delegate to the Fifth Virginia Convention, which was charged with producing Virginia's first constitution. Of short stature and frequently in poor health, Madison never saw battle in the Revolutionary War, but he rose to prominence in Virginia politics as a wartime leader. At the Virginia constitutional convention, he convinced delegates to alter the Virginia Declaration of Rights to provide for \"equal entitlement,\" rather than mere \"tolerance,\" in the exercise of religion. With the enactment of the Virginia constitution, Madison became part of the Virginia House of Delegates, and he was subsequently elected to the Virginia governor's Council of State. In that role, he became a close ally of Governor Thomas Jefferson.\n\nMadison served on the Council of State from 1777 to 1779, when he was elected to the Second Continental Congress, the governing body of the United States. The country faced a difficult war against Great Britain, as well as runaway inflation, financial troubles, and lack of cooperation between the different levels of government. Madison worked to make himself an expert on financial issues, becoming a legislative workhorse and a master of parliamentary coalition building. Frustrated by the failure of the states to supply needed requisitions, Madison proposed to amend the Articles of Confederation to grant Congress the power to independently raise revenue through tariffs on foreign imports. Though General George Washington, Congressman Alexander Hamilton, and other influential leaders also favored the amendment, it was defeated because it failed to win the ratification of all thirteen states. While a member of Congress, Madison was an ardent supporter of a close alliance between the United States and France, and, as an advocate of westward expansion, he insisted that the new nation had to assure its right to navigation on the Mississippi River and control of all lands east of it in the Treaty of Paris that ended the Revolution. After serving Congress from 1780 to 1783, Madison won election to the Virginia House of Delegates in 1784.\n\nAs a member of the Virginia House of Delegates, Madison continued to advocate for religious freedom, and, along with Jefferson, drafted the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom. That amendment, which guaranteed freedom of religion and disestablished the Church of England, was passed in 1786. Madison also became a land speculator, purchasing land along the Mohawk River in a partnership with another Jefferson protege, James Monroe.\n\nThroughout the 1780s, Madison advocated for reform of the Articles of Confederation. He became increasingly worried about the disunity of the states and the weakness of the central government after the end of the Revolutionary War in 1783. He believed that \"excessive democracy\" caused social decay, and was particularly troubled by laws that legalized paper money and denied diplomatic immunity to ambassadors from other countries. He was also deeply concerned about the inability of Congress to capably conduct foreign policy, protect American trade, and foster the settlement of the lands between the Appalachian Mountains and the Mississippi River. As Madison wrote, \"a crisis had arrived which was to decide whether the American experiment was to be a blessing to the world, or to blast for ever the hopes which the republican cause had inspired.\" He committed to an intense study of law and political theory, and was heavily influenced by Enlightenment texts sent by Jefferson from France. He especially sought out works on international law and the constitutions of \"ancient and modern confederacies\" such as the Dutch Republic, the Swiss Confederation, and the Achaean League. He came to believe that the United States could improve upon past republican experiments by virtue of its size; with so many distinct interests competing against each other, Madison hoped to minimize the abuses of majority rule. Additionally, navigation rights to the Mississippi River highly concerned Madison. He disdained a proposal by John Jay that the United States acquiesce claims to the river for twenty-five years, and his desire to fight the proposal played a major role in motivating Madison to return to Congress in 1787.\n\nMadison helped arrange the 1785 Mount Vernon Conference, which settled disputes regarding navigation rights on the Potomac River and also served as a model for future interstate conferences. At the 1786 Annapolis Convention, he joined with Alexander Hamilton and other delegates in calling of another convention to consider amending the Articles. After winning election to another term in Congress, Madison helped convince the other Congressmen to authorize the Philadelphia Convention for the purposes of proposing new amendments. Though many members of Congress were wary of the changes the convention might bring, nearly all agreed that the existing government needed some sort of reform. Madison ensured that George Washington, who was popular throughout the country, and Robert Morris, who was influential in the critical state of Pennsylvania, would both broadly support Madison's plan to implement a new constitution. The outbreak of Shays' Rebellion in 1786 reinforced the necessity for constitutional reform in the eyes of Washington and other American leaders.\n\nBefore a quorum was reached at the Philadelphia Convention on May 25, 1787, Madison worked with other members of the Virginia delegation, especially Edmund Randolph and George Mason, to create and present the Virginia Plan. The Virginia Plan was an outline for a new federal constitution; it called for three branches of government (legislative, executive, and judicial), a bicameral Congress (consisting of the United States Senate and the United States House of Representatives) apportioned by population, and a federal Council of Revision that would have the right to veto laws passed by Congress. Reflecting the centralization of power envisioned by Madison, the Virginia Plan granted the U.S. Senate the power to overturn any law passed by state governments. The Virginia Plan did not explicitly lay out the structure of the executive branch, but Madison himself favored a single executive. Many delegates were surprised to learn that the plan called for the abrogation of the Articles and the creation of a new constitution, to be ratified by special conventions in each state rather than by the state legislatures. Nonetheless, with the assent of prominent attendees such as Washington and Benjamin Franklin, the delegates went into a secret session to consider a new constitution.\n\nThough the Virginia Plan was an outline rather than a draft of a possible constitution, and though it was extensively changed during the debate, its use at the convention has led many to call Madison the \"Father of the Constitution.\" During the course of the convention, Madison spoke over two hundred times, and his fellow delegates rated him highly. Delegate William Pierce wrote that \"in the management of every great question he evidently took the lead in the Convention ... he always comes forward as the best informed man of any point in debate.\" Madison believed that the constitution produced by the convention \"would decide for ever the fate of republican government\" throughout the world, and he kept copious notes to serve as an historical record of the convention.\n\nMadison had hoped that a coalition of Southern states and populous Northern states would ensure the approval of a constitution largely similar to the one proposed in the Virginia Plan. However, delegates from small states successfully argued for more power for state governments and presented the New Jersey Plan as an alternative. In response, Roger Sherman proposed the Connecticut Compromise, which sought to balance the interests of small and large states. During the course of the convention, Madison's Council of Revision was jettisoned, each state was given equal representation in the Senate, and the state legislatures, rather than the House of Representatives, were given the power to elect members of the Senate. Madison was able to convince his fellow delegates to have the Constitution ratified by ratifying conventions rather than state legislatures, which he distrusted. He also helped ensure that the president of the United States would have the ability to veto federal laws and would be elected independently of Congress through the Electoral College. By the end of the convention, Madison believed that the new constitution failed to give enough power to the federal government compared to the state governments, but he still viewed the document as an improvement on the Articles of Confederation.\n\nThe ultimate question before the convention, Wood notes, was not how to design a government but whether the states should remain sovereign, whether sovereignty should be transferred to the national government, or whether the constitution should settle somewhere in between. Most of the delegates at the Philadelphia Convention wanted to empower the federal government to raise revenue and protect property rights. Those, like Madison, who thought democracy in the state legislatures was excessive and insufficiently \"disinterested\", wanted sovereignty transferred to the national government, while those who did not think this a problem, wanted to fix the Articles of Confederation. Even many delegates who shared Madison's goal of strengthening the central government reacted strongly against the extreme change to the \"status quo\" envisioned in the Virginia Plan. Though Madison lost most of his battles over how to amend the Virginia Plan, in the process he increasingly shifted the debate away from a position of pure state sovereignty. Since most disagreements over what to include in the constitution were ultimately disputes over the balance of sovereignty between the states and national government, Madison's influence was critical. Wood notes that Madison's ultimate contribution was not in designing any particular constitutional framework, but in shifting the debate toward a compromise of \"shared sovereignty\" between the national and state governments.\n\nAfter the Philadelphia Convention ended in September 1787, Madison convinced his fellow Congressmen to remain neutral in the ratification debate and allow each state to vote upon the Constitution. Throughout the United States, opponents of the Constitution, known as Anti-Federalists, began a public campaign against ratification. In response, Alexander Hamilton and John Jay began publishing a series of pro-ratification newspaper articles in New York. After Jay dropped out from the project, Hamilton approached Madison, who was in New York on congressional business, to write some of the essays. Altogether, Hamilton, Madison, and Jay wrote the 85 essays of what became known as \"The Federalist Papers\" in the span of six months, with Madison writing 29 of the essays. The articles were also published in book form and became a virtual debater's handbook for the supporters of the Constitution in the ratifying conventions. Historian Clinton Rossiter called \"The Federalist Papers\" \"the most important work in political science that ever has been written, or is likely ever to be written, in the United States.\" Federalist No. 10, Madison's first contribution to \"The Federalist Papers\", became highly regarded in the 20th century for its advocacy of representative democracy. In Federalist No. 51, Madison explained how the separation of powers between three branches of the federal government, as well as between state governments and the federal government, established a system of checks and balances that ensured that no one institution would become too powerful.\n\nWhile Madison and Hamilton continued to write \"The Federalist Papers\", Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, and several smaller states voted to ratify the Constitution. After finishing his last contributions to \"The Federalist Papers\", Madison returned to Virginia. Initially, Madison did not want to stand for election to the Virginia Ratifying Convention, but he was persuaded to do so by the strength of the Anti-Federalists. Virginians were divided into three main camps: Washington and Madison led the faction in favor of ratification of the Constitution, Edmund Randolph and George Mason headed a faction that wanted ratification but also sought amendments to the Constitution, and Patrick Henry was the most prominent member of the faction opposed to the ratification of the Constitution. When the Virginia Ratifying Convention began on June 2, 1788, the Constitution had been ratified by the eight of the required nine states. New York, the second largest state and a bastion of anti-federalism, would likely not ratify it without Virginia, and Virginia's exclusion from the new government would disqualify George Washington from being the first president.\n\nAt the start of the convention, Madison knew that most delegates had already made up their mind about how to vote, and he focused his efforts on winning the support of the relatively small number of undecided delegates. His long correspondence with Edmund Randolph paid off at the convention as Randolph announced that he would support unconditional ratification of the Constitution, with amendments to be proposed after ratification. Though Henry gave several effective speeches arguing against ratification, Madison's expertise on the subject he had long argued for allowed him to respond with rational arguments to Henry's emotional appeals. In his final speech to the ratifying convention, Madison implored his fellow delegates to ratify the Constitution as it had been written, arguing that the failure to do so would lead to the collapse of the entire ratification effort as each state would seek favorable amendments. On June 25, 1788, the convention voted 89–79 to ratify the Constitution, making it the tenth state to do so. New York ratified the constitution the following month, and Washington won the country's first presidential election.\n\nAfter Virginia ratified the constitution, Madison returned to New York to resume his duties in the Congress of the Confederation. At the request of Washington, Madison sought a seat in the U.S. Senate, but the state legislature instead elected two Anti-Federalist allies of Patrick Henry. Now deeply concerned both for his own political career and over the possibility that Henry and his allies would arrange for a second constitutional convention, Madison ran for the U.S. House of Representatives. At Henry's behest, the Virginia legislature created congressional districts designed to deny Madison a seat, and Henry recruited a strong challenger to Madison in the person of James Monroe. Locked in a difficult race against Monroe, Madison promised to support a series of constitutional amendments to protect individual liberties. In an open letter, Madison wrote that, while he had opposed requiring alterations to the Constitution prior to ratification, he now believed that \"amendments, if pursued with a proper moderation and in a proper mode ... may serve the double purpose of satisfying the minds of well-meaning opponents, and of providing additional guards in favor of liberty.\" Madison's promise paid off, as he won election to Congress with 57 percent of the vote.\n\nMadison became a key adviser to President Washington, who looked to Madison as the person who best understood the constitution. Madison helped Washington write his first inaugural address, and also prepared the official House response to Washington's address. He played a major role in establishing and staffing the three Cabinet departments, and his influence helped Thomas Jefferson become the inaugural Secretary of State. At the start of the 1st Congress, he introduced a tariff bill similar to the one he had advocated for under the Articles of the Confederation, and Congress established a federal tariff on foreign imports through the Tariff of 1789. The following year, Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton introduced an ambitious economic program that called for the federal assumption of state debts and the funding of that debt through the issuance of federal securities. Hamilton's plan favored Northern speculators and was disadvantageous to states such as Virginia that had already paid off most of their debt, and Madison emerged as one of the principal congressional opponents of the plan. After prolonged legislative deadlock, Madison, Jefferson, and Hamilton agreed to the Compromise of 1790, which provided for the enactment of Hamilton's assumption plan through the Funding Act of 1790. In return, Congress passed the Residence Act, which established the federal capital district of Washington, D.C. on the Potomac River.\n\nDuring the 1st Congress, Madison took the lead in pressing for the passage of several constitutional amendments that would form the United States Bill of Rights. His primary goals were to fulfill his 1789 campaign pledge and to prevent the calling of a second constitutional convention, but he also hoped to protect individual liberties against the actions of the federal government and state legislatures. He believed that the enumeration of specific rights would fix those rights in the public mind and encourage judges to protect them. After studying over two hundred amendments that had been proposed at the state ratifying conventions, Madison introduced the Bill of Rights on June 8, 1789. His amendments contained numerous restrictions on the federal government and would protect, among other things, freedom of religion, freedom of speech, and the right to peaceful assembly. While most of his proposed amendments were drawn from the ratifying conventions, Madison was largely responsible for proposals to guarantee freedom of the press, protect property from government seizure, and ensure jury trials. He also proposed an amendment to prevent states from abridging \"equal rights of conscience, or freedom of the press, or the trial by jury in criminal cases.\"\n\nMadison's Bill of Rights faced little opposition; he had largely co-opted the Anti-Federalist goal of amending the Constitution, but had avoided proposing amendments that would alienate supporters of the Constitution. Madison's proposed amendments were largely adopted by the House of Representatives, but the Senate made several changes. Madison's proposal to apply parts of the Bill of Rights to the states was eliminated, as was his final proposed change to the Constitution's preamble. Madison was disappointed that the Bill of Rights did not include protections against actions by state governments, but passage of the document mollified some critics of the original constitution and shored up Madison's support in Virginia. Of the twelve amendments formally proposed by Congress to the states, ten amendments were ratified as additions to the Constitution on December 15, 1791, becoming known as the Bill of Rights.\n\nAfter 1790, the Washington administration became polarized among two main factions. One faction was led by Jefferson and Madison, broadly represented Southern interests, and sought close relations with France. The other faction was led by Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton, broadly represented Northern financial interests, and favored close relations with Britain. In 1791, Hamilton introduced a plan that called for the establishment of a national bank to provide loans to emerging industries and oversee the money supply. Madison believed that, by empowering financial interests, the bank posed a threat to the republican nature of the U.S. government, and he argued that the Constitution did not grant the federal government the authority to create such an institution. Despite Madison's opposition, Congress passed a bill to create the First Bank of the United States; after a period of consideration, Washington signed the banking bill into law in February 1791. As Hamilton implemented his economic program and Washington continued to enjoy immense prestige as president, Madison became increasingly concerned that Hamilton would seek to abolish the federal republic in favor of a centralized monarchy.\n\nWhen Hamilton submitted his \"Report on Manufactures\", which called for federal action to stimulate the development of a diversified economy, Madison once again challenged Hamilton's proposal on constitutional grounds. He sought to mobilize public opinion by forming a political party based on opposition to Hamilton's policies. Along with Jefferson, Madison helped Philip Freneau establish the \"National Gazette\", a Philadelphia newspaper that attacked Hamilton's proposals. In an essay published in the \"National Gazette\" in September 1792, Madison wrote that the country had divided into two factions: his own faction, which believed in \"the doctrine that mankind are capable of governing themselves,\" and Hamilton's faction, which allegedly sought the establishment of aristocratic monarchy and was biased towards the wealthy. Those opposed to Hamilton's economic policies, including many former Anti-Federalists, coalesced into Democratic-Republican Party, while those who supported the administration's policies coalesced into the Federalist Party. In the 1792 United States presidential election, both major parties supported Washington's successful bid for re-election, but the Democratic-Republicans sought to unseat Vice President John Adams. Because the Constitution's rules essentially precluded Jefferson from challenging Adams, the party backed New York Governor George Clinton for the vice presidency, but Adams won re-election by a comfortable electoral vote margin.\n\nWith Jefferson out of office after 1793, Madison became the de facto leader of the Democratic-Republican Party. When Britain and France went to war in 1793, the U.S. was caught in the middle. While the differences between the Democratic-Republicans and the Federalists had previously centered on economic matters, foreign policy became an increasingly important issue as Madison and Jefferson favored France and Hamilton favored Britain. War with Britain became imminent in 1794 after the British seized hundreds of American ships that were trading with French colonies. Madison believed that a trade war with Britain would probably succeed, and would allow Americans to assert their independence fully. The British West Indies, Madison maintained, could not live without American foodstuffs, but Americans could easily do without British manufactures. Washington avoided a trade war and instead secured friendly trade relations with Britain through the Jay Treaty of 1794. Madison and his Democratic-Republican allies were outraged by the treaty; one Democratic-Republican wrote that the treaty \"sacrifices every essential interest and prostrates the honor of our country.\" Madison's strong opposition to the treaty led to a permanent break with Washington, ending a long friendship.\n\nWashington chose to retire after serving two terms and, in advance of the 1796 presidential election, Madison helped convince Jefferson to run for the presidency. Despite Madison's efforts, Federalist candidate John Adams defeated Jefferson, taking a narrow majority of the electoral vote. Under the rules of the Electoral College then in place, Jefferson became vice president because he finished with the second-most electoral votes. Madison, meanwhile, had declined to seek re-election, and he returned to his home at Montpelier. On Jefferson's advice, President Adams considered appointing Madison to an American delegation charged with ending French attacks on American shipping, but Adams's Cabinet members strongly opposed the idea. After a diplomatic incident between France and the United States known as the XYZ Affair took place, the two countries engaged in an undeclared naval war known as the Quasi-War.\n\nThough he was out of office, Madison remained a prominent Democratic-Republican leader in opposition to the Adams administration. During the Quasi-War, the Federalists created a standing army and passed the Alien and Sedition Acts, which were directed at French refugees engaged in American politics and against Republican editors. Madison and Jefferson believed that the Federalists were using the war to justify the violation of constitutional rights, and they increasingly came to view Adams as a monarchist. In response to the Alien and Sedition Acts, Jefferson wrote the Kentucky Resolutions, which argued that the states had the power to nullify federal law on the basis that the Constitution was a compact among the states. Madison rejected this view of a compact among the states, and his Virginia Resolutions instead urged states to respond to unjust federal laws through interposition, a process in which a state legislature declared a law to be unconstitutional but did not take steps to actively prevent its enforcement. Jefferson's doctrine of nullification was widely rejected, and the incident damaged the Democratic-Republican Party as attention was shifted from the Alien and Sedition Acts to the unpopular nullification doctrine.\n\nIn 1799, after Patrick Henry announced that he would return to politics as a member of the Federalist Party, Madison won election to the Virginia legislature. At the same time, he and Jefferson planned for Jefferson's campaign in the 1800 presidential election. Madison issued the Report of 1800, which attacked the Alien and Sedition Acts as unconstitutional but disregarded Jefferson's theory of nullification. The Report of 1800 held that Congress was limited to legislating on its enumerated powers, and that punishment for sedition violated freedom of speech and freedom of the press. Jefferson embraced the report, and it became the unofficial Democratic-Republican platform for the 1800 election. With the Federalists badly divided between supporters of Hamilton and Adams, and with news of the end of the Quasi-War not reaching the United States until after the election, Jefferson and his ostensible running mate, Aaron Burr, defeated Adams. Because Jefferson and Burr tied in the electoral vote, the Federalist-controlled House of Representatives held a contingent election to choose between the two candidates. After the House conducted dozens of inconclusive ballots, Hamilton, who despised Burr even more than he did Jefferson, convinced several Federalist congressmen to cast blank ballots, giving Jefferson the victory.\n\nOn September 15, 1794, Madison married Dolley Payne Todd, a 26-year-old widow, previously wife of John Todd, a Quaker farmer who died during a yellow fever epidemic in Philadelphia. Aaron Burr introduced Madison to her, at his request, after Dolley had stayed in the same boardinghouse as Burr in Philadelphia. After an arranged meeting in spring 1794, the two quickly became romantically engaged and prepared for a wedding that summer, but Dolley suffered recurring illnesses because of her exposure to yellow fever in Philadelphia. They eventually traveled to Harewood, Virginia for their wedding. Only a few close family members attended, and Winchester Reverend Alexander Balmain pronounced them a wedded couple. Madison enjoyed a strong relationship with his wife, and she became his political partner. She was widely popular in the capital of Washington, and she excelled at dinners and other important political occasions. Her actions helped establish the First Lady of the United States as an important social host in Washington.\n\nMadison never had children, but he adopted Dolley's one surviving son, John Payne Todd (known as Payne), after the marriage. Some of Madison's colleagues, such as Monroe and Burr, alleged that Madison was infertile and that his lack of offspring weighed on his thoughts, but Madison never spoke of any distress on this matter.\n\nThroughout his life, Madison maintained a close relationship with his father, James Madison Sr, who died in 1801. At age 50, Madison inherited the large plantation of Montpelier and other possessions, including his father's numerous slaves. He had three brothers, Francis, Ambrose, and William, and three sisters, Nelly, Sarah, and Frances, who lived to adulthood. Ambrose helped manage Montpelier for both his father and older brother until his death in 1793.\n\nDespite lacking foreign policy experience, Madison was appointed as Secretary of State by Jefferson. Along with Secretary of the Treasury Albert Gallatin, Madison became one of the two major influences in Jefferson's Cabinet. As the ascent of Napoleon in France had dulled Democratic-Republican enthusiasm for the French cause, Madison sought a neutral position in the ongoing Coalition Wars between France and Britain. Domestically, the Jefferson administration and the Democratic-Republican Congress rolled back many Federalist policies; Congress quickly repealed the Alien and Sedition Act, abolished internal taxes, and reduced the size of the army and navy. Gallatin did, however, convince Jefferson to retain the First Bank of the United States. Though the Federalists were rapidly fading away at the national level, Chief Justice John Marshall ensured that Federalist ideology retained an important presence in the judiciary. In the case of \"Marbury v. Madison\", Marshall simultaneously ruled that Madison had unjustly refused to deliver federal commissions to individuals who had been appointed to federal positions by President Adams but who had not yet taken office, but that the Supreme Court did not have jurisdiction over the case. Most importantly, Marshall's opinion established the principle of judicial review.\n\nBy the time Jefferson took office, Americans had settled as far west as the Mississippi River, though vast pockets of American land remained vacant or inhabited only by Native Americans. Jefferson believed that western expansion played an important role in furthering his vision of a republic of yeoman farmers, and he hoped to acquire the Spanish territory of Louisiana, which was located to the west of the Mississippi River. Early in Jefferson's presidency, the administration learned that Spain planned to retrocede the Louisiana to France, raising fears of French encroachment on U.S. territory. In 1802, Jefferson and Madison dispatched James Monroe to France to negotiate the purchase of New Orleans, which controlled access to the Mississippi River and thus was immensely important to the farmers of the American frontier. Rather than selling merely New Orleans, Napoleon's government, having already given up on plans to establish a new French empire in the Americas, offered to sell the entire Territory of Louisiana. Despite lacking explicit authorization from Jefferson, Monroe and ambassador Robert R. Livingston negotiated the Louisiana Purchase, in which France sold over of land in exchange for $15 million.\n\nDespite the time-sensitive nature of negotiations with the French, Jefferson was concerned about the constitutionality of the Louisiana Purchase, and he privately favored introducing a constitutional amendment explicitly authorizing Congress to acquire new territories. Madison convinced Jefferson to refrain from proposing the amendment, and the administration ultimately submitted the Louisiana Purchase without an accompanying constitutional amendment. Unlike Jefferson, Madison was not seriously concerned with the Louisiana Purchase's constitutionality. He believed that the circumstances did not warrant a strict interpretation of the Constitution because the expansion was in the country's best interest. The Senate quickly ratified the treaty providing for the purchase, and the House, with equal alacrity, passed enabling legislation. The Jefferson administration argued that the purchase had included the Spanish territory of West Florida, but France and Spain both held that West Florida was not included in the purchase. Monroe attempted to purchase clear title to West Florida and East Florida from Spain, but the Spanish, outraged by Jefferson's claims to West Florida, refused to negotiate.\n\nEarly in his tenure, Jefferson was able to maintain cordial relations with both France and Britain, but relations with Britain deteriorated after 1805. The British ended their policy of tolerance towards American shipping and began seizing American goods headed for French ports. They also impressed American sailors, some of whom had originally defected from the British navy, and some of whom had never been British subjects. In response to the attacks, Congress passed the Non-importation Act, which restricted many, but not all, British imports. Tensions with Britain heightened due to the Chesapeake–Leopard affair, a June 1807 naval confrontation between American and British naval forces, while the French also began attacking American shipping. Madison believed that economic pressure could force the British to end attacks on American shipping, and he and Jefferson convinced Congress to pass the Embargo Act of 1807, which totally banned all exports to foreign nations. The embargo proved ineffective, unpopular, and difficult to enforce, especially in New England. In March 1809, Congress replaced the embargo with the Non-Intercourse Act, which allowed trade with nations other than Britain and France.\n\nSpeculation regarding Madison's potential succession of Jefferson commenced early in Jefferson's first term. Madison's status in the party was damaged by his association with the embargo, which was unpopular throughout the country and especially in the Northeast. With the Federalists collapsing as a national party after 1800, the chief opposition to Madison's candidacy came from other members of the Democratic-Republican Party. Madison became the target of attacks from Congressman John Randolph, a leader of a faction of the party known as the tertium quids. Randolph recruited James Monroe, who had felt betrayed by the administration's rejection of the proposed Monroe–Pinkney Treaty with Britain, to challenge Madison for leadership of the party. Many Northerners, meanwhile, hoped that Vice President George Clinton could unseat Madison as Jefferson's successor. Despite this opposition, Madison won his party's presidential nomination at the January 1808 congressional nominating caucus. The Federalist Party mustered little strength outside New England, and Madison easily defeated Federalist candidate Charles Cotesworth Pinckney. At a height of only five feet, four inches (163 cm), and never weighing more than 100 pounds (45 kg), Madison became the most diminutive president.\n\nUpon his inauguration in 1809, Madison immediately faced opposition to his planned nomination of Secretary of the Treasury Albert Gallatin as Secretary of State. Madison chose not to fight Congress for the nomination but kept Gallatin in the Treasury Department. The remaining members of Madison's Cabinet were chosen for the purposes of national interest and political harmony, and were largely unremarkable or incompetent. With a Cabinet full of those he distrusted, Madison rarely called Cabinet meetings and instead frequently consulted with Gallatin alone. He gained another trusted confidant in the Cabinet when he dismissed Secretary of State Robert Smith in 1811, replacing him with Monroe. Early in his presidency, Madison sought to continue Jefferson's policies of low taxes and a reduction of the national debt. In 1811, Congress allowed the charter of the First Bank of the United States to lapse after Madison declined to take a strong stance on the issue.\n\nCongress had repealed the embargo shortly before Madison became president, but troubles with the British and French continued. Madison settled on a new strategy designed to pit the British and French against each other, offering to trade with whichever country would end their attacks against American shipping. The gambit almost succeeded, but negotiations with the British collapsed in mid-1809. Seeking to split the Americans and British, Napoleon offered to end French attacks on American shipping so long as the United States punished any countries that did not similarly end restrictions on trade. Madison accepted Napoleon's proposal in the hope that it would convince the British to finally end their policy of commercial warfare, but the British refused to change their policies, and the French reneged on their promise and continued to attack American shipping.\n\nWith sanctions and other policies having failed, Madison determined that war with Britain was the only remaining option. Many Americans called for a \"second war of independence\" to restore honor and stature to the new nation, and an angry public elected a \"war hawk\" Congress, led by Henry Clay and John C. Calhoun. With Britain in the midst of the Napoleonic Wars, many Americans, Madison included, believed that the United States could easily capture Canada, at which point the U.S. could use Canada as a bargaining chip for all other disputes or simply retain control of it. On June 1, 1812, Madison asked Congress for a declaration of war, stating that the United States could no longer tolerate Britain's \"state of war against the United States.\" The declaration of war was passed along sectional and party lines, with opposition to the declaration coming from Federalists and from some Democratic-Republicans in the Northeast. In the years prior to the war, Jefferson and Madison had reduced the size of the military, leaving the country with a military force consisting mostly of poorly trained militia members. Madison asked Congress to quickly put the country \"into an armor and an attitude demanded by the crisis,\" specifically recommending expansion of the army and navy.\n\nMadison's hope that the war would end in a couple months after the capture of Canada was quickly dashed. Madison had believed the state militias would rally to the flag and invade Canada, but the governors in the Northeast failed to cooperate, and the militias either sat out the war or refused to leave their respective states. The American invasion of Canada suffered a major setback when General William Hull surrendered to British and Native American forces at the Siege of Detroit, and a separate U.S. force was defeated at the Battle of Queenston Heights. Lacking adequate revenue to fund the war, the Madison administration was forced to rely on high-interest loans furnished by bankers based in New York City and Philadelphia. In the 1812 presidential election, held during the early stages of the War of 1812, Madison faced a challenge from DeWitt Clinton, who led a coalition of Federalists and disaffected Democratic-Republicans. Clinton won most of the Northeast, but Madison won the election by sweeping the South and the West and winning the key state of Pennsylvania.\n\nAfter the disastrous start to the War of 1812, Madison accepted Russia's invitation to arbitrate the war, and he sent a delegation led by Gallatin and John Quincy Adams to Europe to negotiate a peace treaty. While Madison worked to end the war, the U.S. experienced some military successes, particularly at sea. With a victory at the Battle of Lake Erie, the U.S. crippled the supply and reinforcement of British military forces in the western theater of the war. In the aftermath of the Battle of Lake Erie, General William Henry Harrison defeated the forces of the British and of Tecumseh's Confederacy at the Battle of the Thames. The death of Tecumseh in that battle marked the permanent end of armed Native American resistance in the Old Northwest. In March 1814, General Andrew Jackson broke the resistance of the British-allied Muscogee in the Old Southwest with his victory at the Battle of Horseshoe Bend. Despite those successes, the British continued to repel American attempts to invade Canada, and a British force captured Fort Niagara and burned the American city of Buffalo in late 1813.\n\nThe British agreed to begin peace negotiations in the town of Ghent in early 1814, but at the same time, they shifted soldiers to North America following Napoleon's defeat in the Battle of Paris. Under General George Izard and General Jacob Brown, the U.S. launched another invasion of Canada in mid-1814. Despite an American victory at the Battle of Chippawa, the invasion stalled once again. In August 1814, the British landed a large force off the Chesapeake Bay and routed an American army at the Battle of Bladensburg. Madison escaped capture in the aftermath of the battle, but the British burned Washington. The British army next moved on Baltimore, but the U.S. repelled the British attack in the Battle of Baltimore, and the British army departed from the Chesapeake region in September. That same month, U.S. forces repelled a British invasion from Canada with a victory at the Battle of Plattsburgh. The British public began to turn against the war in North America, and British leaders began to look for a quick exit from the conflict.\n\nIn January 1815, an American force under General Jackson defeated the British at the Battle of New Orleans. Just over a month later, Madison learned that his negotiators had reached the Treaty of Ghent, ending the war without major concessions by either side. Madison quickly sent the Treaty of Ghent to the Senate, and the Senate ratified the treaty on February 16, 1815. To most Americans, the quick succession of events at the end of the war, including the burning of the capital, the Battle of New Orleans, and the Treaty of Ghent, appeared as though American valor at New Orleans had forced the British to surrender. This view, while inaccurate, strongly contributed to a feeling of post-war euphoria that bolstered Madison's reputation as president. Napoleon's defeat at the June 1815 Battle of Waterloo brought a final close to the Napoleonic Wars, ending the danger of attacks on American shipping by British and French forces.\n\nThe postwar period of Madison's second term saw the transition into the \"Era of Good Feelings,\" as the Federalists ceased to act as an effective opposition party. During the war, delegates from the states of New England held the Hartford Convention, where the delegates asked for several amendments to the Constitution. Though the Hartford Convention did not explicitly call for the secession of New England, the Hartford Convention became a political millstone around the Federalist Party as Americans celebrated what they saw as a successful \"second war of independence\" from Britain. Madison hastened the decline of the Federalists by adopting several programs he had previously opposed, weakening the ideological divisions between the two major parties.\n\nRecognizing the difficulties of financing the war and the necessity of an institution to regulate the currency, Madison proposed the re-establishment of a national bank. He also called for increased spending on the army and the navy, a tariff designed to protect American goods from foreign competition, and a constitutional amendment authorizing the federal government to fund the construction of internal improvements such as roads and canals. His initiatives were opposed by strict constructionists such as John Randolph, who stated that Madison's proposals \"out-Hamiltons Alexander Hamilton.\" Responding to Madison's proposals, the 14th Congress compiled one of the most productive legislative records up to that point in history. Congress granted the Second Bank of the United States a twenty-five-year charter and passed the Tariff of 1816, which set high import duties for all goods that were produced in the United States. Madison approved federal spending on the Cumberland Road, which provided a link to the country's western lands, but in his last act before leaving office, he blocked further federal spending on internal improvements by vetoing the Bonus Bill of 1817. In making the veto, Madison argued that the General Welfare Clause did not broadly authorize federal spending on internal improvements.\n\nIn the 1816 presidential election, Madison and Jefferson both favored the candidacy of Secretary of State James Monroe. With the support of Madison and Jefferson, Monroe defeated Secretary of War William H. Crawford in the party's congressional nominating caucus. As the Federalist Party continued to collapse as a national party, Monroe easily defeated Federalist candidate Rufus King in the 1816 election. Madison left office as a popular president; former president Adams wrote that Madison had \"acquired more glory, and established more union, than all his three predecessors, Washington, Adams, and Jefferson, put together.\"\n\nWhen Madison left office in 1817 at age 65, he retired to Montpelier, his tobacco plantation in Orange County, Virginia, not far from Jefferson's Monticello. As with both Washington and Jefferson, Madison left the presidency a poorer man than when elected. His plantation experienced a steady financial collapse, due to the continued price declines in tobacco and also due to his stepson's mismanagement.\n\nIn his retirement, Madison occasionally became involved in public affairs, advising Andrew Jackson and other presidents. He remained out of the public debate over the Missouri Compromise, though he privately complained about the North's opposition to the extension of slavery. Madison had warm relations with all four of the major candidates in the 1824 presidential election, but, like Jefferson, largely stayed out of the race. During Jackson's presidency, Madison publicly disavowed the Nullification movement and argued that no state had the right to secede.\n\nMadison helped Jefferson establish the University of Virginia, though the university was primarily Jefferson's initiative. In 1826, after the death of Jefferson, Madison was appointed as the second rector of the university. He retained the position as college chancellor for ten years until his death in 1836.\n\nIn 1829, at the age of 78, Madison was chosen as a representative to the Virginia Constitutional Convention for revision of the commonwealth's constitution. It was his last appearance as a statesman. The issue of greatest importance at this convention was apportionment. The western districts of Virginia complained that they were underrepresented because the state constitution apportioned voting districts by county. The increased population in the Piedmont and western parts of the state were not proportionately represented by delegates in the legislature. Western reformers also wanted to extend suffrage to all white men, in place of the prevailing property ownership requirement. Madison tried in vain to effect a compromise. Eventually, suffrage rights were extended to renters as well as landowners, but the eastern planters refused to adopt citizen population apportionment. They added slaves held as property to the population count, to maintain a permanent majority in both houses of the legislature, arguing that there must be a balance between population and property represented. Madison was disappointed at the failure of Virginians to resolve the issue more equitably.\n\nIn his later years, Madison became highly concerned about his historic legacy. He resorted to modifying letters and other documents in his possession, changing days and dates, adding and deleting words and sentences, and shifting characters. By the time he had reached his late seventies, this \"straightening out\" had become almost an obsession. As an example, he edited a letter written to Jefferson criticizing Lafayette—Madison not only inked out original passages, but even forged Jefferson's handwriting as well. Historian Drew R. McCoy writes that, \"During the final six years of his life, amid a sea of personal [financial] troubles that were threatening to engulf him ... At times mental agitation issued in physical collapse. For the better part of a year in 1831 and 1832 he was bedridden, if not silenced ... Literally sick with anxiety, he began to despair of his ability to make himself understood by his fellow citizens.\"\n\nMadison's health slowly deteriorated. He died of congestive heart failure at Montpelier on the morning of June 28, 1836, at the age of 85. By one common account of his final moments, he was given his breakfast, which he tried eating but was unable to swallow. His favorite niece, who sat by to keep him company, asked him, \"What is the matter, Uncle James?\" Madison died immediately after he replied, \"Nothing more than a change of \"mind\", my dear.\" He is buried in the family cemetery at Montpelier. He was one of the last prominent members of the Revolutionary War generation to die. His will left significant sums to the American Colonization Society, the University of Virginia, and Princeton, as well as $30,000 to his wife, Dolly. Left with a smaller sum than Madison had intended, Dolly suffered financial troubles until her own death in 1849.\n\nDuring his first stint in Congress in the 1780s, Madison came to favor amending the Articles of Confederation to provide for a stronger central government. In the 1790s, he led the opposition to Hamilton's centralizing policies and the Alien and Sedition Acts. According to Chernow, Madison's support of the Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions in the 1790s \"was a breathtaking evolution for a man who had pleaded at the Constitutional Convention that the federal government should possess a veto over state laws.\" The historian Gordon S. Wood says that Lance Banning, as in his \"Sacred Fire of Liberty\" (1995), is the \"only present-day scholar to maintain that Madison did not change his views in the 1790s.\" During and after the War of 1812, Madison came to support several policies he had opposed in the 1790s, including the national bank, a strong navy, and direct taxes.\n\nWood notes that many historians struggle to understand Madison, but Wood looks at him in the terms of Madison's own times—as a nationalist but one with a different conception of nationalism from that of the Federalists. Gary Rosen and Banning use other approaches to suggest Madison's consistency.\n\nAlthough baptized as an Anglican and educated by Presbyterian clergymen, young Madison was an avid reader of English deist tracts. As an adult, Madison paid little attention to religious matters. Though most historians have found little indication of his religious leanings after he left college, some scholars indicate he leaned toward deism. Others maintain that Madison accepted Christian tenets and formed his outlook on life with a Christian world view.\n\nRegardless of his own religious beliefs, Madison believed in religious liberty, and he advocated for Virginia's disestablishment of the Anglican Church throughout the late 1770s and 1780s. He also opposed the appointments of chaplains for Congress and the armed forces, arguing that the appointments produce religious exclusion as well as political disharmony. In 1819, Madison said, \"The number, the industry, and the morality of the priesthood & the devotion of the people have been manifestly increased by the total separation of the Church from the State.\"\n\nMadison grew up on a plantation that made use of slave labor and he viewed the institution as a necessary part of the Southern economy, though he was troubled by the instability of a society that depended on a large enslaved population. Madison failed to free any of his slaves either during his lifetime or in his will. At the Philadelphia Convention, Madison favored an immediate end to the importation of slaves, though the final document barred Congress from interfering with the international slave trade until 1808. (The domestic trade in slaves was expressly permitted by the constitution.) He also proposed that apportionment in the United States Senate be allocated by the sum of each state's free population and slave population, eventually leading to the adoption of the Three-Fifths Compromise. Madison supported the extension of slavery into the West during the Missouri crisis of 1819–1821. Madison believed that former slaves were unlikely to successfully integrate into Southern society, and in the late 1780s, he became interested in the idea of African-Americans establishing colonies in Africa. Madison ended his life as president of the American Colonization Society, which founded the settlement of Liberia for former slaves.\n\nUpon becoming president, Madison stated that the federal government's duty was to convert the American Indians by the \"participation of the improvements of which the human mind and manners are susceptible in a civilized state\". Like Jefferson, Madison had a paternalistic attitude toward American Indians, encouraging the men to give up hunting and become farmers. Madison believed the adoption of European-style agriculture would help Native Americans assimilate the values of British-U.S. civilization. As pioneers and settlers moved West into large tracts of Cherokee, Choctaw, Creek, and Chickasaw territory, Madison ordered the U.S. Army to protect Native lands from intrusion by settlers, to the chagrin of his military commander Andrew Jackson. Jackson wanted the president to ignore Indian pleas to stop the invasion of their lands. In the Northwest Territory after the Battle of Tippecanoe, Indians were pushed off their tribal lands and replaced entirely by white settlers.\n\nMadison is widely regarded as one of the most important Founding Fathers of the United States. Historian J.C.A. Stagg writes that \"in some ways—because he was on the winning side of every important issue facing the young nation from 1776 to 1816—Madison was the most successful and possibly the most influential of all the Founding Fathers.\" Though he helped found a major political party and served as the fourth president of the United States, his legacy has largely been defined by his contributions to the Constitution; even in his own life he was hailed as the \"Father of the Constitution.\" Law professor Noah Feldman writes that Madison \"invented and theorized the modern ideal of an expanded, federal constitution that combines local self-government with an overarching national order.\" Feldman adds that Madison's \"model of liberty-protecting constitutional government\" is \"the most influential American idea in global political history.\"\n\nPolls of historians and political scientists tend to rank Madison as an above average president. A 2018 poll of the American Political Science Association's Presidents and Executive Politics section ranked Madison as the twelfth best president. Wood commends Madison for his steady leadership during the war and resolve to avoid expanding the president's power, noting one contemporary's observation that the war was conducted \"without one trial for treason, or even one prosecution for libel.\" Nonetheless, many historians have criticized Madison's tenure as president. Henry Steele Commager and Richard B. Morris in 1968 said the conventional view of Madison was as an \"incapable President\" who \"mismanaged an unnecessary war.\" A 2006 poll of historians ranked Madison's failure to prevent the War of 1812 as the sixth-worst mistake made by a sitting president.\n\nThe historian Garry Wills wrote, \"Madison's claim on our admiration does not rest on a perfect consistency, any more than it rests on his presidency. He has other virtues. ... As a framer and defender of the Constitution he had no peer. ... The finest part of Madison's performance as president was his concern for the preserving of the Constitution. ... No man could do everything for the country—not even Washington. Madison did more than most, and did some things better than any. That was quite enough.\"\n\nMontpelier, his family's plantation, has been designated a National Historic Landmark. The James Madison Memorial Building is a building of the United States Library of Congress and serves as the official memorial to Madison. In 1986, Congress created the James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation as part of the bicentennial celebration of the Constitution. Several counties and communities have been named for Madison, including Madison County, Alabama and Madison, Wisconsin. Other things named for Madison include Madison Square, James Madison University, and the USS \"James Madison\".\n\nBULLET::::- Irving Newton Brant, Madison's leading biographer\nBULLET::::- Republicanism\nBULLET::::- List of delegates to the Continental Congress\nBULLET::::- List of Presidents of the United States\n\nBULLET::::- , the standard scholarly biography; Online additions\nBULLET::::- single volume condensation of 6-vol biography\nBULLET::::- detailed popular history\n\n\n\nBULLET::::- ; The main scholarly edition\nBULLET::::- \"Founders Online,\" searchable edition\nBULLET::::- reprints his major messages and reports.\nBULLET::::- White House biography\nBULLET::::- James Madison: A Resource Guide at the Library of Congress\nBULLET::::- The James Madison Papers, 1723–1836 at the Library of Congress\nBULLET::::- The Papers of James Madison, subset of Founders Online from the National Archives\nBULLET::::- American President: James Madison (1751–1836) at the Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia\nBULLET::::- James Madison Personal Manuscripts\n"}
{"id": "15954", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15954", "title": "January 24", "text": "January 24\n\nBULLET::::- AD 41 – Claudius is proclaimed Roman Emperor by the Praetorian Guard after they assassinate the previous emperor, his nephew Caligula.\nBULLET::::- 661 – The Rashidun Caliphate ends with the assassination of Ali, and the Imamah of the Shia going to the second Imam, Hassan ibn Ali.\nBULLET::::- 914 – Start of the First Fatimid invasion of Egypt.\nBULLET::::- 1438 – The Council of Basel suspends Pope Eugene IV.\nBULLET::::- 1458 – Matthias Corvinus becomes King of Hungary.\nBULLET::::- 1624 – Afonso Mendes, appointed by Pope Gregory XV as Prelate of Ethiopia, arrives at Massawa from Goa.\nBULLET::::- 1679 – King Charles II of England dissolves the Cavalier Parliament.\nBULLET::::- 1739 – Peshva warrior Chimnaji Appa defeats Portuguese forces and captures Tarapur Fort, India.\nBULLET::::- 1742 – Charles VII Albert becomes Holy Roman Emperor.\nBULLET::::- 1758 – During the Seven Years' War the leading burghers of Königsberg submit to Elizabeth of Russia, thus forming Russian Prussia (until 1763)\nBULLET::::- 1817 – Crossing of the Andes: Many soldiers of Juan Gregorio de las Heras are captured during the Action of Picheuta.\nBULLET::::- 1835 – Slaves in Salvador da Bahia, Brazil, stage a revolt, which is instrumental in ending slavery there 50 years later.\nBULLET::::- 1848 – California Gold Rush: James W. Marshall finds gold at Sutter's Mill near Sacramento.\nBULLET::::- 1857 – The University of Calcutta is formally founded as the first fully fledged university in South Asia.\nBULLET::::- 1859 – The United Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia (later named Romania) is formed as a personal union under the rule of Domnitor Alexandru Ioan Cuza.\nBULLET::::- 1862 – Bucharest is proclaimed the capital of Romania.\nBULLET::::- 1900 – Second Boer War: Boers stop a British attempt to break the Siege of Ladysmith in the Battle of Spion Kop.\nBULLET::::- 1908 – The first Boy Scout troop is organized in England by Robert Baden-Powell.\nBULLET::::- 1915 – World War I: British Grand Fleet battle cruisers under Vice-Admiral Sir David Beatty engage Rear-Admiral Franz von Hipper's battle cruisers in the Battle of Dogger Bank.\nBULLET::::- 1916 – In \"Brushaber v. Union Pacific Railroad Co.\", the Supreme Court of the United States declares the federal income tax constitutional.\nBULLET::::- 1918 – The Gregorian calendar is introduced in Russia by decree of the Council of People's Commissars effective February 14(NS).\nBULLET::::- 1933 – The 20th Amendment to the United States Constitution is ratified, changing the beginning and end of terms for all elected federal offices.\nBULLET::::- 1939 – The deadliest earthquake in Chilean history strikes Chillán, killing approximately 28,000 people.\nBULLET::::- 1942 – World War II: The Allies bombard Bangkok, leading Thailand, then under Japanese control, to declare war against the United States and United Kingdom.\nBULLET::::- 1943 – World War II: Franklin D. Roosevelt and Winston Churchill conclude a conference in Casablanca.\nBULLET::::- 1946 – The United Nations General Assembly passes its first resolution to establish the United Nations Atomic Energy Commission.\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Algerian War: Some units of European volunteers in Algiers stage an insurrection known as the \"barricades week\", during which they seize government buildings and clash with local police.\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Goldsboro B-52 crash: A bomber carrying two H-bombs breaks up in mid-air over North Carolina. The uranium core of one weapon remains lost.\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Vietnam War: The 1st Australian Task Force launches Operation Coburg against the North Vietnamese Army and Viet Cong during wider fighting around Long Bình and Biên Hòa\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Japanese Sgt. Shoichi Yokoi is found hiding in a Guam jungle, where he had been since the end of World War II.\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Atocha massacre occurs in Madrid during the Spanish transition to democracy.\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Soviet satellite Kosmos 954, with a nuclear reactor on board, burns up in Earth's atmosphere, scattering radioactive debris over Canada's Northwest Territories. Only 1% is recovered.\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Apple Computer places the Macintosh personal computer on sale in the United States.\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Notorious serial killer Ted Bundy, with over 30 known victims, is executed by the electric chair at the Florida State Prison.\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Japan launches Hiten, the country's first lunar probe, the first robotic lunar probe since the Soviet Union's Luna 24 in 1976, and the first lunar probe launched by a country other than Soviet Union or the United States.\nBULLET::::- 2003 – The United States Department of Homeland Security officially begins operation.\nBULLET::::- 2009 – Cyclone Klaus makes landfall near Bordeaux, France, causing 26 deaths as well as extensive disruptions to public transport and power supplies.\nBULLET::::- 2011 – At least 35 die and 180 are injured in a bombing at Moscow's Domodedovo Airport.\n\nBULLET::::- AD 76 – Hadrian, Roman emperor (d. 138)\nBULLET::::- 1287 – Richard de Bury, English bishop and politician, Lord Chancellor of Great Britain (d. 1345)\nBULLET::::- 1444 – Galeazzo Maria Sforza, Duke of Milan (d. 1476)\nBULLET::::- 1540 – Edmund Campion, English priest and martyr (d. 1581)\nBULLET::::- 1547 – Joanna of Austria, Grand Duchess of Tuscany, Austrian Archduchess (d. 1578)\nBULLET::::- 1602 – Mildmay Fane, 2nd Earl of Westmorland, English politician (d. 1666)\nBULLET::::- 1619 – Yamazaki Ansai, Japanese philosopher (d. 1682)\nBULLET::::- 1643 – Charles Sackville, 6th Earl of Dorset, English poet and politician, Lord Chamberlain of Great Britain (d. 1706)\nBULLET::::- 1664 – John Vanbrugh, English architect and dramatist (d. 1726)\nBULLET::::- 1670 – William Congreve, English playwright and poet (d. 1729)\nBULLET::::- 1672 – Margrave Albert Frederick of Brandenburg-Schwedt, German Lieutenant General (d. 1731)\nBULLET::::- 1674 – Thomas Tanner, English bishop (d. 1735)\nBULLET::::- 1679 – Christian Wolff, German philosopher and academic (d. 1754)\nBULLET::::- 1684 – Charles Alexander, Duke of Württemberg, German noble (d. 1737)\nBULLET::::- 1705 – Farinelli, Italian castrato singer (d. 1782)\nBULLET::::- 1709 – Dom Bédos de Celles, French monk and organist (d. 1779)\nBULLET::::- 1712 – Frederick the Great, Prussian king (d. 1786)\nBULLET::::- 1732 – Pierre Beaumarchais, French playwright and financier (d. 1799)\nBULLET::::- 1739 – Jean Nicolas Houchard, French General of the French Revolution (d. 1793)\nBULLET::::- 1746 – Gustav III of Sweden (d. 1792)\nBULLET::::- 1749 – Charles James Fox, English businessman and politician, Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs (d. 1806)\nBULLET::::- 1754 – Andrew Ellicott, American soldier and surveyor (d. 1820)\nBULLET::::- 1761 – Louis Klein, French general (d. 1845)\nBULLET::::- 1763 – Louis Alexandre Andrault de Langeron, French-Ukrainian general and politician (d. 1831)\nBULLET::::- 1776 – E. T. A. Hoffmann, German jurist, author, and composer (d. 1822)\nBULLET::::- 1787 – Christian Ludwig Brehm, German pastor and ornithologist (d. 1864)\nBULLET::::- 1804 – Delphine de Girardin, French author (d. 1855)\nBULLET::::- 1814 – Duchess Helene of Mecklenburg-Schwerin, French Crown Princess (d. 1858)\nBULLET::::- 1814 – John Colenso, British mathematician (d. 1883)\nBULLET::::- 1816 – Wilhelm Henzen, German philologist and epigraphist (d. 1887)\nBULLET::::- 1828 – Ferdinand Cohn, German biologist (d. 1898)\nBULLET::::- 1829 – Yechiel Michel Epstein, Rabbi and posek (d. 1908)\nBULLET::::- 1836 – Signe Rink, Greenland-born Danish writer and ethnologist (d. 1909)\nBULLET::::- 1843 – Josip Stadler, Croatian archbishop (d. 1918)\nBULLET::::- 1848 – Vasily Surikov, Russian painter (d. 1916)\nBULLET::::- 1850 – Hermann Ebbinghaus, German psychologist (d. 1909)\nBULLET::::- 1853 – Sigbert Josef Maria Ganser, German psychiatrist (d. 1931)\nBULLET::::- 1856 – Friedrich Grünanger, Transylvanian Hungarian-German architect (d. 1929)\nBULLET::::- 1858 – Constance Naden, English poet and philosopher (d. 1889)\nBULLET::::- 1862 – Edith Wharton, American novelist and short story writer (d. 1937)\nBULLET::::- 1863 – August Adler, Czech and Austrian mathematician (d. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 1864 – Marguerite Durand, French actress, journalist, and activist (d. 1936)\nBULLET::::- 1864 – Gaetano Giardino, Italian soldier and Marshal of Italy (d. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 1866 – Jaan Poska, Estonian lawyer and politician, 1st Estonian Minister of Foreign Affairs (d. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 1870 – Herbert Kilpin, English footballer (d. 1916)\nBULLET::::- 1871 – Jiří Karásek ze Lvovic, Czech poet, writer and literary critic (d. 1951)\nBULLET::::- 1871 – Thomas Jaggar, American volcanologist (d. 1953)\nBULLET::::- 1872 – Yuly Aykhenvald, Russian literary critic (d. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 1872 – Konstantin Bogaevsky, Russian painter (d. 1943)\nBULLET::::- 1872 – Morris Travers, English chemist and academic (d. 1961)\nBULLET::::- 1873 – Dmitry Ushakov, Russian philologist and lexicographer (d. 1942)\nBULLET::::- 1882 – Harold D. Babcock, American astronomer (d. 1968)\nBULLET::::- 1882 – Ödön Bodor, Hungarian athlete (d. 1927)\nBULLET::::- 1886 – Henry King, American actor, director, producer, and screenwriter (d. 1982)\nBULLET::::- 1887 – Jean-Henri Humbert, French botanist (d. 1967)\nBULLET::::- 1888 – Vicki Baum, Austrian author and screenwriter (d. 1960)\nBULLET::::- 1888 – Ernst Heinkel, German engineer and businessman, founded the Heinkel Aircraft Manufacturing Company (d. 1958)\nBULLET::::- 1889 – Victor Eftimiu, Romanian poet and playwright (d. 1972)\nBULLET::::- 1889 – Charles Hawes, American historian and author (d. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 1889 – Hermann-Bernhard Ramcke, German general of paratroop forces during World War II (d. 1968)\nBULLET::::- 1891 – Walter Model, German field marshal (d. 1945)\nBULLET::::- 1892 – Franz Aigner, Austrian weightlifter (d. 1970)\nBULLET::::- 1895 – Eugen Roth, German poet and songwriter (d. 1976)\nBULLET::::- 1897 – Paul Fejos, Hungarian-born American director (d. 1963)\nBULLET::::- 1899 – Hoyt Vandenberg, U.S. Air Force general (d. 1954)\nBULLET::::- 1900 – Theodosius Dobzhansky, Ukrainian-American geneticist and biologist (d. 1975)\nBULLET::::- 1900 – René Guillot, French writer (d. 1969)\nBULLET::::- 1901 – Harry Calder, South African cricketer (d. 1995)\nBULLET::::- 1901 – Cassandre, French painter (d. 1968)\nBULLET::::- 1901 – Edward Turner, English engineer (d. 1973)\nBULLET::::- 1905 – J. Howard Marshall, American lawyer and businessman (d. 1995)\nBULLET::::- 1906 – Wilfred Jackson, American animator and composer (d. 1988)\nBULLET::::- 1907 – Ismail Nasiruddin of Terengganu, fourth Yang di-Pertuan Agong of Malaysia (d. 1979)\nBULLET::::- 1907 – Maurice Couve de Murville, French soldier and politician, Prime Minister of France (d. 1999)\nBULLET::::- 1907 – Jean Daetwyler, Swiss composer and musician (d. 1994)\nBULLET::::- 1909 – Martin Lings, English author and scholar (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1910 – Doris Haddock, American political activist (d. 2010)\nBULLET::::- 1912 – Frederick Ashworth, American admiral (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1913 – Norman Dello Joio, American organist and composer (d. 2008)\nBULLET::::- 1913 – Ray Stehr, Australian rugby league player and coach (d. 1983)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Vítězslava Kaprálová, Czech composer and conductor (d. 1940)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Robert Motherwell, American painter and academic (d. 1991)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Rafael Caldera, Venezuelan lawyer and politician, 65th President of Venezuela (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Gene Mako, Hungarian-American tennis player and actor (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Ernest Borgnine, American actor (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Wilhelmus Demarteau, Dutch prelate of the Roman Catholic Church (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Gottfried von Einem, Austrian pianist and composer (d. 1996)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Oral Roberts, American evangelist, founded Oral Roberts University and Oral Roberts Evangelistic Association (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1919 – Coleman Francis, American actor, director, producer, and screenwriter (d. 1973)\nBULLET::::- 1919 – Leon Kirchner, American composer and educator (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Jimmy Forrest, American saxophonist (d. 1980)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Jerry Maren, American actor (d. 2018)\nBULLET::::- 1922 – Daniel Boulanger, French actor and screenwriter (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1922 – Neil Franklin, English footballer (d. 1996)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Geneviève Asse, French painter\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Gus Mortson, Canadian ice hockey player and coach (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Maria Tallchief, American ballerina and actress (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Ruth Asawa, American sculptor (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Georges Lautner, French director and screenwriter (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Sir Patrick Macnaghten, 11th Baronet, Scottish lieutenant (d. 2007)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Paula Hawkins, American politician (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Desmond Morris, English zoologist, ethologist, and painter\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Michel Serrault, French actor (d. 2007)\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Terence Bayler, New Zealand actor (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Mahmoud Farshchian, Iranian-Persian painter and academic\nBULLET::::- 1930 – John Romita Sr., American soldier and illustrator\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Lars Hörmander, Swedish mathematician and academic (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Ib Nørholm, Danish composer and organist\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Éliane Radigue, French electronic music composer\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Kamran Baghirov, the 12th First Secretary of Azerbaijan Communist Party (d. 2000)\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Asim Ferhatović, Bosnian footballer (d. 1987)\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Leonard Goldberg, American producer\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Stanisław Grochowiak, Polish poet and dramatist (d. 1976)\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Eric Ashton, English rugby player and coach (d. 2008)\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Shivabalayogi, Indian religious leader (d. 1994)\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Doug Kershaw, American fiddle player and singer\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Trevor Edwards, Welsh footballer\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Julius Hemphill, American saxophonist and composer (d. 1995)\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Renate Garisch-Culmberger, German shot putter\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Ray Stevens, American singer-songwriter and actor\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Vito Acconci, American designer (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Joachim Gauck, German pastor and politician, 11th President of Germany\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Gary Hart, American wrestler and manager (d. 2008)\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Neil Diamond, American singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Aaron Neville, American singer\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Dan Shechtman, Israeli chemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Ingo Friedrich, German Member of the European Parliament\n\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Peter Struck, German lawyer and politician, 13th German Federal Minister of Defence (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Sharon Tate, American model and actress (d. 1969)\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Tony Trimmer, English race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Manuel Velázquez, Spanish footballer (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1944 – David Gerrold, American science fiction screenwriter and author\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Gian-Franco Kasper, Swiss ski official\nBULLET::::- 1945 – John Garamendi, American football player and politician, 1st United States Deputy Secretary of the Interior\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Subhash Ghai, Indian director, producer and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Eva Janko, Austrian javelin thrower\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Michael Ontkean, Canadian actor\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Giorgio Chinaglia, Italian footballer (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Michio Kaku, American physicist and academic\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Masashi Ozaki, Japanese baseball player and golfer\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Warren Zevon, American singer-songwriter (d. 2003)\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Elliott Abrams, American diplomat, lawyer and political scientist\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Michael Des Barres, English singer-songwriter and actor\nBULLET::::- 1949 – John Belushi, American actor and screenwriter (d. 1982)\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Bart Gordon, American lawyer\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Nadezhda Ilyina, Russian athlete and mother of Russian tennis player Nadia Petrova (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Rihoko Yoshida, Japanese voice actress\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Daniel Auteuil, French actor, director, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Yakov Smirnoff, Ukrainian-American comedian and actor\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Yuri Bashmet, Russian violinist, viola player, and conductor\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Moon Jae-in, 19th President of South Korea\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Jo Gartner, Austrian race car driver (d. 1986)\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Jim Montgomery, American swimmer\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Alan Sokal, American physicist and author\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Lynda Weinman, American businesswoman and author\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Agus Martowardojo, governor of Bank Indonesia\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Mark Eaton, American basketball player and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Ade Edmondson, English comedian and musician\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Kim Eui-kon, Korean wrestler\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Jools Holland, English singer-songwriter and pianist\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Frank Ullrich, German biathlete\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Akira Maeda, Japanese wrestler, mixed martial artist, and actor\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Michel Preud'homme, Belgian footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Jorge Barrios, Uruguayan footballer\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Guido Buchwald, German footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Christa Kinshofer, German ski racer\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Nastassja Kinski, German-American actress and producer\nBULLET::::- 1961 – William Van Dijck, Belgian runner\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Arnold Vanderlyde, Dutch boxer\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Annika Dahlman, Swedish cross country skier\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Robin Dutt, German footballer\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Carlos Saldanha, Brazilian-American actor, director, producer, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Margaret Urlich, New Zealand singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Pagonis Vakalopoulos, Greek footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Kim Sung-moon, South Korean wrestler\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Julie Dreyfus, French actress\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Karin Viard, French actress\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Michael Kiske, German singer\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Mark Kozelek, American singer and musician\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Phil LaMarr, American actor, singer, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1967 – John Myung, American bass player and songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Fernando Escartín, Spanish cyclist\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Antony Garrett Lisi, American theoretical physicist\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Mary Lou Retton, American gymnast\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Tymerlan Huseynov, Ukrainian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Yoo Ho-jeong, South Korean actress\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Carlos Rômulo Gonçalves e Silva, bishop of Montenegro\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Roberto Bonano, Argentine footballer\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Neil Johnson, Zimbabwean cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Matthew Lillard, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1971 – José Carlos Fernandez, Bolivian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Beth Hart, American blues-rock singer and piano player\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Cyril Despres, French rally racer\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Ed Helms, American actor, producer, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Melissa Tkautz, Australian actress and singer\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Rokia Traoré, Malian singer\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Gianluca Basile, Italian former professional basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Rónald Gómez, Costa Rican footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Reto Hug, Swiss triathlonist\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Henna Raita, Finnish alpine skier\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Shae-Lynn Bourne, Canadian ice dancer, coach, and choreographer\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Cindy Pieters, Belgian cyclist\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Andrija Gerić, Serbian volleyball player\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Michelle Hunziker, Swiss-Dutch actress, model and singer\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Veerle Baetens, Belgian actress and singer\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Mark Hildreth, Canadian actor and musician\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Kristen Schaal, American actress, voice artist, comedian and writer\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Tatyana Ali, American actress and singer\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Leandro Desábato, Argentinian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Busy Signal, Jamaican dancehall reggae artist\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Nik Wallenda, American acrobat\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Jofre Mateu, Spanish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Suzy, Portuguese singer\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Mario Eggimann, Swiss footballer\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Zaur Hashimov, Azerbaijani footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Elena Kolomina, Kazakhstani cross country skier\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Céline Deville, French footballer\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Daveed Diggs, American actor, rapper and singer\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Claudia Heill, Austrian judoka\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Aitor Hernández, Spanish racing cyclist\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Davide Biondini, Italian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Wyatt Crockett, New Zealand rugby player\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Evgeny Drattsev, Russian swimmer\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Craig Horner, Australian actor and musician\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Shaun Maloney, Scottish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Scott Speed, American race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Emerse Faé, French-born Ivorian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Yotam Halperin, Israeli basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Jung Jin-sun, South Korean fencer\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Scott Kazmir, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Paulo Sérgio Moreira Gonçalves, Portuguese footballer\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Fabiana Claudino, Brazilian volleyball player\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Trey Gilder, American basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Cristiano Araújo, Brazilian singer-songwriter (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Mohammad Bagheri Motamed, Iranian taekwondo practitioner\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Mischa Barton, English-American actress\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Vladislav Ivanov, Russian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Michael Kightly, English footballer\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Ricky Ullman, Israeli-American actor\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Wayne Hennessey, Welsh footballer\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Luis Suárez, Uruguayan footballer\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Davide Valsecchi, Italian racing driver\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Kia Vaughn, American born Czech basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Guan Xin, Chinese basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1988 –\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Selina Jörg, German snowboarder\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Serdar Kesimal, Turkish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Gong Lijiao, Chinese shot putter\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Ki Sung-yueng, South Korean footballer\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Mao Abe, Japanese singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Zhan Beleniuk, Ukrainian Greco-Roman wrestler\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Tatiana Kashirina, Russian weightlifter\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Zé Luís, Cape Verdean footballer\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Li Xuerui, Chinese badminton player\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Becky Downie, English gymnast\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Phiwa Nkambule, South African entrepreneur\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Felitciano Zschusschen, Curaçao footballer\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Tommie Hoban, English footballer\nBULLET::::- 1995 – Dylan Everett, Canadian actor\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Nirei Fukuzumi, Japanese racer\nBULLET::::- 1999 – Vitalie Damașcan, Moldovan footballer\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Princess Athena of Denmark, younger child of Prince Joachim and Princess Marie of Denmark\nBULLET::::- AD 41 – Caligula, Roman emperor (b. 12)\nBULLET::::- 817 – Pope Stephen IV (b. 770)\nBULLET::::- 901 – Liu Jishu, general of the Tang Dynasty\nBULLET::::- 1046 – Eckard II, Margrave of Meissen (b. c. 985)\nBULLET::::- 1125 – David IV of Georgia (b. 1073)\nBULLET::::- 1336 – Alfonso IV of Aragon (b. 1299)\nBULLET::::- 1376 – Richard FitzAlan, 10th Earl of Arundel, English commander (b. 1306)\nBULLET::::- 1473 – Conrad Paumann, German organist and composer (b. 1410)\nBULLET::::- 1525 – Franciabigio, Florentine painter (b. 1482)\nBULLET::::- 1595 – Ferdinand II, Archduke of Austria (b. 1529)\nBULLET::::- 1626 – Samuel Argall, English captain and politician, Colonial Governor of Virginia (b. 1572)\nBULLET::::- 1639 – Jörg Jenatsch, Swiss pastor and politician (b. 1596)\nBULLET::::- 1666 – Johann Andreas Herbst, German composer and theorist (b. 1588)\nBULLET::::- 1709 – George Rooke, English admiral and politician (b. 1650)\nBULLET::::- 1877 – Johann Christian Poggendorff, German physicist and journalist (b. 1796)\nBULLET::::- 1881 – James Collinson, English painter (b. 1825)\nBULLET::::- 1883 – Friedrich von Flotow, German composer (b. 1812)\nBULLET::::- 1895 – Lord Randolph Churchill, English lawyer and politician, Chancellor of the Exchequer (b. 1849)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Amedeo Modigliani, Italian painter and sculptor (b. 1884)\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Maximilian Bircher-Benner, Swiss physician, created Muesli (b. 1867)\nBULLET::::- 1943 – John Burns, English trade union leader and politician, Secretary of State for Business, Innovation and Skills (b. 1858)\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Edwin Fischer, Swiss pianist and conductor (b. 1886)\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Alfred Carlton Gilbert, American pole vaulter and businessman, founded the A. C. Gilbert Company (b. 1884)\nBULLET::::- 1962 – André Lhote, French sculptor and painter (b. 1885)\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Stanley Lord, English naval captain (b. 1877)\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Ahmet Hamdi Tanpınar, Turkish author, poet, and scholar (b. 1901)\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Winston Churchill, English colonel and politician, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1874)\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Homi J. Bhabha, Indian physicist and academic (b. 1909)\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Caresse Crosby, American fashion designer and publisher, co-founded the Black Sun Press (b. 1891)\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Bill W., American activist, co-founder of Alcoholics Anonymous (b. 1895)\nBULLET::::- 1973 – J. Carrol Naish, American actor (b. 1896)\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Larry Fine, American comedian (b. 1902)\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Alfredo Ovando Candía, Bolivian general and politician, 56th President of Bolivia (b. 1918)\nBULLET::::- 1983 – George Cukor, American director and producer (b. 1899)\nBULLET::::- 1986 – L. Ron Hubbard, American religious leader and author, founded the Church of Scientology (b. 1911)\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Gordon MacRae, American actor and singer (b. 1921)\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Werner Fenchel, German-Danish mathematician and academic (b. 1905)\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Ted Bundy, American serial killer (b. 1946)\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Madge Bellamy, American actress (b. 1899)\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Jack Schaefer, American journalist and author (b. 1907)\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Ken Darby, American composer and conductor (b. 1909)\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Gustav Ernesaks, Estonian composer and conductor (b. 1908)\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Thurgood Marshall, American lawyer and jurist, 32nd United States Solicitor General (b. 1908)\nBULLET::::- 2002 – Elie Hobeika, Lebanese commander and politician (b. 1956)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Gianni Agnelli, Italian businessman (b. 1921)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Leônidas, Brazilian footballer and manager (b. 1913)\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Schafik Handal, Salvadoran politician (b. 1930)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Krystyna Feldman, Polish actress (b. 1916)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – İsmail Cem İpekçi, Turkish journalist and politician, 45th Turkish Minister of Foreign Affairs (b. 1940)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Guadalupe Larriva, Ecuadorian academic and politician (b. 1956)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Emiliano Mercado del Toro, Puerto Rican-American soldier (b. 1891)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – Pernell Roberts, American actor (b. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 2011 – Bernd Eichinger, German director and producer (b. 1949)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Shulamit Aloni, Israeli lawyer and politician, 11th Israeli Minister of Education (b. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Rafael Pineda Ponce, Honduran academic and politician (b. 1930)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Otto Carius, German lieutenant and pharmacist (b. 1922)\nBULLET::::- 2016 – Fredrik Barth, German-Norwegian anthropologist and academic (b. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 2016 – Marvin Minsky, American computer scientist and academic (b. 1927)\nBULLET::::- 2016 – Henry Worsley, English colonel and explorer (b. 1960)\nBULLET::::- 2017 – Butch Trucks, American drummer (b. 1947)\nBULLET::::- 2018 – Mark E. Smith, British singer-songwriter (b. 1957)\nBULLET::::- 2019 – Rosemary Bryant Mariner, 20th and 21st-century U.S. Navy officer\nBULLET::::- Christian feast day:\nBULLET::::- Babylas of Antioch\nBULLET::::- Cadoc (Wales)\nBULLET::::- Exuperantius of Cingoli\nBULLET::::- Felician of Foligno\nBULLET::::- Francis de Sales\nBULLET::::- Pratulin Martyrs (Greek Catholic Church)\nBULLET::::- January 24 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)\nBULLET::::- Earliest day on which Saturday of Souls can fall, while February 27 (or 28 during Leap Year) is the latest; observed 57 days before Easter. (Eastern Orthodox)\nBULLET::::- Feast of Our Lady of Peace (Roman Catholic Church), and its related observances:\nBULLET::::- \"Feria de Alasitas\" (La Paz)\nBULLET::::- Unification Day (Romania)\n\nBULLET::::- BBC: On This Day\nBULLET::::- Today in Canadian History\n"}
{"id": "15956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15956", "title": "Journal of the Travellers Aid Society", "text": "Journal of the Travellers Aid Society\n\nJournal of the Travellers Aid Society is a role-playing game magazine devoted to Traveller, commonly abbreviated JTAS.\n\nIn 1979 Loren K. Wiseman created a magazine to support \"Traveller\", which resulted in Game Designers' Workshop's\"The Journal of the Travellers' Aid Society\" (JTAS), which Loren Wiseman would further develop as editor over its history. J. Andrew Keith's writing for \"JTAS\" was so extensive that he had to take the pseudonyms John Marshal and Keith Douglass (he was later 'caught' when a reader did a word-use analysis of his articles and determined that they were all written by the same person). Marc Miller decided that, rather than using modern dates for the magazine, each issue would instead be based on the in-game Imperium's calendar, and the calendar advanced about 90 days every quarterly issue. \"JTAS\" #2 (1979) began printing excerpts from the 'Traveller News Service', which provided information on 'current' events in the Imperium; that issue, dated 274-1105, offered two news excerpts from Regina sector, dated 097-1105 and 101-1105. \"JTAS\" #9 (1981) GDW developed their metaplot for \"Traveller\" by describing the start of a war with an alien species named the Zhodani. GDW's original magazine ended with \"The Journal of the Travellers' Aid Society\" #24 (1984); it was soon replaced with a new magazine, \"Challenge\", which continued JTAS' numbering with issue #25 (1986) but covered all of GDW's games, not just \"Traveller\".\n\nImperium Games published \"Journal of the Travellers' Aid Society\" #25 in 1996, and published their second and final issue of the \"Journal of the Travellers' Aid Society\" in 1997. The magazine was revived by Imperium Games after GDW closed its doors, and JTAS 25 and 26 were published before that publisher ceased operations.\n\nAfter Steve Jackson Games licensed the \"Traveller\" setting, \"Journal of the Travellers' Aid Society\" was resurrected as an online magazine in 2000. JTAS was revived once again as a weekly, then bi-weekly subscriber-supported web magazine in February, 2000.\n\nThe Journal of the Travellers Aid Society takes its name from the fictional Travellers' Aid Society (TAS) that was first mentioned in the original incarnation of the Traveller game published by Game Designers Workshop [GDW]. In the original Traveller game, it was not too uncommon for characters to obtain membership in the TAS during character creation. The idea of the TAS is that it is an organization that exists to support what are basically 'transients,' or 'wanderers' ['Travellers' in the game's terminology] around the galaxy. It does so by maintaining low-cost hostels at many of the large starports, and, most importantly, by maintaining its 'rating system,' which warns of the dangers inherent in visiting certain worlds. Under this system, a world which should be approached with caution is denoted an 'Amber Zone,' and a world that should not be approached at all is denoted a 'Red Zone.'\n\nThe \"Journal of the Travellers Aid Society\" won the H.G. Wells award for Best Magazine Covering Roleplaying of 1979.\n\nWilliam A. Barton reviewed the \"Merchant Prince\" supplement from \"Journal of the Travellers Aid Society\" #12 in \"The Space Gamer\" No. 53. Barton commented that \"Although it probably won't totally supplant \"Merchants & Merchandise\" as \"the\" book for generating merchant characters, \"Merchant Prince\" is a well-conceived and viable alternative to M&M. Its inclusion in the \"Journal\" makes it a special bargain. I recommend it to every \"Traveller\" player, especially those who find the merchant life the most appealing.\"\n\nBULLET::::- JTAS web magazine\n"}
{"id": "15960", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15960", "title": "Judicial Committee of the Privy Council", "text": "Judicial Committee of the Privy Council\n\nThe Judicial Committee of the Privy Council (JCPC) is the highest court of appeal for certain British territories and Commonwealth countries. Established on 13 August 1833 to hear appeals formerly heard by the King-in-Council, the Privy Council formerly acted as the court of last resort for the entire British Empire (other than for the United Kingdom itself), and continues to act as the highest court of appeal for several independent Commonwealth nations, the Crown Dependencies, and the British Overseas Territories.\n\nFormally a statutory committee of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, the Judicial Committee consists of senior judges who are Privy Councillors: they are predominantly Justices of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom and senior judges from the Commonwealth. It is often referred to as the Privy Council. In Commonwealth realms, appeals are nominally made to \"Her Majesty in Council\" (i.e. the British monarch as formally advised by her Privy Counsellors), who then refers the case to the Judicial Committee for \"advice\", while in Commonwealth republics retaining the JCPC as their final court of appeal, appeals are made directly to the Judicial Committee itself. The panel of judges (typically five in number) hearing a particular case is known as \"the Board\". The \"report\" of the Board is always accepted by the Queen in Council as judgment. \n\nThe origins of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council can be traced back to the \"curia regis\", or royal council. In theory, the King was the fount of justice, and petitions for redress of wrongs arising from his courts were addressed to him. That power was gradually taken over by Parliament (which evolved out of the \"curia regis\") within England, but the King-in-Council (which also evolved out of the \"curia regis\") retained jurisdiction to hear petitions from the King's non-English possessions, such as the Channel Islands and, later on, from England's colonies.\n\nThe task of hearing appeals was given to a series of short-lived committees of the Privy Council. In 1679, appellate jurisdiction was given to the Board of Trade, before being transferred to a standing Appeals Committee in 1696. By the nineteenth century, the growth of the British Empire, which had greatly expanded the appellate jurisdiction of the Privy Council (despite the loss of appeals from the American colonies), had put great strains on the existing arrangements. In particular, the Appeals Committee had to hear cases in a variety of legal systems, such as Hindu law, with which its members were unfamiliar.\n\nIn 1833, at the instigation of Lord Brougham, the Lord Chancellor, Parliament passed the Judicial Committee Act 1833. The Act established a statutory committee of the Privy Council, known as The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, to hear appeals to the King-in-Council. In addition to colonial appeals, later legislation gave the Judicial Committee appellate jurisdiction over a range of miscellaneous matters, such as patents, ecclesiastical matters, and prize suits. At its height, the Judicial Committee was said to be the court of final appeal for over a quarter of the world.\n\nIn the twentieth century, the jurisdiction of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council shrank considerably, as British Dominions established their own courts of final appeal and as British colonies became independent, although many retained appeals to the Privy Council post-independence. Canada abolished Privy Council appeals in 1949, India and South Africa in 1950, and New Zealand in 2003. Currently, twelve Commonwealth countries outside of the United Kingdom retain Privy Council appeals, in addition to various British and New Zealand territories. The Judicial Committee also retains jurisdiction over a small number of domestic matters in the United Kingdom, reduced by the creation of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom in 2009.\n\nThe United Kingdom does not have a single highest national court; the Judicial Committee is the highest court of appeal in some cases, while in most others the highest court of appeal is the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom. (In Scotland the highest court in criminal cases is the High Court of Justiciary; the Supreme Court is the highest court in civil cases and matters arising from Scottish devolution, the latter previously having been dealt with by the Judicial Committee.)\n\nThe Judicial Committee of the Privy Council has jurisdiction in the following domestic matters:\nBULLET::::- Appeals against schemes of the Church Commissioners (who control the estate of the Church of England).\nBULLET::::- Appeals from the ecclesiastical courts (the Arches Court of Canterbury and the Chancery Court of York) in non-doctrinal faculty cases.\nBULLET::::- Appeals from the High Court of Chivalry.\nBULLET::::- Appeals from the Court of Admiralty of the Cinque Ports.\nBULLET::::- Appeals from prize courts.\nBULLET::::- Appeals from the Disciplinary Committee of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons.\nBULLET::::- Disputes under the House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975.\n\nAdditionally, the government may (through the Queen) refer any issue to the committee for \"consideration and report\" under section 4 of the Judicial Committee Act 1833.\n\nThe Judicial Committee of the Privy Council is the Court of Final Appeal for the Church of England. It hears appeals from the Arches Court of Canterbury and the Chancery Court of York, except on matters of doctrine, ritual or ceremony, which go to the Court for Ecclesiastical Causes Reserved. By the Church Discipline Act 1840 and the Appellate Jurisdiction Act 1876 all archbishops and bishops of the Church of England became eligible to be members of the Judicial Committee.\n\nPrior to the coming into force of the Constitutional Reform Act 2005, the Privy Council was the court of last resort for devolution issues. On 1 October 2009 this jurisdiction was transferred to the new Supreme Court of the United Kingdom.\n\nJudgments of the Judicial Committee are not generally binding on courts within the United Kingdom, having only persuasive authority, but are binding on all courts within any other Commonwealth country from which an appeal is heard. Where a binding precedent of the UK Supreme Court, or of the House of Lords, or of the Court of Appeal conflicts with that of a decision of the Judicial Committee on English law, English courts are required to follow the domestic decision over that of the Judicial Committee except when the Judicial Committee has in its decision expressly directed the domestic court to follow its new decision. However, given the overlap between the membership of the Judicial Committee and of the Supreme Court, the decisions of the former are extremely persuasive and usually followed.\n\nThe Judicial Committee holds jurisdiction in appeals from the following 31 jurisdictions (including twelve independent nations):\n\nAppeal is to \"Her Majesty in Council\" from eight independent nations, and nineteen other jurisdictions:\n\nBULLET::::- The Commonwealth realms of Antigua and Barbuda, The Bahamas, Grenada, Jamaica, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Tuvalu.\nBULLET::::- The New Zealand associated states of Cook Islands and Niue.\nBULLET::::- The Crown Dependencies of Jersey, Guernsey (including Guernsey's own dependencies of Alderney and Sark), and appeals from the Staff of Government Division on the Isle of Man.\nBULLET::::- The British overseas territories of Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, the Falkland Islands, Gibraltar, Montserrat, St Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha, the Turks and Caicos Islands, the Pitcairn Islands, the British Antarctic Territory, the British Indian Ocean Territory, and South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands.\nBULLET::::- The United Kingdom's Sovereign Base Areas of Akrotiri and Dhekelia, in Cyprus.\n\nAppeal is directly to the Judicial Committee from three independent Commonwealth republics:\n\nBULLET::::- Mauritius and Trinidad and Tobago, and also, if the case involves constitutional rights, Kiribati.\n\nAppeal to the head of state:\n\nBULLET::::- Brunei, an independent monarchy of the Commonwealth of Nations that is not a Commonwealth realm, has an agreement with the United Kingdom that the Judicial Committee hears cases in which an appeal to the Sultan has been made, and reports back to him.\n\nJudicial appeal of final resort has been assumed by other bodies in some current and former Commonwealth realms as well as in some Commonwealth monarchies:\n!data-sort-type=\"text\"Realm !!data-sort-type=\"number\" Date !!data-sort-type=\"text\"Abolishing statute !!data-sort-type=\"text\"New court of final appeal !!class=\"unsortable\"Notes\ndata-sort-value=\"Gambia\" The Gambia  1998  1997 Constitution of the Gambia  Supreme Court of the Gambia  A restructure of the Gambian judiciary by Yahya Jammeh, which made the Supreme Court of The Gambia the highest court instead of being below the Court of Appeal of the Gambia as was the case under the 1970 Constitution of the Gambia.\n\nThe following are members of the Judicial Committee:\n\nBULLET::::- Justices of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom (before the establishment of that court in 2009, the Lords of Appeal in Ordinary)\nBULLET::::- Other Lords of Appeal (senior judges) from within the United Kingdom\nBULLET::::- Privy Counsellors who are (or have been) judges of the Court of Appeal of England and Wales, the Inner House of the Court of Session in Scotland, or of the Court of Appeal in Northern Ireland\nBULLET::::- Judges of certain superior courts in Commonwealth nations, who are appointed Privy Counsellors for the purpose of sitting in the JCPC\n\nThe bulk of the Committee's work is done by the Supreme Court Justices, who are paid to work full-time in both the Supreme Court and the Privy Council. Overseas judges may not sit when certain UK domestic matters are being heard, but will often sit when appeals from their own countries are being heard.\n\nBULLET::::- Henry Reeve, 1853–1887\nBULLET::::- Denison Faber, 1st Baron Wittenham, 1887–1896\nBULLET::::- Sir Thomas Raleigh, 1896–1899\nBULLET::::- Edward Stanley Hope, KCB, 1899–1909\nBULLET::::- Sir Charles Henry Lawrence Neish KBE CB, 1909–1934\nBULLET::::- Colin Smith MVO OBE, 1934–1940\nBULLET::::- Lieutenant-Colonel John Dallas Waters, CB, DSO, 1940–1954\nBULLET::::- Aylmer J. N. Paterson, 1954–1963\nBULLET::::- Leslie Upton CBE, 1963–1966\nBULLET::::- Eric Mills, 1966–1983\nBULLET::::- D. H. O. Owen, 1983–1998\nBULLET::::- John Watherston, 1998–2005\nBULLET::::- Mary Macdonald, 2005–2010\nBULLET::::- Louise di Mambro, 2011–present\n\nUntil 1904 the Registrar of the Admiralty court was also Registrar to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in ecclesiastical and maritime causes.\n\nMost appeals to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council are formally appeals to \"Her Majesty in Council\". Appeals from Brunei are formally to the Sultan and Yang di-Pertuan, while appeals from republics within the Commonwealth are directly to the Judicial Committee. Appeals are generally by leave of the local Court of Appeal, although the Judicial Committee retains discretionary power to grant leave to appeal as well.\n\nAfter hearing an appeal, the panel of judges which heard the case (known as \"the Board\") issues its decision in writing. For appeals to Her Majesty in Council, the decision is framed in the form of advice to Her Majesty, which is inevitably followed and given effect by being embodied in an Order in Council. Formerly, the Judicial Committee could only give a unanimous report, but since the Judicial Committee (Dissenting Opinions) Order 1966, dissenting opinions have been allowed.\n\nThe Judicial Committee is not bound by its own previous decisions, but may depart from them in exceptional circumstances if following its previous decisions would be unjust or contrary to public policy.\n\nThe Judicial Committee of the Privy Council is based in London. From its establishment to 2009, it mainly met in the Privy Council Chamber in Downing Street, although increase in the Judicial Committee's business in the twentieth century required it to sit simultaneously in several panels, which met elsewhere. The Chamber, designed by John Soane, was often criticised for its interior design, and was extensively remodelled in 1845 by Sir Charles Barry. On 1 October 2009, the Judicial Committee moved to the former Middlesex Guildhall building, which had been refurbished in 2007 to provide a home for both the JCPC and the newly created Supreme Court of the United Kingdom. In this renovated building, Court 3 is used for Privy Council sittings.\n\nIn recent years, the Judicial Committee has occasionally sat outside of London. Between 2005 and 2010 it sat twice in Mauritius and three times in the Bahamas.\n\nInitially, all Commonwealth realms and their territories maintained a right of appeal to the Privy Council. Many of those Commonwealth countries that became republics, or which had indigenous monarchies, preserved the Judicial Committee's jurisdiction by agreement with the United Kingdom. However, retention of a right of appeal to a court located overseas, made up mostly of British judges who may be out of tune with local values, has often come to be seen as incompatible with notions of an independent nation's sovereign status, and so a number of Commonwealth members have ended the right of appeal from their jurisdiction. The Balfour Declaration of 1926, while not considered to be \"lex scripta\", severely limited the conditions under which the Judicial Committee might hear cases:\n\nFrom these discussions it was clear that it was no part of the policy of His Majesty's Government in Great Britain that questions affecting judicial appeals should be determined otherwise than in accordance with the wishes of the part of the Empire primarily affected ...\n\nIn 1901, the Constitution of Australia limited appeals from the new federal High Court of Australia to the Privy Council, by prohibiting appeals on constitutional matters unless leave is granted by the High Court on \"inter se\" questions. Appeals on non-constitutional matters were not prohibited, but the federal Parliament of Australia had the power to legislate to limit them. The right of appeal from federal courts (including territory supreme courts) was abolished through the \"Privy Council (Limitation of Appeals) Act 1968\". Appeals from state courts, a continuation of the right to appeal decisions of colonial courts before 1901, continued, until they were also abolished by the Australia Act 1986, which was enacted by both the UK and Australian parliaments, on the request of all the state governments. The Australian Constitution retains the provision allowing the High Court of Australia to permit appeals to the Privy Council on \"inter se\" questions. However, the High Court has stated that it will not give such permission, that the jurisdiction to do so \"has long since been spent\", and that it is obsolete.\n\nCanada created its own Supreme Court in 1875 and abolished appeals to the Privy Council in criminal cases in 1933. Despite this, some decisions by the Supreme Court of Canada went on to appeal in the JCPC, including notably the Persons Case (\"Edwards v Canada (AG)\"), which established that women were \"persons\" under the British North America Act (Canada's early Constitution) eligible to sit in the Senate of Canada. It also established what came to be known as the \"living tree doctrine\" in Canadian Constitutional law, which says that a constitution is organic and must be read in a broad and liberal manner so as to adapt it to changing times.\n\nIn 1949, all appeals to the Privy Council were abolished, but prior to this, there were several factors that served to limit the effectiveness of measures to reduce appeals:\n\nBULLET::::- Appeals of rulings from the various provincial courts of appeal could still be made directly to the Privy Council, without first going to the Supreme Court of Canada.\nBULLET::::- In \"Cushing v. Dupuy\" (1885), the Privy Council held that the ability to grant special leave to appeal to the Privy Council was unaffected, as the prerogative of the Crown cannot be taken away except by express words.\nBULLET::::- In \"Nadan v The King\" (1926), the Privy Council ruled that the provision of the Criminal Code barring appeals to the Privy Council was \"ultra vires\" of the Parliament of Canada as it was contrary to s. 2 of the Colonial Laws Validity Act 1865.\n\n\"Nadan\", together with the King–Byng Affair, was a major irritant for Canada and provoked the discussion at the 1926 Imperial Conference which led to the Balfour Declaration, which declared the United Kingdom and the Dominions to be\nWith that Declaration and its statutory confirmation in the Statute of Westminster 1931 (Imp, 22–23 Geo 5, c.4) the impediment to abolishing appeals to the Privy Council, whether or not it had been legitimate, was comprehensively removed. Criminal appeals to the Privy Council were ended in 1933. Moves to extend the abolition to civil matters were shelved during the growing international crisis of the 1930s but re-tabled after the Second World War, and civil appeals ended in 1949, with an amendment of the Supreme Court Act. Cases begun before 1949 were still allowed to appeal after 1949, and the final case to make it to the Council was not until 1959 with the case of \"Ponoka-Calmar Oils v Wakefield\".\n\nThe JCPC played a controversial role in the evolution of Canadian federalism in that, whereas most Fathers of Confederation in negotiating the union of the British North American colonies against the backdrop of the American Civil War wished to ensure a strong central government vis-à-vis relatively weak provinces, appeals to the JCPC in constitutional matters progressively shifted the balance in favour of the provinces. While a few commentators have suggested that Canadian First Nations retain the right to appeal to the Privy Council because their treaties predate their relationship to Canada, the JCPC has not entertained any such appeal since 1867 and the dominant view is that no such appeal right exists.\n\nThe nations of the Caribbean Community voted in 2001 to abolish the right of appeal to the Privy Council in favour of a Caribbean Court of Justice (CCJ). Some debate between member countries and also the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council had repeatedly delayed the court's date of inauguration. As of 2005, Barbados replaced the process of appeals to Her Majesty in Council with the CCJ, which had then come into operation. The Co-operative Republic of Guyana also enacted local legislation allowing the CCJ to have jurisdiction over their sovereign final court of appeals system. Belize acceded to the Appellate Jurisdiction of the CCJ on 1 June 2010. As it stands, a few other CARICOM states appear to be ready for the abolition of appeals to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in the immediate future. The government of Jamaica in particular had come close and attempted to abolish appeals to the Judicial Committee without the support of the opposition in Parliament; however, it was ruled by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council that the procedure used in Jamaica to bypass the opposition was incorrect and unconstitutional. Another attempt will also be forthcoming.\n\nCaribbean governments have been coming under increased pressure from their electorates to devise ways to override previous rulings by the JCPC such as \"Pratt v A-G\" (Jamaica, 1993), \"R v Hughes\" (Saint Lucia, 2002), \"Fox v R\" (Saint Kitts and Nevis, 2002), \"Reyes v R\" (2002, Belize), \"Boyce v R\" (Barbados, 2004), and \"Matthew v S\" (Trinidad and Tobago, 2004), all of which are Privy Council judgments concerning the death penalty in the Caribbean region.\n\nThe then President of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom, Lord Phillips of Worth Matravers, has voiced displeasure with Caribbean and other Commonwealth countries continuing to rely on the British JCPC. During an interview Lord Phillips was quoted by the \"Financial Times\" as saying that in an ideal world' Commonwealth countries—including those in the Caribbean—would stop using the Privy Council and set up their own final courts of appeal instead\".\n\nOn 18 December 2006, the Judicial Committee made history when for the first time in more than 170 years it ventured outside London, holding a five-day sitting in the Bahamas. Lords Bingham, Brown, Carswell, and Scott, and Baroness Hale of Richmond, travelled to the Bahamas for the special sitting at the invitation of Dame Joan Sawyer, then the President of the Court of Appeal of the Bahamas; the Committee returned to the Bahamas in December 2007 for a second sitting. On the latter occasion, Lords Hope, Rodger, Walker, and Mance, and Sir Christopher Rose, heard several cases. At the end of the sitting, Lord Hope indicated that there may be future sittings of the Committee in the Bahamas, and the Committee has indeed sat in the Bahamas again, in 2009.\n\nSri Lanka, formerly Ceylon, abolished appeals to the Privy Council in 1972, on becoming a republic. Previously, the Privy Council had ruled in \"Ibralebbe v The Queen\" that it remained the highest court of appeal in Ceylon notwithstanding the country's independence as a Dominion in 1948.\n\nThe Gambia retained the right of appeal to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council under the Gambia Independence Act 1964, even after The Gambia became a Commonwealth republic in April 1970 under Sir Dawda Jawara. Appeals were still taken to the J.C.P.C. from 1994 to 1998, when Yahya Jammeh, the then dictator and President of the Gambia decided to restructure the Gambian judiciary under the 1997 Constitution of the Gambia to replace the J.C.P.C. with the Supreme Court of the Gambia.\n\nGrenadian appeals to the Privy Council were temporarily abolished from 1979 until 1991, as a result of the Grenadian Revolution, which brought Prime Minister Maurice Bishop to power. People's Law 84 was enacted to this effect. In 1985, \"Mitchell v DPP\" affirmed Grenada's right to unilaterally abolish appeals to the Privy Council. In 1991, Grenada restored the JCPC's jurisdiction.\n\nIn 2016, there was a proposal in the Grenadian constitutional referendum, 2016 to terminate appeals from Grenada to the JCPC and to replace the JCPC with the Caribbean Court of Justice. This was rejected by a 56.73% majority, which means the JCPC remains Grenada's highest court.\n\nGuyana retained the right of appeal to the Privy Council until the government of Prime Minister Forbes Burnham passed the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council (Termination of Appeals) Act 1970.\n\nHong Kong's court system changed following the transfer of sovereignty from the United Kingdom to China on 1 July 1997, with the Court of Final Appeal serving as the highest judicial authority of the Special Administrative Region (SAR), and (pursuant to Article 158 of the Basic Law) the power of final interpretation vested not in the Court of Final Appeal of Hong Kong but in the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress of China.\n\nDecisions of the Privy Council on Hong Kong appeals before the 1 July 1997 remain binding on the courts of Hong Kong. This accords with the principle of continuity of the legal system enshrined in Article 8 of the Basic Law. Decisions of the Privy Council on non-Hong Kong appeals are of persuasive authority only. Such decisions were not binding on the courts in Hong Kong under the doctrine of precedent before 1 July 1997 and are not binding today. Decisions of the House of Lords before 1 July 1997 stand in a similar position. It is of the greatest importance that the courts of Hong Kong should derive assistance from overseas jurisprudence, particularly from the final appellate courts of other common law jurisdictions. This is recognised by Article 84 of the Basic Law.\n\nPursuant to Article 158 of the Basic Law (the constitutional instrument of the SAR), the power of final interpretation of the Basic Law is vested not in the Court of Final Appeal of Hong Kong but in the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress of China, which, unlike the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, is a political body rather than an independent and impartial tribunal of last resort.\n\nIndia retained the right of appeal from the Federal Court of India to the Privy Council after the establishment of the Dominion of India. Following the replacement of the Federal Court with the Supreme Court of India in January 1950, the Abolition of Privy Council Jurisdiction Act 1949 came into effect, ending the right of appeal to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council.\n\nThe right of appeal to the Privy Council was provided for in the Constitution of the Irish Free State until its abolition in 1933 by an Act of the Oireachtas of the Irish Free State, amending said constitution.\n\nIn \"Moore v Attorney-General of the Irish Free State\" the right of the Oireachtas to abolish appeals to the Privy Council was challenged as a violation of the 1921 Anglo-Irish Treaty. The then Attorney General for England and Wales (Sir Thomas Inskip) is reported to have warned the then Attorney-General of the Irish Free State (Conor Maguire) that the Irish Free State had no right to abolish appeals to the Privy Council. The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council itself ruled that the Irish Free State Government had that right under the Statute of Westminster 1931 (Imp.).\n\nIn May 2015, the Jamaican House of Representatives approved with the necessary two-thirds majority bills to end legal appeals to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council and make the Caribbean Court of Justice Jamaica's final court of appeal. The reform will be debated by the Jamaican Senate; however, the government needed the support of at least one opposition Senator for the measures to be approved by the required two-thirds majority. The 2016 general election was called before the reforms could be brought to the Senate for a final vote. The Jamaican Labour Party, which opposed the changes, won the election and has promised to hold a referendum on the issue.\n\nMalaysia abolished appeals to the Privy Council in criminal and constitutional matters in 1978, and in civil matters in 1985.\n\nProposals to abolish appeals to the Privy Council in New Zealand date back to the early 1980s. It was not until October 2003 that New Zealand law was changed to abolish appeals to the Privy Council in respect of all cases heard by the Court of Appeal of New Zealand after the end of 2003, in favour of a Supreme Court of New Zealand. In 2008, Prime Minister John Key ruled out any abolition of the Supreme Court and return to the Privy Council.\n\nJudgment was delivered on 3 March 2015 in the last appeal from New Zealand to be heard by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council.\n\nThe Dominion of Pakistan retained the right of appeal to the Privy Council from the Federal Court of Pakistan until the Privy Council (Termination of Jurisdiction) Act 1950 was passed. The Federal Court of Pakistan remained the highest court until 1956, when the Supreme Court of Pakistan was established.\n\nDespite the Rhodesian Constitution of 1965 coming into effect as a result of the Unilateral Declaration of Independence, appeals continued to be accepted by the Privy Council as late as 1969 due to the fact that under international law, Rhodesia remained a British colony until gaining its independence as Zimbabwe in April 1980.\n\nSingapore abolished Privy Council appeals in all cases save those involving the death penalty, or in civil cases where the parties had agreed to such a right of appeal, in 1989. The remaining rights of appeal were abolished in 1994.\n\nSouth Africa abolished the right of appeal to the Privy Council from the Appellate Division of the then Supreme Court of South Africa in 1950 under the terms of the Privy Council Appeals Act, 1950.\n\nBULLET::::- Constitutional Reform Act 2005\nBULLET::::- List of Judicial Committee of the Privy Council cases\nBULLET::::- List of Judicial Committee of the Privy Council cases originating in Canada\n\nBULLET::::- Judicial Committee Act 1833\nBULLET::::- National Archives, Records of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council\nBULLET::::- Privy Council Office site, including JCPC\nBULLET::::- The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council and the Canadian Constitution\n"}
{"id": "15962", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15962", "title": "Jötunheimr", "text": "Jötunheimr\n\nIn Norse cosmology, Jötunheimr (or Jǫtunheimr in Old Norse orthography; often anglicized as Jotunheim or Udgård) is a location associated with the Jötnar, entities in Norse mythology.\n\nFrom Jötunheimr, the giants menace the humans in Midgard and the gods in Asgard. The river Ifing (Old Norse, \"Ífingr\") separates Asgard, the realm of the gods, from Jötunheimr, the land of giants. Gastropnir, the protection wall for the home of Menglad, and Þrymheimr, home of Þjazi, were both located in Jötunheimr, which was ruled by King Thrym. Glæsisvellir was a location in Jötunheimr, where lived the giant Gudmund, father of Höfund. Utgard was a stronghold surrounding the land of the giants, but in Nordic languages, “Jötunheimr” is also simply a name for the realm of giants (Jötun).\n\nThe protection wall for the dwelling of Menglöð, lover of the human Svipdagr.\n\nLocated under the second root of the world tree Yggdrasil in Jötunheim, guarded by the jötunn Mímir. The well is the source of Mímir's wisdom. Odin, wanting to possess great wisdom, journeys through the land of the giants to acquire it.\n\nOften anglicized as Thrymheim, it was the home of the jötunn Þjazi (anglicized as Thiazi). Þjazi once tricked Loki into aiding him on kidnapping Iðunn, the goddess who grants magic apples of youth to gods. This act would be the cause of Þjazi's death.\n\nÚtgarðar (often anglicized as Utgard) is the capital of Jotunheim, serving as the stronghold of the giants. Útgarða-Loki, also known as Skrýmir, rules the place. The god Thor challenged him, only to get fooled by the trickster giant who then disappeared.\n\nThe river where the giantess Gjálp tried to drown Thor.\n\nSvipdagr was given a task by his stepmother to woo the maiden Menglöð. He summoned his mother, Gróa, a völva in life, to seek her advice on how to woo the maiden Menglöð. Gróa cast a series of charms to protect him on his quest. Upon arriving at Jötunheim, Svipdagr is blocked by a castle gate guarded by the jötunn Fjölsviðr, who dismisses him before asking for his name. Svipdagr, giving a false name, answers a series of questions, in which he learned about the castle, its residents, and its environments. Svipdagr learns that the gate will only open up to one person: Svipdagr. The gates opens when he reveals his identity, where he is met by his expected lover, Menglöð.\n\nThe popular myth of how Thor killed the jötunn Geirröd has many variations, but all of them are caused by the trickster god Loki. Donning a suit of falcon feathers, Loki paid a visit to the jötunn's castle. When Geirröd saw the falcon, he knew right away that it was not a real falcon. Locked in a cage and starving, Loki revealed his identity. Geirröd released him on the condition that he bring Thor without his hammer to his castle. Loki readily agreed.\n\nBack in Asgard, Loki openly discussed the giant's eagerness to meet Thor to introduce his two beautiful daughters, Gjálp and Greip. Simple-minded Thor couldn't resist the temptation of meeting beautiful maidens. He agreed to Loki's suggestion of leaving his hammer behind. On the way to the castle, Thor and Loki had to stay overnight with a gentle giantess, Gríðr, who warned Thor of the danger Geirröd possessed. The giantess lent him her belt and her magic staff.\n\nSeeing the giantess Gjálp causing the water on Vimur river to rise, Thor used the magic staff to escape drowning, and then threw a rock at the giantess who fled. Thor and Loki arrived at the castle, where he was placed in a room with one chair. Weary from the travel, he sat down and closed his eyes. All at once, Thor was closing in on the ceiling. He thrust Gríðr's staff against the roof beam and pushed down. With the heavy weight and force of their guest, the giantess sisters, Gjálp and Greip, were crushed to death.\n\nThor, displeased with everything that had happened, went to confront Geirröd. The giant raised his hand and threw a hot lump of iron at the thunder god. Using the iron gloves lent to him by Gríðr, Thor caught the hot iron and threw it back at the giant who hid behind a pillar. The hot ball went straight into the pillar, into the head of Geirröd, and finally rested deep into the earth.\n\nThor, the god of thunder and storm, once lost his hammer, Mjölnir. With the loss of the mighty weapon, the only absolute defense of the Aesir against the giants, Asgard would be in much danger. Thor's angered shouts were heard by the trickster god, Loki, who knew that he must help this time. Thor and Loki sought out Freyja, a beautiful goddess, to borrow her suit of falcon feathers. Putting on the feathered coat, Loki flew to Jötunheim.\n\nLoki met the king of the jötnar, Þrymr (often anglicized as Thrym), who had admitted to the theft of Thor's hammer. Mjölnir was hidden deep beneath the earth. Loki flew back to Asgard and relayed the information to Thor. The gods convened a meeting to discuss how to get back the hammer. Heimdallr offered the solution to their problem. Thor was to be dressed in bridal clothes and meet Þrymr as Freyja.\n\nUpon hearing that Freyja was on her way, Þrymr ordered a grand feast in her honor. Seeing his bride consume large servings of food after food, Thrym was astounded by the fact. Loki reasoned \"she\" had not eaten or drunk for eight days due to her anxiety in meeting him. Elated, Thrym reached over to kiss his bride, but seeing the glaring eyes of Thor through the thin veil, he withdrew in disappointment. Loki explained that \"Freyja\" had not slept for eight nights in her excitement to come to Jötunheim. Wanting the marriage to be done quickly, Thrym ordered for Mjölnir to be brought to his bride. Once Mjölnir was placed on his lap, Thor grabbed the hammer by its handle and slew every jötunn in sight.\n\nThe tale of how Thor was outwitted by the giant Útgarða-Loki (often anglicized as Utgard-Loki) was one of the best known myths of Norse mythology. Thor, wanting to go to Utgard, the stronghold of the jötunn, traveled with Asgard's trickster god, Loki. Utgard was guarded by Útgarða-Loki, a known master of trickery.\n\nThor and Loki were traveling to Jötunheimr, accompanied by Þjálfi (anglicized as Thialfi) and his sister, Röskva. They arrived to a vast forest and continued their journey through the woods until dark. The four seek shelter for the night and discover an immense building. Finding shelter in a side room, they experience earthquakes through the night. The earthquakes cause all four to be fearful, except Thor, who grips his hammer in defense. The building turns out to be the huge glove of Skrýmir, who has been snoring throughout the night, causing what seemed to be earthquakes. The next night, all four sleep beneath an oak tree near Skrýmir in fear.\n\nThor wakes up in the middle of the night, and a series of events occur where Thor twice attempts to destroy the sleeping Skrýmir with his hammer. Skrýmir awakes after each attempt, only to say that he detected an acorn falling on his head or that he wonders if bits of tree from the branches above have fallen on top of him. The second attempt awakes Skrýmir. Skrýmir gives them advice; if they are going to be cocky at the castle of Útgarðr it would be better for them to turn back now, for Útgarða-Loki's men there won't put up with it. Skrýmir throws his knapsack onto his back and abruptly goes into the forest and \"there is no report that the Æsir expressed hope for a happy reunion\".\n\nThe four travelers continue their journey until midday. They find themselves facing a massive castle in an open area. The castle is so tall that they must bend their heads back to their spines to see above it. At the entrance to the castle is a shut gate, and Thor finds that he cannot open it. Struggling, all four squeeze through the bars of the gate, and continue to a large hall. Inside the great hall are two benches, where many generally large people sit on two benches. The four see Útgarða-Loki, the king of the castle, sitting.\n\nÚtgarða-Loki says that no visitors are allowed to stay unless they can perform a feat. Loki, standing in the rear of the party, is the first to speak, claiming that he can eat faster than anyone. Loki competes with a being named Logi to consume a trencher full of meat but loses. Útgarða-Loki asks what feat the \"young man\" can perform, referring to Þjálfi. Þjálfi says that he will attempt to run a race against anyone Útgarða-Loki chooses. Útgarða-Loki says that this would be a fine feat yet that Þjálfi had better be good at running, for he is about to be put to the test. Útgarða-Loki and the group go outside to a level-grounded course.\n\nAt the course, Útgarða-Loki calls for a small figure by the name of Hugi to compete with Þjálfi. The first race begins and Þjálfi runs, but Hugi runs to the end of the course and then back again to meet Þjálfi. Útgarða-Loki comments to Þjálfi that he will have to run faster than that, yet notes that he has never seen anyone who has come to his hall run faster than that. Þjálfi and Hugi run a second race. Þjálfi loses by an arrow-shot. Útgarða-Loki comments that Þjálfi has again ran a fine race but that he has no confidence that Þjálfi will be able to win a third. A third race between the two commences and Þjálfi again loses to Hugi. Everyone agrees that the contest between Þjálfi and Hugi has been decided.\n\nThor agrees to compete in a drinking contest but after three immense gulps fails. Thor agrees to lift a large, gray cat in the hall but finds that it arches his back no matter what he does, and that he can only raise a single paw. Thor demands to fight someone in the hall, but the inhabitants say doing so would be demeaning, considering Thor's weakness. Útgarða-Loki then calls for his nurse Elli, an old woman. The two wrestle but the harder Thor struggles the more difficult the battle becomes. Thor is finally brought down to a single knee. Útgarða-Loki said to Thor that fighting anyone else would be pointless. Now late at night, Útgarða-Loki shows the group to their rooms and they are treated with hospitality.\n\nThe next morning the group gets dressed and prepares to leave the keep. Útgarða-Loki appears, has his servants prepare a table, and they all merrily eat and drink. As they leave, Útgarða-Loki asks Thor how he thought he fared in the contests. Thor says that he is unable to say he did well, noting that he is particularly annoyed that Útgarða-Loki will now speak negatively about him. Útgarða-Loki, once the group has left his keep, points out that he hopes that they never return to it, for if he had an inkling of what he was dealing with he would never have allowed the group to enter in the first place. Útgarða-Loki reveals that all was not what it seemed to the group. Útgarða-Loki was in fact the immense Skrýmir, and that if the three blows Thor attempted to land had hit their mark, the first would have killed Skrýmir. In reality, Thor's blows were so powerful that they had resulted in three square valleys.\nThe contests, too, were an illusion. Útgarða-Loki reveals that Loki had actually competed against wildfire itself (\"Logi\", Old Norse \"flame\"), Þjálfi had raced against thought (\"Hugi\", Old Norse \"thought\"), Thor's drinking horn had actually reached to the ocean and with his drinks he lowered the ocean level (resulting in tides). The cat that Thor attempted to lift was in actuality the world serpent, Jörmungandr, and everyone was terrified when Thor was able to lift the paw of this \"cat\", for Thor had actually held the great serpent up to the sky. The old woman Thor wrestled was in fact old age (\"Elli\", Old Norse \"old age\"), and there is no one that old age cannot bring down. Útgarða-Loki tells Thor that it would be better for \"both sides\" if they did not meet again. Upon hearing this, Thor takes hold of his hammer and swings it at Útgarða-Loki but he is gone and so is his castle. Only a wide landscape remains.\n\nUnlike the Greek gods, the gods of Norse mythology were prone to aging. One day, the jötnar Þjazi, disguised as an eagle, swooped down and tricked Loki into bringing him Iðunn, the goddess who supplied magic apples to the gods and goddesses to stay young, in exchange for his life. Fearful of what the ancient giant would do to him, Loki agreed to the bargain.\n\nAs soon as Loki reached Asgard, he went straight to the orchard tended by Iðunn and her husband, Bragi. He spun a lie of having found some apples in Midgard that looked the same as hers. Urging her to bring her own basket of apples to compare the two fruits, they departed for the world. When they crossed Bifrost, Þjazi swooped down and carried Iðunn away. The giant had locked her up in the highest tower in Þrymheimr. The gods and goddesses started aging. Summoning a meeting where every god was present except for Loki, the gods knew that Loki was up to no good. Upon finding the trickster god, he was ordered by Odin to bring back Iðunn and her apples or his life would be forfeited.\n\nFleeing in terror, Loki sought out Freyja to borrow her suit of falcon feathers. Loki flew to Þrymheimr, where he found Iðunn alone and unguarded. Loki turned the goddess and her basket of apples into a nut and held her in his claws. At this time, Þjazi, in his eagle disguise, was following them. Odin, who saw everything, immediately ordered the gods to build a bonfire at the gates of Asgard. When Þjazi reached the walls, his body caught on fire, and he fell to the ground. The gods slew him with no mercy. Releasing Iðunn from the spell, the gods and goddesses were once again youthful.\n\nMimir was an ancient being, notorious for his unparalleled wisdom. His dwelling was Mímisbrunnr (\"Mímir's well\"), a sacred well situated under one of the roots of the tree Yggdrasil in Jötunheim. Odin, wanting to gain immense knowledge and wisdom, consulted all living beings. He ventured to the land of the giants and asked for a drink from the well. Mimir, knowing the value of the water, refused unless Odin offered one of his eyes. The chief god was ready to pay any price for the wisdom he desired, and so he agreed to the deal and sacrificed his eye. The eye was then placed in Mímisbrunnr.\n\nBULLET::::- Geirröd - a giant who tried to kill Thor.\nBULLET::::- Iðunn - a goddess who supplied the magic apples that kept the gods young.\nBULLET::::- Jötunn - In Norse mythology, giant whose otherworldly homeland is Jötunheimr.\nBULLET::::- Jotunheimen - the name of a large mountain range in Norway. The name Jotunheimen was first popularized by Aasmund Olafson Vinje, who spent much time in the area in the 1860s.\nBULLET::::- Svipdagr - the human who wooed and won Menglöð.\nBULLET::::- Thor - the god of thunder and storms. He wields a hammer called Mjölnir.\nBULLET::::- Þrymheimr - In Norse mythology, the abode of Þjazi, located in Jötunheimr.\nBULLET::::- Útgarða-Loki - In Norse mythology, ruler of the castle Útgarðr in Jötunheimr. He was the one who humiliated and defeated Thor, the god of thunder and storm.\n\n"}
{"id": "15963", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15963", "title": "Johann Friedrich Agricola", "text": "Johann Friedrich Agricola\n\nJohann Friedrich Agricola (4 January 1720 – 2 December 1774) was a German composer, organist, singer, pedagogue, and writer on music. He sometimes wrote under the pseudonym Flavio Anicio Olibrio.\n\nAgricola was born in Dobitschen, Thuringia.\n\nWhile a student of law at Leipzig (1738–41) he studied music under Johann Sebastian Bach.\n\nIn 1741 Agricola went to Berlin, where he studied musical composition under Johann Joachim Quantz. He was soon generally recognized as one of the most skillful organists of his time. The success of his comic opera, \"Il filosofo convinto in amore\", performed at Potsdam in 1750, led to an appointment as court composer to Frederick the Great. In 1759, on the death of Carl Heinrich Graun, he was appointed conductor of the royal orchestra. He married the noted court operatic soprano Benedetta Emilia Molteni, despite the king's prohibition of court employees marrying each other. Because of this trespass, the king reduced Molteni's and Agricola's combined salaries to a single annual salary of 1,000 \"Thalers\" (Agricola's annual salary alone had been 1,500 \"Thalers\"). Agricola died in Berlin at age 54.\n\nAgricola wrote a number of Italian operas, as well as \"Lieder,\" chorale preludes, various other keyboard pieces and church music, especially oratorios and cantatas. His reputation chiefly rests, however, on his theoretical and critical writings on musical subjects.\n\nIn 1754 he co-authored, with Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach, J. S. Bach's obituary. His 1757 \"Anleitung zur Singekunst\" (\"Introduction to the Art of Singing\") is a translation of Pier Francesco Tosi's 1723 treatise \"Opinioni de' cantori antichi e moderni\" with Agricola's own extensive comments. He edited and added extensive commentary to the 1768 (posthumous) edition of Jakob Adlung's \"Musica mechanica organoedi\" (English translation). His annotations are considered an important source of information on J. S. Bach's views on the fortepiano designs of Gottfried Silbermann, on the lute-harpsichord, and on organ building.\n\nAgricola is also noted in Bach studies as one of the copyists for both books of the Well-Tempered Clavier and the St. Matthew Passion.\n\nBULLET::::- Ach, was soll ich Sünder machen\nBULLET::::- Jauchzet, ihr Erlösten dem Herren\nBULLET::::- Harpsicord Sonata in F major\n\nBULLET::::- Jesu, meine Freude\nBULLET::::- Ein feste Burg ist unser Gott\nBULLET::::- Auf meinen lieben Gott\nBULLET::::- Erbarm dich mein, o Herre Gott\nBULLET::::- Es ist das Heil uns kommen her\nBULLET::::- Jauchzt, ihr Erlösten, dem Herren\nBULLET::::- O Ewigkeit, du Donnerwort\nBULLET::::- Herr, ich habe mißgehandelt\nBULLET::::- Herr Jesu Christ, ich weiß gar wohl\nBULLET::::- Wer nur den lieben Gott läßt walten\nBULLET::::- Ach, was soll ich Sünder machen\nBULLET::::- O Traurigkeit, o Herzeleid\nBULLET::::- Keinen hat Gott verlassen\nBULLET::::- Herzliebster Jesu, was hast du verbrochen\nBULLET::::- Freu dich sehr, o meine Seele\nBULLET::::- Ich hab mein Sach Gott heimgestellt\n\nBULLET::::- Flute Sonata in A major\n\nBULLET::::- A la mignonne de fortune (song)\nBULLET::::- L'accorto nocchiero (aria)\nBULLET::::- Canzonetta, Les Rois d'Égypte\nBULLET::::- 6 Canzonettes\nBULLET::::- Cleofide\nBULLET::::- Torna aprile e l'aure scherzano (aria)\n\nBULLET::::- Die Hirten bei der Krippe, cantata for 4 voices, chorus & orchestra\nBULLET::::- Kündlich gross ist das gottselige Geheimnis, cantata for 4 voices, chorus & orchestra\nBULLET::::- Uns ist ein Kind geboren, cantata for 4 voices, chorus & orchestra\nBULLET::::- Die Hirten bey der Krippe zu Bethlehem, sacred cantata\nBULLET::::- Der König jauchzt, sacred cantata\nBULLET::::- Il tempio d'amore, serenata\nBULLET::::- Magnificat in D major\n\nBULLET::::- Achille in Sciro, (1765)\nBULLET::::- L'Ippocondriaco\n\nAttribution\n\nBULLET::::- a list of works copied by Agricola's hand may be found by a source search on Bach Digital.\nBULLET::::- Samples of Agricola's handwriting on Bach Digital: 1, 2, 3 and 4.\n"}
{"id": "15965", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15965", "title": "James Hutton", "text": "James Hutton\n\nJames Hutton (; 3 June 1726 – 26 March 1797) was a Scottish geologist, physician, chemical manufacturer, naturalist, and experimental agriculturalist. He contributed to what was later called uniformitarianism—a fundamental principle of geology—that explains the features of the Earth's crust by means of natural processes over geologic time. Hutton's work helped to establish geology as a science, and as a result he is often referred to as the \"Father of Modern Geology\", though these principles were already in use by others including Buffon.\n\nThrough observation and carefully reasoned geological arguments, Hutton came to believe that the Earth was perpetually being formed; he recognised that the history of Earth could be determined by understanding how processes such as erosion and sedimentation work in the present day. His theories of geology helped to establish geologic time, also called deep time, but unlike modern concepts, Hutton's \"system of the habitable Earth\" was a deistic mechanism to keep the world eternally suitable for humans.\n\nHutton was born in Edinburgh on 3 June 1726, as one of five children of Sarah Balfour and William Hutton, a merchant who was Edinburgh City Treasurer. Hutton's father died in 1729, when he was three.\n\nHe was educated at the High School of Edinburgh (as were most Edinburgh children) where he was particularly interested in mathematics and chemistry, then when he was 14 he attended the University of Edinburgh as a \"student of humanity\", studying the classics. He was apprenticed to the lawyer George Chalmers WS when he was 17, but took more interest in chemical experiments than legal work. At the age of 18, he became a physician's assistant, and attended lectures in medicine at the University of Edinburgh. After three years he went to the University of Paris to continue his studies, taking the degree of Doctor of Medicine at Leiden University in 1749 with a thesis on blood circulation.\n\nAfter his degree Hutton went to London, then in mid-1750 returned to Edinburgh and resumed chemical experiments with close friend, James Davie. Their work on production of sal ammoniac from soot led to their partnership in a profitable chemical works, manufacturing the crystalline salt which was used for dyeing, metalworking and as smelling salts and had been available only from natural sources and had to be imported from Egypt. Hutton owned and rented out properties in Edinburgh, employing a factor to manage this business.\n\nHutton inherited from his father the Berwickshire farms of \"Slighhouses\", a lowland farm which had been in the family since 1713, and the hill farm of \"Nether Monynut\". In the early 1750s he moved to \"Slighhouses\" and set about making improvements, introducing farming practices from other parts of Britain and experimenting with plant and animal husbandry. He recorded his ideas and innovations in an unpublished treatise on \"The Elements of Agriculture\".\n\nThis developed his interest in meteorology and geology. In a 1753 letter he wrote that he had \"become very fond of studying the surface of the earth, and was looking with anxious curiosity into every pit or ditch or bed of a river that fell in his way\". Clearing and draining his farm provided ample opportunities. The mathematician John Playfair described Hutton as having noticed that \"a vast proportion of the present rocks are composed of materials afforded by the destruction of bodies, animal, vegetable and mineral, of more ancient formation\". His theoretical ideas began to come together in 1760. While his farming activities continued, in 1764 he went on a geological tour of the north of Scotland with George Maxwell-Clerk, ancestor of the famous James Clerk Maxwell.\n\nIn 1768 Hutton returned to Edinburgh, letting his farms to tenants but continuing to take an interest in farm improvements and research which included experiments carried out at \"Slighhouses\". He developed a red dye made from the roots of the madder plant.\n\nHe had a house built in 1770 at St John's Hill, Edinburgh, overlooking Salisbury Crags. This later became the Balfour family home and, in 1840, the birthplace of the psychiatrist James Crichton-Browne. Hutton was one of the most influential participants in the Scottish Enlightenment, and fell in with numerous first-class minds in the sciences including mathematician John Playfair, philosopher David Hume and economist Adam Smith. Hutton held no position in the University of Edinburgh and communicated his scientific findings through the Royal Society of Edinburgh. He was particularly friendly with physician and chemist Joseph Black, and together with Adam Smith they founded the \"Oyster Club\" for weekly meetings.\n\nBetween 1767 and 1774 Hutton had close involvement with the construction of the Forth and Clyde canal, making full use of his geological knowledge, both as a shareholder and as a member of the committee of management, and attended meetings including extended site inspections of all the works. At this time he is listed as living on Bernard Street in Leith. In 1777 he published a pamphlet on \"Considerations on the Nature, Quality and Distinctions of Coal and Culm\" which successfully helped to obtain relief from excise duty on carrying small coal.\n\nIn 1783 he was a joint founder of the Royal Society of Edinburgh.\n\nFrom 1791 Hutton suffered extreme pain from stones in the bladder and gave up field work to concentrate on finishing his books. A dangerous and painful operation failed to resolve his illness. He died in Edinburgh and was buried in the vault of Andrew Balfour, opposite the vault of his friend Joseph Black, in the now sealed south-west section of Greyfriars Kirkyard commonly known as the Covenanter's Prison.\n\nHutton did not marry and had no legitimate children. Around 1747 he had a son by a Miss Edington, and though he gave his child James Smeaton Hutton financial assistance, he had little to do with the boy who went on to become a post-office clerk in London.\n\nHutton developed several hypotheses to explain the rock formations he saw around him, but according to Playfair he \"was in no haste to publish his theory; for he was one of those who are much more delighted with the contemplation of truth, than with the praise of having discovered it\". After some 25 years of work, his \"Theory of the Earth; or an Investigation of the Laws observable in the Composition, Dissolution, and Restoration of Land upon the Globe\" was read to meetings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in two parts, the first by his friend Joseph Black on 7 March 1785, and the second by himself on 4 April 1785. Hutton subsequently read an abstract of his dissertation \"Concerning the System of the Earth, its Duration and Stability\" to Society meeting on 4 July 1785, which he had printed and circulated privately. In it, he outlined his theory as follows;\n\nIn 1785 at Glen Tilt in the Cairngorm mountains in the Scottish Highlands, Hutton found granite penetrating metamorphic schists, in a way which indicated that the granite had been molten at the time. This demonstrated to him that granite formed from the cooling of molten rock rather than it precipitating out of water as others at the time believed, and therefore the granite must be younger than the schists.\n\nHe went on to find a similar penetration of volcanic rock through sedimentary rock in Edinburgh, at Salisbury Crags, adjoining Arthur's Seat – this area of the Crags is now known as Hutton's Section. He found other examples in Galloway in 1786, and on the Isle of Arran in 1787.\n\nThe existence of angular unconformities had been noted by Nicolas Steno and by French geologists including Horace-Bénédict de Saussure, who interpreted them in terms of Neptunism as \"primary formations\". Hutton wanted to examine such formations himself to see \"particular marks\" of the relationship between the rock layers. On the 1787 trip to the Isle of Arran he found his first example of Hutton's Unconformity to the north of Newton Point near Lochranza, but the limited view meant that the condition of the underlying strata was not clear enough for him, and he incorrectly thought that the strata were conformable at a depth below the exposed outcrop.\n\nLater in 1787 Hutton noted what is now known as the Hutton or \"Great\" Unconformity at Inchbonny, Jedburgh, in layers of sedimentary rock. As shown in the illustrations to the right, layers of greywacke in the lower layers of the cliff face are tilted almost vertically, and above an intervening layer of conglomerate lie horizontal layers of Old Red Sandstone. He later wrote of how he \"rejoiced at my good fortune in stumbling upon an object so interesting in the natural history of the earth, and which I had been long looking for in vain.\" That year, he found the same sequence in Teviotdale.\nIn the Spring of 1788 he set off with John Playfair to the Berwickshire coast and found more examples of this sequence in the valleys of the Tour and Pease Burns near Cockburnspath. They then took a boat trip from Dunglass Burn east along the coast with the geologist Sir James Hall of Dunglass. They found the sequence in the cliff below St. Helens, then just to the east at Siccar Point found what Hutton called \"a beautiful picture of this junction washed bare by the sea\". Playfair later commented about the experience, \"the mind seemed to grow giddy by looking so far into the abyss of time\". Continuing along the coast, they made more discoveries including sections of the vertical beds showing strong ripple marks which gave Hutton \"great satisfaction\" as a confirmation of his supposition that these beds had been laid horizontally in water. He also found conglomerate at altitudes that demonstrated the extent of erosion of the strata, and said of this that \"we never should have dreamed of meeting with what we now perceived\".\n\nHutton reasoned that there must have been innumerable cycles, each involving deposition on the seabed, uplift with tilting and erosion then undersea again for further layers to be deposited. On the belief that this was due to the same geological forces operating in the past as the very slow geological forces seen operating at the present day, the thicknesses of exposed rock layers implied to him enormous stretches of time.\n\nThough Hutton circulated privately a printed version of the abstract of his Theory (\"Concerning the System of the Earth, its Duration, and Stability\") which he read at a meeting of the Royal Society of Edinburgh on 4 July 1785; the full account of his theory as read at 7 March 1785 and 4 April 1785 meetings did not appear in print until 1788. It was titled \"Theory of the Earth; or an Investigation of the Laws observable in the Composition, Dissolution, and Restoration of Land upon the Globe\" and appeared in \"Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh\", vol. I, Part II, pp. 209–304, plates I and II, published 1788. He put forward the view that \"from what has actually been, we have data for concluding with regard to that which is to happen thereafter.\" This restated the Scottish Enlightenment concept which David Hume had put in 1777 as \"all inferences from experience suppose ... that the future will resemble the past\", and Charles Lyell memorably rephrased in the 1830s as \"the present is the key to the past\". Hutton's 1788 paper concludes; \"The result, therefore, of our present enquiry is, that we find no vestige of a beginning,–no prospect of an end.\" His memorably phrased closing statement has long been celebrated. (It was quoted in the 1989 song “No Control\" by songwriter and professor Greg Graffin.)\n\nFollowing criticism, especially the arguments from Richard Kirwan who thought Hutton's ideas were atheistic and not logical, Hutton published a two volume version of his theory in 1795, consisting of the 1788 version of his theory (with slight additions) along with a lot of material drawn from shorter papers Hutton already had to hand on various subjects such as the origin of granite. It included a review of alternative theories, such as those of Thomas Burnet and Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon.\n\nThe whole was entitled \"An Investigation of the Principles of Knowledge and of the Progress of Reason, from Sense to Science and Philosophy\" when the third volume was completed in 1794. Its 2,138 pages prompted Playfair to remark that \"The great size of the book, and the obscurity which may justly be objected to many parts of it, have probably prevented it from being received as it deserves.”\n\nHis new theories placed him into opposition with the then-popular Neptunist theories of Abraham Gottlob Werner, that all rocks had precipitated out of a single enormous flood. Hutton proposed that the interior of the Earth was hot, and that this heat was the engine which drove the creation of new rock: land was eroded by air and water and deposited as layers in the sea; heat then consolidated the sediment into stone, and uplifted it into new lands. This theory was dubbed \"Plutonist\" in contrast to the flood-oriented theory.\n\nAs well as combating the Neptunists, he also opened up the concept of deep time for scientific purposes, in opposition to Catastrophism. Rather than accepting that the earth was no more than a few thousand years old, he maintained that the Earth must be much older, with a history extending indefinitely into the distant past. His main line of argument was that the tremendous displacements and changes he was seeing did not happen in a short period of time by means of catastrophe, but that processes still happening on the Earth in the present day had caused them. As these processes were very gradual, the Earth needed to be ancient, to allow time for the changes. Before long, scientific inquiries provoked by his claims had pushed back the age of the earth into the millions of yearsstill too short when compared with the accepted 4.6 billion year age in the 21st century, but a distinct improvement.\n\nIt has been claimed that the prose of \"Principles of Knowledge\" was so obscure that it also impeded the acceptance of Hutton's geological theories. Restatements of his geological ideas (though not his thoughts on evolution) by John Playfair in 1802 and then Charles Lyell in the 1830s popularised the concept of an infinitely repeating cycle, though Lyell tended to dismiss Hutton's views as giving too much credence to catastrophic changes.\n\nIt was not merely the earth to which Hutton directed his attention. He had long studied the changes of the atmosphere. The same volume in which his \"Theory of the Earth\" appeared contained also a \"Theory of Rain\". He contended that the amount of moisture which the air can retain in solution increases with temperature, and, therefore, that on the mixture of two masses of air of different temperatures a portion of the moisture must be condensed and appear in visible form. He investigated the available data regarding rainfall and climate in different regions of the globe, and came to the conclusion that the rainfall is regulated by the humidity of the air on the one hand, and mixing of different air currents in the higher atmosphere on the other.\n\nHutton taught that biological and geological processes are interlinked. James Lovelock, who developed the Gaia hypothesis in the 1970s, cites Hutton as saying that the Earth was a superorganism and that its proper study should be physiology. Lovelock writes that Hutton’s view of the Earth was rejected because of the intense reductionism among 19th-century scientists.\n\nHutton also advocated uniformitarianism for living creatures evolution, in a senseand even suggested natural selection as a possible mechanism affecting them:\n\nHutton gave the example that where dogs survived through \"swiftness of foot and quickness of sight... the most defective in respect of those necessary qualities, would be the most subject to perish, and that those who employed them in greatest perfection... would be those who would remain, to preserve themselves, and to continue the race\". Equally, if an acute sense of smell became \"more necessary to the sustenance of the animal... the same principle [would] change the qualities of the animal, and.. produce a race of well scented hounds, instead of those who catch their prey by swiftness\". The same \"principle of variation\" would influence \"every species of plant, whether growing in a forest or a meadow\". He came to his ideas as the result of experiments in plant and animal breeding, some of which he outlined in an unpublished manuscript, the \"Elements of Agriculture\". He distinguished between heritable variation as the result of breeding, and non-heritable variations caused by environmental differences such as soil and climate.\n\nThough he saw his \"principle of variation\" as explaining the development of varieties, Hutton rejected the idea that evolution might originate species as a \"romantic fantasy\", according to palaeoclimatologist Paul Pearson. Influenced by deism, Hutton thought the mechanism allowed species to form varieties better adapted to particular conditions and provided evidence of benevolent design in nature. Studies of Charles Darwin's notebooks have shown that Darwin arrived separately at the idea of natural selection which he set out in his 1859 book \"On the Origin of Species\", but it has been speculated that he had some half-forgotten memory from his time as a student in Edinburgh of ideas of selection in nature as set out by Hutton, and by William Charles Wells and Patrick Matthew who had both been associated with the city before publishing their ideas on the topic early in the 19th century.\n\nBULLET::::- 1785. \"Abstract of a dissertation read in the Royal Society of Edinburgh, upon the seventh of March, and fourth of April, MDCCLXXXV, Concerning the System of the Earth, Its Duration, and Stability\". Edinburgh. 30pp. at Oxford Digital Library.\nBULLET::::- 1788.\"The theory of rain\". Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, vol. 1, Part 2, pp. 41–86.\nBULLET::::- 1788. \"Theory of the Earth; or an investigation of the laws observable in the composition, dissolution, and restoration of land upon the Globe\". Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, vol. 1, Part 2, pp. 209–304. at Internet Archive.\nBULLET::::- 1792. \"Dissertations on different subjects in natural philosophy.\" Edinburgh & London: Strahan & Cadell. at Google Books\nBULLET::::- 1794. \"Observations on granite\". Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, vol. 3, pp. 77–81.\nBULLET::::- 1794. \"A dissertation upon the philosophy of light, heat, and fire.\" Edinburgh: Cadell, Junior, Davies. at e-rara (ETH-Bibliothek)\nBULLET::::- 1794. \"An investigation of the principles of knowledge and of the progress of reason, from sense to science and philosophy\". Edinburgh: Strahan & Cadell. at (VIRGO) University of Virginia Library)\nBULLET::::- 1795. \"Theory of the Earth; with proofs and illustrations\". Edinburgh: Creech. 3 vols. at e-rara (ETH-Bibliothek)\nBULLET::::- 1797. \"Elements of Agriculture\". Unpublished manuscript.\nBULLET::::- 1899. \"Theory of the Earth; with proofs and illustrations, vol III\", Edited by Sir Archibald Geikie. Geological Society, Burlington House, London. at Internet Archive\n\nBULLET::::- A street was named after Hutton in the Kings Buildings complex (a series of science buildings linked to Edinburgh University) in the early 21st century.\nBULLET::::- The punk band Bad Religion quoted James Hutton with \"no vestige of a beginning, no prospect of an end\" in their song \"No Control\".\n\nBULLET::::- James Hutton Institute\nBULLET::::- Climate of Scotland\nBULLET::::- Geology of Scotland\nBULLET::::- Shen Kuo\nBULLET::::- \"Time's Arrow, Time's Cycle\", a book by Stephen Jay Gould that reassesses Hutton's work\n\nBULLET::::- Baxter, Stephen (2003). \"Ages in Chaos: James Hutton and the Discovery of Deep Time.\" New York: Tor Books, 2004. . Published in the UK as \"Revolutions in the Earth: James Hutton and the True Age of the World.\" London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.\nBULLET::::- Repcheck, Jack (2003). \"The Man Who Found Time: James Hutton and the Discovery of the Earth's Antiquity.\" London and Cambridge, Massachusetts: Simon & Schuster. (UK), (US)\n\nBULLET::::- James Hutton.org.uk, links to \"James HuttonThe Man\" and \"The James Hutton Trail\".\nBULLET::::- James Hutton and Uniformitarianism (scroll down)\nBULLET::::- James Hutton's memorial in Greyfriars Kirkyard, Edinburgh\nBULLET::::- First Publication of Theory of the Earth\nBULLET::::- Digitized volumes at the Linda Hall Library:\nBULLET::::- Hutton's (1788), \"Theory of the Earth.\" \"Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh\", Vol. 1, no. 20.\nBULLET::::- Hutton's (1795–1899), \"Theory of the earth, with proofs and illustrations, 3 vols.\"\nBULLET::::- John Playfair (1802), \"Illustrations of the Huttonian theory of the Earth\nBULLET::::- John Playfair (1815), \"Explication de Playfair sur la théorie de la terre par Hutton\" (French)\n"}
{"id": "15966", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15966", "title": "Jakob Abbadie", "text": "Jakob Abbadie\n\nJakob Abbadie (; 25 September 1727), also known as Jacques or James Abbadie, was a French Protestant minister and writer. He became Dean of Killaloe, in Ireland.\n\nJacques Abbadie was born at Nay, Béarn, probably in 1654, although 1657 and 1658 have been given; he is \"most probably the Jacques Abbadie who was the third child of Violente de Fortaner and Pierre Abbadie, baptized on 27 April 1654.\" Samuel Smiles stated that he was \"the scion of a distinguished Béarnese family\"; although it is probable that the poverty of his parents would have excluded him from a learned career if some of the leading Protestants of the district had not charged themselves with the expenses of his education, which was begun under M. Jean de la Placette, the minister of Nay, He studied at Puylaurens, the Academy of Saumur, and the Academy of Sedan, receiving the degree of doctor in theology, it is said, at the age of seventeen. An obituary notice, however, which appeared in the \"Daily Courant\" for 5 October 1727, says: \"He was not above twenty-two when he undertook of himself his admirable treatise on the \"Truth of the Christian Religion\"\".\n\nAbout the same time he was sent for by Frederick William, Elector of Brandenburg, to be minister of the French church at Berlin; the electoral summons found Abbadie at Paris, and it was conveyed through the Count d'Espense, who had been commissioned by his master to make the selection. The congregation of refugees, small enough at first to be accommodated in an apartment of the Count d'Espense's residence, grew gradually from increased emigration to Brandenburg, caused by the revocation of the edict of Nantes in 1685. The elector ordered the ancient chapel of his palace to be prepared for the congregation, and the services were frequently attended by the younger members of his family. Abbadie's arrival in Berlin has been variously assigned to the years 1680 and 1681. During seven or eight years he used his increasing favour with the elector to relieve the distress of the refugees from France, and especially from his native province of Béarn. Abbadie continued to occupy his pastorate at Berlin until the death of the great elector, which took place 29 April 1688.\n\nHe then accompanied Marshal Schomberg to England in 1688, and the following year became minister of the French church in the Savoy area of London, which had been founded about 1641. In the autumn of 1689 he went to Ireland with the marshal.\n\nAfter the Battle of the Boyne, Abbadie returned to London. He subsequently published a revised version of the French translation of the English liturgy used at this church, with an epistle dedicatory to George I. He was often appointed to deliver occasional discourses, both in London and Dublin, but his lack of facility in English prevented his preferment in England, and also excluded him from the deanery of St. Patrick's, Dublin, to which William III wished to promote him. Abbadie's health suffered from devotion to his duties in the Savoy and from the English climate. He therefore settled in Ireland, and in 1699 the deanery of Killaloe was conferred on him by the king. whose favour he had attracted by a vindication of the Revolution of 1688.\n\nThe remainder of Abbadie's life was spent in writing and preaching, and in the performance—not too sedulous, for he was frequently absent from his benefice—of the ordinary duties of his office, varied by visits to England and to Holland, where most of his books were printed. Abbadie visited Holland to see his \"La Vérité\" through the press, and stayed more than three years in Amsterdam, 1720–23, during the preparation of \"Le Triomphe\" and other works. He returned to Ireland in 1723. Abbadie's income as dean of Killaloe was so small that he could not afford a literary amanuensis; and Hugh Boulter, archbishop of Armagh, having appealed in vain to Lord Carteret, the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, on Abbadie's behalf, gave him a letter of introduction to Dr. Edmund Gibson, bishop of London, and Abbadie left Ireland. He established himself at Marylebone. He died at his lodgings at Marylebone on Monday, 25 September 1727, aged 74.\n\nAbbadie is best known by his religious treatises, several of which were translated from the original French into other languages and had a wide circulation throughout Europe. The most important of these are \"Traite de la verité de la religion chrétienne\" (1684); its continuation, \"Traité de la divinité de Jesus-Christ\" (1689); and \"L'Art de se connaitre soi-meme\" (1692).\n\nWhile at Berlin, he made several visits to the Netherlands, in 1684, 1686, and 1688, chiefly for the purpose of superintending the printing of several of his works, including the \"Traité de la Vérité\", 1684. The book went through a vast number of editions and was translated into several languages, an English version, by Henry Lussan, appearing in 1694. Completed by a third volume, the \"Traité de la Divinité de Nôtre Seigneur Jésus-Christ\", it appeared at Rotterdam, 1689. An English translation, entitled \"A Sovereign Antidote against Arian Poyson\", appeared in London, 1719, and again \"revised, corrected, and, in a few places, abridged\", by Abraham Booth, under the title of \"The Deity of Jesus Christ essential to the Christian Religion\", 1777. The entire apology for Christianity formed by the three volumes of the \"Traité\", which combated severally the heresies of atheism, deism, and Socinianism, was received with praise. \"La Vérité de la Religion Chrétienne Réformée\" (1717) was a controversial treatise which in its four parts attacks the characteristic doctrines of the Roman Catholic Church; it was translated into English, for the use of the Roman Catholics of his diocese of Dromore, by Dr. Ralph Lambert, afterwards bishop of Meath. The work was completed in 1723 in \"Le Triomphe de la Providence et de la Religion; ou, l'Ouverture des sept Seaux par le Fils de Dieu, où l'on trouvera la première partie de l'Apocalypse clairement expliquée par ce qu'il y a de plus connu dans l'Histoire et de moins contesté dans la Parole de Dieu. Avec une nouvelle et très-sensible Démonstration de la Vérité de la Religion Chrétienne\".\n\nIt was in the Irish camp with Schomberg that Abbadie commenced one of his most successful works, which was published at Rotterdam in 1692, as \"L'Art de se connoître soi-même; ou, La Recherche des Sources de la Morale\", and went through many editions and amplifications. Translations of this work into other languages include a popular English version by the Rev. Thomas Woodcock, \"The Art of Knowing One-self\", 1694. The last 50 pages of this 274-page work deals with pride, which he divided into five branches: love of esteem, presumptuousness, vanity, ambition and arrogance.\n\nAmong the early writings of Abbadie were four \"Sermons sur divers Textes de l'Ecriture\", 1680; \"Réflexions sur la Présence réelle du Corps de Jésus-Christ dans l'Eucharistie\", 1685; and two highly adulatory addresses on persons in high stations, entitled respectively \"Panégyrique de Monseigneur l'Electeur de Brandebourg\", 1684; and \"Panégyrique de Marie Stuart, Reine d'Angleterre, d'Ecosse, de France, et d'Irlande, de glorieuse et immortelle mémoire, décédée à Kensington le 28 décembre 1694\", 1695, also published in England as \"A Panegyric on our late Sovereign Lady\", 1695. These four productions, with other occasional sermons, were in 1760 republished collectively, in three volumes, at Amsterdam, and preceded by an \"Essai historique sur la Vie et les Ouvrages de M. Abbadie\". The pamphlet on the Eucharist was also reprinted at Toulouse, in 1835, under the title of \"Quatre Lettres sur la Trans-substantiation\", and appeared in an English translation, by John W. Hamersley, as the \"Chemical Change in the Eucharist\", 1867.\n\n\"Défense de la Nation Britannique\", 1693 was an elaborate defence of the Glorious Revolution, written in answer to Pierre Bayle's \"Avis important aux Réfugiés\", 1690. He gave a funeral oration on Queen Mary. Abbadie had also written, at the request of the king, \"Histoire de la dernière Conspiration d'Angleterre\", 1696, a history of the conspiracy of 1696, which was reprinted in Holland and translated into English, and for which the Earl of Portland and Secretary Sir William Trumbull placed original documents at the author's disposal. This work helped Abbadie's preferment. After its production, \"his majesty sent him to Ireland, with an order to the lords justices to confer upon him some dignity in the church, which order was complied with by his promotion to the deanery of Killalow\" (\"Daily Courant,\" 5 October 1727).\n\nHe revised his works for a complete edition in four volumes, in which were also to be included two unpublished treatises, \"Nouvelle Manière de prouver l'Immortalité de l'Ame\", and \"Notes sur le Commentaire philosophique de M. Bayle\". No trace of them could be found after his death.\n\n\nBULLET::::- Abbadie, Jacques in the Christian Cyclopedia\nBULLET::::- Works by Jacques Abbadie at Early English Books Online\n"}
{"id": "15967", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15967", "title": "Jerry Lewis", "text": "Jerry Lewis\n\nJoseph Levitch (March 16, 1926 – August 20, 2017), better known by his stage name Jerry Lewis, was an American comedian, actor, singer, filmmaker and humanitarian, dubbed as \"The King of Comedy\" and \"The Total Filmmaker\". Lewis gained his career breakthrough with fellow singer Dean Martin, billed as Martin & Lewis, in 1946 and would perform together for ten years until an acrimonious breakup of the partnership in 1956. \n\nLewis pursued a solo career as a filmmaker and comedian, starring in several movies, ventured into behind-the-scenes work as a director, producer and screenwriter, performed comedy routines on stage and released several albums as a singer, selling millions of records. Throughout his career, he raised awareness for muscular dystrophy, while as national chairman of the Muscular Dystrophy Association. Lewis was also known for his friendship with Sammy Davis Jr.\n\nLewis was born on March 16, 1926 in Newark, New Jersey, to Daniel \"Danny\" Levitch (1902 – 1980), a master of ceremonies and vaudevillian, who performed under the stage name Danny Lewis, from New York whose parents immigrated to the United States from the Russian Empire, and Rachael \"Rae\" Levitch (née Brodsky; 1903 – 1983), a WOR pianist and Danny's music director from Warsaw. Reports as to his birth name are conflicting; in Lewis' 1982 autobiography, he claimed his birth name was Joseph, after his maternal grandfather, but his birth certificate, the 1930 U. S. Census, and the 1940 U. S. Census all name him as Jerome.\n\nLewis said that he ceased using the names Joseph and Joey as an adult to avoid being confused with Joe E. Lewis and Joe Louis. Reports as to the hospital in which he was born conflict as well, with biographer Shawn Levy claiming he was born at Clinton Private Hospital and others claiming Newark Beth Israel Hospital. Other claims of his early life also conflict with accounts made by family members, burial records, and vital records.\n\nHe was a \"character\" even in his teenage years, pulling pranks in his neighborhood including sneaking into kitchens to steal fried chicken and pies. He dropped out of Irvington High School in the tenth grade. By age 15, he had developed his \"Record Act\" miming lyrics to songs while a phonograph played offstage. He landed a gig at a burlesque house in Buffalo, but his performance fell flat and was unable to book any more shows. Lewis worked as a soda jerk and a theater usher for Suzanne Pleshette's father Gene at the Paramount Theater to make ends meet.\n\nA veteran burlesque comedian, Max Coleman, who had worked with Lewis' father years before, persuaded him to try again. Irving Kaye, a Borscht Belt comedian, saw Lewis' mime act at Brown's Hotel in Loch Sheldrake, New York, the following summer, and the audience was so enthusiastic that Kaye became Lewis' manager and guardian for Borscht Belt appearances. During World War II, he was rejected for military service because of a heart murmur.\n\nLewis initially gained attention as part of a double act with singer Dean Martin, who served as straight man to Lewis' zany antics as the Martin and Lewis comedy team. They were different from other duo acts of the time because they played to each other and had ad-libbed improvisational segments within their planned routines.\n\nAfter forming in 1946, they quickly rose to national prominence, first with their popular nightclub act, then as stars of their NBC radio program \"The Martin and Lewis Show\". The two made appearances on early live television on their June 20, 1948 debut broadcast on \"Toast of the Town\" (later renamed as \"The Ed Sullivan Show\" on September 25, 1955) on CBS.\nThis was followed by a guest stint on \"The Milton Berle Show\", then their appearance on NBC's \"Welcome Aboard\" on October 3, 1948.\n\nIn 1950, Martin and Lewis signed with NBC to be one of a series of weekly rotating hosts of \"The Colgate Comedy Hour\", a live Sunday evening broadcast. Lewis, writer for the team's nightclub act, hired Norman Lear and Ed Simmons as regular writers for their \"Comedy Hour\" material. Their \"Comedy Hour\" shows consisted of stand-up dialogue, song and dance from their nightclub act and movies, backed by Dick Stabile's big band, slapstick and satirical sketch comedy, Martin's solo songs, and Lewis' solo pantomimes or physical numbers.\n\nMartin and Lewis often broke character, ad-libbing and breaking the fourth wall. While not completely capturing the orchestrated mayhem of their nightclub act, the \"Comedy Hour\" displayed charismatic energy between the team and established their popularity nationwide. By 1951, with an appearance at the Paramount Theater, they were a cultural phenomenon, attracting crowds rivaled only by Frank Sinatra earlier and later by Elvis Presley and The Beatles. The duo began their film careers at Paramount Pictures as ensemble players, in a 1949 film adaptation of the radio series \"My Friend Irma\" and its sequel \"My Friend Irma Goes West\" (1950).\n\nSoon after, Martin and Lewis starred in their own vehicles in 14 new movies, \"At War with the Army\" (1950), \"That's My Boy\" (1951), \"Sailor Beware\" (1952), \"Jumping Jacks\" (1952), \"The Stooge\" (1952), \"Scared Stiff\" (1953), \"The Caddy\" (1953), \"Money from Home\" (1953), \"Living It Up\" (1954), \"3 Ring Circus\" (1954), \"You're Never Too Young\" (1955), \"Artists and Models\" (1955), \"Pardners\" (1956) and \"Hollywood or Bust\" (1956), all produced by Hal B. Wallis.\n\nIn 1952, Martin and Lewis appeared on Bing Crosby and Bob Hope's Olympic Fund Telethon, then cameo starred in \"Road to Bali\" (1952). Hope and Crosby would do the same in Lewis and Martin's \"Scared Stiff\" a year later. Attesting to the duo's popularity, DC Comics published \"The Adventures of Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis\" from 1952 to 1957. In 1954, the team appeared on episode 191 of \"What's My Line?\" as mystery guests, appeared on the 27th annual Academy Awards in 1955 and appeared on \"The Steve Allen Show\" and \"The Today Show\" in 1956.\n\nThe boys' films were reliable financial successes for Paramount and hugely popular with audiences, in later years, both Lewis and Martin admitted frustration, and were critical of Wallis for his formulaic and trite film choices, restricting them to narrow, repetitive roles. As Martin's roles in their films became less important over time and Lewis receiving the majority of critical acclaim, the partnership came under strain. Martin's participation became an embarrassment in 1954 when \"Look\" magazine published a publicity photo of the team for the magazine cover but cropped Martin out. \n\nThe partnership ended with their final nightclub act on July 24, 1956 (exactly 10 years to the day of their debut as a duo). Both Martin and Lewis went on to highly successful solo careers, and neither would comment on the split nor consider a reunion. However, they would occasionally be seen at the same public events, though never together. On two occasions, Martin invited Lewis on stage, in 1958 and 1961, but the split was too serious for them to reconcile. Sinatra surprised Lewis by bringing Martin on stage on the MDA telethon in September 1976 and in 1989, Lewis attended Martin's 72nd birthday.\n\nAfter his partnership with Martin ended in 1956, Lewis and his wife Patty took a vacation in Las Vegas to consider the direction of his career. He felt his life was in a crisis state: \"I was unable to put one foot in front of the other with any confidence. I was completely unnerved to be alone\". While there, he received an urgent request from his friend Sid Luft, who was Judy Garland's husband and manager, saying that she couldn't perform that night in Las Vegas because of strep throat, and asking Lewis to fill in.\n\nLewis had not sung alone on stage since he was five years old, twenty-five years before, but he appeared before the audience of a thousand nonetheless, delivering jokes and clowning with the audience while Garland sat off-stage, watching. He then sang a rendition of a song he'd learned as a child, \"Rock-a-Bye Your Baby with a Dixie Melody\" along with \"Come Rain or Come Shine.\" Lewis recalled, \"When I was done, the place exploded. I walked off the stage knowing I could make it on my own\".\n\nAt his wife's pleading, Lewis used his own money to record the songs on a single. Record company Decca Records heard it, liked it and insisted he record an album for them. The single of \"Rock-a-Bye Your Baby\" went to #10 and the album \"Jerry Lewis Just Sings\" went to #3 on the \"Billboard\" charts, staying near the top for four months and selling a million and a half copies.\n\nWith the success of that album he recorded the additional albums \"More Jerry Lewis\" (an EP of songs from this release was released as \"Somebody Loves Me\"), and \"Jerry Lewis Sings Big Songs For Little People\" (later reissued with fewer tracks as \"Jerry Lewis Sings For Children\"). Non-album singles were released, and \"It All Depends On You\", hit the charts in April and May 1957, but peaked at only #68. Further singles were recorded and released by Lewis into the mid-1960s.\n\nBut these were not Lewis's first foray into recording, nor his first appearance on the hit charts. During his partnership with Martin, they made several recordings together, charting at #22 in 1948 with the 1920s chestnut \"That Certain Party\" and later mostly re-recording songs highlighted in their films. Also during the time of their partnership, but without Martin, he recorded numerous novelty-comedy numbers for adults as well as records specifically intended for the children's market.\n\nHaving proven he could sing and do live shows, he began performing regularly at the Sands Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas, beginning in late 1956, which marked a turning point in his life and career. The Sands signed him for five years, to perform six weeks each year and paid him the same amount they had paid Martin and Lewis as a team. The critics gave him positive reviews: \"Jerry was wonderful. He has proved that he can be a success by himself,\" wrote one. He continued with club performances in Miami, New York, Chicago and Washington.\n\nSuch live performances became a staple of his career and over the years he performed at casinos, theaters and state fairs coast-to-coast. In February 1957, he followed Garland at the Palace Theater in New York and Martin called on the phone during this period to wish him the best of luck. \"I've never been happier,\" said Lewis. \"I have peace of mind for the first time.\" Lewis established himself as a solo act on TV starting with the first of six appearances on \"What's My Line?\" from 1956 to 1966.\n\nHe guest appeared on both \"Tonight Starring Jack Paar\" and \"The Ed Sullivan Show\" and beginning in January 1957, in a number of solo TV specials for NBC. He starred in his adaptation of \"The Jazz Singer\" for \"Startime\". Lewis hosted the Academy Awards three times, in 1956, 1957 and the 31st Academy Awards in 1959, which ran twenty minutes short, forcing Lewis to improvise to fill time. DC Comics, switching from Martin and Lewis, published a new comic book series titled \"The Adventures of Jerry Lewis\", running from 1957 to 1971.\n\nLewis would remain at Paramount, becoming a comedy star in his own right and his first solo movie was \"The Delicate Delinquent\" (1957), marking Lewis' debut as film producer. It originally had been planned as the next Martin and Lewis film. He and Martin had made two films with director Frank Tashlin, whose background as a \"Looney Tunes\" cartoon director suited Lewis' brand of humor. After starring in \"The Sad Sack\" (1957), Lewis made more films with Tashlin starting with \"Rock-A-Bye Baby\" (1958) and \"The Geisha Boy\" (1958).\n\nLewis starred in \"Don't Give Up The Ship\" (1959) and then cameo appeared in \"Li'l Abner\" (1959). After his contract with Wallis ended, Lewis had several movies under his belt and was eager to flex his creative muscle. He was free to deepen his comedy with pathos, believing, \"Funny without pathos is a pie in the face. And a pie in the face is funny, but I wanted more.\" In 1959, a contract between Paramount and Jerry Lewis Productions was signed specifying a payment of $10 million plus 60% of the profits for 14 films over seven years.\n\nThis contract made Lewis the highest paid individual Hollywood talent to date and was unprecedented in that he had unlimited creative control, including final cut and the return of film rights after 30 years. Lewis' clout and box office were so strong (his films had already earned Paramount $100 million in rentals) that Barney Balaban, head of production at Paramount at that time, told the press, \"If Jerry wants to burn down the studio I'll give him the match!\"\n\nUsing the Fontainebleau Hotel in Miami as his setting — on a small budget, with a very tight shooting schedule — Lewis shot the film during the day and performed at the hotel in the evenings. Bill Richmond collaborated with him on many of the sight gags. Lewis later revealed that Paramount was not happy about financing a \"silent movie\" and withdrew backing. Lewis used his own funds to cover the movie's $950,000 budget.\n\nLewis followed \"\"The Bellboy\"\" by directing several more movies he co-wrote with Richmond, including \"The Ladies Man\" (1961), where Lewis constructed a three-story dollhouse-like set spanning two sound stages. The set was equipped with state of the art lighting and sound, eliminating the need for boom mics in each room.\n\nHis next feature \"The Errand Boy\" (1961), was one of the earliest films about moviemaking, utilizing all of Paramount's backlot and offices. Lewis then starred in his first special in three years \"The Wacky World of Jerry Lewis\". He appeared in an episode of \"Celebrity Golf\" followed by a guest spot on an episode of \"The Garry Moore Show\". He then starred in Tashlin's \"It's Only Money\" (1962).\n\nLewis took on as guest host on \"The Tonight Show\" during the transition from Jack Paar to Johnny Carson in 1962. His appearance on the show scored the highest ratings thus far in late night, surpassing other guest hosts and Paar. The three major networks began a bidding war, wooing Lewis for his own talk show, which debuted the following year. Lewis then directed, co-wrote and starred in the smash hit \"The Nutty Professor\" (1963).\n\nA parody of \"Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde\", it featured him as a socially awkward professor inventing a serum that turns him into a handsome but obnoxious ladies man. It is largely considered to be Lewis' finest and most memorable film (being selected in 2004 for preservation in the U.S. National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\"). Lewis then appeared in a cameo role in \"It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World\" (1963).\n\nHe starred next in Tashlin's \"Who's Minding the Store?\" (1963) and then hosted \"The Jerry Lewis Show\", a 13-week lavish, big-budget show for ABC, that aired from September to December in 1963. The show suffered in the ratings, beleaguered by technical and other difficulties, including the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, which left the country in a somber mood. Lewis co-wrote and starred in \"The Patsy\" (1964), his satire about the Hollywood star-making industry.\n\nHis last film collaboration with Tashlin was \"The Disorderly Orderly\" (1964), which Lewis not only starred in but executive produced. After that, he then directed, co-wrote and appeared in \"The Family Jewels\" (1965) about a young heiress who must choose among six uncles, one of whom is up to no good and out to harm the girl's beloved bodyguard who practically raised her. Lewis played all six uncles and the bodyguard. This Diamond Ring, a song sung by Lewis' son Gary Lewis and his band was featured in the film.\n\nIn 1965, Lewis was interviewed on \"The David Susskind Show\", then co-starred in \"Boeing Boeing\" (1965), his last film for Paramount, based on the French stage play. He received a Golden Globe nomination for this role. Lewis directed and appeared on an episode of \"Ben Casey\", an early dramatic role, appeared on \"The Andy Williams Show\" and \"Hullabaloo\" with his son Gary Lewis. In 1966, after 17 years, Lewis left Paramount, which changed ownership while its new executives declined to renew his 1959 profit sharing contract and went on to other movie studios.\n\nHe direct and starred in \"Three on a Couch\" (1966), then as guest on \"The Merv Griffin Show\" alongside Richard Pryor. Lewis starred in \"Way...Way Out\" (1966), appeared on \"The Sammy Davis Jr. Show\", then had cameos in \"Batman\", \"Laugh In\", was a panelist on \"Password\" and in a pilot for \"Sheriff Who\". Lewis returned with a new version of \"The Jerry Lewis Show\", this time as a one-hour variety show for NBC, which ran from 1967 to 1969. He would next direct and star in \"The Big Mouth\" (1967) and starred on \"Run For Your Life\".\n\nLewis made an appearance on \"The Danny Thomas Hour\", starred in \"Don't Raise the Bridge, Lower the River\" (1968) and then appear as a guest on \"Playboy After Dark\", surprising friend Sammy Davis Jr. in 1968. Lewis went on to star in and produce \"Hook, Line & Sinker\" (1969) and afterwards, guest starred in an episode of \"Jimmy Durante Presents the Lennon Sisters Hour\".\n\nIn 1970, Lewis guest appeared on \"The Red Skelton Show\", then contributed to some scripts for Filmation's animated show \"Will the Real Jerry Lewis Please Sit Down\". He later guest hosted \"The Mike Douglas Show\" and then directed an episode of \"The Bold Ones\". He made guest appearances on \"The Hollywood Palace\", \"The Engelbert Humperdinck Show\", \"The Irv Kupcinet Show\", \"The Linkletter Show\", \"The Real Tom Kennedy Show\" and \"A Christmas Night with the Stars\".\n\nLewis then directed and made his first offscreen voice performance as a bandleader in \"One More Time\" (1970), a sequel to the 1968 film \"Salt and Pepper\", at times turning stars Peter Lawford and Davis Jr. into something of an erstwhile faux Martin and Lewis. His next film was \"Which Way to the Front?\" (1970) and guest spots on \"The Carol Burnett Show\", \"The Rolf Harris Show\" and \"The Kraft Music Hall\" in 1971.\n\nLewis then directed and starred in the partly unreleased \"The Day the Clown Cried\" (1972), a drama set in a Nazi concentration camp. Lewis rarely discussed the film, but stated litigation over post-production finances and copyright prevented the film's completion and theatrical release. During his book tour for \"Dean and Me\" he also said a factor for the film's burial was that he was not proud of the effort.\n\nLewis explained his reason for choosing the project and the emotional difficulty of the subject matter in an interview with an Australian documentary film crew. A 31-minute version was shown on the German television station ARD, in the documentary Der Clown. It was later put on DVD and shown at Deutsches Filminstitute\n\nWithin historical context, the movie was the earliest attempt by an American motion picture director to address the subject of The Holocaust, preceding by thirteen years Claude Lanzmann's groundbreaking film \"Shoah\", and more than twenty years, Steven Spielberg's \"Schindler's List\" and \"Life is Beautiful\", dealing with similar themes. Significant speculation continues to surround the film. Following this, Lewis would take a break from the movie business for several years.\n\nIn 1973, Lewis was a guest on \"The Dick Cavett Show\" and \"NBC Follies\". He then appeared on \"Celebrity Sportsman\" in 1974. Next, Lewis appeared as guest on both \"Cher\" and \"Dinah!\" in 1975. Lewis then guested on an episode of \"Tony Orlando and Dawn\". Lewis surprised Sinatra and Martin after walking onto the Aladdin stage in Las Vegas during their performance and exchanged jokes for several minutes. Next, he starred in a revival of \"Hellzapoppin\" with Lynn Redgrave, but closed on the road before reaching Broadway. In 1979, he guest hosted as ringmaster of \"Circus of the Stars\".\n\nLewis guest hosted \"Saturday Night Live\" and also starred in \"Cracking Up\" a.k.a. \"Smorgasbord\" (1983) and \"Slapstick (Of Another Kind)\" (1984), then starred in two French films, \"To Catch a Cop\" a.k.a. \"The Defective Detective\" (1984) and \"How Did You Get In? We Didn't See You Leave\" (1984), both of which had their distribution under Lewis' control; Lewis stated that they would never be released in American movie theaters and on home media.\n\nHe then hosted a syndicated talk show for Metromedia, which was not continued beyond the scheduled five shows. In 1985, Lewis directed an episode of the Showtime series \"Brothers\". In 1986, Lewis appeared at the first Comic Relief, where he was the only performer to receive a standing ovation and after that, he was interviewed on \"Classic Treasures\". Lewis also starred in the ABC televised movie \"Fight For Life\" (1987).\n\nIn 1987, Lewis performed a second double act with Davis Jr. at Bally's in Las Vegas, then after learning the death of Martin's son Dean Paul Martin, he attended his funeral, which lead to a more substantial reconciliation with Martin. In 1988, Lewis hosted \"America's All-Time Favorite Movies\", then was interviewed by Howard Cosell on \"Speaking of Everything.\" He then starred in five episodes of the CBS program \"Wiseguy\".\n\nThe filming schedule of the show forced Lewis to miss the Museum of the Moving Image's opening with a retrospective of his work. In 1989, Lewis joined Martin on stage, for what would be Martin's final live performance, at Bally's Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas. Lewis wheeled out a cake on Martin's 72nd birthday, sang \"Happy Birthday\" to him and joked, \"Why we broke up, I'll never know\". Again, their appearance together made headlines. He then appeared in \"Cookie\" (1989).\nIn 1991, Lewis guest starred in and directed an episode of the FOX series \"Good Grief\". In 1992, Lewis had a cameo in \"Mr. Saturday Night\" (1992), appeared as a guest on \"The Arsenio Hall Show\", \"The Whoopi Goldberg Show\" and \"Inside The Comedy Mind\". Lewis did a three-part retrospective for The Disney Channel entitled \"Martin & Lewis: Their Golden Age of Comedy\", using previously unseen kinescopes from his personal archive, highlighting his years as part of a team with Martin and as a soloist.\n\nIn 1993, he was the first of a series of 'classic' comedians to guest star in \"Mad About You\", playing an eccentric billionaire. He appearanced on \"Larry King Live\" many times and co-starred in the film \"Arizona Dream\" (1993) as a car salesman uncle to as his nephew. Lewis then starred as the 'Comedy Legend' father of a young comic in \"Funny Bones\" (1995).\n\nLewis' role serves as the metaphorical pivot in 20th Century comedy, from slapstick anarchists to clever storytellers. Both \"Arizona Dream\" and \"Funny Bones\" were tongue-in-cheek roles for independent films. In 1995, realizing a lifelong ambition, Lewis made his Broadway debut, as a replacement cast member, in a revival of \"Damn Yankees\". Playing the devil, he was reportedly paid the highest sum in Broadway history at the time.\n\nHe performed in both the national and London runs of the musical. Lewis missed three performances of the live show in four-plus years, one being Martin's funeral. He was then interviewed by James Lipton on \"Inside the Actors Studio\". In 1996, Lewis served as executive producer of \"The Nutty Professor\" remake, starring Eddie Murphy. Lewis would next appear on the 12th annual American Comedy Awards in 1998.\n\nIn 2000, Lewis appeared as a guest on \"The Martin Short Show\", then on \"Russell Gilbert Live\" and executive produced \"\". In 2003, Lewis did guest appearances on \"Your World with Neil Cavuto\" and did a guest voice as Professor Frink's father in a \"Treehouse of Horror\" episode of \"The Simpsons\". He then made a cameo in \"Miss Cast Away and the Island Girls\" in 2004. In 2005, Lewis went on make guest appearances on \"Late Night with Conan O' Brien\" and \"Live with Kelly\".\n\nIn 2006, he guest starred in an episode of \"\" as Munch's uncle. Lewis sang and recorded the duet song \"Time After Time\" with Dean Martin's daughter, Deana Martin, for her album \"Memories Are Made of This\". In 2008, Lewis reprised his role of Prof. Kelp in an animated direct sequel to his 1963 film \"The Nutty Professor\", then appeared on the 81st Academy Awards in 2009.\n\nLewis starred in a small role in \"The Trust\" (2016) and a serious lead role in his final film \"Max Rose\" (2016), which premiered at the Cannes Film Festival. He was a guest on \"WTF with Marc Maron\" and in December, expressed interest in another movie. Lewis' last appearance was in an episode of \"Comedians in Cars Getting Coffee\".\n\nDuring production of \"The Bellboy\", Lewis pioneered the technique of using video cameras and multiple closed circuit monitors, which allowed him to review his performance instantly. This was necessary since he was acting as well as directing. His techniques and methods of video assist, documented in his book and his USC class, enabled him to complete most of his films on time and under budget since reshoots could take place immediately instead of waiting for the dailies.\n\n\"Man in Motion\", a featurette for \"Three on a Couch\", features the video system, named \"Jerry's Noisy Toy\" and shows Lewis receiving the Golden Light Technical Achievement award for its development. Lewis stated he worked with the head of Sony to produce the prototype. While he initiated its practice and use, and was instrumental in its development, he did not hold a patent. This practice is now commonplace in filmmaking.\n\nStarting in 1967, Lewis taught a film directing class at the University of Southern California in Los Angeles for a number of years. His students included George Lucas, whose friend Steven Spielberg sometimes sat in on classes. Lewis screened Spielberg's early film \"Amblin'\" and told his students, \"That's what filmmaking is all about.\" The class covered all topics related to filmmaking, including pre and post production, marketing and distribution and filming comedy with rhythm and timing.\n\nHis book \"The Total Film Maker\" (1971), was based on 480 hours of his class lectures. Lewis traveled to medical schools for seminars on laughter and healing with Dr. Clifford Kuhn and also did corporate and college lectures, motivational speaking and promoted the pain-treatment company Medtronic.\n\nWhile Lewis was popular in France for his duo films with Dean Martin and his solo comedy films, his reputation and stature increased after the Paramount contract, when he began to exert total control over all aspects of his films. His involvement in directing, writing, editing and art direction coincided with the rise of auteur theory in French intellectual film criticism and the French New Wave movement. He earned consistent praise from French critics in the influential magazines \"Cahiers du Cinéma\" and \"Positif\", where he was hailed as an ingenious auteur.\n\nHis singular \"mise-en-scène\", and skill behind the camera, were aligned with Howard Hawks, Alfred Hitchcock and Satyajit Ray. Appreciated too, was the complexity of his also being in front of the camera. The new French criticism viewed cinema as an art form unto itself, and comedy as part of this art. Lewis is then fitted into a historical context and seen as not only worthy of critique, but as an innovator and satirist of his time. Jean-Pierre Coursodon states in a 1975 Film Comment article, \"The merit of the French critics, auteurist excesses notwithstanding, was their willingness to look at what Lewis was doing as a filmmaker for what it was, rather than with some preconception of what film comedy should be.\"\n\nNot yet curricula at universities or art schools, Cinema Studies and Film theory were avant-garde in early 1960s America. Mainstream movie reviewers such as Pauline Kael, were dismissive of auteur theory, and others, seeing only absurdist comedy, criticized Lewis for his ambition and \"castigated him for his self-indulgence\" and egotism. \"The total film-maker, so admired in France, made Hollywood uncomfortable, since the system has always operated otherwise.\"\n\nAppreciation of Lewis became a misunderstood stereotype about \"the French\", and it was often the object of jokes in American pop culture. \"That Americans can't see Jerry Lewis' genius is bewildering,\" says N. T. Binh, a French film magazine critic. Such bewilderment was the basis of the book \"Why the French Love Jerry Lewis\". In response to the lingering perception that French audiences adored him, Lewis stated in interviews he was more popular in (Germany), Japan and Australia.\n\nLewis was also a world-renowned humanitarian, philanthropist and \"number one volunteer\" who supported fundraising for research into muscular dystrophy. In 1951, Lewis and Martin made their first appeal for the Muscular Dystrophy Association (formerly the Muscular Dystrophy Associations of America) in early December during the finale of \"The Colgate Comedy Hour\". In 1952, after another appeal, Lewis hosted New York area telethons until 1959 and in 1954, has fought Rocky Marciano in a boxing bout for MDA's fund drive.\nIn 1956, Lewis was named national chairman of the Muscular Dystrophy Association, then in late 1966, the live annual Labor Day event of \"The Jerry Lewis MDA Labor Day Telethon\" (also referred to as \"Jerry Lewis Extra Special Special\", \"Jerry Lewis Super Show\" and \"Jerry Lewis Stars Across America\") debuted in syndication and would air each year.\n\nThe first show aired on one TV station, New York-based WNEW. In 1968, Ed McMahon (announcer, second banana and sidekick to Johnny Carson on \"The Tonight Show\") began his involvement in the telethon, and co-anchored the event with Lewis every year until 2008. The program was seen on 150 local stations (known as the MDA \"Love Network\") throughout the United States.\n\nFor decades, the legendary broadcast originated from different locations including New York, Las Vegas and Hollywood and was the most successful fundraising event in the history of television. The show, with Lewis as its iconic host and emcee and help from a legion of top celebrities and entertainers, raised billions of dollars during the years. In 1977, Lewis was nominated for a Nobel Peace Prize for his work with the charity.\n\nIn its first year, the show raised over $1 million. By 1990, pop culture had shifted its view of disabled individuals and the telethon format. Lewis and the telethon's methods were criticized by disabled-rights activists who believed the show was \"designed to evoke pity rather than empower the disabled.\" The activists said the telethon perpetuated prejudices and stereotypes, that Lewis treated those he claimed to be helping with little respect, and that he used offensive language when describing them.\n\nLewis rebutted the criticism and defended his methods saying, \"If you don't tug at their heartstrings, then you're on the air for nothing.\"\n\nIn 1998, Lewis' telethon became the first ever to be viewed around the globe via internet simulcast by RealNetworks on MDA's website. He received a Governors Award in 2005 and the Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award in 2009, in recognition of his fight for the cause and his efforts for MDA. On August 3, 2011, it was announced that Lewis would no longer host the MDA telethons and that he was no longer associated with the Muscular Dystrophy Association\n\n\"Smile\", \"What the World Needs Now Is Love\" and \"You'll Never Walk Alone\" have been forever associated throughout the program's 44-year run. The first song served as the intro, the second for the timpani and tote board cues and the third to close the show. A tribute to Lewis was held during the 2011 telethon (originally was to be Lewis' final show bearing his name with MDA) and then on May 1, 2015, it was announced that in view of \"the new realities of television viewing and philanthropic giving\", the telethon was being discontinued.\n\nIn early 2016, Lewis broke a five-year silence during a special taped message at MDA's brand re-launch event at Carnegie Hall in New York City for the organization on its website in honor of its rebranding marking his first (and as it turned out, his final) appearance in support of MDA since his final telethon in 2010 and the end of his tenure as national chairman in 2011.\n\nLewis raised an estimated $2.6 billion in donations for the cause. MDA's website states, \"Jerry's love, passion and brilliance are woven throughout this organization, which he helped build from the ground up, courted sponsors for MDA, appeared at openings of MDA care and research centers, addressed meetings of civic organizations, volunteers and the MDA Board of Directors, successfully lobbied Congress for federal neuromuscular disease research funds, made countless phone calls and visits to families served by MDA.\n\nDuring Lewis' lifetime, MDA-funded scientists discovered the causes of most of the diseases in the Muscular Dystrophy Association's program, developing treatments, therapies and standards of care that have allowed many people living with these diseases to live longer and grow stronger.\" Over 200 research and treatment facilities were built with donations raised by the Jerry Lewis Telethons.\n\nLewis opened a camera shop in 1950, then in 1969, Lewis agreed to lend his name to \"Jerry Lewis Cinemas\", offered by National Cinema Corporation as a franchise business opportunity for those interested in theatrical movie exhibition. Jerry Lewis Cinemas stated that their theaters could be operated by a staff of as few as two with the aid of automation and support provided by the franchiser in booking film and other aspects of film exhibition. A forerunner of the smaller rooms typical of later multi-screen complexes, a Jerry Lewis Cinema was billed in franchising ads as a \"mini-theatre\" with a seating capacity of between 200 and 350.\n\nIn addition to Lewis's name, each Jerry Lewis Cinemas bore a sign with a cartoon logo of Lewis in profile. Initially 158 territories were franchised, with a buy-in fee of $10,000 or $15,000 depending on the territory, for what was called an \"individual exhibitor\". For $50,000, Jerry Lewis Cinemas offered an opportunity known as an \"area directorship\", in which investors controlled franchising opportunities in a territory as well as their own cinemas. The success of the chain was hampered by a policy of only booking second-run, family-friendly films.\n\nEventually the policy was changed, and the Jerry Lewis Cinemas were allowed to show more competitive movies. But after a decade the chain failed and both Lewis and National Cinema Corporation declared bankruptcy in 1980. In 1973, Lewis appeared on the 1st annual 20-hour Highway Safety Foundation telethon, hosted by Davis Jr. and Monty Hall. In 1990, Lewis wrote and directed a short film for UNICEF's \"How Are The Children?\" anthology exploring the rights of children worldwide. The eight-minute segment, titled \"Boy\", was about a young white child in a black world and being subjected to quiet, insidious racism, and outright racist bullying.\n\nIn 2010, Lewis met with seven-year-old Lochie Graham, who shared his idea for \"Jerry's House\", a place for vulnerable and traumatized children. Lewis and Graham entered into a joint partnership for an Australian and a U.S.-based charity and began raising funds to build the facility in Melbourne. On September 12, 2016, Lewis lent his name and star power to Criss Angel's HELP (Heal Every Life Possible) charity event.\n\nLewis kept a low political profile for many years, having taken advice reportedly given to him by President John F. Kennedy, who told him \"Don't get into anything political. Don't do that because they will usurp your energy\". Nevertheless, he campaigned and performed on behalf of both JFK and Robert F. Kennedy. Lewis was a supporter of the Civil Rights Movement. For his 1957 NBC special, Lewis held his ground when southern affiliates objected to his stated friendship with Sammy Davis Jr. In a 1971 \"Movie Mirror\" magazine article, Lewis came out against the Vietnam War, when his son Gary returned from service traumatized. He vowed to leave the country rather than send another of his sons.\n\nLewis once stated political speeches should not be at the Oscars. \"I think we are the most dedicated industry in the world. And I think that we have to present ourselves that night as hard-working, caring and important people to the industry. We need to get more self-respect as an industry\".\nIn a 2004 interview with The Guardian, Lewis was asked what he was least proud of, to which he answered, \"Politics\". Not his politics, but the world's politics – the madness, the destruction, the general lack of respect.\n\nHe lamented citizens' lack of pride in their country, stating, \"President Bush is my president. I will not say anything negative about the president of the United States. I don't do that. And I don't allow my children to do that. Likewise when I come to England don't you do any jokes about 'Mum' to me. That is the Queen of England, you moron.\" \"Do you know how tough a job it is to be the Queen of England?\"\n\nIn a December 2015 interview on EWTN's \"World Over\" with Raymond Arroyo, Lewis expressed opposition to the United States letting in Syrian refugees, saying \"No one has worked harder for the human condition than I have, but they're not part of the human condition if 11 guys in that group of 10,000 are ISIS. How can I take that chance?\" In the same interview, he criticized President Barack Obama for not being prepared for ISIS, while expressing support for Donald Trump, saying he would make a good president because he was a good \"showman\". He also added that he admired Ronald Reagan's presidency.\n\nIn 1998, at the Aspen U.S. Comedy Arts Festival, when asked which women comics he admired, Lewis answered, \"I don't like any female comedians.\" \"A woman doing comedy doesn't offend me but sets me back a bit.\" He later clarified his statements saying, \"Seeing a woman project the kind of aggression that you have to project as a comic just rubs me wrong.\" \"I cannot sit and watch a lady diminish her qualities to the lowest common denominator.\" Lewis explained his attitude as that of an older generation and said women are funny, but not when performing 'broad' or 'crude' humor.\n\nHe went on to praise Lucille Ball as \"brilliant\" and said Carol Burnett is \"the greatest female entrepreneur of comedy.\" On other occasions Lewis expressed admiration for female comedians Totie Fields, Phyllis Diller, Kathleen Freeman, Elayne Boosler, Whoopi Goldberg and Tina Fey. During the 2007 MDA Telethon, Lewis used the word \"fag\" in a joke, for which he apologized. Lewis used the same word the following year on Australian television. In 2017, Lewis invited the world's most influential minds of comedy to join him at the inaugural Legionnaires of Laughter.\n\nLewis wed Patti Palmer (later Lewis, née Esther Grace Calonico; born 1922), an Italian American singer with Ted Fio Rito, on October 3, 1944, and the two had six children together, five biological, Gary Levitch (later Lewis) (born 1946), Scott (born 1956), Christopher (born 1957), Anthony (born 1959), and Joseph (1964 – 2009), and one adopted, Ronald (born 1949). It was an Interfaith marriage; Lewis was Jewish and Palmer was Catholic. Palmer filed for divorce from Lewis in 1980, after 35 years of marriage, citing Lewis' extravagant spending and infidelity on his part, and it was finalized in 1983. All of Lewis' children and grandchildren from his marriage to Palmer were excluded from inheriting any part of his estate. While married to Palmer, Lewis openly pursued relationships with other women and gave unapologetic interviews about his infidelity, revealing his affairs with Marilyn Monroe and Marlene Dietrich to People in 2011. His eldest son, Gary, publicly called his father a \"mean and evil person\" and said that Lewis never showed him or his siblings any love or care.\n\nLewis' second wife was Sandra \"SanDee\" Pitnick, a stewardess who met Lewis after winning a bit part in his film, \"Hardly Working\". They were wed on February 13, 1983, in Key Biscayne, Florida and had one child together, an adopted daughter named Danielle (born 1992).\n\nDuring his marriage to Palmer, Lewis purportedly had an affair with model Lynn Dixon (née Esther Lynn Schaffel, born 1920), by whom he allegedly had an illegitimate daughter, Suzan Minoret (née Uchitel; born 1952). While Lewis never publicly denied or confirmed his relationship to Minoret, genetic testing performed in 2009 by professionals hired by Inside Edition determined there was more than an 88% likelihood that Minoret was Lewis' daughter. She was later adopted by her step-father and mother's second husband, nightclub owner and restaurateur Hy Jason Uchitel. According to Minoret, she met Lewis as an adult only once and after that meeting, Lewis' agent ordered her to not contact the entertainer again and her requests to visit him in the hospital were denied by staff.\n\nIn February 1994, a man named Gary Benson was revealed to have been stalking Lewis and his family. Benson subsequently served four years in prison.\n\nLewis suffered from a number of chronic health problems, illnesses and addictions related both to aging and a back injury sustained in a comedic pratfall. The fall has been stated as being either from a piano while performing at the Sands Hotel and Casino on the Las Vegas Strip on March 20, 1965, or during an appearance on \"The Andy Williams Show\". In its aftermath, Lewis became addicted to the painkiller Percodan for thirteen years. He said he had been off the drug since 1978. In April 2002, Lewis had a Medtronic \"Synergy\" neurostimulator implanted in his back, which helped reduce the discomfort. He was one of the company's leading spokesmen.\n\nLewis suffered numerous heart problems throughout his life; he revealed in the 2011 documentary \"Method to the Madness of Jerry Lewis,\" that he suffered his first heart attack at age 34 while filming \"Cinderfella\" in 1960. In December 1982, he had another heart attack. Several months later, in February 1983, Lewis underwent emergency open-heart double-bypass surgery. En route to San Diego from New York City on a cross-country commercial airline flight on June 11, 2006, Lewis suffered another heart attack. It was discovered that he had pneumonia, as well as a severely damaged heart. He underwent a cardiac catheterization days after the heart attack, and two stents were inserted into one of his coronary arteries, which was 90 percent blocked. The surgery resulted in increased blood flow to his heart and allowed him to continue his rebound from earlier lung problems. Having the cardiac catheterization meant canceling several major events from his schedule, but Lewis fully recuperated in a matter of weeks.\n\nIn 1999, Lewis' Australian tour was cut short when he had to be hospitalized in Darwin with viral meningitis. He was ill for more than five months. It was reported in the Australian press that he had failed to pay his medical bills. However, Lewis maintained that the payment confusion was the fault of his health insurer. The resulting negative publicity caused him to sue his insurer for US$100 million.\n\nIn addition to his decades-long heart problems, Lewis had prostate cancer, type 1 diabetes, and pulmonary fibrosis. Prednisone treatment in the late 1990s for pulmonary fibrosis resulted in considerable weight gain and a startling change in his appearance. In September 2001, Lewis was unable to perform at a planned London charity event at the London Palladium. He was the headlining act, and he was introduced but did not appear. He had suddenly become unwell, apparently with heart problems.\n\nHe was subsequently taken to the hospital. Some months thereafter, Lewis began an arduous, months-long therapy that weaned him off prednisone and he lost much of the weight gained while on the drug. The treatment enabled him to return to work. On June 12, 2012, he was treated and released from a hospital after collapsing from hypoglycemia at a New York Friars Club event. This latest health issue forced him to cancel a show in Sydney. In an October 2016 interview with \"Inside Edition\", Lewis acknowledged that he might not star in any more films, given his advanced age, while admitting, through tears, that he was afraid of dying, as it would leave his wife and daughter alone. In June 2017, Lewis was hospitalized at a Las Vegas hospital for a urinary tract infection.\n\nLewis died at his home in Las Vegas, Nevada, at 9:15 a.m. (PDT) on August 20, 2017, at the age of 91. The cause was end-stage cardiac disease and peripheral artery disease. In his will, Lewis left his estate to his second wife of 34 years, SanDee Pitnick, and their daughter, and intentionally excluded his sons from his first marriage as well as their descendants.\n\nFor almost two decades, from the late '40s to the mid-'60s, \"Lewis was a virtually unprecedented force in American popular culture.\" Widely acknowledged as a comic genius, Lewis influenced successive generations of comedians, comedy writers, performers and filmmakers. As Lewis was often referred to as the bridge from Vaudeville to modern comedy, Carl Reiner wrote after Lewis' death, \"All comedians watch other comedians, and every generation of comedians going back to those who watched Jerry on the \"Colgate Comedy Hour\" were influenced by Jerry. They say that mankind goes back to the first guy ... which everyone tries to copy. In comedy that guy was Jerry Lewis.\"\n\nLewis \"single-handedly created a style of humor that was half anarchy, half excruciation. Even comics who never took a pratfall in their careers owe something to the self-deprecation Jerry introduced into American show business.\" His self-deprecating humor can be found in Larry David or David Letterman.\n\nLewis' comedy style was physically uninhibited, expressive, and potentially volatile. He was known especially for his distinctive voice, facial expressions, pratfalls, and physical stunts. His improvisations and ad-libbing, especially in nightclubs and early television were revolutionary among performers. It was \"marked by a raw, edgy energy that would distinguish him within the comedy landscape.\" Will Sloan, of \"Flavorwire\" wrote, \"In the late '40s and early '50s, nobody had ever seen a comedian as wild as Jerry Lewis.\" Placed in the context of the conservative era, his antics were radical and liberating, paving the way for future comedians Richard Pryor, Steve Martin, Andy Kaufman, Paul Reubens, and Jim Carrey. Carrey wrote: \"Through his comedy, Jerry would stretch the boundaries of reality so far that it was an act of anarchy ... I learned from Jerry\", and \"I am because he was\".\n\nActing the bumbling and stammering 'everyman', Lewis used tightly choreographed, sophisticated sight gags, physical routines, verbal double-talk and malapropisms. \"You cannot help but notice Lewis' incredible sense of control in regards to performing—they may have looked at times like the ravings of a madman but his best work had a genuine grace and finesse behind it that would put most comedic performers of any era to shame.\" They are \"choreographed as exactly as any ballet, each movement and gesture coming on natural beats and conforming to the overall rhythmic form which is headed to a spectacular finale: absolute catastrophe.\"\n\nLewis' work, specifically his self-directed films, have warranted steady reappraisal. Richard Brody in \"The New Yorker\" said, Lewis was \"one of the most original, inventive, ... profound directors of the time.\" and \"one of the most skilled and original comic performers, verbal and physical, ever to appear on screen.\" Film critic and film curator for the Museum of Modern Art, Dave Kehr wrote in \"The New York Times\" of Lewis' \"fierce creativity\", \"the extreme formal sophistication of his direction\" and, Lewis was \". ... one of the great American filmmakers.\"\n\n\"Lewis was an explosive experimenter with a dazzling skill, and an audacious, innovatory flair for the technique of the cinema. He knew how to frame and present his own adrenaline-fuelled, instinctive physical comedy for the camera.\"\n\nLewis was in the forefront in the transition to independent filmmaking, which came to be known as New Hollywood in the late 1960s. Writing for the \"Los Angeles Times\" in 2005, screenwriter David Weddle lauded Lewis' audacity in 1959 \"daring to declare his independence from the studio system.\" Lewis came along to a studio system in which the industry was regularly stratified between players and coaches. The studios tightly controlled the process and they wanted their people directing. Yet Lewis regularly led, often flouting the power structure to do so.\nSteven Zeitchik of the LA Times wrote of Lewis, \"Control over material was smart business, and it was also good art. Neither the entrepreneur nor the auteur were common types among actors in mid-20th century Hollywood. But there Lewis was, at a time of strict studio control, doing both.\"\nNo other comedic star, with the exceptions of Chaplin and Keaton in the silent era, dared to direct himself. \"Not only would Lewis' efforts as a director pave the way for the likes of Mel Brooks and Woody Allen, but it would reveal him to be uncommonly skilled in that area as well.\" \"Most screen comedies until that time were not especially cinematic—they tended to plop down the camera where it could best capture the action and that was it. Lewis, on the other hand, was interested in exploring the possibilities of the medium by utilizing the tools he had at his disposal in formally innovative and oftentimes hilarious ways.\" \"In Lewis' work the way the scene is photographed is an integral part of the joke. His purposeful selection of lenses, for example, expands and contracts space to generate laughs that aren't necessarily inherent in the material, and he often achieves his biggest effects via what he leaves off screen, not just visually but structurally.\" \n\nAs a director, Lewis advanced the film comedy genre with innovations in the areas of fragmented narrative, experimental use of music and sound technology, and near surrealist use of color and art direction. This prompted his peer, filmmaker Jean Luc Godard to proclaim, \"Jerry Lewis ... is the only one in Hollywood doing something different, the only one who isn't falling in with the established categories, the norms, the principles. ... Lewis is the only one today who's making courageous films. He's been able to do it because of his personal genius\". Jim Hemphill for \"American Cinematheque\" wrote, \"They are films of ambitious visual and narrative experimentation, provocative and sometimes conflicted commentaries on masculinity in post-war America, and unsettling self-critiques and analyses of the performer's neuroses.\"\n\nIntensely personal and original, Lewis' films were groundbreaking in their use of dark humor for psychological exploration. Justin Chang of the \"Los Angeles Times\" said, \"The idea of comedians getting under the skin and tapping into their deepest, darkest selves is no longer especially novel, but it was far from a universally accepted notion when Lewis first took the spotlight. Few comedians before him had so brazenly turned arrested development into art, or held up such a warped fun house mirror to American identity in its loudest, ugliest, vulgarest excesses. Fewer still had advanced the still-radical notion that comedy doesn't always have to be funny, just fearless, in order to strike a nerve\".\n\nBefore 1960, Hollywood comedies were screwball or farce. Lewis, from his earliest 'home movies, such as \"How to Smuggle a Hernia Across the Border\", made in his playhouse in the early 1950s, was one of the first to introduce satire as a full-length film. This \"sharp-eyed\" satire continued in his mature work, commenting on the cult of celebrity, the machinery of 'fame', and \"the dilemma of being true to oneself while also fitting into polite society.\" Stephen Dalton in \"The Hollywood Reporter\" wrote, Lewis had \"an agreeably bitter streak, offering self-lacerating insights into celebrity culture which now look strikingly modern. Even post-modern in places.\" Speaking of \"The King of Comedy\", \"More contemporary satirists like Garry Shandling, Steve Coogan and Ricky Gervais owe at least some of their self-deconstructing chops to Lewis' generously unappetizing turn in Scorsese's cult classic.\"\n\nLewis was an early master of deconstruction to enhance comedy. From the first \"Comedy Hour\"s he exposed the artifice of on-stage performance by acknowledging the lens, sets, malfunctioning props, failed jokes, and tricks of production. As Jonathan Rosenbaum wrote: Lewis had \"the impulse to deconstruct and even demolish the fictional \"givens\" of any particular sketch, including those that he might have dreamed up himself, a kind of perpetual auto-destruction that becomes an essential part of his filmmaking as he steadily gains more control over the writing and direction of his features.\" His self directed films abound in behind-the-scene reveals, demystifying movie-making. Daniel Fairfax writes in \"Deconstructing Jerry: Lewis as a Director\", \"Lewis deconstructs the very functioning of the joke itself\". ... quoting Chris Fujiwara, \"\"The Patsy\" is a film so radical that it makes comedy out of the situation of a comedian who isn't funny.\" The final scene of \"The Patsy\" is famous for revealing to the audience the movie as a movie, and Lewis as actor/director. Lewis wrote in \"The Total Filmmaker\", his belief in breaking the fourth wall, actors looking directly into the camera, despite industry norms. More contemporary comedies such as \"The Larry Sanders Show\", \"Curb Your Enthusiasm\", and \"The Office\" continue this method.\n\nRobert DeNiro and Sandra Bernhard (both of whom starred with Lewis in \"The King of Comedy\") reflected on his death, Bernhard said, \"It was one of the great experiences of my career, he was tough but one of a kind\". De Niro said, \"Jerry was a pioneer in comedy and film. And he was a friend. I was fortunate to have seen him a few times over the past couple of years. Even at 91, he didn't miss a beat ... or a punchline. You'll be missed.\" There was also a New York Friars Club roast in honor of Lewis with Sarah Silverman and Amy Schumer. Martin Scorsese recalls working with him on \"The King of Comedy\", \"It was like watching a virtuoso pianist at the keyboard\". Lewis was the subject of a documentary \"Jerry Lewis: Method to the Madness\".\n\nPeter Chelsom, director of \"Funny Bones\" wrote, \"Working with him was a masterclass in comic acting – and in charm. From the outset he was generous.\" \"There's a very thin line between a talent for being funny and being a great actor. Jerry Lewis epitomized that. Jerry embodied the term \"funny bones\": a way of differentiating between comedians who \"tell\" funny and those who \"are\" funny.\" Director Daniel Noah recalling his relationship with Lewis during production of \"Max Rose\" wrote, \"He was kind and loving and patient and limitlessly generous with his genius. He was unbelievably complicated and shockingly self-aware.\"\n\nActor and comedian Jeffrey Tambor wrote after Lewis' death, \"You invented the whole thing. Thank you doesn't even get close.\"\n\nThere have been numerous retrospectives of Lewis' films in the U.S. and abroad, most notably \"Jerry Lewis: A Film and Television Retrospective\" at Museum of the Moving Image, the 2013 Viennale, the 2016 Melbourne International Film Festival, \"The Innovator: Jerry Lewis at Paramount\", at American Cinematheque in Los Angeles, and \"Happy Birthday Mr. Lewis: The Kid Turns 90\", at MOMA.\nLewis is one of the few performers to have touched every aspect of 20th Century American entertainment, appearing in vaudeville, burlesque, the 'borsht belt', nightclubs, radio, Classical Hollywood Cinema (The 'Golden Age'), Las Vegas, television: variety, drama, sit-coms and talk shows, Broadway and independent films.\n\nOn August 21, 2017, multiple hotel marquees on the Las Vegas Strip honored Lewis with a coordinated video display of images of his career as a Las Vegas performer and resident. From 1949, as part of Martin and Lewis, and from 1956 as a solo, Lewis was a casino showroom headliner, playing numerous dates over the decades. It was also the home for the annual Labor Day MDA telethon.\n\nOn June 25, 2019, \"The New York Times Magazine\" listed Jerry Lewis among hundreds of artists whose material was reportedly destroyed in the 2008 Universal fire.\n\nBetween 1952 and 1971, DC Comics published a 124-issues comic book series with Lewis as one (later, the only) main protagonist, titled \"The Adventures of Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis\". In \"The Simpsons\", the character of Professor Frink is based on Lewis' Julius Kelp from \"The Nutty Professor.\" In \"Family Guy,\" Peter recreates Lewis' 'Chairman of the Board' scene from \"The Errand Boy\". Comedian, actor and friend of Lewis, Martin Short satirized him on the series \"SCTV\" in the sketches \"The Nutty Lab Assistant\", \"Martin Scorsese presents Jerry Lewis Live on the Champs Elysees!\", \"The Tender Fella\", and \"Scenes From an Idiots Marriage\", as well as on \"Saturday Night Live\"s \"Celebrity Jeopardy!\".\n\nAlso on \"SNL\", the Martin and Lewis reunion on the 1976 MDA Telethon is reported by Chevy Chase on \"Weekend Update\". Comedians Eddie Murphy and Joe Piscopo both parodied Lewis when he hosted SNL in 1983. Piscopo also channeled Jerry Lewis while performing as a 20th-century stand-up comedian in \"\"; in the second-season episode \"The Outrageous Okona\", Piscopo's Holodeck character, The Comic, tutors android Lieutenant Commander Data on humor and comedy. Comedian and actor Jim Carrey satirized Lewis on \"In Living Color\" in the sketch \"Jheri's Kids Telethon\". Carrey had an uncredited cameo playing Lewis in the series \"Buffalo Bill\" on the episode \"Jerry Lewis Week\". He also played Lewis, with impersonator Rich Little as Dean Martin, on stage. Actor Sean Hayes portrayed Lewis in the made-for-TV movie \"Martin and Lewis\", with Jeremy Northam as Dean Martin. Actor Kevin Bacon plays the Lewis character in the 2005 film \"Where The Truth Lies,\" based on a fictionalized version of Martin and Lewis. In the satiric novel, \"Funny Men\", about singer/wild comic double act, the character Sigmund \"Ziggy\" Blissman, is based on Lewis.\n\nJohn Saleeby, writer for \"National Lampoon\" has a humor piece \"Ten Things You Should Know About Jerry Lewis\".\nIn the animated cartoon \"Popeye's 20th Anniversary\", Martin and Lewis are portrayed on the dais. The animated series \"Animaniacs\" satirized Lewis in several episodes. The voice and boyish, naive cartoon character \"SpongeBob SquarePants\" is partially based on Lewis, with particular inspiration from his film \"The Bellboy\".\nIn 1998, The MTV animated show \"Celebrity Deathmatch\" had a clay-animated fight to the death between Dean Martin and Lewis. In a 1975 re-issue of \"MAD Magazine\" the contents of Lewis' wallet is satirized in their on-going feature \"Celebrities' Wallets\".\n\nLewis, and Martin & Lewis, as himself or his films, have been referenced by directors and performers of differing genres spanning decades, including, Blake Edwards's \"Breakfast at Tiffany's\" (1960), Andy Warhol's Soap Opera (1964), John Frankenheimer's \"I Walk the Line\" (1970), Francis Ford Coppola's \"The Godfather\" (1972), Randal Kleiser's \"Grease\" (1978), Rainer Werner Fassbinder's \"In a Year of 13 Moons\" (1978), Quentin Tarantino's Four Rooms (1995), Martin Scorsese's \"Gangs of New York\" (2002), Hitchcock (2012), Ben Stiller's \"The Secret Life of Walter Mitty\" (2013), Jay Roach's \"Trumbo\" (2015), \"The Comedians\" (2015), \"Baskets\" (2016) and \"The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel\" (2017, 2018).\n\nSimilarly, varied musicians have mentioned Lewis in song lyrics including, Ice Cube, The Dead Milkmen, Queen Latifah, and Frank Zappa. The hip hop music band Beastie Boys have an unreleased single \"The Jerry Lewis\", which they mention, and danced to, on stage in Asheville, North Carolina in 2009. In their film \"Paul's Boutique — A Visual Companion\", clips from \"The Nutty Professor\" play to . In 1986, the comedy radio show \"Dr. Demento\" aired a parody of \"Rock Me Amadeus\", \"Rock Me Jerry Lewis\".\n\nApple iOS 10 includes an auto-text emoji for 'professor' with a Lewis lookalike portrayal from \"The Nutty Professor\".\nThe word \"flaaaven!\", with its many variations and rhymes, is a Lewis-ism often used as a misspoken word or a person's mis-pronounced name. In a 2016 episode of the podcast \"West Wing Weekly\", Joshua Malina is heard saying \"flaven\" when trying to remember a character's correct last name. Lewis' signature catchphrase \"Hey, Laaady!\" is ubiquitously used by comedians and laypersons alike.\n\nSammy Petrillo bore a coincidental resemblance to Lewis, so much so that Lewis at first tried to catch and kill Petrillo's career by signing him to a talent contract and then not giving him any work. When that failed (as Petrillo was under 18 at the time), Lewis tried to blackball Petrillo by pressuring television outlets and then nightclubs, also threatening legal action after Petrillo used his Lewis impersonation in the film \"Bela Lugosi Meets a Brooklyn Gorilla\".\n\nBULLET::::- 1952 - Photoplay Award\nBULLET::::- 1952 - Primetime Emmy Award Nomination for Best Comedian or Comedienne\nBULLET::::- 1954 - Most Cooperative Actor, Golden Apple Award\nBULLET::::- 1960 - Two stars (one for film and one for television) on the Hollywood Walk of Fame\nBULLET::::- 1965 - Golden Laurel, Special Award – Family Comedy King\nBULLET::::- 1966 - Golden Light Technical Achievement Award for his 'video assist'\nBULLET::::- 1966 - Golden Globe Nomination for Best Actor in a Comedy or Musical\nBULLET::::- 1970 - Jerry Lewis Award for Outstanding achievement in being a \"Person\" and \"Performer\" for \"Which Way to the Front\"\nBULLET::::- 1970 - The Michael S. McLean Happy Birthday and Thank You Award for \"Which Way to the Front\"\nBULLET::::- 1977 - Nominated for a Nobel Peace Prize, for his work on behalf of the Muscular Dystrophy Association\nBULLET::::- 1978 - Greatest Public Service Benefiting the Disadvantaged, a Jefferson Awards annual award.\nBULLET::::- 1983 - British Academy Film Awards (BAFTA) nomination for Best Actor in a Supporting Role for \"The King of Comedy\"\nBULLET::::- 1984 - Chevalier, Ordre national de la Légion d'honneur, France\nBULLET::::- 1991 - Comic Life Achievement Award\nBULLET::::- 1991 - Induction into the Broadcast Hall of Fame\nBULLET::::- 1991 - Lifetime Achievement Award, The Greater Fort Lauderdale Film Festival\nBULLET::::- 1992 - Induction into the International Humor Hall of Fame\nBULLET::::- 1995 - Theatre World Award, for Outstanding Broadway Debut for \"Damn Yankees\"\nBULLET::::- 1997 - American Comedy Awards Lifetime Achievement Award\nBULLET::::- 1999 - Golden Lion Honorary Award\nBULLET::::- 2004 - Los Angeles Film Critics Association's Career Achievement Award\nBULLET::::- 2005 - Primetime Emmy Governor's Award\nBULLET::::- 2005 - Goldene Kamera Honorary Award\nBULLET::::- 2006 - Satellite Award for Outstanding Guest Star on \"Law and Order SVU\"\nBULLET::::- 2006 - Commandeur, Ordre national de la Légion d'honneur, France\nBULLET::::- 2009 - Induction into the New Jersey Hall of Fame\nBULLET::::- 2009 - Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award at the 81st Academy Awards\nBULLET::::- 2009 - International Press Academy's Nikola Tesla Award in recognition of visionary achievements in filmmaking technology for his \"video assist\".\nBULLET::::- 2010 - Chapman University Honorary Doctorate of Humane Letters during the 2010 MDA Telethon\nBULLET::::- 2011 - Ellis Island Medal of Honor\nBULLET::::- 2013 - Homage from the Cannes Film Festival, with the screening of Lewis' latest film \"Max Rose\"\nBULLET::::- 2013 - Honorary Member of the Order of Australia (AM), for service to the Muscular Dystrophy Foundation of Australia and those affected by the disorder\nBULLET::::- 2014 - \"Forecourt to the Stars\" imprints at Grauman's Chinese Theatre in Hollywood\nBULLET::::- 2014 - New York Friars Club renames clubhouse building The Jerry Lewis Monastery\nBULLET::::- 2015 - Casino Entertainment Legend Award\n\nBULLET::::- (ISBN is for the 2004 Mass Market Edition)\n\nBULLET::::- Annett Wolf (Director) (1972) \"The World of Jerry Lewis\" (unreleased)\nBULLET::::- Robert Benayoun (Director) (1982) \"Bonjour Monsieur Lewis\" (Hello Mr. Lewis)\nBULLET::::- Burt Kearns (Director) (1989) \"Telethon\" (Released in US, 2014)\nBULLET::::- Carole Langer (Director) (1996) \"Jerry Lewis: The Last American Clown\"\nBULLET::::- Eckhart Schmidt (Director) (2006) \"König der Komödianten\" (King of Comedy)*\nBULLET::::- Gregg Barson (Director) (2011). \"Jerry Lewis: Method to the Maddness\"\n\nBULLET::::- Also, Film Quarterly, Vol. 48, No. 1 (Autumn, 1994), pp. 12–26 University of California Press\nBULLET::::- Vol.23 Issue 1\nBULLET::::- Lamarca, Manuel (2017). Jerry Lewis. El día en el que el cómico filmó. Barcelona, Spain. Ediciones Carena.\n\nBULLET::::- Bright Lights Film Online Journal\nBULLET::::- Film School Rejects\nBULLET::::- la furia umana (Multilingual Film Quarterly)\nBULLET::::- ‘jerrython’ at MUBI\nBULLET::::- Museum of the Moving Image\nBULLET::::- An American Original: The RogerEbert.com Staff Remembers Jerry Lewis\nBULLET::::- Senses of Cinema\n\nBULLET::::- Jerry Lewis Interview video at Directors Guild of America\nBULLET::::- [http://www.movingimagesource.us/dialogues/view/316/ Jerry Lewis interview video with [[Peter Bogdanovich] [[Museum of the Moving Image]] Pinewood Dialogues]\nBULLET::::- Jerry Lewis Interview Podcast WTF with Marc Maron\nBULLET::::- Drum Solo Battle (1955) with [[Buddy Rich]] at DrummerWorld\n\n[[Category:1926 births]]\n[[Category:2017 deaths]]\n[[Category:Jerry Lewis*]]\n[[Category:American male comedians]]\n[[Category:20th-century American comedians]]\n[[Category:21st-century American comedians]]\n[[Category:American male film actors]]\n[[Category:American male television actors]]\n[[Category:American television personalities]]\n[[Category:American male stage actors]]\n[[Category:American male musical theatre actors]]\n[[Category:Nightclub performers]]\n[[Category:Vaudeville performers]]\n[[Category:20th-century American male actors]]\n[[Category:21st-century American male actors]]\n[[Category:Paramount Pictures contract players]]\n[[Category:American television directors]]\n[[Category:American film producers]]\n[[Category:American television producers]]\n[[Category:American male screenwriters]]\n[[Category:American male singer-songwriters]]\n[[Category:American singer-songwriters]]\n[[Category:Traditional pop music singers]]\n[[Category:American memoirists]]\n[[Category:Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award winners]]\n[[Category:Commandeurs of the Légion d'honneur]]\n[[Category:Honorary Members of the Order of Australia]]\n[[Category:Decca Records artists]]\n[[Category:Liberty Records artists]]\n[[Category:Jewish American comedians]]\n[[Category:Jewish American male actors]]\n[[Category:Jewish American screenwriters]]\n[[Category:Jewish singers]]\n[[Category:Jewish American musicians]]\n[[Category:Jewish activists]]\n[[Category:Male actors from Newark, New Jersey]]\n[[Category:Musicians from Newark, New Jersey]]\n[[Category:Singers from New Jersey]]\n[[Category:Songwriters from New Jersey]]\n[[Category:Writers from New Jersey]]\n[[Category:People from Irvington, New Jersey]]\n[[Category:Irvington High School (New Jersey) alumni]]\n[[Category:American people of Russian-Jewish descent]]\n[[Category:Cancer survivors]]\n[[Category:People with type 1 diabetes]]\n[[Category:American male comedy actors]]\n[[Category:Film directors from New Jersey]]\n[[Category:American male non-fiction writers]]\n[[Category:Screenwriters from California]]\n[[Category:Las Vegas shows]]"}
{"id": "15968", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15968", "title": "July 29", "text": "July 29\n\nBULLET::::- 587 BC – The Neo-Babylonian Empire sacks Jerusalem and destroys the First Temple.\nBULLET::::- 238 – The Praetorian Guard storm the palace and capture Pupienus and Balbinus. They are dragged through the streets of Rome and executed. On the same day, Gordian III, age 13, is proclaimed emperor.\nBULLET::::- 615 – Pakal ascends the throne of Palenque at the age of 12.\nBULLET::::- 904 – Sack of Thessalonica: Saracen raiders under Leo of Tripoli sack Thessaloniki, the Byzantine Empire's second-largest city, after a short siege, and plunder it for a week.\nBULLET::::- 923 – Battle of Firenzuola: Lombard forces under King Rudolph II and Adalbert I, margrave of Ivrea, defeat the dethroned Emperor Berengar I of Italy at Firenzuola (Tuscany).\nBULLET::::- 1014 – Byzantine–Bulgarian wars: Battle of Kleidion: Byzantine emperor Basil II inflicts a decisive defeat on the Bulgarian army, and his subsequent treatment of 15,000 prisoners reportedly causes Tsar Samuil of Bulgaria to die of a heart attack less than three months later, on October 6.\nBULLET::::- 1018 – Count Dirk III defeats an army sent by Emperor Henry II in the Battle of Vlaardingen.\nBULLET::::- 1030 – Ladejarl-Fairhair succession wars: Battle of Stiklestad: King Olaf II fights and dies trying to regain his Norwegian throne from the Danes.\nBULLET::::- 1148 – The Siege of Damascus ends in a decisive crusader defeat and leads to the disintegration of the Second Crusade.\nBULLET::::- 1565 – The widowed Mary, Queen of Scots marries Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley, Duke of Albany, at Holyrood Palace, Edinburgh, Scotland.\nBULLET::::- 1567 – James VI is crowned King of Scotland at Stirling.\nBULLET::::- 1588 – Anglo-Spanish War: Battle of Gravelines: English naval forces under the command of Lord Charles Howard and Sir Francis Drake defeat the Spanish Armada off the coast of Gravelines, France.\nBULLET::::- 1693 – War of the Grand Alliance: Battle of Landen: France wins a Pyrrhic victory over Allied forces in the Netherlands.\nBULLET::::- 1775 – Founding of the U.S. Army Judge Advocate General's Corps: General George Washington appoints William Tudor as Judge Advocate of the Continental Army.\nBULLET::::- 1818 – French physicist Augustin Fresnel submits his prizewinning \"Memoir on the Diffraction of Light\", precisely accounting for the limited extent to which light spreads into shadows, and thereby demolishing the oldest objection to the wave theory of light.\nBULLET::::- 1836 – Inauguration of the Arc de Triomphe in Paris, France.\nBULLET::::- 1848 – Irish Potato Famine: Tipperary Revolt: In County Tipperary, Ireland, then in the United Kingdom, an unsuccessful nationalist revolt against British rule is put down by police.\nBULLET::::- 1851 – Annibale de Gasparis discovers asteroid 15 Eunomia.\nBULLET::::- 1858 – United States and Japan sign the Harris Treaty.\nBULLET::::- 1864 – American Civil War: Confederate spy Belle Boyd is arrested by Union troops and detained at the Old Capitol Prison in Washington, D.C.\nBULLET::::- 1899 – The First Hague Convention is signed.\nBULLET::::- 1900 – In Italy, King Umberto I of Italy is assassinated by the anarchist Gaetano Bresci.\nBULLET::::- 1907 – Sir Robert Baden-Powell sets up the Brownsea Island Scout camp in Poole Harbour on the south coast of England. The camp runs from August 1 to August 9, 1907, and is regarded as the foundation of the Scouting movement.\nBULLET::::- 1914 – The Cape Cod Canal opened.\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Construction of the Link River Dam begins as part of the Klamath Reclamation Project.\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Adolf Hitler becomes leader of the National Socialist German Workers Party.\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Great Depression: In Washington, D.C., troops disperse the last of the \"Bonus Army\" of World War I veterans.\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Tōngzhōu Incident: In Tōngzhōu, China, the East Hopei Army attacks Japanese troops and civilians.\nBULLET::::- 1945 – The BBC Light Programme radio station is launched for mainstream light entertainment and music.\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Olympic Games: The Games of the XIV Olympiad: After a hiatus of 12 years caused by World War II, the first Summer Olympics to be held since the 1936 Summer Olympics in Berlin, open in London.\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Korean War: After four days, the No Gun Ri Massacre ends when the US Army 7th Cavalry Regiment is withdrawn.\nBULLET::::- 1957 – The International Atomic Energy Agency is established.\nBULLET::::- 1958 – U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower signs into law the National Aeronautics and Space Act, which creates the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA).\nBULLET::::- 1959 – First United States Congress elections in Hawaii as a state of the Union.\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Vietnam War: The first 4,000 101st Airborne Division paratroopers arrive in Vietnam, landing at Cam Ranh Bay.\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Vietnam War: Off the coast of North Vietnam the catches on fire in the worst U.S. naval disaster since World War II, killing 134.\nBULLET::::- 1967 – During the fourth day of celebrating its 400th anniversary, the city of Caracas, Venezuela is shaken by an earthquake, leaving approximately 500 dead.\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Greeks vote to abolish the monarchy, beginning the first period of the Metapolitefsi.\nBULLET::::- 1973 – During the Dutch Grand Prix driver Roger Williamson was killed in the race, after a suspected tire failure caused the car to pitch into the barriers at high speed.\nBULLET::::- 1976 – In New York City, David Berkowitz (a.k.a. the \"Son of Sam\") kills one person and seriously wounds another in the first of a series of attacks.\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Iran adopts a new \"holy\" flag after the Islamic Revolution.\nBULLET::::- 1981 – A worldwide television audience of over 700 million people watch the wedding of Charles, Prince of Wales, and Lady Diana Spencer at St Paul's Cathedral in London.\nBULLET::::- 1981 – After impeachment on June 21, Abolhassan Banisadr flees with Massoud Rajavi to Paris, in an Iranian Air Force Boeing 707, piloted by Colonel Behzad Moezzi, to form the National Council of Resistance of Iran.\nBULLET::::- 1987 – British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and President of France François Mitterrand sign the agreement to build a tunnel under the English Channel (Eurotunnel).\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Prime Minister of India Rajiv Gandhi and President of Sri Lanka J. R. Jayewardene sign the Indo-Sri Lanka Accord on ethnic issues.\nBULLET::::- 1993 – The Supreme Court of Israel acquits alleged Nazi death camp guard John Demjanjuk of all charges and he is set free.\nBULLET::::- 1996 – The child protection portion of the Communications Decency Act is struck down by a U.S. federal court as too broad.\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Astronomers announce their discovery of the dwarf planet Eris.\nBULLET::::- 2010 – An overloaded passenger ferry capsizes on the Kasai River in Bandundu Province, Democratic Republic of the Congo, resulting in at least 80 deaths.\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Two passenger trains collide in the Swiss municipality of Granges-près-Marnand near Lausanne injuring 25 people.\nBULLET::::- 2019 – Prison riot between rival gangs broke out in Brazil, at least 57 people have been killed.\n\nBULLET::::- 869 – Muhammad al-Mahdi, Iraqi 12th Imam (d. 941)\nBULLET::::- 996 – Fujiwara no Norimichi, Japanese nobleman (d. 1075)\nBULLET::::- 1166 – Henry II, French nobleman and king of Jerusalem (d. 1197)\nBULLET::::- 1356 – Martin the Elder, king of Aragon, Valencia and Majorca (d. 1410)\nBULLET::::- 1537 – Pedro Téllez-Girón, Spanish nobleman (d. 1590)\nBULLET::::- 1573 – Philip II, duke of Pomerania-Stettin (d. 1618)\nBULLET::::- 1580 – Francesco Mochi, Italian sculptor (d. 1654)\nBULLET::::- 1605 – Simon Dach, German poet and hymn-writer (d. 1659)\nBULLET::::- 1646 – Johann Theile, German organist and composer (d. 1724)\nBULLET::::- 1744 – Giulio Maria della Somaglia, Italian cardinal (d. 1830)\nBULLET::::- 1763 – Philip Charles Durham, Scottish admiral and politician (d. 1845)\nBULLET::::- 1797 – Daniel Drew, American businessman and financier (d. 1879)\nBULLET::::- 1801 – George Bradshaw, English cartographer and publisher (d. 1853)\nBULLET::::- 1805 – Alexis de Tocqueville, French historian and philosopher (d. 1859)\nBULLET::::- 1806 – Horace Abbott, American businessman and banker (d. 1887)\nBULLET::::- 1817 – Ivan Aivazovsky, Armenian-Russian painter and illustrator (d. 1900)\nBULLET::::- 1817 – Martin Körber, Baltic German pastor, composer, and conductor (d. 1893)\nBULLET::::- 1841 – Gerhard Armauer Hansen, Norwegian physician (d. 1912)\nBULLET::::- 1843 – Johannes Schmidt, German linguist and academic (d. 1901)\nBULLET::::- 1846 – Sophie Menter, German pianist and composer (d. 1918)\nBULLET::::- 1846 – Isabel, Brazilian princess (d. 1921)\nBULLET::::- 1849 – Max Nordau, Hungarian physician, author, and critic, co-founded the World Zionist Organization (d. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 1860 – Charles Cochrane-Baillie, 2nd Baron Lamington, English politician, 8th Governor of Queensland (d. 1940)\nBULLET::::- 1867 – Berthold Oppenheim, Moravian rabbi (d. 1942)\nBULLET::::- 1869 – Booth Tarkington, American novelist and dramatist (d. 1946)\nBULLET::::- 1871 – Jakob Mändmets, Estonian writer and journalist (d. 1930)\nBULLET::::- 1872 – Eric Alfred Knudsen, American author, lawyer, and politician (d. 1957)\nBULLET::::- 1874 – J. S. Woodsworth, Canadian minister and politician (d. 1942)\nBULLET::::- 1876 – Maria Ouspenskaya, Russian-American actress and acting teacher (d. 1949)\nBULLET::::- 1878 – Don Marquis, American author, poet, and playwright (d. 1937)\nBULLET::::- 1883 – Porfirio Barba-Jacob, Colombian poet and author (d. 1942)\nBULLET::::- 1883 – Benito Mussolini, Italian journalist and politician, 27th Prime Minister of Italy (d. 1945)\nBULLET::::- 1884 – Ralph Austin Bard, American financier and politician, 2nd Under Secretary of the Navy (d. 1975)\nBULLET::::- 1885 – Theda Bara, American actress (d. 1955)\nBULLET::::- 1887 – Sigmund Romberg, Hungarian-American pianist and composer (d. 1951)\nBULLET::::- 1888 – Vladimir K. Zworykin, Russian-American engineer, invented the Iconoscope (d. 1982)\nBULLET::::- 1891 – Bernhard Zondek, German-Israeli gynecologist and academic (d. 1966)\nBULLET::::- 1892 – William Powell, American actor and singer (d. 1984)\nBULLET::::- 1896 – Maria L. de Hernández, Mexican-American rights activist (d. 1986)\nBULLET::::- 1897 – Neil Ritchie, Guyanese-English general (d. 1983)\nBULLET::::- 1898 – Isidor Isaac Rabi, American physicist and academic, Nobel Prize Laureate (d. 1988)\nBULLET::::- 1899 – Walter Beall, American baseball player (d. 1959)\nBULLET::::- 1900 – Mary V. Austin, Australian community worker and political activist (d. 1986)\nBULLET::::- 1900 – Eyvind Johnson, Swedish novelist and short story writer, Nobel Prize Laureate (d. 1976)\nBULLET::::- 1900 – Teresa Noce, Italian labor leader, activist, and journalist (d. 1980)\nBULLET::::- 1900 – Don Redman, American composer, and bandleader (d. 1964)\nBULLET::::- 1904 – Mahasi Sayadaw, Burmese monk and philosopher (d. 1982)\nBULLET::::- 1904 – J. R. D. Tata, French-Indian pilot and businessman, founded Tata Motors and Tata Global Beverages (d. 1993)\nBULLET::::- 1905 – Clara Bow, American actress (d. 1965)\nBULLET::::- 1905 – Dag Hammarskjöld, Swedish economist and diplomat, 2nd Secretary-General of the United Nations, Nobel Prize Laureate (d. 1961)\nBULLET::::- 1905 – Stanley Kunitz, American poet and translator (d. 2006)\nBULLET::::- 1906 – Thelma Todd, American actress and singer (d. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 1907 – Melvin Belli, American lawyer (d. 1996)\nBULLET::::- 1909 – Samm Sinclair Baker, American author (d. 1997)\nBULLET::::- 1909 – Chester Himes, American-Spanish author (d. 1984)\nBULLET::::- 1910 – Gale Page, American actress (d. 1983)\nBULLET::::- 1911 – Foster Furcolo, American lawyer and politician, 60th Governor of Massachusetts (d. 1995)\nBULLET::::- 1911 – Archbishop Iakovos of America (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1913 – Erich Priebke, German war criminal, leader of the 1944 Ardeatine massacre (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1914 – Irwin Corey, American actor and activist (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Bruce R. McConkie, American colonel and religious leader (d. 1985)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Francis W. Sargent, American soldier and politician, 64th Governor of Massachusetts (d. 1998)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Budd Boetticher, American director, producer, and screenwriter (d. 2001)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Charlie Christian, American guitarist (d. 1942)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Rupert Hamer, Australian politician, 39th Premier of Victoria (d. 2004)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Rochus Misch, German SS officer (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Don Ingalls, American writer and producer (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Edwin O'Connor, American journalist and author (d. 1968)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Mary Lee Settle, American novelist, essayist, and memoirist (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Neville Jeffress, Australian businessman (d. 2007)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Richard Egan, American actor (d. 1987)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Chris Marker, French photographer and journalist (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – George Burditt, American screenwriter and producer (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Edgar Cortright, American scientist and engineer (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Jim Marshall, English businessman, founded Marshall Amplification (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Gordon Mitchell, American bodybuilder and actor (d. 2003)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Lloyd Bochner, Canadian-American actor (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Robert Horton, American actor (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Harold W. Kuhn, American mathematician and academic (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Ted Lindsay, Canadian ice hockey player, manager, and sportscaster (d. 2019)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Mikis Theodorakis, Greek composer\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Robert Kilpatrick, Baron Kilpatrick of Kincraig, Scottish physician, academic, and politician (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Harry Mulisch, Dutch author, poet, and playwright (d. 2010)\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Paul Taylor, American dancer and choreographer\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Kjell Karlsen, Norwegian pianist, composer, and bandleader\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Leslie Fielding, English diplomat\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Nancy Kassebaum, American businesswoman and politician\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Lou Albano, Italian-American wrestler, manager, and actor (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Colin Davis, English race car driver (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Robert Fuller, American actor and rancher\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Randy Sparks, American folk singer-songwriter and musician (The New Christy Minstrels)\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Peter Schreier, German tenor and conductor\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Elizabeth Dole, American lawyer and politician, 20th United States Secretary of Labor\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Daniel McFadden, American economist and academic, Nobel Prize Laureate\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Peter Jennings, Canadian-American journalist and author (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Jean Rochon, Canadian physician and politician\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Betty Harris, American chemist\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Winnie Monsod, Filipina economist and political commentator\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Jennifer Dunn, American engineer and politician (d. 2007)\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Goenawan Mohamad, Indonesian poet and playwright\nBULLET::::- 1941 – David Warner, English actor\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Doug Ashdown, Australian singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1943 – David Taylor, English snooker player and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Jim Bridwell, American rock climber and mountaineer\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Sharon Creech, American author and educator\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Mircea Lucescu, Romanian footballer, coach, and manager\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Ximena Armas, Chilean painter\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Stig Blomqvist, Swedish race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Neal Doughty, American keyboard player, songwriter, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Alessandro Gogna, Italian mountaineer and adventurer\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Diane Keen, English actress\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Aleksei Tammiste, Estonian basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Dick Harmon, American golfer and coach (d. 2006)\nBULLET::::- 1948 – John Clarke, New Zealand-Australian comedian, actor, producer, and screenwriter (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Leslie Easterbrook, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Jamil Mahuad, Ecuadorian lawyer and politician, 51st President of Ecuador\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Jenny Holzer, American painter, author, and dancer\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Susan Blackmore, English psychologist and theorist\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Dan Driessen, American baseball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Dean Pitchford, American actor, director, screenwriter, and composer\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Norman Blackwell, Baron Blackwell, English businessman and politician\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Joe Johnson, English snooker player and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Marie Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou, Greek politician\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Ken Burns, American director and producer\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Geddy Lee, Canadian musician\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Frank McGuinness, Irish poet and playwright\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Tim Gunn, American television host and actor\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Patti Scialfa, American musician\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Jean-Hugues Anglade, French actor, director, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Dave Stevens, American illustrator (d. 2008)\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Stephen Timms, English politician, Minister of State for Competitiveness\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Teddy Atlas, American boxer, trainer, and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Ronnie Musgrove, American lawyer and politician, 62nd Governor of Mississippi\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Faustino Rupérez, Spanish cyclist\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Liam Davison, Australian author and educator (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Viktor Gavrikov, Lithuanian-Swiss chess player (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Nellie Kim, Russian gymnast and coach\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Gail Dines, English-American author, activist, and academic\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Simon Nye, English screenwriter and producer\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Cynthia Rowley, American fashion designer\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Sanjay Dutt, Indian actor, singer, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Ruud Janssen, Dutch blogger and illustrator\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Dave LaPoint, American baseball player and manager\nBULLET::::- 1959 – John Sykes, English singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Didier Van Cauwelaert, French author\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Carl Cox, English DJ and producer\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Frank Neubarth, German footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Scott Steiner, American wrestler\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Vincent Rousseau, Belgian runner\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Hans-Holger Albrecht, Belgian-German businessman\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Jim Beglin, Irish footballer and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Julie Elliott, English politician\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Azeem Hafeez, Pakistani cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Alexandra Paul, American actress and producer\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Graham Poll, English footballer, referee, and journalist\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Jaanus Veensalu, Estonian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Luis Alicea, Puerto Rican-American baseball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Dean Haglund, Canadian actor, producer, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Adam Holloway, English captain and politician\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Stan Koziol, American soccer player (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Chang-Rae Lee, South Korean-American author and academic\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Xavier Waterkeyn, Australian author\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Woody Weatherman, American guitarist and songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Sally Gunnell, English hurdler and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Stuart Lampitt, English cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Martina McBride, American singer-songwriter and producer\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Gideon Henderson, English geologist and academic\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Paavo Lötjönen, Finnish cellist and educator\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Adele Griffin, American author\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Andi Peters, English journalist, actor, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1970 – John Rennie, Zimbabwean cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Andrea Philipp, German sprinter\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Wil Wheaton, American actor, producer, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Stephen Dorff, American actor and producer\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Denis Urubko, Kazakh mountaineer\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Yoshihiro Akiyama, Japanese mixed martial artist\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Lanka de Silva, Sri Lankan cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Corrado Grabbi, Italian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Jaanus Sirel, Estonian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Mike Adams, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Marina Lazarovska, Macedonian tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Karim Essediri, Tunisian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Ronald Murray, American basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Juris Umbraško, Latvian basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Ryan Braun, Canadian-American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Fernando González, Chilean tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Ben Koller, American drummer\nBULLET::::- 1980 – John Morris, Australian rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Fernando Alonso, Spanish race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Andrés Madrid, Argentinian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Troy Perkins, American soccer player\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Janez Aljančič, Slovenian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Jônatas Domingos, Brazilian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Allison Mack, American actress and criminal\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Jason Belmonte, Australian bowler\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Inés Gómez Mont, Mexican journalist and actress\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Alexei Kaigorodov, Russian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Jerious Norwood, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Elise Testone, American singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Oh Beom-seok, South Korean footballer\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Chad Billingsley, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Wilson Palacios, Honduran footballer\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Besart Berisha, Albanian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Okinoumi Ayumi, Japanese sumo wrestler\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Simon Santoso, Indonesian badminton player\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Tarjei Bø, Norwegian biathlete\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Grit Šadeiko, Estonian heptathlete\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Dale Copley, Australian rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Irakli Logua, Russian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Karen Torrez, Bolivian swimmer\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Nicole Melichar, American tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Liam O'Brien, Canadian ice hockey player\n\nBULLET::::- 238 – Balbinus, Roman emperor (b. 165)\nBULLET::::- 238 – Pupienus, Roman emperor (b. 178)\nBULLET::::- 451 – Tuoba Huang, prince of Northern Wei (b. 428)\nBULLET::::- 796 – Offa of Mercia (b. 730)\nBULLET::::- 846 – Li Shen, chancellor of the Tang Dynasty\nBULLET::::- 1030 – Olaf II of Norway (b. 995)\nBULLET::::- 1095 – Ladislaus I of Hungary (b. 1040)\nBULLET::::- 1099 – Pope Urban II (b. 1042)\nBULLET::::- 1108 – Philip I of France (b. 1052)\nBULLET::::- 1236 – Ingeborg of Denmark, Queen of France (b. 1175)\nBULLET::::- 1326 – Richard Óg de Burgh, 2nd Earl of Ulster (b. 1259)\nBULLET::::- 1504 – Thomas Stanley, 1st Earl of Derby (b. 1435)\nBULLET::::- 1507 – Martin Behaim, German-Bohemian geographer and astronomer (b. 1459)\nBULLET::::- 1573 – John Caius, English physician and academic (b. 1510)\nBULLET::::- 1612 – Jacques Bongars, French scholar and diplomat (b. 1554)\nBULLET::::- 1644 – Pope Urban VIII (b. 1568)\nBULLET::::- 1752 – Peter Warren, Irish admiral and politician (b. 1703)\nBULLET::::- 1781 – Johann Kies, German astronomer and mathematician (b. 1713)\nBULLET::::- 1792 – René Nicolas Charles Augustin de Maupeou, French lawyer and politician, Chancellor of France (b. 1714)\nBULLET::::- 1813 – Jean-Andoche Junot, French general (b. 1771)\nBULLET::::- 1833 – William Wilberforce, English philanthropist and politician (b. 1759)\nBULLET::::- 1839 – Gaspard de Prony, French mathematician and engineer (b. 1755)\nBULLET::::- 1844 – Franz Xaver Wolfgang Mozart, Austrian pianist, composer, and conductor (b. 1791)\nBULLET::::- 1856 – Robert Schumann, German composer and critic (b. 1810)\nBULLET::::- 1857 – Thomas Dick, Scottish minister, astronomer, and author (b. 1774)\nBULLET::::- 1887 – Agostino Depretis, Italian politician, 9th Prime Minister of Italy (d. 1813)\nBULLET::::- 1890 – Vincent van Gogh, Dutch painter and illustrator (b. 1853)\nBULLET::::- 1895 – Floriano Peixoto, Brazilian general and politician, 2nd President of Brazil (b. 1839)\nBULLET::::- 1900 – Umberto I of Italy (b. 1844)\nBULLET::::- 1908 – Marie Adam-Doerrer (b. 1838)\nBULLET::::- 1913 – Tobias Asser, Dutch lawyer and jurist, Nobel Prize Laureate (b. 1838)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Ernest William Christmas, Australian-American painter (b. 1863)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Sotirios Krokidas, Greek educator and politician, 110th Prime Minister of Greece (b. 1852)\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Didier Pitre, Canadian ice hockey player (b. 1883)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Nikolai Krylenko, Russian lawyer, jurist, and politician, Prosecutor General of the Russian SFSR (b. 1885)\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Joe Fry, English race car driver (b. 1915)\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Ali Sami Yen, Turkish footballer and manager, founded Galatasaray S.K. (b. 1886)\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Coen de Koning, Dutch speed skater (b. 1879)\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Hasan Saka, Turkish politician, 7th Prime Minister of Turkey (b. 1885)\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Ronald Fisher, English biologist and statistician (b. 1890)\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Leonardo De Lorenzo, Italian-American flute player and educator (b. 1875)\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Vean Gregg, American baseball player (b. 1885)\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Johnson Aguiyi-Ironsi, Nigerian general and politician, 2nd Head of State of Nigeria (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Adekunle Fajuyi, Nigerian colonel (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 1970 – John Barbirolli, English cellist and conductor (b. 1899)\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Norm Smith, Australian footballer and coach (b. 1915)\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Roger Williamson, English race car driver (b. 1948)\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Cass Elliot, American singer (b. 1941)\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Erich Kästner, German author and poet (b. 1899)\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Mickey Cohen, American gangster (b. 1913)\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Andrzej Bogucki, Polish actor, operetta singer, and songwriter (b. 1904)\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Herbert Marcuse, German sociologist and philosopher (b. 1898)\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Bill Todman, American screenwriter and producer (b. 1916)\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Robert Moses, American urban planner, designed the Northern State Parkway and Southern State Parkway (b. 1888)\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Harold Sakata, American wrestler and actor (b. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Vladimir K. Zworykin, Russian-American engineer, invented the Iconoscope (b. 1889)\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Luis Buñuel, Spanish actor, director, and screenwriter (b. 1900)\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Raymond Massey, Canadian-American actor and screenwriter (b. 1896)\nBULLET::::- 1983 – David Niven, English military officer and actor (b. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Fred Waring, American television host and bandleader (b. 1900)\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Bibhutibhushan Mukhopadhyay, Indian author, poet, and playwright (b. 1894)\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Bruno Kreisky, Austrian academic and politician, 22nd Chancellor of Austria (b. 1911)\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Michel Larocque, Canadian ice hockey player and manager (b. 1952)\nBULLET::::- 1994 – John Britton, American physician (b. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Dorothy Hodgkin, Egyptian-English biochemist and biophysicist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 1995 – Les Elgart, American trumpet player and bandleader (b. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Ric Nordman, Canadian businessman and politician (b. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Marcel-Paul Schützenberger, French mathematician and theorist (b. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Jason Thirsk, American singer and bass player (b. 1967)\nBULLET::::- 1998 – Jerome Robbins, American director, producer, and choreographer (b. 1918)\nBULLET::::- 2001 – Edward Gierek, Polish soldier and politician (b. 1913)\nBULLET::::- 2001 – Wau Holland, German computer scientist, co-founded Chaos Computer Club (b. 1951)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Foday Sankoh, Sierra Leonean soldier, founded the Revolutionary United Front (b. 1937)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Rena Vlahopoulou, Greek actress and singer (b. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Mike Reid, English comedian, actor, and author (b. 1940)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Michel Serrault, French actor (b. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Tom Snyder, American journalist and talk show host (b. 1936)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Marvin Zindler, American journalist (b. 1921)\nBULLET::::- 2008 – Bruce Edward Ivins, American scientist and bio-defense researcher (b. 1946)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – Charles E. Wicks, American chemist and academic (b. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Tatiana Egorova, Russian footballer and manager (b. 1970)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – August Kowalczyk, Polish actor and director (b. 1921)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Chris Marker, French photographer and journalist (b. 1921)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – James Mellaart, English archaeologist and author (b. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – John Stampe, Danish footballer and coach (b. 1957)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Christian Benítez, Ecuadorian footballer (b. 1986)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Peter Flanigan, American banker and civil servant (b. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Tony Gaze, Australian soldier, pilot, and race car driver (b. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Munir Hussain, Indian cricketer and sportscaster (b. 1929)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – M. Caldwell Butler, American soldier, lawyer, and politician (b. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Jon R. Cavaiani, English-American sergeant, Medal of Honor recipient (b. 1943)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Giorgio Gaslini, Italian pianist and composer (b. 1929)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – María Antonia Iglesias, Spanish journalist and author (b. 1945)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Péter Kiss, Hungarian engineer and politician (b. 1959)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Idris Muhammad, American drummer and composer (b. 1939)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Thomas R. St. George, American soldier and author (b. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Antony Holland, English-Canadian actor, director, and playwright (b. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Peter O'Sullevan, Anglo-Irish sportscaster (b. 1918)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Mike Pyle, American football player and sportscaster (b. 1939)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Franklin H. Westervelt, American computer scientist, engineer, and academic (b. 1930)\nBULLET::::- 2018 – Oliver Dragojević, a Croatian recording artist (b. 1947)\nBULLET::::- 2018 – Josip Peruzovic, Yugoslav-born American professional wrestler (b. 1947)\nBULLET::::- Christian feast day:\nBULLET::::- Lupus of Troyes\nBULLET::::- Martha of Bethany (Catholic, Anglican, and Lutheran Church)\nBULLET::::- Mary of Bethany\nBULLET::::- Olaf II of Norway\nBULLET::::- Simplicius, Faustinus and Beatrix\nBULLET::::- July 29 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)\nBULLET::::- Earliest day on which Somer's Day can fall, while August 4 is the latest; celebrated on Friday before the first Monday in August. (Bermuda)\nBULLET::::- International Tiger Day\nBULLET::::- Mohun Bagan Day (India)\nBULLET::::- National Anthem Day (Romania)\nBULLET::::- National Thai Language Day (Thailand)\nBULLET::::- Ólavsøka or Olsok, opening of the Løgting session. (Faroe Islands and the Nordic countries)\n\nBULLET::::- BBC: On This Day\nBULLET::::- Today in Canadian History\n"}
{"id": "15970", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15970", "title": "Johannes Agricola", "text": "Johannes Agricola\n\nJohann(es) Agricola (originally Schneider, then Schnitter) (April 20, 1494 – September 22, 1566) was a German Protestant Reformer in the Lutheran tradition during the Protestant Reformation. He was a follower and friend of Martin Luther, who became his antagonist in the matter of the binding obligation of the law on Christians.\n\nAgricola was born at Eisleben, whence he is sometimes called Magister Islebius. He studied at Wittenberg, where he soon gained the friendship of Martin Luther. In 1519 he accompanied Luther to the great assembly of German divines at Leipzig, and acted as recording secretary. After teaching for some time in Wittenberg, he went to Frankfurt in 1525 to establish the Protestant mode of worship. He had resided there only a month when he was called to Eisleben, where he remained till 1526 as teacher in the school of St Andrew, and preacher in the Nicolai church.\n\nIn 1536 he was recalled to teach in Wittenberg, and was welcomed by Luther. Almost immediately, however, a controversy, which had been begun ten years before and been temporarily silenced, broke out more violently than ever. Agricola was the first to teach the views which Luther was the first to stigmatize by the name Antinomian, maintaining that while non-Christians were still held to the Mosaic law, Christians were entirely free from it, being under the gospel alone. (See also: Law and Gospel). After he wrote an attack on Luther shortly after Luther had given him shelter when he was fleeing persecution, Luther had nothing further to do with him.\n\nAs a consequence of the bitter controversy with Luther, in 1540 Agricola left Wittenberg secretly for Berlin, where he published a letter addressed to Frederick III, Elector of Saxony, which was generally interpreted as a recantation of his obnoxious views. Luther, however, seems not to have so accepted it, and Agricola remained at Berlin.\n\nJoachim II Hector, Elector of Brandenburg, having taken Agricola into his favour, appointed him court preacher and general superintendent. He held both offices until his death in 1566, and his career in Brandenburg was one of great activity and influence.\n\nAlong with Julius von Pflug, bishop of Naumburg-Zeitz, and Michael Helding, titular bishop of Sidon, he prepared the Augsburg Interim of 1548, a proposed settlement under which Protestants would accept all Catholic authority, being permitted to retain the Protestant teaching on justification but otherwise compelled to accept Catholic doctrine and practice. From that time, he was an outcast among Protestant theologians. It was an irony that one of the most radical Reformers ended his life viewed as having capitulated to Catholics.\n\nHe endeavoured in vain to appease the Adiaphoristic controversy.\n\nHe died during an epidemic of plague on September 22, 1566 in Berlin.\n\nAgricola wrote a number of theological works. He was among the first to make a commentated collection of German proverbs. The first volume contains 300 proverbs and was published in 1529 (\"Drey hundert Gemeyner Sprichworter, der wir Deutschen vns gebrauchen, vnd doch nicht wissen woher sie kommen\"; first published in Low German the year before); the second volume contains 450 proverbs and was published in 1530 (\"Das ander teyl gemainer Tewtscher Sprichwörter, mit jhrer außlegung : hat fünffthalb hundert newer Wörtter\"). A revised edition containing the seven hundred and fifty proverbs of the previous two volumes was published in 1534 (\"Sybenhundert und fünfftzig teütscher Sprichwörter, verneüwert und gebessert\") and later republished with updated orthography, for example, in Wittenberg in 1592.\n\nIn 1836, Robert Browning used him as the subject of an early poetic soliloquy, \"Johannes Agricola in Meditation\".\n"}
{"id": "15971", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15971", "title": "July 12", "text": "July 12\n\nBULLET::::- AD 70 – The armies of Titus attack the walls of Jerusalem after a six-month siege. Three days later they breach the walls, which enables the army to destroy the Second Temple.\nBULLET::::- 927 – King Constantine II of Scotland, King Hywel Dda of Deheubarth, Ealdred of Bamburgh and King Owain of the Cumbrians accepted the overlordship of King Æthelstan of England, leading to seven years of peace in the north.\nBULLET::::- 1191 – Third Crusade: Saladin's garrison surrenders to Philip Augustus, ending the two-year siege of Acre.\nBULLET::::- 1470 – The Ottomans capture Euboea.\nBULLET::::- 1493 – Hartmann Schedel's \"Nuremberg Chronicle\", one of the best-documented early printed books, is published.\nBULLET::::- 1527 – Lê Cung Hoàng ceded the throne to Mạc Đăng Dung, ending the Lê dynasty and starting the Mạc dynasty.\nBULLET::::- 1543 – King Henry VIII of England marries his sixth and last wife, Catherine Parr, at Hampton Court Palace.\nBULLET::::- 1562 – Fray Diego de Landa, acting Bishop of Yucatán, burns the sacred books of the Maya.\nBULLET::::- 1576 – Mughal Empire annexes Bengal after defeating the Bengal Sultanate at the \"Battle of Raj Mahal\".\nBULLET::::- 1580 – The Ostrog Bible, one of the early printed Bibles in a Slavic language, is published.\nBULLET::::- 1691 – Battle of Aughrim (Julian calendar): The decisive victory of William III of England's forces in Ireland.\nBULLET::::- 1776 – Captain James Cook begins his third voyage.\nBULLET::::- 1789 – In response to the dismissal of the French finance minister Jacques Necker, the radical journalist Camille Desmoulins gives a speech which results in the storming of the Bastille two days later.\nBULLET::::- 1790 – The Civil Constitution of the Clergy is passed in France by the National Constituent Assembly.\nBULLET::::- 1799 – Ranjit Singh conquers Lahore and becomes Maharaja of the Punjab (Sikh Empire).\nBULLET::::- 1801 – British ships inflict heavy damage on Spanish and French ships in the Second Battle of Algeciras.\nBULLET::::- 1806 – Sixteen German imperial states leave the Holy Roman Empire and form the Confederation of the Rhine.\nBULLET::::- 1812 – The American Army of the Northwest briefly occupies the Upper Canadian settlement at what is now at Windsor, Ontario.\nBULLET::::- 1862 – The Medal of Honor is authorized by the United States Congress.\nBULLET::::- 1913 – Serbian forces begin their siege of the Bulgarian city of Vidin; the siege is later called off when the war ends.\nBULLET::::- 1917 – The Bisbee Deportation occurs as vigilantes kidnap and deport nearly 1,300 striking miners and others from Bisbee, Arizona.\nBULLET::::- 1918 – The Imperial Japanese Navy battleship \"Kawachi\" blows up at Shunan, western Honshu, Japan, killing at least 621.\nBULLET::::- 1920 – The Soviet–Lithuanian Peace Treaty is signed, by which Soviet Russia recognizes the independence of Lithuania.\nBULLET::::- 1943 – German and Soviet forces engage in one of the largest armored engagements of all time.\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion orders the expulsion of Palestinians from the towns of Lod and Ramla.\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Orlyonok, the main Young Pioneer camp of the Russian SFSR, is founded.\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Indian city Pune floods due to failure of the Khadakwasla and Panshet dams, killing at least two thousand people.\nBULLET::::- 1962 – The Rolling Stones perform their first concert, at London's Marquee Club.\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Pauline Reade, 16, disappears in Gorton, England, the first victim in the Moors murders.\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Riots begin in Newark, New Jersey.\nBULLET::::- 1971 – The Australian Aboriginal Flag is flown for the first time.\nBULLET::::- 1973 – A fire destroys the entire sixth floor of the National Personnel Records Center of the United States.\nBULLET::::- 1975 – São Tomé and Príncipe declare independence from Portugal.\nBULLET::::- 1979 – The island nation of Kiribati becomes independent from the United Kingdom.\nBULLET::::- 1998 – The Ulster Volunteer Force attacked a house in Ballymoney, County Antrim, Northern Ireland with a petrol bomb, killing the Quinn brothers.\nBULLET::::- 2006 – The 2006 Lebanon War begins.\nBULLET::::- 2007 – U.S. Army Apache helicopters engage in airstrikes against civilians in Baghdad, Iraq; footage from the cockpit is later leaked to the Internet.\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Syrian Civil War: Government forces target the homes of rebels and activists in Tremseh and kill anywhere between 68 and 150 people.\nBULLET::::- 2012 – A tank truck explosion kills more than 100 people in Okobie, Nigeria.\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Six people are killed and 200 injured in a French passenger train derailment in Brétigny-sur-Orge.\n\nBULLET::::- 100 BC – Julius Caesar, Roman politician and general (d. 44 BC)\nBULLET::::- 1394 – Ashikaga Yoshinori, Japanese shōgun (d. 1441)\nBULLET::::- 1468 – Juan del Encina, Spanish poet, playwright, and composer (probable; d. 1530)\nBULLET::::- 1477 – Jacopo Sadoleto, Italian cardinal (d. 1547)\nBULLET::::- 1549 – Edward Manners, 3rd Earl of Rutland (d. 1587)\nBULLET::::- 1628 – Henry Howard, 6th Duke of Norfolk (d. 1684)\nBULLET::::- 1651 – Margaret Theresa of Spain (d. 1673)\nBULLET::::- 1675 – Evaristo Felice Dall'Abaco, Italian violinist and composer (d. 1742)\nBULLET::::- 1712 – Sir Francis Bernard, 1st Baronet, Colonial governor of New Jersey and Massachusetts Bay (d. 1779)\nBULLET::::- 1730 – Josiah Wedgwood, English potter, founded the Wedgwood Company (d. 1795)\nBULLET::::- 1803 – Peter Chanel, French priest and saint (d. 1841)\nBULLET::::- 1807 – Thomas Hawksley, English engineer and academic (d. 1893)\nBULLET::::- 1813 – Claude Bernard, French physiologist and academic (d. 1878)\nBULLET::::- 1817 – Henry David Thoreau, American essayist, poet, and philosopher (d. 1862)\nBULLET::::- 1817 – Alvin Saunders, Territorial Governor and Senator from Nebraska (d. 1899)\nBULLET::::- 1821 – D. H. Hill, American general and academic (d. 1889)\nBULLET::::- 1824 – Eugène Boudin, French painter (d. 1898)\nBULLET::::- 1828 – Nikolay Chernyshevsky, Russian philosopher and critic (d. 1889)\nBULLET::::- 1849 – William Osler, Canadian physician and author (d. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 1850 – Otto Schoetensack, German anthropologist and academic (d. 1912)\nBULLET::::- 1852 – Hipólito Yrigoyen, Argentinian lawyer and politician, 19th President of Argentina (d. 1933)\nBULLET::::- 1854 – George Eastman, American businessman, founded Eastman Kodak (d. 1933)\nBULLET::::- 1855 – Ned Hanlan, Canadian rower, academic, and businessman (d. 1908)\nBULLET::::- 1857 – George E. Ohr, American potter (d. 1918)\nBULLET::::- 1861 – Anton Arensky, Russian pianist, composer, and educator (d. 1906)\nBULLET::::- 1863 – Albert Calmette, French physician, bacteriologist, and immunologist (d. 1933)\nBULLET::::- 1863 – Paul Drude, German physicist and academic (d. 1906)\nBULLET::::- 1868 – Stefan George, German poet and translator (d. 1933)\nBULLET::::- 1870 – Louis II, Prince of Monaco (d. 1949)\nBULLET::::- 1872 – Emil Hácha, Czech lawyer and politician, 3rd President of Czechoslovakia (d. 1945)\nBULLET::::- 1876 – Max Jacob, French poet, painter, and critic (d. 1944)\nBULLET::::- 1876 – Alphaeus Philemon Cole, American artist, engraver and etcher (d. 1988)\nBULLET::::- 1878 – Peeter Põld, Estonian scientist and politician, 1st Estonian Minister of Education (d. 1930)\nBULLET::::- 1879 – Margherita Piazzola Beloch, Italian mathematician (d. 1976)\nBULLET::::- 1879 – Han Yong-un, Korean poet (d. 1944)\nBULLET::::- 1880 – Tod Browning, American actor, director, and screenwriter (d. 1962)\nBULLET::::- 1884 – Louis B. Mayer, Russian-born American film producer, co-founded Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (d. 1957)\nBULLET::::- 1884 – Amedeo Modigliani, Italian painter and sculptor (d. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 1886 – Jean Hersholt, Danish-American actor and director (d. 1956)\nBULLET::::- 1892 – Bruno Schulz, Ukrainian-Polish author and painter (d. 1942)\nBULLET::::- 1895 – Kirsten Flagstad, Norwegian soprano (d. 1962)\nBULLET::::- 1895 – Buckminster Fuller, American architect and engineer, designed the Montreal Biosphère (d. 1983)\nBULLET::::- 1895 – Oscar Hammerstein II, American director, producer, and songwriter (d. 1960)\nBULLET::::- 1899 – E.D. Nixon, American civil rights leader (d. 1987)\nBULLET::::- 1902 – Günther Anders, German philosopher and journalist (d. 1992)\nBULLET::::- 1902 – Tony Lovink, Dutch politician; Governor-General of the Dutch East Indies (d. 1995)\nBULLET::::- 1902 – Vic Armbruster, Australian rugby league player (d. 1984)\nBULLET::::- 1904 – Pablo Neruda, Chilean poet and diplomat, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1973)\nBULLET::::- 1907 – Weary Dunlop, Australian colonel and surgeon (d. 1993)\nBULLET::::- 1908 – Milton Berle, American comedian and actor (d. 2002)\nBULLET::::- 1908 – Alain Cuny, French actor (d. 1994)\nBULLET::::- 1908 – Paul Runyan, American golfer and sportscaster (d. 2002)\nBULLET::::- 1909 – Joe DeRita, American actor (d. 1993)\nBULLET::::- 1909 – Motoichi Kumagai, Japanese photographer and illustrator (d. 2010)\nBULLET::::- 1909 – Fritz Leonhardt, German engineer, designed Fernsehturm Stuttgart (d. 1999)\nBULLET::::- 1909 – Herbert Zim, American naturalist, author, and educator (d. 1994)\nBULLET::::- 1911 – Evald Mikson, Estonian footballer (d. 1993)\nBULLET::::- 1913 – Willis Lamb, American physicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 2008)\nBULLET::::- 1914 – Mohammad Moin, Iranian linguist and lexicographer (d. 1971)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Emanuel Papper, American anesthesiologist, professor, and author (d. 2002)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Princess Catherine Ivanovna of Russia, (d. 2007)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Lyudmila Pavlichenko, Ukrainian-Russian soldier and sniper (d. 1974)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Luigi Gorrini, Italian soldier and pilot (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Satyendra Narayan Sinha, Indian statesman (d. 2006)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Andrew Wyeth, American artist (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Mary Glen-Haig, English fencer (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Vivian Mason, American actress (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Doris Grumbach, American novelist, memoirist, biographer, literary critic, and essayist\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Rusty Dedrick, American swing and bebop jazz trumpeter (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Pierre Berton, Canadian journalist and author (d. 2004)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Bob Fillion, Canadian ice hockey player and manager (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Paul Gonsalves, American saxophonist (d. 1974)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Randolph Quirk, Manx linguist and academic (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Beah Richards, American actress (d. 2000)\nBULLET::::- 1922 – Mark Hatfield, American soldier and politician, 29th Governor of Oregon (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – James E. Gunn, American science fiction author\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Faidon Matthaiou, Greek basketball player and coach (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Albert Lance, Australian-French tenor (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Roger Smith, American businessman (d. 2007)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Françoys Bernier, Canadian pianist, conductor, and educator (d. 1993)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Conte Candoli, American trumpet player (d. 2001)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Jack Harshman, American baseball player (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Harley Hotchkiss, Canadian businessman (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Alastair Burnet, English journalist (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Elias James Corey, American chemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Imero Fiorentino, American lighting designer (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Gordon Pinsent, Canadian actor, director, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Siti Hasmah Mohamad Ali, wife of the Prime Minister of Malaysia, Tun Dr. Mahathir Mohamad\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Eric Ives, English historian and academic (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Geeto Mongol, Canadian-American wrestler and trainer (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Rene Goulet, Canadian retired professional wrestler\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Monte Hellman, American director and producer\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Otis Davis, American sprinter\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Victor Poor, American engineer, developed the Datapoint 2200 (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Donald E. Westlake, American author and screenwriter (d. 2008)\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Thomas Charlton, American competition rower and Olympic champion\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Van Cliburn, American pianist and composer (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Satoshi Ōmura, Japanese biochemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Jan Němec, Czech director and screenwriter (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Bill Cosby, American actor, comedian, producer, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Mickey Edwards, American lawyer and politician\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Lionel Jospin, French civil servant and politician, 165th Prime Minister of France\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Robert McFarlane, American colonel and diplomat, 13th United States National Security Advisor\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Guy Woolfenden, English composer and conductor (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Ron Fairly, American baseball player and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Wieger Mensonides, Dutch swimmer\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Eiko Ishioka, Japanese art director and graphic designer (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Phillip Adams, Australian journalist and producer\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Arlen Ness, American motorcycle designer and entrepreneur\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Benny Parsons, American race car driver and sportscaster (d. 2007)\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Swamp Dogg, American R&B singer-songwriter and musician\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Roy Palmer, English cricketer and umpire\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Billy Smith, Australian rugby league player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Steve Young, American country singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Christine McVie, English singer-songwriter and keyboard player\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Paul Silas, American basketball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Simon Blackburn, English philosopher and academic\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Delia Ephron, American author, playwright, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Pat Woodell, American actress and singer (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Butch Hancock, American country-folk singer-songwriter and musician\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Gareth Edwards, Welsh rugby player and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Wilko Johnson, English singer-songwriter, guitarist, and actor\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Richard C. McCarty, American psychologist and academic\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Ben Burtt, American director, screenwriter, and sound designer\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Walter Egan, American singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Richard Simmons, American fitness trainer and actor\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Simon Fox, English drummer\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Rick Hendrick, American businessman, founded Hendrick Motorsports\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Eric Carr, American drummer and songwriter (d. 1991)\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Gilles Meloche, Canadian ice hockey player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Joan Bauer, American author\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Brian Grazer, American screenwriter and producer, founded Imagine Entertainment\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Cheryl Ladd, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Piotr Pustelnik, Polish mountaineer\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Jamey Sheridan, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Voja Antonić, Serbian computer scientist and journalist, designed the Galaksija computer\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Irina Bokova, Bulgarian politician, Bulgarian Minister of Foreign Affairs\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Philip Taylor Kramer, American bass player (d. 1995)\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Eric Adams, American singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Robert Carl, American pianist and composer\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Wolfgang Dremmler, German footballer and coach\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Timothy Garton Ash, English historian and author\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Jimmy LaFave, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Mel Harris, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Sandi Patty, American singer and pianist\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Mario Soto, Dominican baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Rick Husband, American colonel, pilot, and astronaut (d. 2003)\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Dave Semenko, Canadian ice hockey player and sportscaster (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1958 – J. D. Hayworth, American politician and radio host\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Tonya Lee Williams, English-Canadian actress and producer\nBULLET::::- 1959 – David Brown, Australian meteorologist\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Tupou VI, King of Tonga\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Karl J. Friston, English psychiatrist and neuroscientist\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Charlie Murphy, American actor and comedian (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Heikko Glöde, German footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Shiva Rajkumar, Indian actor, singer, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Julio César Chávez, Mexican boxer\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Luc De Vos, Belgian singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Joanna Shields, American-English businesswoman\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Dean Wilkins, English footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Gaby Roslin, English television host and actress\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Sanjay Manjrekar, Indian cricketer and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Robin Wilson, American singer and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Jeff Bucknum, American race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Annabel Croft, English tennis player and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Taiji, Japanese bass player and songwriter (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Richard Herring, English comedian and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Mac McCaughan, American singer and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1967 – John Petrucci, American singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Bruny Surin, Canadian sprinter\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Catherine Plewinski, French swimmer\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Lisa Nicole Carson, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Chantal Jouanno, French politician, French Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Alan Mullally, English cricketer and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Anne-Sophie Pic, French chef\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Jesse Pintado, Mexican-American guitarist (d. 2006)\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Aure Atika, Portuguese-French actress, director, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Lee Byung-hun, South Korean actor, singer, and dancer\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Joel Casamayor, Cuban American former professional boxer\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Andriy Kovalenco, Ukrainian-Spanish rugby player\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Loni Love, American comedian, actress, and talk show host\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Kristi Yamaguchi, American figure skater\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Travis Best, American basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Jake Wood, English actor\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Christian Vieri, Italian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Sharon den Adel, Dutch singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Stelios Giannakopoulos, Greek footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Gregory Shane Helms, American professional wrestler\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Phil Lord, American filmmaker\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Dan Boyle, Canadian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Anna Friel, English actress\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Tracie Spencer, American singer-songwriter and actress\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Neil Harris, English footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Steve Howey, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Brock Lesnar, American mixed martial artist and wrestler\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Francesca Lubiani, Italian tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Topher Grace, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Michelle Rodriguez, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Brooke Baldwin, American journalist and television news anchor\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Nikos Barlos, Greek basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Maya Kobayashi, Japanese journalist\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Kristen Connolly, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Adrienne Camp, South African singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Pradeepan Raveendran, Sri Lankan director, producer, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Antonio Cassano, Italian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Gareth Gates, English singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Jonathan Lewis, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Natalie Martinez, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Michael McGovern, Irish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Sami Zayn, Canadian professional wrestler\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Paulo Vitor Barreto, Brazilian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Gianluca Curci, Italian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Keven Lacombe, Canadian cyclist\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Ismael Londt, Surinamese-Dutch kickboxer\nBULLET::::- 1986 – 360, Australian rapper\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Didier Digard, French footballer\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Hannaliis Jaadla, Estonian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1986 – JP Pietersen, South African rugby player\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Simone Laudehr, German footballer\nBULLET::::- 1988 – LeSean McCoy, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Inbee Park, South Korean golfer\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Nick Palmieri, American ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Bebé, Portuguese footballer\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Rachel Brosnahan, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Chasen Shreve, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Salih Dursun, Turkish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1991 – James Rodríguez, Colombian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Bartosz Bereszyński, Polish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Kurt Capewell, Australian rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Kanako Momota, Japanese singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1995 – Luke Shaw, English footballer\nBULLET::::- 1995 – Jordyn Wieber, American gymnast\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Moussa Dembélé, French footballer\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Jordan Romero, American mountaineer\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Daniel Lawrence, English cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Malala Yousafzai, Pakistani-English activist, Nobel Prize laureate\nBULLET::::- 524 – Viventiolus, archbishop of Lyon (b. 460)\nBULLET::::- 783 – Bertrada of Laon, Frankish queen (b. 720)\nBULLET::::- 965 – Meng Chang, emperor of Later Shu (b. 919)\nBULLET::::- 981 – Xue Juzheng, Chinese scholar-official and historian\nBULLET::::- 1067 – John Komnenos, Byzantine general\nBULLET::::- 1441 – Ashikaga Yoshinori, Japanese shōgun (b. 1394)\nBULLET::::- 1441 – Kyōgoku Takakazu, Japanese nobleman\nBULLET::::- 1489 – Bahlul Lodi, sultan of Delhi\nBULLET::::- 1536 – Desiderius Erasmus, Dutch priest and philosopher (b. 1466)\nBULLET::::- 1584 – Steven Borough, English navigator and explorer (b. 1525)\nBULLET::::- 1623 – William Bourchier, 3rd Earl of Bath (b. 1557)\nBULLET::::- 1664 – Stefano della Bella, Italian illustrator and engraver (b. 1610)\nBULLET::::- 1682 – Jean Picard, French priest and astronomer (b. 1620)\nBULLET::::- 1691 – Marquis de St Ruth, French general\nBULLET::::- 1693 – John Ashby, English admiral (b. 1640)\nBULLET::::- 1712 – Richard Cromwell, English academic and politician (b. 1626)\nBULLET::::- 1742 – Evaristo Felice Dall'Abaco, Italian violinist and composer (b. 1675)\nBULLET::::- 1749 – Charles de la Boische, Marquis de Beauharnois, French navy officer and politician, Governor General of New France (b. 1671)\nBULLET::::- 1773 – Johann Joachim Quantz, German flute player and composer (b. 1697)\nBULLET::::- 1804 – Alexander Hamilton, American general, economist, and politician, 1st United States Secretary of the Treasury (b. 1755)\nBULLET::::- 1845 – Henrik Wergeland, Norwegian linguist, poet, and playwright (b. 1808)\nBULLET::::- 1850 – Robert Stevenson, Scottish engineer (b. 1772)\nBULLET::::- 1855 – Pavel Nakhimov, Russian admiral (b. 1802)\nBULLET::::- 1870 – John A. Dahlgren, American admiral (b. 1809)\nBULLET::::- 1892 – Alexander Cartwright, American firefighter, invented baseball (b. 1820)\nBULLET::::- 1910 – Charles Rolls, English engineer and businessman, co-founded Rolls-Royce Limited (b. 1887)\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Gertrude Bell, English archaeologist and spy (b. 1868)\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Charles Wood Irish composer (b. 1866)\nBULLET::::- 1929 – Robert Henri, American painter and educator (b. 1865)\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Nathan Söderblom, Swedish archbishop, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1866)\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Ole Evinrude, Norwegian-American inventor and businessman, invented the outboard motor (b. 1877)\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Alfred Dreyfus, French colonel (b. 1859)\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Theodore Roosevelt, Jr., American general and politician, Governor of Puerto Rico (b. 1887)\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Boris Galerkin, Russian mathematician and engineer (b. 1871)\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Wolfram Freiherr von Richthofen, German field marshal (b. 1895)\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Ray Stannard Baker, American journalist and author (b. 1870)\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Jimmie Lunceford, American saxophonist and bandleader (b. 1902)\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Douglas Hyde, Irish scholar and politician, 1st President of Ireland (b. 1860)\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Elsie de Wolfe, American actress, author, and interior decorator (b. 1865)\nBULLET::::- 1956 – John Hayes, Australian politician, 25th Premier of Tasmania (b. 1868)\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Mazo de la Roche, Canadian author and playwright (b. 1879)\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Roger Wolfe Kahn, American composer and bandleader (b. 1907)\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Christfried Burmeister, Estonian speed skater (b. 1898)\nBULLET::::- 1966 – D. T. Suzuki, Japanese philosopher and author (b. 1870)\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Henry George Lamond, Australian farmer and author (b. 1885)\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Yvon Robert, Canadian wrestler (b. 1914)\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Lon Chaney, Jr., American actor (b. 1906)\nBULLET::::- 1975 – James Ormsbee Chapin, American painter and illustrator (b. 1887)\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Minnie Riperton, American singer-songwriter (b. 1947)\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Kenneth More, English actor (b. 1914)\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Chris Wood, English saxophonist (b. 1944)\nBULLET::::- 1990 – João Saldanha, Brazilian footballer, manager, and journalist (b. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Caroline Pafford Miller, American journalist and author (b. 1903)\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Dan Eldon, English photographer and journalist (b. 1970)\nBULLET::::- 1996 – John Chancellor, American journalist (b. 1927)\nBULLET::::- 1997 – François Furet, French historian and author (b. 1927)\nBULLET::::- 1998 – Jimmy Driftwood, American singer-songwriter and banjo player (b. 1907)\nBULLET::::- 1998 – Arkady Ostashev, Soviet/Russian scientist and engineer (b. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 1998 – Serge Lemoyne, Canadian painter (b. 1941)\nBULLET::::- 1999 – Rajendra Kumar, Bollywood actor, (b. 1921)\nBULLET::::- 2000 – Charles Merritt, Canadian colonel and politician, Victoria Cross recipient (b. 1908)\nBULLET::::- 2001 – Fred Marcellino, American author and illustrator (b. 1939)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Benny Carter, American trumpet player, saxophonist, and composer (b. 1907)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Mark Lovell, English race car driver (b. 1960)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Betty Oliphant, English-Canadian ballerina, co-founded the National Ballet School of Canada (b. 1918)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – John King, Baron King of Wartnaby, English businessman (b. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Robert Burås, Norwegian singer-songwriter and guitarist (b. 1975)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Stan Zemanek, Australian radio and television host (b. 1947)\nBULLET::::- 2008 – Bobby Murcer, American baseball player, coach, and sportscaster (b. 1946)\nBULLET::::- 2008 – Tony Snow, American journalist, 26th White House Press Secretary (b. 1955)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – Olga Guillot, Cuban-American singer (b. 1922)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – James P. Hogan, English-American author (b. 1941)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – Paulo Moura, Brazilian clarinetist and saxophonist (b. 1932)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – Pius Njawé, Cameroonian journalist (b. 1957)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – Harvey Pekar, American author and critic (b. 1939)\nBULLET::::- 2011 – Sherwood Schwartz, American screenwriter and producer (b. 1916)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Alimuddin, Pakistani cricketer (b. 1930)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Dara Singh, Indian wrestler, actor, and politician (b. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Eddy Brown, English footballer and manager (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Else Holmelund Minarik, Danish-American author and illustrator (b. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Roger Payne, English mountaineer (b. 1956)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Hamid Samandarian, Iranian director and playwright (b. 1931)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – George C. Stoney, American director and producer (b. 1916)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Amar Bose, American businessman, founded the Bose Corporation (b. 1929)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Takako Takahashi, Japanese author (b. 1932)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Alan Whicker, Egyptian-English journalist (b. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Jamil Ahmad, Pakistani author (b. 1931)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Nestor Basterretxea, Spanish painter and sculptor (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Emil Bobu, Romanian politician (b. 1927)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Alfred de Grazia, American political scientist and author (b. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Kenneth J. Gray, American soldier and politician (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Valeriya Novodvorskaya, Russian journalist and politician (b. 1950)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – D'Army Bailey, American lawyer, judge, and actor (b. 1941)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Chenjerai Hove, Zimbabwean journalist, author, and poet (b. 1956)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Tenzin Delek Rinpoche, Tibetan monk and activist (b. 1950)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Cheng Siwei, Chinese engineer, economist, and politician (b. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 2016 – Goran Hadžić, Serbian politician (b. 1958)\nBULLET::::- 2018 – Dada J. P. Vaswani, Indian spiritual leader (b. 1918)\nBULLET::::- Birthday of the Heir to the Crown of Tonga (Tonga)\nBULLET::::- Christian feast day:\nBULLET::::- Feast of Saints Peter and Paul (Eastern Orthodox)\nBULLET::::- Hermagoras and Fortunatus\nBULLET::::- Jason of Thessalonica (Catholic Church)\nBULLET::::- John Gualbert\nBULLET::::- Louis Martin and Marie-Azélie Guérin\nBULLET::::- Nabor and Felix\nBULLET::::- Nathan Söderblom (Lutheran, Episcopal Church (USA))\nBULLET::::- Veronica\nBULLET::::- Viventiolus\nBULLET::::- July 12 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day, celebrates the independence of Kiribati from the United Kingdom in 1979.\nBULLET::::- Independence Day, celebrates the independence of São Tomé and Príncipe from Portugal in 1975.\nBULLET::::- The second day of Naadam (Mongolia)\nBULLET::::- The Twelfth, also known as Orangemen's Day (Northern Ireland, Scotland, Newfoundland and Labrador)\n\nBULLET::::- BBC: On This Day\nBULLET::::- On This Day in Canada\n"}
{"id": "15974", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15974", "title": "Johann Georg Albrechtsberger", "text": "Johann Georg Albrechtsberger\n\nJohann Georg Albrechtsberger (3 February 1736 – 7 March 1809) was an Austrian composer, organist, and music theorist and one of the teachers of Ludwig van Beethoven.\n\nAlbrechtsberger was born at Klosterneuburg, near Vienna. He originally studied music at Melk Abbey and philosophy at a Benedictine seminary in Vienna and became one of the most learned and skillful contrapuntists of his age. Albrechtsberger's earliest classmates included Michael Haydn and Franz Joseph Aumann. After being employed as organist at Raab in 1755 and Maria Taferl in 1757, he was appointed Thurnermeister back at Melk Abbey. In 1772 he was appointed organist to the court of Vienna, and in 1792 Kapellmeister of St. Stephen's Cathedral.\n\nHis fame as a theorist attracted to him in the Austrian capital a large number of pupils, some of whom afterwards became eminent musicians. Among these were Johann Nepomuk Hummel, Ignaz Moscheles, Josef Weigl (1766–1846), Ludwig-Wilhelm Tepper de Ferguson (1768after 1824), Antonio Casimir Cartellieri, Ludwig van Beethoven, Anton Reicha and Franz Xaver Wolfgang Mozart. Beethoven had arrived in Vienna in 1792 to study with Joseph Haydn but quickly became infuriated when his work was not being given attention or corrected. Haydn recommended his friend Albrechtsberger, with whom Beethoven then studied harmony and counterpoint. On completion of his studies, the young student noted, \"Patience, diligence, persistence, and sincerity will lead to success,\" which reflects upon Albrechtsberger's own compositional philosophy.\n\nWhen Beethoven was finished studying with Albrechtsberger he decided to get a few more tips and pointers, so to speak, from Haydn. From there Beethoven possibly studied with Antonio Salieri, but this is unknown as a fact. It is also quite possible that Beethoven went off on his own to make a living, and only then returned after he had a stable career.\n\nAlbrechtsberger died in Vienna; his grave is in St. Marx cemetery.\n\nHis published compositions consist of preludes, fugues and sonatas for the piano and organ, string quartets, etc.; but the greater proportion of his works, vocal and instrumental, exists only in manuscript. They are in the library of the Vienna Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde. Around 1765, he wrote at least seven concerti for jaw harp and strings (three survive in the Hungarian National Library in Budapest). They are pleasant, well written works in the galant style. One of his most notable works is his Concerto for Alto Trombone and Orchestra in B Major. As the trombone has few works dating back to the classical period, his concerto is often highlighted by the trombone community. He also wrote a Concerto for the Mandola, Op. 27, written positively about in the 1914 book \"The Guitar and Mandolin\".\n\nProbably the most valuable service he rendered to music was in his theoretical works. In 1790 he published at Leipzig a treatise on composition, of which a third edition appeared in 1821. A collection of his writings on harmony, in three volumes, was published under the care of his pupil Ignaz von Seyfried (1776–1841) in 1826. An English version of this was published by Novello in 1855. His compositional style derives from Johann Joseph Fux's counterpoint, who was Kapellmeister at St Stephen's Cathedral 1713-1741, a position that Albrechtsberger would hold 52 years later.\n\nA continuous thread can be traced from his teaching through that of his pupil Reicha, who went on to become the first Professor of Counterpoint and Fugue at the Paris Conservatoire from 1818 to his death in 1836, and who in turn reached a wide audience through both his own teaching and his theoretical writings, which were standard reference at the Conservatoire for most of the 19th century and translated into German by Czerny.\n\nBULLET::::- Catholic Encyclopedia article\n"}
{"id": "15975", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15975", "title": "John Alden", "text": "John Alden\n\nJohn Alden Sr. ( 15981687) was a crew member on the historic 1620 voyage of the Pilgrim ship \"Mayflower\". Rather than return to England with the ship, he stayed and became a blacksmith at what became Plymouth Colony. He was hired in Southhampton, England, as the ship's cooper, responsible for maintaining the ship's barrels. He was a signatory to the Mayflower Compact. He married fellow \"Mayflower\" passenger Priscilla Mullins, whose entire family perished in the first winter.\n\nHe served in a number of important government positions such as Assistant Governor, Duxbury Deputy to the General Court of Plymouth, Captain Myles Standish's Duxbury militia company, a member of the Council of War, Treasurer of Plymouth Colony, and Commissioner to Dartmouth.\n\nMany theories have been ventured about the English origins of John Alden. Robert Charles Anderson, general editor of the multi-decade \"Great Migration\" effort to establish the earliest European immigrants to New England, says that although one or two of the hypothesized origins are \"tempting,\" none of them are proved.\n\nThe only certainty about John Alden's English background were Bradford's words that Alden \"was hired for a cooper, (barrel maker) at Southampton, where the ship victuled; and being a hopeful young man, was much desired, but left to his liking to go or stay when he came here; but he stayed, and maryed here.\" Author Charles Edward Banks states that the employment of Alden \"at Southampton\" does not necessarily mean that he was a resident of the seaport and may have only been there to work temporarily when the \"Mayflower\" arrived.\nResearch by Charles Edward Banks published in 1929 theorized that John Alden may have come from the Alden family of Harwich in Essex, England. Harwich is an ancient North Sea port, northeast of London, which was the homeport of the Pilgrim ship \"Mayflower\" and home of its captain, Christopher Jones. The Alden family of Harwich had distant connections to Jones, residing there in the 17th century and possibly related to him by marriage. Banks notes a young John Alden of the Harwich Aldens was about the same age as the Mayflower passenger.\nBanks also reports that John Alden \"may have been the son of George Alden the fletcher [arrow maker], who disappeared – probably dying in that year – leaving John, an orphan, free to take employment overseas. Jane, the widow, may have been his mother and Richard and Avys his grandparents.\" The tax list of Holyrood Ward, Southampton, in 1602 list the names of George Alden and John's future father-in-law William Mullins. Banks points out, however, that this theory cannot be proven. None of the records that mention this George Alden mention John, and none of John's children or grandchildren were named George, in a time when it was common to name one's children after their grandparents.\n\nAlycia Crane Williams analyzed these and several other theories in \"The Mayflower Descendant\". She also pointed out that some have connected John Alden of the Mayflower with John Alden, a gentleman, \"son and heir of John Alden of Swanscomb, Kent,\" who obtained a Patent of Arms in 1607. There is no evidence that John Alden of the Mayflower was connected to this family or inherited this coat of arms. Williams states, \"This Alden coat of arms was published in the \"Encyclopaedia Britannica\" and has led many unsuspecting [beginning genealogists] astray.\"\n\nThe \"Mayflower\" departed Plymouth, England, on September 6, 1620. The 100-foot ship had 102 passengers and a crew of about 30-40 in extremely cramped conditions. By the second month out, the ship was being buffeted by westerly gales, causing the ship's timbers to be badly shaken with caulking failing to keep out sea water, and with passengers, even in their berths, lying wet and ill. This, combined with a lack of proper rations and unsanitary conditions for several months, attributed to what would be fatal for many, especially the majority of women and children. On the way, there were two deaths, a crew member and a passenger, but the worst was yet to come. After arriving at their destination, in the space of several months, almost half the passengers perished in the cold, harsh, unfamiliar New England winter.\n\nOn November 9, 1620, after a month of delays in England and about two months at sea, they spotted the Cape Cod Hook. After several days of trying to get south to their planned destination of the Colony of Virginia, strong winter seas forced them to return to the harbor at Cape Cod Hook, now called Provincetown Harbor, where they anchored on November 11. The Mayflower Compact was signed that day.\n\nJohn Alden was among the original settlers of the Plymouth Colony. Although not himself a Separatist, he had been hired to be a cooper (barrel maker) and decided to join the journey when she set sail, perhaps with the hope of becoming prosperous in the New World. Alden's rivalry with Miles Standish for the affection of Priscilla Mullins is recounted elaborately in Henry Wadsworth Longfellow's poem \"The Courtship of Miles Standish\" (1858).\n\nFrom 1633 until 1675, he was assistant to the governor of the Plymouth Colony, frequently serving as acting governor and also on many juries.\n\nIn 1634, Alden was jailed, in Boston, for a fight at Kenebeck in Maine between members of the Plymouth Colony and the Massachusetts Bay Colony. The fight involved a fur trading dispute that escalated into a killing of Plymouth colonist Moses Talbot by John Hocking by a shot to the head. Hocking was then immediately killed by Plymouth colonists by a shot to the head.\n\nWhile Alden did not participate in the fight, he was the highest-ranking member from Plymouth that the Massachusetts Bay colonists found to arrest. It was only through the intervention of Bradford that he was eventually released.\n\nJohn Alden married Priscilla Mullins on May 12, 1622. She was the only survivor of the Mayflower Mullins family. They had ten children. Priscilla died in Duxbury between 1651 and her husband's death in 1687. Both were buried in the Myles Standish Burial Ground in Duxbury, Massachusetts.\n\nBULLET::::- Elizabeth was born in 1623 and died in Little Compton, Rhode Island, on May 31, 1717. She married William Pabodie on December 26, 1644 in Duxbury MA, and had thirteen children. Her grave and that of her husband are in the Old Commons Cemetery in Little Compton.\nBULLET::::- John Jr. was born about 1626 and died in Boston on March 14, 1701/2. He married Elizabeth (Phillips) Everill on April 1, 1660, and had fourteen children. He was a survivor of the Salem witch trials, of which he wrote a notable account.\nBULLET::::- Joseph was born about 1628 and died in Bridgewater on February 8, 1696/7. He married Mary Simmons about 1660 and had seven children.\nBULLET::::- Priscilla was born about 1630. She was alive and unmarried in 1688.\nBULLET::::- Jonathan was born about 1632 and died in Duxbury on February 14, 1697. He married Abigail Hallett on December 10, 1672, and had six children. Jonathan was buried in the Old Cemetery in South Duxbury.\nBULLET::::- Sarah was born about 1634 and died before the settlement of her father's estate in 1688. She married Alexander Standish about 1660 and had eight children.\nBULLET::::- Ruth was born about 1636 and died in Braintree on October 12, 1674. She married John Bass in Braintree on February 3, 1657/8, and had seven children. Among her children was Hannah Bass, paternal grandmother of future United States President John Adams.\nBULLET::::- Mary was born about 1638. She was alive and unmarried in 1688.\nBULLET::::- Rebecca was born about 1640. She married Thomas Delano in 1677 and had nine children. She died between June 12, 1696 and October 5, 1722. She is buried in The Old Burying Ground (Myles Standish Cemetery) in Duxbury, Massachusetts.\nBULLET::::- David was born about 1642 and died in Duxbury between July 2, 1718, and April 1, 1719. He married Mary Southworth by 1674 and had six children.\n\nPriscilla Alden who married Samuel Cheeseborough of Stonington, Connecticut was the daughter of David, who is the youngest child of John and Pricilla Alden. There is confusion here in this documentation. John and Pricilla Alden of the Mayflower were her grandparents.\n\nJohn Alden was the last survivor of the signers of the Mayflower Compact. He died at Duxbury on September 12, 1687. Both he and his wife Priscilla lie buried in the Myles Standish Burial Ground.\n\nThe Alden residence is also in Duxbury, on the north side of the village, on a farm which is still in possession of their descendants of the seventh generation. He made no will, having distributed the greater part of his estate among his children during his lifetime.\n\nA wheel-lock carbine owned by John Alden is housed at the NRA's National Firearms Museum; it is the only known surviving firearm to have crossed the Atlantic aboard the Mayflower. The musket was found hidden in the Alden house during a 1924 restoration.\n\nJohn Alden's House, now a National Historic Landmark, was built in 1653 and is open to the public as a museum. It is run by the Alden Kindred of America, an organization which provides historical information about him and his home, including genealogical records of his descendants. John and Priscilla had the following children who survived to adulthood: Elizabeth, John (accused during the Salem witch trials), Joseph, Priscilla, Robert, Jonathan, Sarah, Ruth, Mary, Rebecca, and David. They have the most descendants today of all the pilgrim families.\n\nAlden has a sandwich named in his honor, consisting of ciabatta bread, mayo, seasonal greens, sliced turkey, cranberry sauce and a layer of stuffing, at Waterside Market in Vineyard Haven, MA.\n\nBULLET::::- John Alden was an extreme ancestor to president John Adams and his family.\nBULLET::::- A direct descendant of John was Scott Alden (1907–1977), who served as an assistant to FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover.\nBULLET::::- Also a descendant was Vernon Alden who served as President of Ohio University from 1962 until 1967. The main campus library at Ohio University is named in his honor.\nBULLET::::- Another descendant is the Academy Award-winning actress Jodie Foster.\nBULLET::::- Emily Gilmore Alden, author and educator, is a descendant.\nBULLET::::- H. Verlan Andersen, LDS General Authority\nBULLET::::- Rosemary (Dale) Morgenstern, b 1972, teacher\n\nBULLET::::- Alden, Ebenezer. \"Memorial of the Descendants of the Hon. John Alden\". S.P. Brown, 1867\nBULLET::::- Addison, Daniel Dulany. \"The Life and Times of Edward Bass, First Bishop of Massachusetts\". Houghton, Mifflin, 1897\nBULLET::::- National Society of Colonial Dames. \"First Record Book of the Society of Colonial Dames\", 1897; Ch.75\nBULLET::::- Waters, Henry Fitz-Gilbert. \"The New England Historical and Genealogical Register\". New England Historic Genealogical Society, 1898; p. 435-440\nBULLET::::- Longfellow, H.W. \"The Courtship of Miles Standish\", 1858\nBULLET::::- Hawthorne, Julian. \"The History of the United States from 1492 to 1910 Volume 1: 1492-1910\". BiblioBazaar, LLC, 2007. , .; p. 61-62\n\nBULLET::::- John Alden MayflowerHistory.com page with vital facts and references.\nBULLET::::- John Alden House & Alden Kindred of America\n"}
{"id": "15976", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15976", "title": "Japanese cuisine", "text": "Japanese cuisine\n\nJapanese cuisine encompasses the regional and traditional foods of Japan, which have developed through centuries of political, economic, and social changes. The traditional cuisine of Japan, , lit. \"[traditional] Japanese cuisine\" (or , lit. \"culinary arts\"), is based on rice with miso soup and other dishes; there is an emphasis on seasonal ingredients. Side dishes often consist of fish, pickled vegetables, and vegetables cooked in broth. Seafood is common, often grilled, but also served raw as sashimi or in sushi. Seafood and vegetables are also deep-fried in a light batter, as tempura. Apart from rice, staples include noodles, such as soba and udon. Japan also has many simmered dishes such as fish products in broth called oden, or beef in sukiyaki and nikujaga.\n\nHistorically influenced by Chinese cuisine, Japanese cuisine has opened up to influence from Western cuisines in the modern era. Dishes inspired by foreign food—in particular Chinese food—like ramen and gyōza, as well as foods like spaghetti, curry, and hamburgers have become adopted with variants for Japanese tastes and ingredients. Traditionally, the Japanese shunned meat due to Buddhism, but with the modernization of Japan in the 1880s, meat-based dishes such as tonkatsu and yakiniku have become common. Japanese cuisine, particularly sushi, has become popular throughout the world.\n\nIn 2011, Japan overtook France to become the country with the most 3-starred Michelin restaurants; as of 2018, the capital Tokyo has maintained the title of the city with the most 3-starred restaurants in the world.\n\nJapanese cuisine is based on combining the staple food, which is steamed white rice or , with one or several \"okazu\" or main dishes and side dishes. This may be accompanied by a clear or miso soup and \"tsukemono\" (pickles).The phrase refers to the makeup of a typical meal served, but has roots in classic \"kaiseki\", \"honzen,\" and \"yūsoku\" cuisine. The term is also used to describe the first course served in standard \"kaiseki\" cuisine nowadays.\n\nRice is served in its own small bowl (\"chawan\"), and each main course item is placed on its own small plate (\"sara\") or bowl (\"hachi\") for each individual portion. This is done even in Japanese homes. It contrasts with the Western-style dinners at home, where each individual takes helpings from the large serving dishes of food presented at the middle of the dining table. Japanese style traditionally abhors different flavored dishes touching each other on a single plate, so different dishes are given their own individual plates as mentioned, or are partitioned using leaves, etc. Placing main dishes on top of rice and \"soiling\" it is also frowned upon by old-fashioned etiquette.\nThough this tradition originated from Classical Chinese dining formalities, especially after the adoption of Buddhism with its tea ceremony, it became most popular and common during and after the \"Kamakura period\", such as the \"Kaiseki\". Japanese cuisine keeps such tradition still, whereas in modern times such practice is in sharp contrast to present day Chinese cuisine, where placing food on rice is standard. However, an exception is the popular \"donburi\".\n\nThe small rice bowl or \"chawan\" (lit. \"tea bowl\") doubles as a word for the large tea bowls in tea ceremonies. Thus in common speech, the drinking cup is referred to as \"yunomi-jawan\" or \"yunomi\" for the purpose of distinction. In the olden days, among the nobility, each course of a full-course Japanese meal would be brought on serving napkins called , which were originally platformed trays or small dining tables. In the modern age, faldstool trays or stackup-type legged trays may still be seen used in \"zashiki\", i.e. tatami-mat rooms, for large banquets or at a ryokan type inn. Some restaurants might use the suffix as a more sophisticated though dated synonym to the more familiar , since the latter basically is a term for a combo meal served at a \"taishū-shokudō\", akin to a diner. \"Teishoku\" means a meal of fixed menu (for example, grilled fish with rice and soup), a dinner \"à prix fixe\" served at or , which is somewhat vague (\"shokudō\" can mean a diner-type restaurant or a corporate lunch hall); but e.g. writer on Japanese popular culture Ishikawa Hiroyoshi defines it as fare served at , etc., a diner-like establishment.\n\nAbout 2000 years ago, Japanese cuisine was developed with the influence of China. Rice is a staple in Japanese cuisine. Between 300 and 100 BC, rice was widely used in Japan due to Chinese influence. Wheat and soybeans were introduced shortly after rice. All three act as staple foods in Japanese cuisine today. During the Kofun period, Buddhism became the official religion of the country. Therefore, eating meat and fish were prohibited. In 675 AD, Emperor Tenmu prohibited the eating of horses, dogs, monkeys, and chickens. In the 8th and 9th century, many emperors continued to prohibit killing many types of animals. The number of regulated meats increased significantly, leading to the banning of all mammals except whale, which were categorized as fish. During this period, chopsticks were introduced to Japan. Initially they were only used by nobility. The general population used their hands, as utensils were quite expensive.\n\nDue to the lack of meat products Japanese people minimized spice utilization. Spices were rare to find back in the day. Spices like pepper and garlic were only used in a minimalist amount. In the absence of meat, fish was served as the main protein, as Japan is an island nation. Fish has influenced many iconic Japanese dishes today. In the 9th century, grilled fish and sliced raw fish were widely popular. Japanese people would eat fish in every one of their meals. In traditional Japanese cuisine, oil and fat are usually avoided within the cooking process, because Japanese people were trying to keep a healthy lifestyle.\n\nPreserving fish became a sensation; sushi was originated as means of preserving fish by fermenting it in boiled rice. Fish that are salted and then placed in rice are preserved by lactic acid fermentation, which helps prevent proliferation of the bacteria that bring about putrefaction. During the 15th century, advancement and development helped shorten the fermentation of sushi to about one to two weeks. Sushi thus became a popular snack food and main entrée, combining fish with rice. During the Edo period (mid-15th century), sushi without fermentation was introduced. Sushi was still being consumed without fermentation till the end of 18th century, when the hand-rolled and nigri-type sushi was invented.\n\nIn 1854, Japan started to gain new trade deals with Western countries when a new Japanese ruling order took over the old emperor. Emperor Meiji, the new ruler, staged a New Years feast designed to embrace the Western world and countries in 1872. The feast contained food that had a lot of European emphasis. For the first time in a thousand years, people were allowed to consume meat in public. After this New Years feast, the general population from Japan started to consume meat again.\n\nEmphasis is placed on seasonality of food or , and dishes are designed to herald the arrival of the four seasons or calendar months.\n\nSeasonality means taking advantage of the (e.g. bamboo shoots in spring, chestnuts in the autumn) as well as the as they come into season. Thus that arrives with the Kuroshio Current has traditionally been greatly prized.\n\nIf something becomes available rather earlier than what is usual for the item in question, the first crop or early catch is called \"hashiri\".\n\nUse of tree leaves and branches as decor is also characteristic of Japanese cuisine. Maple leaves are often floated on water to exude coolness or ; sprigs of nandina are popularly used. The \"haran\" (\"Aspidistra\") and sasa bamboo leaves were often cut into shapes and placed underneath or used as separators.\n\nA characteristic of traditional Japanese food is the sparing use of red meat, oils and fats, and dairy products. Use of ingredients such as soy sauce, miso, and umeboshi tends to result in dishes with high salt content, though there are low-sodium versions of these available.\n\nAs Japan is an island nation surrounded by an ocean, its people have always taken advantage of the abundant seafood supply. It is the opinion of some food scholars that the Japanese diet always relied mainly on \"grains with vegetables or seaweeds as main, with poultry secondary, and red meat in slight amounts\" even before the advent of Buddhism which placed an even stronger taboo. The eating of was spoken of as taboo, unclean or something to be avoided by personal choice through the Edo period. The consumption of whale and terrapin meat were not forbidden under this definition. Despite this, the consumption of red meat did not completely disappear in Japan. Eating wild game—as opposed to domesticated livestock—was tolerated; in particular, trapped hare was counted using the measure word , a term normally reserved for birds.\n\nVegetable consumption has dwindled while processed foods have become more prominent in Japanese households due to the rising costs of general foodstuffs. Nonetheless, Kyoto vegetables, or Kyoyasai, are rising in popularity and different varieties of Kyoto vegetables are being revived.\n\nGenerally speaking, traditional Japanese cuisine is prepared with little cooking oil. A major exception is the deep-frying of foods. This cooking method was introduced during the Edo period due to influence from Western (formerly called ) and Chinese cuisine, and became commonplace with the availability of cooking oil due to increased productivity. Dishes such as tempura, aburaage, and satsuma age are now part of established traditional Japanese cuisine. Words such as \"tempura\" or \"hiryōzu\" (synonymous with ganmodoki) are said to be of Portuguese origin.\n\nAlso, certain honey or rustic sorts of traditional Japanese foods such as kinpira, hijiki, and \"kiriboshi\" daikon usually involve stir-frying in oil before stewing in soy sauce. Some standard \"osōzai\" or obanzai dishes feature stir-fried Japanese greens with either age or , dried sardines.\n\nTraditional Japanese food is typically seasoned with a combination of dashi, soy sauce, sake and mirin, vinegar, sugar, and salt. These are typically the only seasonings used when grilling or braising an item. A modest number of herbs and spices may be used during cooking as a hint or accent, or as a means of neutralizing fishy or gamy odors present. Examples of such spices include ginger and red pepper. This contrasts conceptually with barbecue or stew, where a blend of seasonings is used before and during cooking.\n\nOnce a main dish has been cooked, spices such as minced ginger and various pungent herbs may be added as a garnish, called \"tsuma\". With certain milder items, a dollop of wasabi and grated daikon (\"daikon-oroshi\"), or Japanese mustard are provided as condiments. A sprig of mitsuba or a piece of yuzu rind floated on soups are called \"ukimi\". Minced shiso leaves and myoga often serve as \"yakumi\", a type of condiment paired with tataki of katsuo or soba. Finally, a dish may be garnished with minced seaweed in the form of crumpled nori or flakes of aonori. Shichimi is also a very popular spice mixture often added to soups, noodles and rice cakes. Shichimi is a chilli based spice mix which contains seven spices: chilli, sansho, orange peel, black sesame, white sesame, hemp, ginger, and nori.\n\nIn the aforementioned stock phrase , the word has the basic meaning of \"vegetable\", but secondarily means any accompanying dish including fish or meat. It figures in the Japanese word for appetizer, ; main dish, ; or (formal synonym for \"okazu\" – considered somewhat of a housewife's term).\n\nThe is boiled green-leaf vegetables bunched and cut to size, steeped in dashi broth, eaten with dashes of soy sauce. Another item is , which could be made with wakame seaweed, or be something like a made from thin toothpick slices of daikon and carrot. The so-called vinegar that is blended with the ingredient here is often which is a blend of vinegar, mirin, and soy sauce. A adds katsuo dashi to this. Note sparing use of oil, compared with Western salads.\n\nAn is another group of items, describable as a sort of \"tossed salad\" or \"dressed\" (though \"aemono\" also includes thin strips of squid or fish sashimi (\"itozukuri\") etc. similarly prepared). One types are where usually vegetables such as green beans are tossed with white or black sesame seeds ground in a suribachi mortar bowl, flavored additionally with sugar and soy sauce. adds tofu (bean curd) in the mix. An \"aemono\" is tossed with vinegar-white miso mix and uses \"wakegi\" scallion and as standard.\n\nDifferent cooking techniques are applied to each of the three \"okazu\"; they may be raw (sashimi), grilled, simmered (sometimes called boiled), steamed, deep-fried, vinegared, or dressed.\n\nBelow are listed some of the most common dishes:\nBULLET::::- grilled and pan-fried dishes (\"yakimono\" 焼き物),\nBULLET::::- stewed/simmered/cooked/boiled dishes (\"nimono\" 煮物),\nBULLET::::- stir-fried dishes (\"itamemono\" 炒め物),\nBULLET::::- steamed dishes (\"mushimono\" 蒸し物),\nBULLET::::- deep-fried dishes (\"agemono\" 揚げ物),\nBULLET::::- sliced raw fish (\"sashimi\" 刺身),\nBULLET::::- soups (\"suimono\" 吸い物 and \"shirumono\" 汁物),\nBULLET::::- pickled/salted vegetables (\"tsukemono\" 漬け物),\nBULLET::::- dishes dressed with various kinds of sauce (\"aemono\" 和え物),\nBULLET::::- vinegared dishes (\"su-no-mono\" 酢の物),\nBULLET::::- delicacies, food of delicate flavor (\"chinmi\" 珍味).\n\n\"Kaiseki\", closely associated with tea ceremony (\"chanoyu\"), is a high form of hospitality through cuisine. The style is minimalist, extolling the aesthetics of wabi-sabi. Like the tea ceremony, appreciation of the diningware and vessels is part of the experience. In the modern standard form, the first course consists of \"ichijū-sansai\" (one soup, three dishes), followed by the serving of sake accompanied by dish(es) plated on a square wooden bordered tray of sorts called . Sometimes another element called is served to complement the sake, for guests who are heavier drinkers.\n\nThe tea ceremony kaiseki(懐石) is often confounded with another , which is an outgrowth of meals served at a gathering for haiku and renga composition, which turned into a term for sumptuous sake-accompanied banquet, or .\n\nStrictly vegetarian food is rare since even vegetable dishes are flavored with the ubiquitous dashi stock, usually made with katsuobushi (dried skipjack tuna flakes), and are therefore pescetarian more often than carnivorous. An exception is \"shōjin-ryōri\" (精進料理), vegetarian dishes developed by Buddhist monks. However, the advertised \"shōjin-ryōri\" at public eating places includes some non-vegetarian elements. Regarding vegetarianism, was introduced from China by the Ōbaku sect (a sub-sect of Zen Buddhism), and which some sources still regard as part of \"Japanese cuisine\". The sect in Japan was founded by the priest Ingen (d. 1673), and is headquartered in Uji, Kyoto. The Japanese name for the common green bean takes after this priest who allegedly introduced the New World crop via China. One aspect of the fucha-ryōri practiced at the temple is the wealth of , one example being mock-eel, made from strained tofu, with nori seaweed used expertly to mimic the black skin. The secret ingredient used is grated \"gobō\" (burdock) roots.\n\nDr. Masakazu Tada, Honorary Vice-President of the International Vegetarian Union for 25 years from 1960, stated that \"Japan was vegetarian for a 1,000 years\". Although this is not totally true, British journalist J. W. Robertson Scott reported in the 1920s that the society was 90% vegetarian. 50–60% of the population ate fish only on festive occasions, probably more because of poverty than for any other reason.\n\nRice has been the staple food for the Japanese historically. Its fundamental importance is evident from the fact that the word for cooked rice, \"gohan\" and \"meshi\", also stands for a \"meal\". While rice has a long history of cultivation in Japan, its use as a staple has not been universal. Notably, in northern areas (northern Honshū and Hokkaidō), other grain such as wheat were more common into the 19th century.\n\nIn most of Japan, rice used to be consumed for almost every meal, and although a 2007 survey showed that 70% of Japanese still eat it once or twice a day, its popularity is now declining. In the 20th century there has been a shift in dietary habits, with an increasing number of people choosing wheat based products (such as bread and noodles) over rice.\n\nJapanese rice is short-grained and becomes sticky when cooked. Most rice is sold as \"hakumai\" (白米, \"white rice\"), with the outer portion of the grains (糠, \"nuka\") polished away. Unpolished brown rice (玄米, \"genmai\") is considered less desirable, but its popularity has been increasing.\n\nJapanese noodles often substitute for a rice-based meal. \"Soba\" (thin, grayish-brown noodles containing buckwheat flour) and \"udon\" (thick wheat noodles) are the main traditional noodles, while ramen is a modern import and now very popular. There are also other, less common noodles.\n\nJapanese noodles, such as soba and udon, are eaten as a standalone, and usually not with a side dish, in terms of general custom. It may have toppings, but they are called . The fried battered shrimp tempura sitting in a bowl of tempura-soba would be referred to as \"the shrimp\" or \"the tempura\", and not so much be referred to as a topping (\"gu\"). The identical toppings, if served as a dish to be eaten with plain white rice could be called \"okazu\", so these terms are context-sensitive.\n\nHot noodles are usually served in a bowl already steeped in their broth and are called \"kakesoba\" or \"kakeudon\". Cold soba arrive unseasoned and heaped atop a \"zaru\" or \"seiro\", and are picked up with a chopstick and dunked in their dip sauce. The broth is a soy-dashi-mirin type of mix; the dip is similar but more concentrated (heavier on soy sauce).\n\nIn the simple form, \"yakumi\" (condiments and spices) such as shichimi, nori, finely chopped scallions, wasabi, etc. are added to the noodles, besides the broth/dip sauce.\n\nUdon may also be eaten in \"kama-age\" style, piping hot straight out of the boiling pot, and eaten with plain soy sauce and sometimes with raw egg also.\n\nJapanese noodles are traditionally eaten by bringing the bowl close to the mouth, and sucking in the noodles with the aid of chopsticks. The resulting loud slurping noise is considered normal in Japan, although in the 2010s concerns began to be voiced about the slurping being offensive to others, especially tourists. The word \"nuuhara\" (ヌーハラ, from \"nuudoru harasumento\", noodle harassment) was coined to describe this.\n\nTraditional Japanese sweets are known as \"wagashi\". Ingredients such as red bean paste and mochi are used. More modern-day tastes includes green tea ice cream, a very popular flavor. Almost all manufacturers produce a version of it. Kakigōri is a shaved ice dessert flavored with syrup or condensed milk. It is usually sold and eaten at summer festivals. A dessert very popular among the children in Japan are dorayaki. They are sweet pancakes filled with a sweet red bean paste. They are mostly eaten at room temperature but are also considered very delicious hot.\n\nGreen tea may be served to most Japanese dishes. It is produced in Japan and prepared in various forms such as matcha, the tea used in the Japanese tea ceremony.\n\nBeer production started in Japan in the 1860s. The most commonly consumed beers in Japan are pale-colored light lagers, with an alcohol strength of around 5.0% ABV. Lager beers are the most commonly produced beer style in Japan, but beer-like beverages, made with lower levels of malts called \"Happoshu\" (発泡酒, literally, \"bubbly alcohol\") or non-malt Happousei (発泡性, literally \"effervescence\") have captured a large part of the market as tax is substantially lower on these products. Beer and its varieties have a market share of almost 2/3 of alcoholic beverages.\n\nSmall local microbreweries have also gained increasing popularity since the 1990s, supplying distinct tasting beers in a variety of styles that seek to match the emphasis on craftsmanship, quality, and ingredient provenance often associated with Japanese food.\n\nSake is a brewed rice beverage that typically contains 15–17% alcohol and is made by multiple fermentation of rice. At traditional formal meals, it is considered an equivalent to rice and is not simultaneously taken with other rice-based dishes, although this notion is typically no longer applied to modern, refined, premium (\"ginjo\") sake, which bear little resemblance to the sakes of even 100 years ago. Side dishes for sake are particularly called \"sakana\" or \"otsumami\".\n\nSake is brewed in a highly labor-intensive process more similar to beer production than winemaking, hence, the common description of sake as rice \"wine\" is misleading.\nSake is made with, by legal definition, strictly just four ingredients: special rice, water, koji, and special yeast.\n\nAs of 2014, Japan has some 1500 registered breweries, which produce thousands of different sakes. Sake characteristics and flavor profiles vary with regionality, ingredients, and the styles (maintained by brewmaster guilds) that brewery leaders want to produce.\n\nSake flavor profiles lend extremely well to pairing with a wide variety of cuisines, including non-Japanese cuisines.\n\n\"Shōchū\" is a distilled spirit that is typically made from barley, sweet potato, buckwheat, or rice. \"Shōchū\" is produced everywhere in Japan, but its production started in Kyushu.\n\nJapanese whisky began commercial production in the early 20th century, and is now extremely popular, primarily consumed in . It is produced in the Scottish style, with malt whisky produced since the 1980s, and has since won top international awards, since the 2000s.\n\nA domestic wine production exists since the 1860s yet most wine is imported. The total market share of wine on alcoholic beverages is about 3%.\n\nJapanese cuisine offers a vast array of regional specialties known as \"kyōdo-ryōri\" (郷土料理), many of them originating from dishes prepared using traditional recipes with local ingredients. Foods from the Kantō region taste very strong. For example, the dashi-based broth for serving udon noodles is heavy on dark soy sauce, similar to soba broth. On the other hand, Kansai region foods are lightly seasoned, with clear udon noodles. made with light soy sauce.\n\nThe traditional Japanese table setting has varied considerably over the centuries, depending primarily on the type of table common during a given era. Before the 19th century, small individual box tables (\"hakozen\", 箱膳) or flat floor trays were set before each diner. Larger low tables (\"chabudai\", ちゃぶ台) that accommodated entire families were gaining popularity by the beginning of the 20th century, but these gave way to Western-style dining tables and chairs by the end of the 20th century.\n\nTraditional Japanese table setting is to place a bowl of rice on your left and to place a bowl of miso soup on your right side at the table. Behind these, each \"okazu\" is served on its own individual plate. Based on the standard three \"okazu\" formula, behind the rice and soup are three flat plates to hold the three \"okazu\"; one to far back left, one at far back right, and one in the center. Pickled vegetables are often served on the side but are not counted as part of the three \"okazu\". Chopsticks are generally placed at the very front of the tray near the diner with pointed ends facing left and supported by a chopstick rest, or \"hashioki\".\n\nMany restaurants and homes in Japan are equipped with Western-style chairs and tables. However, traditional Japanese low tables and cushions, usually found on tatami floors, are also very common. Tatami mats, which are made of straw, can be easily damaged and are hard to clean, thus shoes or any type of footwear are always taken off when stepping on tatami floors.\n\nWhen dining in a traditional tatami room, sitting upright on the floor is common. In a casual setting, men usually sit with their feet crossed and women sit with both legs to one side. Only men are supposed to sit cross-legged. The formal way of sitting for both sexes is a kneeling style known as \"seiza\". To sit in a \"seiza\" position, one kneels on the floor with legs folded under the thighs and the buttocks resting on the heels.\n\nWhen dining out in a restaurant, the customers are guided to their seats by the host. The honored or eldest guest will usually be seated at the center of the table farthest from the entrance. In the home, the most important guest is also seated farthest away from the entrance. If there is a tokonoma, or alcove, in the room, the guest is seated in front of it. The host sits next to or closest to the entrance.\n\nIn Japan, it is customary to say \"itadakimasu\" (\"I [humbly] receive\") before starting to eat a meal. When saying \"itadakimasu\", both hands are put together in front of the chest or on the lap. \"Itadakimasu\" is preceded by complimenting the appearance of food. The Japanese attach as much importance to the aesthetic arrangement of the food as its actual taste. Before touching the food, it is polite to compliment the host on his artistry. It is also a polite custom to wait for the eldest guest at the table to start eating before the other diners start. Another customary and important etiquette is to say \"go-chisō-sama deshita\" (\"It was a feast\") to the host after the meal and the restaurant staff when leaving.\n\nIn Japanese tradition some dishes are strongly tied to a festival or event. These dishes include:\nBULLET::::- Botamochi, a sticky rice dumpling with sweet azuki paste served in spring, while a similar sweet Ohagi is served in autumn.\nBULLET::::- Chimaki (steamed sweet rice cake): Tango no sekku and Gion Festival.\nBULLET::::- Hamo (a type of fish, often eel) and sōmen: Gion Festival.\nBULLET::::- Osechi: New Year.\nBULLET::::- Sekihan, is red rice, which is served for any celebratory occasion. It is usually sticky rice cooked with azuki, or red bean, which gives the rice its distinctive red color.\nBULLET::::- Soba: New Year's Eve. This is called \"toshi koshi soba\" () (literally \"year crossing soba\").\nBULLET::::- Chirashizushi, Ushiojiru (clear soup of clams) and amazake: Hinamatsuri.\n\nIn some regions every 1st and 15th day of the month people eat a mixture of rice and azuki (\"azuki meshi\" (小豆飯), see Sekihan).\n\nJapan has a long history of importing food from other countries, some of which are now part of Japan's most popular cuisine. Ramen is considered an important part to their culinary history, to the extent where in survey of 2,000 Tokyo residents, instant ramen came up many times as a product they thought was an outstanding Japanese invention. Believed to have originated in China, Ramen became popular in Japan after the Second Sino-Japanese war (1937–1945), when many Chinese students were displaced to Japan.\nCurry is another popular imported dish and is ranked near the top of nearly all Japanese surveys for favorite foods. The average Japanese person eats curry at least once a week. The origins of curry, as well many other foreign imports such as \"pan\" or bread are linked to the emergence of \"Yōshoku\", or western cuisine. \"Yōshoku\" can be traced as far back as the late Muromachi period (1336–1573) during a culinary revolution called \"namban ryori\" (南蛮料理), which means “Southern barbarian cooking”, as it is rooted in European cuisine. This cuisine style was first seen in Nagasaki, which served as the point of contact between Europe and Japan at that point in time. Food items such as potatoes, corn, dairy products, as well as the hard candy \"kompeito\" (金平糖), spread during this time. This cuisine became popular in the Meiji period, which is considered by many historians to be when Japan first opened itself to the outside world. Today, many of these imported items still hold a heavy presence in Japan.\nBULLET::::- Foods imported from Portugal in the 16th century\nBULLET::::- Other adapted cuisines in Japan\n\nJapan today abounds with home-grown, loosely Western-style food. Many of these were invented in the wake of the 1868 Meiji Restoration and the end of national seclusion, when the sudden influx of foreign (in particular, Western) culture led to many restaurants serving Western food, known as \"yōshoku\" (洋食), a shortened form of \"seiyōshoku\" (西洋食, \"Western cuisine\"), opening up in cities. Restaurants that serve these foods are called \"yōshokuya\" (洋食屋, \"Western cuisine restaurants\").\n\nMany \"yōshoku\" items from that time have been adapted to a degree that they are now considered Japanese and are an integral part of any Japanese family menu. Many are served alongside rice and miso soup, and eaten with chopsticks. Yet, due to their origins these are still categorized as \"yōshoku\" as opposed to the more traditional \"washoku\" (和食, \"Japanese cuisine\").\n\nOkonomiyaki is a savoury pancake containing a variety of ingredients.\n\nTonkatsu is a breaded, deep-fried pork cutlet.\n\nCurry was introduced to Japan by the British in the Meiji period. Japanese versions of curry can be found in foods such as curry udon, curry bread, and \"katsukarē\", tonkatsu served with curry. They very commonly come with rice beside the curry on the dish. This can be eaten during dinner most of the time.\n\nChinese-style wheat noodles served in a meat stock broth known as ramen have become extremely popular over the last century.\n\nHamburger chains active in Japan include McDonald's, Burger King, First Kitchen, Lotteria and MOS Burger. Many chains developed uniquely Japanese versions of American fast food such as the teriyaki burger, kinpira (sauté) rice burger, fried shrimp burgers, and green tea milkshakes.\n\nHigh-class Japanese chefs have preserved many Italian seafood dishes that are forgotten in other countries. These include pasta with prawns, lobster (a specialty known in Italy as pasta all'aragosta), crab (an Italian specialty; in Japan it is served with a different species of crab), and pasta with sea urchin sauce (sea urchin pasta being a specialty of the Puglia region).\n\nMany countries have imported portions of Japanese cuisine. Some may adhere to the traditional preparations of the cuisines, but in some cultures the dishes have been adapted to fit the palate of the local populace. In 1970s sushi travelled from Japan to Canada and the United States, it was modified to suit the American palate, and re-entered the Japanese market as \"American Sushi\". An example of this phenomenon is the California roll, which was created in North America in the 1970s, rose in popularity across the United States through the 1980s, and thus sparked Japanese food's – more precisely, sushi's – global popularity.\n\nIn 2014, Japanese Restaurant Organization has selected potential countries where Japanese food is becoming increasingly popular, and conducted research concerning the Japanese restaurants abroad. These key nations or region are Taiwan, Hong Kong, China, Singapore, Thailand and Indonesia. This was meant as an effort to promote Japanese cuisine and to expand the market of Japanese ingredients, products and foodstuffs. Numbers of Japanese foodstuff and seasoning brands such as Ajinomoto, Kikkoman, Nissin and Kewpie mayonnaise, are establishing production base in other Asian countries, such as China, Thailand and Indonesia.\n\nJapan and Taiwan have shared close historical and cultural relations. Taiwan has adapted many Japanese food items. \"Tianbula\", a Taiwanese version of tempura, only barely resembles the original, being more a variant of oden. Taiwanese \"Tianbula\" is prepared by boiling fish paste, dicing it into small pieces, and then coating it lightly with sweet chili sauce. Taiwanese versions of oden are known locally as \"olen\".\n\nIn Southeast Asia, Thailand is the largest market for Japanese food. This is partly because Thailand is a popular tourist destination, having large numbers of Japanese expatriates, as well as the local population having developed a taste for authentic Japanese cuisine. According to the Organisation that Promote Japanese Restaurants Abroad (JRO), the number of Japanese restaurants in Thailand jumped about 2.2-fold from 2007's figures to 1,676 in June 2012. In Bangkok, Japanese restaurants accounts for 8.3 percent of all restaurants, following those that serve Thai. Numbers of Japanese chain restaurants has established their business in Thailand, such as Yoshinoya gyūdon restaurant chain, Gyu-Kaku yakiniku restaurant chain and Kourakuen ramen restaurant chain.\n\nIn the ASEAN region, Indonesia is the second largest market for Japanese food, after Thailand. Japanese cuisine has been increasingly popular as the growth of the Indonesian middle-class expecting higher quality foods. This is also contributed to the fact that Indonesia has large numbers of Japanese expatriates. The main concern is the halal issue. As a Muslim majority country, Indonesians expected that Japanese food served there are halal according to Islamic dietary law, which means no pork and alcohol allowed. Japanese restaurants in Indonesia often offer a set menu which include rice served with an array of Japanese favourites in a single setting. A set menu might include a choice of yakiniku or sukiyaki, including a sample of sushi, tempura, gyoza and miso soup. Quite authentic Japanese style izakaya and ramen shops can be found in Little Tokyo (Melawai) area in Blok M, South Jakarta, serving both Japanese expats and local clienteles. Today, Japanese restaurants can be found in most of Indonesian major cities, with high concentration in Greater Jakarta area, Bandung, Surabaya and Bali.\n\nIn some cases, Japanese cuisine in Indonesia is often slanted to suit Indonesian taste. Hoka Hoka Bento in particular is an Indonesian-owned Japanese fast food restaurant chain that cater to the Indonesian clientele. As a result the foods served there have been adapted to suit Indonesians' taste. Examples of the change include stronger flavours compared to the authentic subtle Japanese taste, the preference for fried food, as well as the addition of sambal to cater to the Indonesians' preference for hot and spicy food.\n\nJapanese food popularity also had penetrated street food culture, as modest \"Warjep\" or \"Warung Jepang\" (Japanese food stall) offer Japanese food such as tempura, okonomiyaki and takoyaki, at very moderately low prices. Today, okonomiyaki and takoyaki are popular street fare in Jakarta and other Indonesian cities. This is also pushed further by the Japanese convenience stores operating in Indonesia, such as 7-Eleven and Lawson offering Japanese favourites such as oden, chicken katsu (deep-fried chicken cutlet), chicken teriyaki and onigiri.\n\nSome chefs in Indonesian sushi establishment has created a Japanese-Indonesian fusion cuisine, such as krakatau roll, gado-gado roll, rendang roll and gulai ramen. The idea of fusion cuisine between spicy Indonesian Padang and Japanese cuisine was thought because both cuisine traditions are well-liked by Indonesians. Nevertheless, some of these Japanese eating establishments might strive to serve authentic Japanese cuisine abroad. Numbers of Japanese chain restaurants has established their business in Indonesia, such as Yoshinoya gyūdon restaurant chain, Gyu-Kaku yakiniku restaurant chain and Ajisen Ramen restaurant chain.\n\nIn the Philippines, Japanese cuisine is also popular among the local population. The Philippines have been exposed to the influences from the Japanese, Indian and Chinese. The cities of Davao and Metro Manila probably have the most Japanese influence in the country. The popular dining spots for Japanese nationals are located in Makati City, which is called as \"Little Tokyo\", a small area filled with restaurants specializing in different types of Japanese food. Some of the best Japanese no-frills restaurants in the Philippines can be found in Makati's \"Little Tokyo\" area.\n\nJapanese cuisine is very popular in Australia, and Australians are becoming increasingly familiar with traditional Japanese foods. Restaurants serving Japanese cuisine feature prominently in popular rankings, including Gourmet Traveller and The Good Food Guide.\n\nSushi in particular has been described as being \"as popular as sandwiches\", particularly in large cities like Melbourne, Sydney, or Brisbane. As such, sushi bars are a mainstay in shopping centre food courts, and are extremely common in cities and towns all over the country.\n\nJapanese food restaurant chains in the UK include Wagamama, YO! Sushi, Nudo Sushi Box, Wasabi and Kokoro.\n\nThe Canada-born popular makizushi California roll has been influential in sushi's global popularity; .\n\nSushi pizza is also originally from Canada.\n\nIn Canada, Japanese cuisine has become quite popular. Sushi, sashimi, and instant ramen are highly popular at opposite ends of the income scale, with instant ramen being a common low-budget meal. Sushi and sashimi takeout began in Vancouver and Toronto, and is now common throughout Canada. The largest supermarket chains all carry basic sushi and sashimi, and Japanese ingredients and instant ramen are readily available in most supermarkets. Most mid-sized mall food courts feature fast-food teppan cooking. Izakaya restaurants have surged in popularity.\n\nThe Canada-born popular makizushi California roll has been influential in sushi's global popularity; the country has about 4,200 sushi restaurants. It is one of the most popular styles of sushi in the US market. Japanese cuisine is an integral part of food culture in Hawaii as well as in other parts of the United States. Popular items are sushi, sashimi, and teriyaki. Kamaboko, known locally as fish cake, is a staple of saimin, a noodle soup. Sushi, long regarded as quite exotic in the west until the 1970s, has become a popular health food in parts of North America, Western Europe and Asia.\n\nTwo of the first Japanese restaurants in the United States were Saito and Nippon. Restaurants such as these popularized dishes such as sukiyaki and tempura, while Nippon was the first restaurant in Manhattan to have a dedicated sushi bar. Nippon was also one of the first Japanese restaurants in the U.S. to grow and process their own soba and responsible for creation of the now standard beef negimayaki dish.\n\nIn the U.S., the phrase “hibachi-style” is sometimes used to refer to what is really teppanyaki \"iron hot plate\" cooking, featuring steak, chicken, or shrimp and vegetables cooked in front of the customer on a \"teppanyaki grill\" (teppan) by a personal chef who turns cooking into performance art, twirling and juggling cutting knives like batons. This style of cooking was made popular in the U.S. when Rocky Aoki founded his popular restaurant chain Benihana in 1964. In Japan this type of cooking is thought to be American food, but in the U.S. it is thought to be Japanese. Aoki thought this would go over better in the U.S. than traditional Japanese cuisine because he felt that Americans enjoyed \"eating in exotic surroundings, but are deeply mistrustful of exotic foods.”\n\nIn Mexico, certain Japanese restaurants have created what is known as \"sushi Mexicano\", in which spicy sauces and ingredients accompany the dish or are integrated in sushi rolls. The habanero and serrano chiles have become nearly standard and are referred to as chiles toreados, as they are fried, diced and tossed over a dish upon request.\n\nIn Brazil, Japanese food is widespread due to the large Japanese-Brazilian population living in the country, which represents the largest Japanese community living outside Japan. Over the past years, many restaurant chains such as Koni Store have opened, selling typical dishes such as the popular temaki. Yakisoba, which is readily available in all supermarkets, and often included in non-Japanese restaurant menus.\n\nIn February 2012, the Agency for Cultural Affairs recommended that 'Washoku: Traditional Dietary Cultures of the Japanese' be added to the UNESCO Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity. On December 4, 2013, \"Washoku, traditional dietary cultures of the Japanese, notably for the celebration of New Year\" was added to UNESCO's Intangible Cultural Heritage, bringing the number of Japanese assets listed on UNESCO's Intangible Cultural Heritage list to 22.\n\nJapanese obsession with fresh food—which manifested in certain aspect of Japanese cuisine traditions of eating live seafood, which includes Ikizukuri and Odori ebi, has gained criticism—condemned as a form of animal cruelty.\n\nJapanese cuisine is heavily dependent on seafood products. Compared to other developed countries, the Japanese eat more fish than any of them, consuming about 27 kilograms of seafood per capita annually. An aspect of environmental concern is Japanese appetite for seafood, which might lead to depletion of natural ocean resources through overfishing. For example, Japan consumes 80% of the global supply of blue fin tuna, a popularly sought sushi and sashimi ingredient, which might lead to its extinction due to commercial overfishing. Another environmental concern is commercial whaling and the consumption of whale meat, since Japan is the world's largest market for whale meat.\n\nBULLET::::- Bento\nBULLET::::- Culture of Japan\nBULLET::::- Cuisine of Okinawa\nBULLET::::- Fake food in Japan\nBULLET::::- Honzen-ryōri\nBULLET::::- Japanese New Year\nBULLET::::- Kaiseki\nBULLET::::- List of Japanese condiments\nBULLET::::- List of Japanese cooking utensils\nBULLET::::- List of Japanese dishes\nBULLET::::- List of Japanese desserts and sweets\nBULLET::::- List of Japanese soups and stews\nBULLET::::- List of Japanese ingredients\nBULLET::::- List of Japanese restaurants\nBULLET::::- Hara, Reiko (2006) \"International Cuisine: Japan\" .\n\nBULLET::::- (language dictionaries)\nBULLET::::- (4th edition), 962pp\nBULLET::::- . Japanese dictionary.\n\nBULLET::::- (encyclopedias and topical dictionaries)\nBULLET::::- (world encyclopedia, in Japanese).\n\nBULLET::::- (Cuisine titles)\n\nBULLET::::- (cookbooks)\n\nBULLET::::- (monograms)\n\nBULLET::::- (guides)\nBULLET::::- (illusr. with diagrams)\n\nBULLET::::- Gastronomic Japan\n"}
{"id": "15978", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15978", "title": "James Monroe", "text": "James Monroe\n\nJames Monroe (; April 28, 1758 – July 4, 1831) was an American statesman, lawyer, diplomat and Founding Father who served as the fifth president of the United States from 1817 to 1825. A member of the Democratic-Republican Party, Monroe was the last president of the Virginia dynasty; his presidency coincided with the Era of Good Feelings. He is perhaps best known for issuing the Monroe Doctrine, a policy of opposing European colonialism in the Americas. He also served as the governor of Virginia, a member of the United States Senate, the U.S. ambassador to France and Britain, the seventh Secretary of State, and the eighth Secretary of War.\n\nBorn into a planter family in Westmoreland County, Virginia, Monroe served in the Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War. After studying law under Thomas Jefferson from 1780 to 1783, he served as a delegate in the Continental Congress. As a delegate to the Virginia Ratifying Convention, Monroe opposed the ratification of the United States Constitution. In 1790, he won election to the Senate, where he became a leader of the Democratic-Republican Party. He left the Senate in 1794 to serve as President George Washington's ambassador to France, but was recalled by Washington in 1796. Monroe won election as Governor of Virginia in 1799 and strongly supported Jefferson's candidacy in the 1800 presidential election.\n\nAs President Jefferson's special envoy, Monroe helped negotiate the Louisiana Purchase, through which the United States nearly doubled in size. Monroe fell out with his longtime friend James Madison after Madison rejected the Monroe–Pinkney Treaty that Monroe negotiated with Britain. He unsuccessfully challenged Madison in the 1808 presidential election, but in April 1811 he joined Madison's administration as Secretary of State. During the later stages of the War of 1812, Monroe simultaneously served as Madison's Secretary of State and Secretary of War. His wartime leadership established him as Madison's heir apparent, and he easily defeated Federalist Party candidate Rufus King in the 1816 presidential election.\n\nMonroe's presidency was coterminous with the Era of Good Feelings, as the Federalist Party collapsed as a national political force. As president, Monroe signed the Missouri Compromise, which admitted Missouri as a slave state and banned slavery from territories north of the parallel 36°30′ north. In foreign affairs, Monroe and Secretary of State John Quincy Adams favored a policy of conciliation with Britain and a policy of expansionism against the Spanish Empire. In the 1819 Adams–Onís Treaty with Spain, the United States secured Florida and established its western border with New Spain. In 1823, Monroe announced the United States' opposition to any European intervention in the recently independent countries of the Americas with the Monroe Doctrine, which became a landmark in American foreign policy. Monroe was a member of the American Colonization Society, which supported the colonization of Africa by freed slaves, and Liberia's capital of Monrovia is named in his honor. Following his retirement in 1825, Monroe was plagued by financial difficulties, and died on July 4, 1831 in New York City. He has been generally ranked as an above-average president by historians.\n\nJames Monroe was born on April 28, 1758, in his parents' house in a wooded area of Westmoreland County, Virginia. The marked site is one mile from the unincorporated community known today as Monroe Hall, Virginia. The James Monroe Family Home Site was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1979. His father Spence Monroe (1727–1774) was a moderately prosperous planter who also practiced carpentry. His mother Elizabeth Jones (1730–1772) married Spence Monroe in 1752 and they had five children: Elizabeth, James, Spence, Andrew, and Joseph Jones.\n\nHis paternal great-great-grandfather Patrick Andrew Monroe emigrated to America from Scotland in the mid-17th century, and was part of an ancient Scottish clan known as Clan Munro. In 1650 he patented a large tract of land in Washington Parish, Westmoreland County, Virginia. Monroe's mother was the daughter of James Jones, who immigrated from Wales and settled in nearby King George County, Virginia. Jones was a wealthy architect. Also among James Monroe's ancestors were French Huguenot immigrants, who came to Virginia in 1700.\n\nAt age 11, Monroe was enrolled in the lone school in the county. He attended this school only 11 weeks a year, as his labor was needed on the farm. During this time, Monroe formed a lifelong friendship with an older classmate, John Marshall. Monroe's mother died in 1772, and his father two years later. Though he inherited property from both of his parents, the 16-year-old Monroe was forced to withdraw from school to support his younger brothers. His childless maternal uncle, Joseph Jones, became a surrogate father to Monroe and his siblings. A member of the Virginia House of Burgesses, Jones took Monroe to the capital of Williamsburg, Virginia, and enrolled him in the College of William and Mary. Jones also introduced Monroe to important Virginians such as Thomas Jefferson, Patrick Henry, and George Washington. In 1774, opposition to the British government grew in the Thirteen Colonies in reaction to the \"Intolerable Acts,\" and Virginia sent a delegation to the First Continental Congress. Monroe became involved in the opposition to Lord Dunmore, the colonial governor of Virginia, and took part in the storming of the Governor's Palace.\n\nIn early 1776, about a year and a half after his enrollment, Monroe dropped out of college and joined the 3rd Virginia Regiment in the Continental Army. As the fledgling army valued literacy in its officers, Monroe was commissioned with the rank of lieutenant, serving under Captain William Washington. After months of training, Monroe and 700 Virginia infantrymen were called north to serve in the New York and New Jersey campaign. Shortly after the Virginians arrived, George Washington led the army in a retreat from New York City into New Jersey and then across the Delaware River into Pennsylvania. In December, Monroe took part in a surprise attack on a Hessian encampment. Though the attack was successful, Monroe suffered a severed artery in the battle and nearly died. In the aftermath, Washington cited Monroe and William Washington for their bravery, and promoted Monroe to captain. After his wounds healed, Monroe returned to Virginia to recruit his own company of soldiers. His participation in the battle was memorialized in John Trumbull's painting \"The Capture of the Hessians at Trenton, December 26, 1776\" as well as Emanuel Leutze's \"Washington Crossing the Delaware.\"\n\nLacking the wealth to induce soldiers to join his company, Monroe instead asked his uncle to return him to the front. Monroe was assigned to the staff of General William Alexander, Lord Stirling. During this time he formed a close friendship with the Marquis de Lafayette, a French volunteer who encouraged him to view the war as part of a wider struggle against religious and political tyranny. Monroe served in the Philadelphia campaign and spent the winter of 1777–78 at the encampment of Valley Forge, sharing a log hut with Marshall. After serving in the Battle of Monmouth, the destitute Monroe resigned his commission in December 1778 and joined his uncle in Philadelphia. After the British captured Savannah, the Virginia legislature decided to raise four regiments, and Monroe returned to his native state, hoping to receive his own command. With letters of recommendation from Washington, Stirling, and Alexander Hamilton, Monroe received a commission as a lieutenant colonel and was expected to lead one of the regiments, but recruitment again proved to be a problem. On Jones's advice, Monroe returned to Williamsburg to study law, becoming a protege of Virginia Governor Thomas Jefferson.\n\nWith the British increasingly focusing their operations in the Southern colonies, the Virginians moved the capital to the more defensible city of Richmond, and Monroe accompanied Jefferson to the new capital. As governor of Virginia, Jefferson held command over its militia, and made Monroe a colonel. Monroe established a messenger network to coordinate with the Continental Army and other state militias. Still unable to raise an army due to a lack of interested recruits, Monroe traveled to his home in King George County, and thus was not present for the British raid of Richmond. As both the Continental Army and the Virginia militia had an abundance of officers, Monroe did not serve during the Yorktown campaign, and, much to his frustration, did not take part in the Siege of Yorktown. Although Andrew Jackson served as a courier in a militia unit at age 13, Monroe is regarded as the last U.S. President who was a Revolutionary War veteran, since he served as an officer of the Continental Army and took part in combat.\nMonroe resumed studying law under Jefferson and continued until 1783. He was not particularly interested in legal theory or practice, but chose to take it up because he thought it offered \"the most immediate rewards\" and could ease his path to wealth, social standing, and political influence. Monroe was admitted to the Virginia bar and practiced in Fredericksburg, Virginia.\n\nOn February 16, 1786, Monroe married Elizabeth Kortright (1768–1830) in New York City. She was the daughter of Hannah Aspinwall Kortright and Laurence Kortright, a wealthy trader and former British officer. Monroe met her while serving in the Continental Congress.\n\nAfter a brief honeymoon on Long Island, New York, the Monroes returned to New York City to live with her father until Congress adjourned. They then moved to Virginia, settling in Charlottesville, Virginia, in 1789. They bought an estate in Charlottesville known as Ash Lawn–Highland, settling on the property in 1799. The Monroes had three children.\nBULLET::::- Eliza Monroe Hay was born in Fredericksburg, Virginia, in 1786, and was educated in Paris at the school of Madame Campan during the time her father was the United States Ambassador to France. In 1808 she married George Hay, a prominent Virginia attorney who had served as prosecutor in the trial of Aaron Burr and later as a U.S. District Judge. She died in 1840.\nBULLET::::- James Spence Monroe was born in 1799 and died sixteen months later in 1800.\nBULLET::::- Maria Hester Monroe (1804–1850) married her cousin Samuel L. Gouverneur on March 8, 1820, in the White House, the first president's child to marry there.\n\nMonroe sold his small Virginia plantation in 1783 to enter law and politics. He later fulfilled his childhood dream of becoming the owner of a large plantation and wielding great political power, but his plantation was never profitable. Although he owned much more land and many more slaves, and speculated in property, he was rarely on site to oversee the operations. Overseers treated the slaves harshly to force production, but the plantations barely broke even. Monroe incurred debts by his lavish and expensive lifestyle and often sold property (including slaves) to pay them off. Overseers moved or separated slave families from different Monroe plantations in accordance with production and maintenance needs of each satellite plantation. One of Monroe's slaves, Daniel, often ran away from his plantation in Albermarle County, to visit other slaves or separated family members. Monroe commonly called Daniel a \"scoundrel\" and described his \"worthlessness\" as a runaway slave. The practice of moving and separating slave families was common in the South.\n\nMonroe was elected to the Virginia House of Delegates in 1782. After serving on Virginia's Executive Council, he was elected to the Congress of the Confederation in November 1783 and served in Annapolis until Congress convened in Trenton, New Jersey in June 1784. He had served a total of three years when he finally retired from that office by the rule of rotation. By that time, the government was meeting in the temporary capital of New York City. In 1784, Monroe undertook an extensive trip through Western New York and Pennsylvania to inspect the conditions in the Northwest. The tour convinced him that the United States had to pressure Britain to abandon its posts in the region and assert control of the Northwest. While serving in Congress, Monroe became an advocate for western expansion, and played a key role in the writing and passage of the Northwest Ordinance. The ordinance created the Northwest Territory, providing for federal administration of the territories West of Pennsylvania and North of the Ohio River. During this period, Jefferson continued to serve as a mentor to Monroe, and, at Jefferson's prompting, he befriended another prominent Virginian, James Madison.\n\nMonroe resigned from Congress in 1786 to focus on his legal career, and he became an attorney for the state. In 1787, Monroe won election to another term in the Virginia House of Delegates. Though he had become outspoken in his desire to reform the Articles, he was unable to attend the Philadelphia Convention due to his work obligations. In 1788, Monroe became a delegate to the Virginia Ratifying Convention. In Virginia, the struggle over the ratification of the proposed Constitution involved more than a simple clash between federalists and anti-federalists. Virginians held a full spectrum of opinions about the merits of the proposed change in national government. Washington and Madison were leading supporters; Patrick Henry and George Mason were leading opponents. Those who held the middle ground in the ideological struggle became the central figures. Led by Monroe and Edmund Pendleton, these \"federalists who are for amendments,\" criticized the absence of a bill of rights and worried about surrendering taxation powers to the central government. After Madison reversed himself and promised to pass a bill of rights, the Virginia convention ratified the constitution by a narrow vote, though Monroe himself voted against it. Virginia was the tenth state to ratify the Constitution, and all thirteen states eventually ratified the document.\n\nHenry and other anti-federalists hoped to elect a Congress that would amend the Constitution to take away most of the powers it had been granted (\"commit suicide on [its] own authority,\" as Madison put it). Henry recruited Monroe to run against Madison for a House seat in the First Congress, and he had the Virginia legislature draw a congressional district designed to elect Monroe. During the campaign, Madison and Monroe often traveled together, and the election did not destroy their friendship. Madison prevailed over Monroe, taking 1,308 votes compared to Monroe's 972 votes. Following his defeat, Monroe returned to his legal duties and developed his farm in Charlottesville. After the death of Senator William Grayson in 1790, Monroe was elected to serve the remainder of Grayson's term.\n\nDuring the presidency of George Washington, U.S. politics became increasingly polarized between the supporters of Secretary of State Jefferson and\nthe Federalists, led by Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton. Monroe stood firmly with Jefferson in opposing Hamilton's strong central government and strong executive. The Democratic-Republican Party coalesced around Jefferson and Madison, and Monroe became one of the fledgling party's leaders in the Senate. He also helped organize opposition to John Adams in the 1792\nelection, though Adams defeated George Clinton to win re-election. As the 1790s progressed, the French Revolutionary Wars came to dominate U.S. foreign policy, with British and French raids both threatening U.S. trade with Europe. Like most other Jeffersonians, Monroe supported the French Revolution, but Hamilton's followers tended to sympathize more with Britain. In 1794, hoping to find a way to avoid war with both countries, Washington appointed Monroe as his minister (ambassador) to France. At the same time, he appointed the anglophile Federalist John Jay as his minister to Britain.\n\nAfter arriving in France, Monroe addressed the National Convention, receiving a standing ovation for his speech celebrating republicanism. He experienced several early diplomatic successes, including the protection of U.S. trade from French attacks. He also used his influence to win the release of Thomas Paine and Adrienne de La Fayette, the wife of the Marquis de Lafayette. Months after Monroe arrived in France, the U.S. and Great Britain concluded the Jay Treaty, outraging both the French and Monroe—not fully informed about the treaty prior to its publication. Despite the undesirable effects of the Jay Treaty on Franco-American relations, Monroe won French support for U.S. navigational rights on the Mississippi River—the mouth of which was controlled by Spain—and in 1795 the U.S. and Spain signed Pinckney's Treaty. The treaty granted the U.S. limited rights to use the port of New Orleans.\n\nWashington decided Monroe was inefficient, disruptive, and failed to safeguard the national interest. He recalled Monroe in November 1796. Returning to his home in Charlottesville, he resumed his dual careers as a farmer and lawyer. Jefferson and Madison urged Monroe to run for Congress, but Monroe chose to focus on state politics instead.\n\nIn 1798 Monroe published \"A View of the Conduct of the Executive, in the Foreign Affairs of the United States: Connected with the Mission to the French Republic, During the Years 1794, 5, and 6 \". It was a long defence of his term as Minister to France. He followed the advice of his friend Robert Livingston who cautioned him to \"repress every harsh and acrimonious\" comment about Washington. However, he did complain that too often the U.S. government had been too close to Britain, especially regarding the Jay Treaty. Washington made notes on this copy, writing, \"The truth is, Mr. Monroe was cajoled, flattered, and made to believe strange things. In return he did, or was disposed to do, whatever was pleasing to that nation, reluctantly urging the rights of his own.\"\n\nBack in 1792, then-Senator Monroe was investigating charges of corruption and misuse of Federal funds earmarked as pay for Revolutionary War veterans, when he encountered claims that Secretary of Treasury Alexander Hamilton was involved. Monroe, Frederick Muhlenberg, and Abraham Venable determined that Hamilton had been making payments to James Reynolds, a co-conspirator in the financial scheme using government money. The investigating committee prepared a report for George Washington, but confronted Hamilton before sending it. Hamilton confessed not to the corruption charge, but instead to an affair with Reynolds' wife, Maria. He claimed Reynolds had found out and was blackmailing him, and offered letters to prove his story. The investigators immediately dropped the matter, and Monroe promised Hamilton he would keep the matter private.\n\nWhen another suspect in that investigation, Jacob Clingman, told Maria Reynolds about the claim she'd had an affair with Hamilton, she denied it, claiming the letters had been forged to help cover up the corruption. Clingman went to Monroe about this. Monroe added that interview to his notes, and sent the entire set to a friend, possibly Thomas Jefferson, for safekeeping. Unfortunately, the secretary who was involved in managing the notes of the investigation made copies and gave them to scandal writer James Callender.\n\nFive years later, shortly after Monroe was recalled from France, Callender published accusations against Hamilton based on those notes. Hamilton and his wife thought this was retaliation on the part of Monroe for the recall, and confronted by Hamilton via letter. In a subsequent meeting between the two of them, where Hamilton had suggested each bring a \"second,\" Hamilton accused Monroe of lying, and challenged him to a duel. While such challenges were usually hot air, in this case Monroe replied \"I am ready, get your pistols.\" Their seconds interceded, and an arrangement was made to give Hamilton documentation on what had occurred with the investigation.\n\nHamilton was not satisfied with the subsequent explanations, and at the end of an exchange of letters the two were threatening duels, again. Monroe chose Aaron Burr as his second. Burr worked as a negotiator between the two parties, believing they were both being \"childish,\" and eventually helped settle matters.\n\nOn a party-line vote, the Virginia legislature elected Monroe as Governor of Virginia in 1799. He would serve as governor until 1802. The constitution of Virginia endowed the governor with very few powers aside from commanding the militia when the Assembly called it into action. But Monroe used his stature to convince legislators to enhance state involvement in transportation and education and to increase training for the militia. Monroe also began to give State of the Commonwealth addresses to the legislature, in which he highlighted areas in which he believed the legislature should act. Monroe also led an effort to create the state's first penitentiary, and imprisonment replaced other, often harsher, punishments. In 1800, Monroe called out the state militia to suppress Gabriel's Rebellion, a slave rebellion originating on a plantation six miles from the capital of Richmond. Gabriel and 27 other enslaved people who participated were all hanged for treason.\n\nMonroe thought that foreign and Federalist elements had created the Quasi War of 1798–1800, and he strongly supported Thomas Jefferson's candidacy for president in 1800. Federalists were likewise suspicious of Monroe, some viewing him at best as a French dupe and at worst a traitor. With the power to appoint election officials in Virginia, Monroe exercised his influence to help Jefferson win Virginia's presidential electors. He also considered using the Virginia militia to force the outcome in favor of Jefferson. Jefferson won the 1800 election, and he appointed Madison as his Secretary of State. As a member of Jefferson's party and the leader of the largest state in the country, Monroe emerged as one of Jefferson's two most likely successors, alongside Madison.\n\nShortly after the end of Monroe's gubernatorial tenure, President Jefferson sent Monroe back to France to assist Ambassador Robert R. Livingston in negotiating the Louisiana Purchase. In the 1800 Treaty of San Ildefonso, France had acquired the territory of Louisiana from Spain; at the time, many in the U.S. believed that France had also acquired West Florida in the same treaty. The American delegation originally sought to acquire West Florida and the city of New Orleans, which controlled the trade of the Mississippi River. Determined to acquire New Orleans even if it meant war with France, Jefferson also authorized Monroe to form an alliance with the British if the French refused to sell the city.\n\nMeeting with François Barbé-Marbois, the French foreign minister, Monroe and Livingston agreed to purchase the entire territory of Louisiana for $15 million; the purchase became known as the Louisiana Purchase. In agreeing to the purchase, Monroe violated his instructions, which had only allowed $9 million for the purchase of New Orleans and West Florida. The French did not acknowledge that West Florida remained in Spanish possession, and the United States would claim that France had sold West Florida to the United States for several years to come. Though he had not ordered the purchase of the entire territory, Jefferson strongly supported Monroe's actions, which ensured that the United States would continue to expand to the West. Overcoming doubts about whether the Constitution authorized the purchase of foreign territory, Jefferson won congressional approval for the Louisiana Purchase, and the acquisition doubled the size of the United States. Monroe would travel to Spain in 1805 to try to win the cession of West Florida, but, with the support of France, Spain refused to consider relinquishing the territory.\n\nAfter the resignation of Rufus King, Monroe was appointed as the ambassador to Great Britain in 1803. The greatest issue of contention between the United States and Britain was that of the impressment of U.S. sailors. Many U.S. merchant ships employed British seamen who had deserted or dodged conscription, and the British frequently impressed sailors on U.S. ships in hopes of quelling their manpower issues. Many of the sailors they impressed had never been British subjects, and Monroe was tasked with persuading the British to stop their practice of impressment. Monroe found little success in this endeavor, partly due to Jefferson's alienation of the British minister to the United States, Anthony Merry. Rejecting Jefferson's offer to serve as the first governor of Louisiana Territory, Monroe continued to serve as ambassador to Britain until 1807.\n\nIn 1806 he negotiated the Monroe–Pinkney Treaty with Great Britain. It would have extended the Jay Treaty of 1794 which had expired after ten years. Jefferson had fought the Jay Treaty intensely in 1794–95 because he felt it would allow the British to subvert American republicanism. The treaty had produced ten years of peace and highly lucrative trade for American merchants, but Jefferson was still opposed. When Monroe and the British signed the new treaty in December 1806, Jefferson refused to submit it to the Senate for ratification. Although the treaty called for ten more years of trade between the United States and the British Empire and gave American merchants guarantees that would have been good for business, Jefferson was unhappy that it did not end the hated British practice of impressment, and refused to give up the potential weapon of commercial warfare against Britain. The president made no attempt to obtain another treaty, and as a result, the two nations drifted from peace toward the War of 1812. Monroe was severely pained by the administration's repudiation of the treaty, and he fell out with Secretary of State James Madison.\n\nOn his return to Virginia in 1807, Monroe received a warm reception, and many urged him to run in the 1808 presidential election. After Jefferson refused to submit the Monroe-Pinkney Treaty, Monroe had come to believe that Jefferson had snubbed the treaty out of the desire to avoid elevating Monroe above Madison in 1808. Out of deference to Jefferson, Monroe agreed to avoid actively campaigning for the presidency, but he did not rule out accepting a draft effort. The Democratic-Republican Party was increasingly factionalized, with \"Old Republicans\" or \"Quids\" denouncing the Jefferson administration for abandoning what they considered to be true republican principles. The Quids tried to enlist Monroe in their cause. The plan was to run Monroe for president in the 1808 election in cooperation with the Federalist Party, which had a strong base in New England. John Randolph of Roanoke led the Quid effort to stop Jefferson's choice of Madison. The regular Democratic-Republicans overcame the Quids in the nominating caucus, kept control of the party in Virginia, and protected Madison's base. Monroe did not publicly criticize Jefferson or Madison during Madison's campaign against Federalist Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, but he refused to support Madison. Madison defeated Pinckney by a large margin, carrying all but one state outside of New England. Monroe won 3,400 votes in Virginia, but received little support elsewhere. After the election Monroe quickly reconciled with Jefferson, but their friendship endured further strains when Jefferson did not promote Monroe's candidacy to Congress in 1809. Monroe did not speak with Madison until 1810. Returning to private life, he devoted his attentions to farming at his Charlottesville estate.\n\nMonroe returned to the Virginia House of Burgesses and was elected to another term as governor in 1811, but served only four months. In April 1811, Madison appointed Monroe as Secretary of State in hopes of shoring up the support of the more radical factions of the Democratic-Republicans. Madison also hoped that Monroe, an experienced diplomat with whom he had once been close friends, would improve upon the performance of the previous Secretary of State, Robert Smith. Madison assured Monroe that their differences regarding the Monroe-Pinkney Treaty had been a misunderstanding, and the two resumed their friendship. On taking office, Monroe hoped to negotiate treaties with the British and French to end the attacks on American merchant ships. While the French agreed to reduce the attacks and release seized American ships, the British were less receptive to Monroe's demands. Monroe had long worked for peace with the British, but he came to favor war with Britain, joining with \"war hawks\" such as Speaker of the House Henry Clay. With the support of Monroe and Clay, Madison asked Congress to declare war upon the British, and Congress complied on June 18, 1812, thus beginning the War of 1812.\n\nThe war went very badly, and the Madison administration quickly sought peace, but were rejected by the British. The U.S. Navy did experience several successes after Monroe convinced Madison to allow the Navy's ships to set sail rather than remaining in port for the duration of the war. After the resignation of Secretary of War William Eustis, Madison asked Monroe to serve in dual roles as Secretary of State and Secretary of War, but opposition from the Senate limited Monroe to serving as acting Secretary of War until Brigadier General John Armstrong won Senate confirmation. Monroe and Armstrong clashed over war policy, and Armstrong blocked Monroe's hopes of being appointed to lead an invasion of Canada. As the war dragged on, the British offered to begin negotiations in Ghent, and the United States sent a delegation led by John Quincy Adams to conduct negotiations. Monroe allowed Adams leeway in setting terms, so long as he ended the hostilities and preserved American neutrality.\n\nWhen the British burned the U.S. Capitol and the White House on August 24, 1814, Madison removed Armstrong as Secretary of War and turned to Monroe for help, appointing him Secretary of War on September 27. Monroe resigned as Secretary of State on October 1, 1814, but no successor was ever appointed and thus from October 1814 to February 28, 1815, Monroe effectively held both Cabinet posts. Now in command of the war effort, Monroe ordered General Andrew Jackson to defend against a likely attack on New Orleans by the British, and he asked the governors of nearby states to send their militias to reinforce Jackson. He also called on Congress to draft an army of 100,000 men, increase compensation to soldiers, and establish a new national bank to ensure adequate funding for the war effort. Months after Monroe took office as Secretary of War, the war ended with the signing of the Treaty of Ghent. The treaty resulted in a return to the status quo ante bellum, and many outstanding issues between the United States and Britain remained. But Americans celebrated the end of the war as a great victory, partly due to the news of the treaty reaching the United States shortly after Jackson's victory in the Battle of New Orleans. With the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815, the British also ended the practice of impressment. After the war, Congress authorized the creation a national bank in the form of the Second Bank of the United States.\n\nMonroe decided to seek the presidency in the 1816 election, and his war-time leadership had established him as Madison's heir apparent. Monroe had strong support from many in the party, but his candidacy was challenged at the 1816 Democratic-Republican congressional nominating caucus. Secretary of the Treasury William H. Crawford had the support of numerous Southern and Western Congressmen, while Governor Daniel D. Tompkins was backed by several Congressmen from New York. Crawford appealed especially to many Democratic-Republicans who were wary of Madison and Monroe's support for the establishment of the Second Bank of the United States. Despite his substantial backing, Crawford decided to defer to Monroe on the belief that he could eventually run as Monroe's successor, and Monroe won his party's nomination. Tompkins won the party's vice presidential nomination. The moribund Federalists nominated Rufus King as their presidential nominee, but the party offered little opposition following the conclusion of a popular war that they had opposed. Monroe received 183 of the 217 electoral votes, winning every state but Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Delaware.\n\nMonroe largely ignored old party lines in making federal appointments, which reduced political tensions and augmented the sense of \"oneness\" that pervaded the United States. He made two long national tours to build national trust. At Boston, a newspaper hailed his 1817 visit as the beginning of an \"Era of Good Feelings\". Frequent stops on his tours included ceremonies of welcome and expressions of good-will. The Federalist Party continued to fade during his administration; it maintained its vitality and organizational integrity in Delaware and a few localities, but lacked influence in national politics. Lacking serious opposition, the Democratic-Republican Party's Congressional caucus stopped meeting, and for practical purposes the party stopped operating.\n\nMonroe appointed a geographically-balanced cabinet, through which he led the executive branch. At Monroe's request, Crawford continued to serve as Treasury Secretary. Monroe also chose to retain Benjamin Crowninshield of Massachusetts as Secretary of the Navy and Richard Rush of Pennsylvania as Attorney General. Recognizing Northern discontent at the continuation of the Virginia dynasty, Monroe chose John Quincy Adams of Massachusetts as Secretary of State, making Adams the early favorite to eventually succeed Monroe. An experienced diplomat, Adams had abandoned the Federalist Party in 1807 in support of Thomas Jefferson's foreign policy, and Monroe hoped that the appointment would encourage the defection of more Federalists. After General Andrew Jackson declined appointment as Secretary of War, Monroe turned to South Carolina Congressman John C. Calhoun, leaving the Cabinet without a prominent Westerner. In late 1817 Rush became the ambassador to Britain, and William Wirt succeeded him as Attorney General. With the exception of Crowninshield, the rest of Monroe's initial cabinet appointees remained in place for the remainder of his presidency.\n\nIn February 1819, a bill to enable the people of the Missouri Territory to draft a constitution and form a government preliminary to admission into the Union came before the House of Representatives. During these proceedings, Congressman James Tallmadge, Jr. of New York \"tossed a bombshell into the Era of Good Feelings\" by offering the Tallmadge Amendment, which prohibited the further introduction of slaves into Missouri and required that all future children of slave parents therein should be free at the age of twenty-five years. After three days of rancorous and sometimes bitter debate, the bill, with Tallmadge's amendments, passed. The measure then went to the Senate, where both amendments were rejected. A House–Senate conference committee was unable to resolve the disagreements on the bill, and so the entire measure failed. The ensuing debates pitted the northern \"restrictionists\" (antislavery legislators who wished to bar slavery from the Louisiana territories) against southern \"anti-restrictionists\" (proslavery legislators who rejected any interference by Congress inhibiting slavery expansion).\n\nDuring the following session, the House passed a similar bill with an amendment, introduced on January 26, 1820, by John W. Taylor of New York, allowing Missouri into the union as a slave state. The question had been complicated by the admission in December of Alabama, a slave state, making the number of slave and free states equal. In addition, there was a bill in passage through the House (January 3, 1820) to admit Maine as a free state. The Senate decided to connect the two measures. It passed a bill for the admission of Maine with an amendment enabling the people of Missouri to form a state constitution. Before the bill was returned to the House, a second amendment was adopted on the motion of Jesse B. Thomas of Illinois, excluding slavery from the Louisiana Territory north of the parallel 36°30′ north (the southern boundary of Missouri), except within the limits of the proposed state of Missouri. The House then approved the bill as amended by the Senate. The legislation passed, which became known as the Missouri Compromise, won the support of Monroe and both houses of Congress, and compromise temporarily settled the issue of slavery in the territories.\n\nAs the United States continued to grow, many Americans advocated a system of internal improvements to help the country develop. Federal assistance for such projects evolved slowly and haphazardly—the product of contentious congressional factions and an executive branch generally concerned with avoiding unconstitutional federal intrusions into state affairs. Monroe believed that the young nation needed an improved infrastructure, including a transportation network to grow and thrive economically, but did not think that the Constitution authorized Congress to build, maintain, and operate a national transportation system. Monroe repeatedly urged Congress to pass an amendment allowing Congress the power to finance internal improvements, but Congress never acted on his proposal, in part because many congressmen believed that the Constitution did in fact authorize the federal financing of internal improvements. In 1822, Congress passed a bill authorizing the collection of tolls on the Cumberland Road, with the tolls being used to finance repairs on the road. Adhering to stated position regarding internal improvements, Monroe vetoed the bill. In an elaborate essay, Monroe set forth his constitutional views on the subject. Congress might appropriate money, he admitted, but it might not undertake the actual construction of national works nor assume jurisdiction over them.\n\nIn 1824, the Supreme Court ruled in \"Gibbons v. Ogden\" that the Constitution's Commerce Clause gave the federal government the authority to regulate interstate commerce. Shortly thereafter, Congress passed two important laws that, together, marked the beginning of the federal government's continuous involvement in civil works. The General Survey Act authorized the president to have surveys made of routes for roads and canals \"of national importance, in a commercial or military point of view, or necessary for the transportation of public mail.\" The president assigned responsibility for the surveys to the Army Corps of Engineers. The second act, passed a month later, appropriated $75,000 to improve navigation on the Ohio and Mississippi rivers by removing sandbars, snags, and other obstacles. Subsequently, the act was amended to include other rivers such as the Missouri. This work, too, was given to the Corps of Engineers—the only formally trained body of engineers in the new republic and, as part of the nation's small army, available to serve the wishes of Congress and the executive branch.\n\nTwo years into his presidency, Monroe faced an economic crisis known as the Panic of 1819, the first major depression to hit the country since the ratification of the Constitution in 1788. The panic stemmed from declining imports and exports, and sagging agricultural prices as global markets readjusted to peacetime production and commerce in the aftermath of the War of 1812 and the Napoleonic Wars. The severity of the economic downturn in the U.S. was compounded by excessive speculation in public lands, fueled by the unrestrained issue of paper money from banks and business concerns. Monroe lacked the power to intervene directly in the economy, as banks were largely regulated by the states, and he could do little to stem the economic crisis.\n\nBefore the onset of the Panic of 1819, some business leaders had called on Congress to increase tariff rates to address the negative balance of trade and help struggling industries. As the panic spread, Monroe declined to call a special session of Congress to address the economy. When Congress finally reconvened in December 1819, Monroe requested an increase in the tariff but declined to recommend specific rates. Congress would not raise tariff rates until the passage of the Tariff of 1824. The panic resulted in high unemployment and an increase in bankruptcies and foreclosures, and provoked popular resentment against banking and business enterprises.\n\nAccording to historian William E. Weeks, \"Monroe evolved a comprehensive strategy aimed at expanding the Union externally while solidifying it internally\". He expanded trade and pacified relations with Great Britain while expanding the United States at the expense of the Spanish Empire, from which he obtained Florida and the recognition of a border across the continent. Faced with the breakdown of the expansionist consensus over the question of slavery, the president tried to provide both North and South with guarantees that future expansion would not tip the balance of power between slave and free states, a system that, Weeks remarks, did indeed allow the continuation of American expansion for the best of four decades.\n\nMonroe pursued warmer relations with Britain in the aftermath of the War of 1812. In 1817 the United States and Britain signed the Rush–Bagot Treaty, which regulated naval armaments on the Great Lakes and Lake Champlain and demilitarized the border between the U.S. and British North America. The Treaty of 1818, also with Great Britain, was concluded October 20, 1818, and fixed the present Canada–United States border from Minnesota to the Rocky Mountains at the 49th parallel. The accords also established a joint U.S.–British occupation of Oregon Country for the next ten years. Though they did not solve every outstanding issue between the U.S. and Britain, the treaties allowed for greater trade between the United States and the British Empire and helped avoid an expensive naval arms race in the Great Lakes. Late in Monroe's second term, the U.S. concluded the Russo-American Treaty of 1824 with the Russian Empire, setting the southern limit of Russian sovereignty on the Pacific coast of North America at the 54°40′ parallel (the present southern tip of the Alaska Panhandle).\n\nSpain had long rejected repeated American efforts to purchase Florida. But by 1818, Spain was facing a troubling colonial situation in which the cession of Florida made sense. Spain had been exhausted by the Peninsular War in Europe and needed to rebuild its credibility and presence in its colonies. Revolutionaries in Central America and South America were beginning to demand independence. Spain was unwilling to invest further in Florida, encroached on by American settlers, and it worried about the border between New Spain and the United States. With only a minor military presence in Florida, Spain was not able to restrain the Seminole warriors who routinely crossed the border and raided American villages and farms, as well as protected southern slave refugees from slave owners and traders of the southern United States.\n\nIn response to these Seminole attacks, Monroe ordered a military expedition to cross into Spanish Florida and attack the Seminoles. The expedition, led by Andrew Jackson, defeated numerous Seminoles but also seized the Spanish territorial capital of Pensacola. With the capture of Pensacola, Jackson established de facto American control of the entire territory. While Monroe supported Jackson's actions, many in Congress harshly criticized what they saw as an undeclared war. With the support of Secretary of State Adams, Monroe defended Jackson against domestic and international criticism, and the United States began negotiations with Spain.\n\nSpain faced revolt in all her American colonies and could neither govern nor defend Florida. On February 22, 1819, Spain and the United States signed the Adams–Onís Treaty, which ceded the Floridas in return for the assumption by the United States of claims of American citizens against Spain to an amount not exceeding $5,000,000. The treaty also contained a definition of the boundary between Spanish and American possessions on the North American continent. Beginning at the mouth of the Sabine River the line ran along that river to the 32nd parallel, then due north to the Red River, which it followed to the 100th meridian, due north to the Arkansas River, and along that river to its source, then north to the 42nd parallel, which it followed to the Pacific Ocean. As the United States renounced all claims to the west and south of this boundary (Texas), so Spain surrendered any title she had to the Northwest (Oregon Country).\n\nMonroe was deeply sympathetic to the Latin American revolutionary movements against Spain. He was determined that the United States should never repeat the policies of the Washington administration during the French Revolution, when the nation had failed to demonstrate its sympathy for the aspirations of peoples seeking to establish republican governments. He did not envisage military involvement but only the provision of moral support, as he believed that a direct American intervention would provoke other European powers into assisting Spain. Monroe initially refused to recognize the Latin American governments due to ongoing negotiations with Spain over Florida.\n\nIn March 1822, Monroe officially recognized the countries of Argentina, Peru, Colombia, Chile, and Mexico, all of which had won independence from Spain. Secretary of State Adams, under Monroe's supervision, wrote the instructions for the ministers to these new countries. They declared that the policy of the United States was to uphold republican institutions and to seek treaties of commerce on a most-favored-nation basis. The United States would support inter-American congresses dedicated to the development of economic and political institutions fundamentally differing from those prevailing in Europe. Monroe took pride as the United States was the first nation to extend recognition and to set an example to the rest of the world for its support of the \"cause of liberty and humanity\".\n\nFor their part, the British also had a strong interest in ensuring the demise of Spanish colonialism, with all the trade restrictions mercantilism imposed. In October 1823, Richard Rush, the American minister in London, advised that Foreign Secretary George Canning was proposing that the U.S. and Britain issue a joint declaration to deter any other power from intervening in Central and South America. Adams vigorously opposed cooperation with Great Britain, contending that a statement of bilateral nature could limit United States expansion in the future. He also argued that the British were not committed to recognizing the Latin American republics and must have had imperial motivations themselves.\n\nTwo months later, the bilateral statement proposed by the British became a unilateral declaration by the United States. While Monroe thought that Spain was unlikely to re-establish its colonial empire on its own, he feared that France or the Holy Alliance might seek to establish control over the former Spanish possessions. On December 2, 1823, in his annual message to Congress, Monroe articulated what became known as the Monroe Doctrine. He first reiterated the traditional U.S. policy of neutrality with regard to European wars and conflicts. He then declared that the United States would not accept the recolonization of any country by its former European master, though he also avowed non-interference with existing European colonies in the Americas. Finally, he stated that European countries should no longer consider the Western Hemisphere open to new colonization, a jab aimed primarily at Russia, which was attempting to expand its colony on the northern Pacific Coast.\n\nThe collapse of the Federalists left Monroe with no organized opposition at the end of his first term, and he ran for reelection unopposed, the only president other than Washington to do so. A single elector from New Hampshire, William Plumer, cast a vote for John Quincy Adams, preventing a unanimous vote in the Electoral College. He did so because he thought Monroe was incompetent. Later in the century, the story arose that he had cast his dissenting vote so that only George Washington would have the honor of unanimous election. Plumer never mentioned Washington in his speech explaining his vote to the other New Hampshire electors.\n\nFive new states were admitted to the Union while Monroe was in office:\nBULLET::::- MississippiDecember 10, 1817\nBULLET::::- IllinoisDecember 3, 1818\nBULLET::::- AlabamaDecember 14, 1819\nBULLET::::- MaineMarch 15, 1820\nBULLET::::- MissouriAugust 10, 1821\n\nWhen his presidency ended on March 4, 1825, James Monroe resided at Monroe Hill, what is now included in the grounds of the University of Virginia. He served on the university's Board of Visitors under Jefferson and under the second rector James Madison, both former presidents, almost until his death. He and his wife lived at Oak Hill in Aldie, Virginia, until Elizabeth's death on September 23, 1830. In August 1825, the Monroes had received the Marquis de Lafayette and President John Quincy Adams as guests there.\n\nMonroe incurred many unliquidated debts during his years of public life. He sold off his Highland Plantation. It is now owned by his \"alma mater\", the College of William and Mary, which has opened it to the public as a historic site. Throughout his life, he was financially insolvent, and this was exacerbated by his wife's poor health.\n\nMonroe was elected as a delegate to the Virginia Constitutional Convention of 1829-1830. He was one of four delegates elected from the senatorial district made up of his home district of Loudoun and Fairfax County. In October 1829, he was elected by the Convention to serve as the presiding officer, until his failing health required him to withdraw on December 8, after which Philip Pendleton Barbour of Orange County was elected presiding officer.\n\nUpon Elizabeth's death in 1830, Monroe moved to 63 Prince Street at Lafayette Place in New York City to live with his daughter Maria Hester Monroe Gouverneur, who had married Samuel L. Gouverneur. Monroe's health began to slowly fail by the end of the 1820s. On July 4, 1831, Monroe died from heart failure and tuberculosis, thus becoming the third president to have died on Independence Day. His death came 55 years after the United States Declaration of Independence was proclaimed and five years after the deaths of John Adams and Thomas Jefferson. His last words were, \"I regret that I should leave this world without again beholding him.\" He referred to James Madison, who in fact was one of his best friends. Monroe was originally buried in New York at the Gouverneur family's vault in the New York City Marble Cemetery. 27 years later, in 1858, his body was re-interred at the President's Circle in Hollywood Cemetery in Richmond, Virginia. The James Monroe Tomb is a U.S. National Historic Landmark.\n\n\"When it comes to Monroe's thoughts on religion,\" historian Bliss Isely notes, \"less is known than that of any other President.\" No letters survive in which he discussed his religious beliefs. Nor did his friends, family or associates comment on his beliefs. Letters that do survive, such as ones written after the death of his son, contain no discussion of religion.\n\nMonroe was raised in a family that belonged to the Church of England when it was the state church in Virginia before the Revolution. As an adult, he attended Episcopal churches. Some historians see \"deistic tendencies\" in his few references to an impersonal God. Unlike Jefferson, Monroe was rarely attacked as an atheist or infidel. In 1832 James Renwick Willson, a Reformed Presbyterian minister in Albany, New York, criticized Monroe for having \"lived and died like a second-rate Athenian philosopher.\"\n\nMonroe owned dozens of slaves. He took several slaves with him to Washington to serve at the White House from 1817 to 1825. This was typical of other slaveholders, as Congress did not provide for domestic staff of the presidents at that time.\n\nAs president of Virginia's constitutional convention in the fall of 1829, Monroe reiterated his belief that slavery was a blight which, even as a British colony, Virginia had attempted to eradicate. \"What was the origin of our slave population?\" he rhetorically asked. \"The evil commenced when we were in our Colonial state, but acts were passed by our Colonial Legislature, prohibiting the importation, of more slaves, into the Colony. These were rejected by the Crown.\" To the dismay of states' rights proponents, he was willing to accept the federal government's financial assistance to emancipate and transport freed slaves to other countries. At the convention, Monroe made his final public statement on slavery, proposing that Virginia emancipate and deport its bondsmen with \"the aid of the Union.\"\n\nWhen Monroe was Governor of Virginia in 1800, hundreds of slaves from Virginia planned to kidnap him, take Richmond, and negotiate for their freedom. Gabriel's slave conspiracy was discovered. Monroe called out the militia; the slave patrols soon captured some slaves accused of involvement. Sidbury says some trials had a few measures to prevent abuses, such as an appointed attorney, but they were \"hardly 'fair'\". Slave codes prevented slaves from being treated like whites, and they were given quick trials without a jury. Monroe influenced the Executive Council to pardon and sell some slaves instead of hanging them. Historians say the Virginia courts executed between 26 and 35 slaves. None of the executed slaves had killed any whites because the uprising had been foiled before it began.\n\nMonroe was active in the American Colonization Society, which supported the establishment of colonies outside of the United States for free African-Americans. The society helped send several thousand freed slaves to the new colony of Liberia in Africa from 1820 to 1840. Slave owners like Monroe and Andrew Jackson wanted to prevent free blacks from encouraging slaves in the South to rebel. Liberia's capital Monrovia was named after President Monroe.\n\nPolls of historians and political scientists tend to rank Monroe as an above average president. Monroe presided over a period in which the United States began to turn away from European affairs and towards domestic issues. His presidency saw the United States settle many of its longstanding boundary issues through an accommodation with Britain and the acquisition of Florida. Monroe also helped resolve sectional tensions through his support of the Missouri Compromise and by seeking support from all regions of the country. Political scientist Fred Greenstein argues that Monroe was a more effective executive than some of his better-known predecessors, including Madison and John Adams.\n\nThe capital of Liberia is named Monrovia after Monroe; it is the only national capital other than Washington, D.C. named after a U.S. President. Monroe is the namesake of seventeen Monroe counties. Monroe, Maine, Monroe, Michigan, Monroe, Georgia, Monroe, Connecticut, Monroe Township, New Jersey, and Fort Monroe are all named for him. Monroe has been depicted on U.S. currency and stamps, including a 1954 United States Postal Service 5¢ Liberty Issue postage stamp.\n\nMonroe was the last U.S. President to wear a powdered wig tied in a queue, a tricorne hat and knee-breeches according to the style of the late 18th century. That earned him the nickname \"The Last Cocked Hat\". He is also the last president to have never been photographed.\n\nBULLET::::- List of Presidents of the United States\nBULLET::::- List of Presidents of the United States, sortable by previous experience\nBULLET::::- List of United States political appointments that crossed party lines\nBULLET::::- History of Virginia on stamps\n\nBULLET::::- 706 pp. standard scholarly biography\nBULLET::::- Ammon, Harry. \"James Monroe\" in Henry F. Graff ed., \"The Presidents: A Reference History\" (3rd ed. 2002) online\nBULLET::::- Cresson, William P. \"James Monroe\" (1946). 577 pp. good scholarly biography\nBULLET::::- Cunningham, Noble E., Jr. \"The Presidency of James Monroe.\" 1996. 246 pp. standard scholarly survey\nBULLET::::- superficial, short, popular biography\nBULLET::::- Haworth, Peter Daniel. \"James Madison and James Monroe Historiography: A Tale of Two Divergent Bodies of Scholarship.\" in \"A Companion to James Madison and James Monroe\" (2013): 521-539.\nBULLET::::- Pulitzer Prize; a sweeping interpretation of the era\nBULLET::::- Holmes, David L. \"The Faiths of the Founding Fathers\", May 2006, online version\nBULLET::::- Leibiger, Stuart, ed. \"A Companion to James Madison and James Monroe\" (2012) excerpt; emphasis on historiography\nBULLET::::- May, Ernest R. \"The Making of the Monroe Doctrine\" (1975), argues it was issued to influence the outcome of the presidential election of 1824.\nBULLET::::- Perkins, Dexter. \"The Monroe Doctrine, 1823–1826\" (1927), the standard monograph about the origins of the doctrine.\nBULLET::::- Renehan Edward J., Jr. \"The Monroe Doctrine: The Cornerstone of American Foreign Policy\" (2007)\nBULLET::::- Scherr, Arthur. \"James Monroe and John Adams: An Unlikely 'Friendship'\". \"The Historian\" 67#3 (2005) pp 405+. online edition\nBULLET::::- Scherr, Arthur. \"James Monroe on the Presidency and 'Foreign Influence: from the Virginia Ratifying Convention (1788) to Jefferson's Election (1801).\" \"Mid-America\" 2002 84(1–3): 145–206. .\nBULLET::::- Scherr, Arthur. \"Governor James Monroe and the Southampton Slave Resistance of 1799.\" \"Historian\" 1999 61(3): 557–578. Fulltext online in SwetsWise and Ebsco.\nBULLET::::- , scholarly biography.\nBULLET::::- Wood, Gordon S. \"Empire of Liberty: A history of the Early Republic, 1789–1815\" (2009)\nBULLET::::- Preston, Daniel, ed. \"The Papers of James Monroe: Selected Correspondence and Papers\" (6 vol, 2006 to 2017), the major scholarly edition; in progress, with coverage to 1814.\nBULLET::::- \"Writings of James Monroe,\" edited by Stanislaus Murray Hamilton, ed., 7 vols. (1898–1903) online edition at Google Books\n\nBULLET::::- White House biography\nBULLET::::- James Monroe: A Resource Guide at the Library of Congress\nBULLET::::- American President: James Monroe (1758–1831) at the Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia\nBULLET::::- James Monroe Papers at the University of Mary Washington\nBULLET::::- A Guide to the Papers of James Monroe 1778–1831 at the University of Virginia Library\nBULLET::::- Monroe Doctrine; December 2, 1823 at the Avalon Project\nBULLET::::- Elections for candidate Monroe, James from \"A New Nation Votes\" at Tufts University\nBULLET::::- Ash Lawn-Highland, home of President James Monroe\nBULLET::::- The James Monroe Memorial Foundation\nBULLET::::- The James Monroe Birthplace\nBULLET::::- James Monroe Museum and Memorial Library\nBULLET::::- \"Life Portrait of James Monroe\", from C-SPAN's \"\", April 12, 1999\nBULLET::::- James Monroe Personal Manuscripts\n"}
{"id": "15980", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15980", "title": "James K. Polk", "text": "James K. Polk\n\nJames Knox Polk (November 2, 1795 – June 15, 1849) was the 11th president of the United States, serving from 1845 to 1849. He previously was Speaker of the House of Representatives (1835–1839) and governor of Tennessee (1839–1841). A protégé of Andrew Jackson, he was a member of the Democratic Party and an advocate of Jacksonian democracy. Polk is chiefly known for extending the territory of the United States during the Mexican–American War; during his presidency, the United States expanded significantly with the annexation of the Republic of Texas, the Oregon Territory, and the Mexican Cession following the American victory in the Mexican–American War.\n\nAfter building a successful law practice in Tennessee, Polk was elected to the state legislature (1823) and then to the United States House of Representatives in 1825, becoming a strong supporter of Andrew Jackson. After serving as chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, he became Speaker in 1835, the only president to have been Speaker. Polk left Congress to run for governor of Tennessee; he won in 1839, but lost in 1841 and 1843. He was a dark horse candidate for the Democratic nomination for president in 1844; he entered his party's convention as a potential nominee for vice president, but emerged as a compromise to head the ticket when no presidential candidate could secure the necessary two-thirds majority. In the general election, Polk defeated Henry Clay of the rival Whig Party.\n\nHistorians consider Polk the most effective president of the pre–Civil War era, having met during his four-year term every major domestic and foreign policy goal he had set. After a negotiation fraught with risk of war, he reached a settlement with Great Britain over the disputed Oregon Country, the territory for the most part being divided along the 49th parallel. Polk achieved a sweeping victory in the Mexican–American War, which resulted in the cession by Mexico of nearly all the American Southwest. He secured a substantial reduction of tariff rates with the Walker tariff of 1846. The same year, he achieved his other major goal, re-establishment of the Independent Treasury system. Historian Thomas A. Bailey says that during the Mexican war, \"Polk was an energetic and indefatigable war leader, and he emerged, partly through rare good luck, with uninterrupted success. He kept the sole direction of the war in his own hands, from grand strategy to the procurement of mules.\" True to his campaign pledge to serve only one term, Polk left office in 1849 and returned to Tennessee where he died three months after leaving the White House.\n\nThough he is relatively obscure today, scholars have ranked Polk favorably for his ability to promote and achieve the major items on his presidential agenda. However, he has also been criticized for leading the country into an unnecessary war against Mexico and for exacerbating sectional divides. A slaveholder for most of his adult life, he owned a plantation in Mississippi and bought slaves while president. A major legacy of Polk's presidency is territorial expansion, as the United States reached the Pacific coast and became poised to be a world power.\n\nJames Knox Polk was born on November 2, 1795, in a log cabin in Pineville, North Carolina. He was the first of 10 children born into a family of farmers. His mother Jane named him after her father, James Knox. His father Samuel Polk was a farmer, slaveholder, and surveyor of Scots-Irish descent. The Polks had immigrated to America in the late 1600s, settling initially on the Eastern Shore of Maryland but later moving to south-central Pennsylvania and then to the Carolina hill country.\n\nThe Knox and Polk families were Presbyterian. While Polk's mother remained a devout Presbyterian, his father, whose own father Ezekiel Polk was a deist, rejected dogmatic Presbyterianism. He refused to declare his belief in Christianity at his son's baptism, and the minister refused to baptize young James. Nevertheless, James' mother \"stamped her rigid orthodoxy on James, instilling lifelong Calvinistic traits of self-discipline, hard work, piety, individualism, and a belief in the imperfection of human nature\", according to James A. Rawley's \"American National Biography\" article.\n\nIn 1803, Ezekiel Polk led four of his adult children and their families to the Duck River area in what is now Maury County, Tennessee; Samuel Polk and his family followed in 1806. The Polk clan dominated politics in Maury County and in the new town of Columbia. Samuel became a county judge, and the guests at his home included Andrew Jackson, who had already served as a judge and in Congress. James learned from the political talk around the dinner table; both Samuel and Ezekiel were strong supporters of President Thomas Jefferson and opponents of the Federalist Party.\n\nPolk suffered from frail health as a child, a particular disadvantage in a frontier society. His father took him to see prominent Philadelphia physician Dr. Philip Syng Physick for urinary stones. The journey was broken off by James's severe pain, and Dr. Ephraim McDowell of Danville, Kentucky, operated to remove them. No anesthetic was available except brandy. The operation was successful, but it might have left James impotent or sterile, as he had no children. He recovered quickly, and became more robust. His father offered to bring him into one of his businesses, but he wanted an education and enrolled at a Presbyterian academy in 1813. He became a member of the Zion Church near his home in 1813, and enrolled in the Zion Church Academy. He then entered Bradley Academy in Murfreesboro, Tennessee, where he proved a promising student.\n\nIn January 1816, Polk was admitted into the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill as a second-semester sophomore. The Polk family had connections with the university, then a small school of about 80 students; Samuel was its land agent in Tennessee and his cousin William Polk was a trustee. Polk's roommate was William Dunn Moseley, who became the first Governor of Florida. Polk joined the Dialectic Society where he took part in debates, became its president, and learned the art of oratory. In one address, he warned that some American leaders were flirting with monarchical ideals, singling out Alexander Hamilton, a foe of Jefferson. Polk graduated with honors in May 1818.\n\nAfter graduation, Polk returned to Nashville, Tennessee to study law under renowned trial attorney Felix Grundy, who became his first mentor. On September 20, 1819, he was elected clerk of the Tennessee State Senate, which then sat in Murfreesboro and to which Grundy had been elected. He was re-elected clerk in 1821 without opposition, and continued to serve until 1822. In June 1820, he was admitted to the Tennessee bar, and his first case was to defend his father against a public fighting charge; he secured his release for a one-dollar fine. He opened an office in Maury County and was successful as a lawyer, due largely to the many cases arising from the Panic of 1819, a severe depression. His law practice subsidized his political career.\n\nBy the time the legislature adjourned its session in September 1822, Polk was determined to be a candidate for the Tennessee House of Representatives. The election was in August 1823, almost a year away, allowing him ample time for campaigning. Already involved locally as a member of the Masons, he was commissioned in the Tennessee militia as a captain in the cavalry regiment of the 5th Brigade. He was later appointed a colonel on the staff of Governor William Carroll, and was afterwards often referred to as \"Colonel\". Although many of the voters were members of the Polk clan, the young politician campaigned energetically. People liked Polk's oratory, which earned him the nickname \"Napoleon of the Stump.\" At the polls, where Polk provided alcoholic refreshments for his voters, he defeated incumbent William Yancey.\n\nBeginning in early 1822, Polk courted Sarah Childress—they were engaged the following year and married on January 1, 1824 in Murfreesboro. Educated far better than most women of her time, especially in frontier Tennessee, Sarah Polk was from one of the state's most prominent families. During James's political career Sarah assisted her husband with his speeches, gave him advice on policy matters, and played an active role in his campaigns. Rawley noted that Sarah Polk's grace, intelligence and charming conversation helped compensate for her husband's often austere manner.\n\nPolk's first mentor was Grundy, but in the legislature, Polk came increasingly to oppose him on such matters as land reform, and came to support the policies of Andrew Jackson, by then a military hero for his victory at the Battle of New Orleans (1815). Jackson was a family friend to both the Polks and the Childresses—there is evidence Sarah Polk and her siblings called him \"Uncle Andrew\"—and James Polk quickly came to support his presidential ambitions for 1824. When the Tennessee Legislature deadlocked on who to elect as U.S. senator in 1823 (until 1913, legislators, not the people, elected senators), Jackson's name was placed in nomination. Polk broke from his usual allies, casting his vote as a member of the state House of Representatives for the general in Jackson's victory. This boosted Jackson's presidential chances by giving him recent political experience to match his military accomplishments. This began an alliance that would continue until Jackson's death early in Polk's presidency. Polk, through much of his political career, was known as \"Young Hickory\", based on the nickname for Jackson, \"Old Hickory\". Polk's political career was as dependent on Jackson as his nickname implied.\n\nIn the 1824 U.S. presidential election, Jackson got the most electoral votes (he also led in the popular vote) but as he did not receive a majority in the Electoral College, the election was thrown into the U.S. House of Representatives, which chose Secretary of State John Quincy Adams, who had received the second-most of each. Polk, like other Jackson supporters, believed that Speaker of the House Henry Clay had traded his support as fourth-place finisher (the House may only choose from among the top three) to Adams in a Corrupt Bargain in exchange for being the new Secretary of State. Polk had in August 1824 declared his candidacy for the following year's election to the House of Representatives from Tennessee's 6th congressional district. The district stretched from Maury County south to the Alabama line, and extensive electioneering was expected of the five candidates. Polk campaigned so vigorously that Sarah began to worry about his health. During the campaign, Polk's opponents said that at the age of 29 Polk was too young for the responsibility of a seat in the House, but he won the election with 3,669 votes out of 10,440 and took his seat in Congress later that year.\n\nWhen Polk arrived in Washington, D.C. for Congress' regular session in December 1825, he roomed in Benjamin Burch's boarding house with other Tennessee representatives, including Sam Houston. Polk made his first major speech on March 13, 1826, in which he said that the Electoral College should be abolished and that the president should be elected by popular vote. Remaining bitter at the alleged Corrupt Bargain between Adams and Clay, Polk became a vocal critic of the administration, frequently voting against its policies. Sarah Polk remained at home in Columbia during her husband's first year in Congress, but accompanied him to Washington beginning in December 1826; she assisted him with his correspondence, and came to hear James's speeches.\n\nPolk won re-election in 1827 and continued to oppose the Adams administration. He remained in close touch with Jackson, and when Jackson ran for president in 1828, Polk was a corresponding advisor on his campaign. Following Jackson's victory over Adams, Polk became one of the new President's most prominent and loyal supporters in the House. Working on Jackson's behalf, Polk successfully opposed federally-funded \"internal improvements\" such as a proposed Buffalo-to-New Orleans road, and he was pleased by Jackson's Maysville Road veto in May 1830, when Jackson blocked a bill to finance a road extension entirely within one state, Kentucky, deeming it unconstitutional. Jackson opponents alleged that the veto message, which strongly complained about Congress' penchant for passing pork barrel projects, was written by Polk, but he denied this, stating that the message was entirely the President's.\n\nPolk served as Jackson's most prominent House ally in the \"Bank War\" that developed over Jackson's opposition to the re-authorization of the Second Bank of the United States. The Second Bank, headed by Nicholas Biddle of Philadelphia, not only held federal dollars, but controlled much of the credit in the United States, as it could present currency issued by local banks for redemption in gold or silver. Some Westerners, including Jackson, opposed the Second Bank, deeming it a monopoly acting in the interest of Easterners. Polk, as a member of the House Ways and Means Committee, conducted investigations of the Second Bank, and though the committee voted for a bill to renew the bank's charter (scheduled to expire in 1836), Polk issued a strong minority report condemning the bank. The bill passed Congress in 1832, but Jackson vetoed it and Congress failed to override the veto. Jackson's action was highly controversial in Washington, but had considerable public support, and he won easy re-election in 1832.\n\nLike many Southerners, Polk favored low tariffs on imported goods, and initially sympathized with John C. Calhoun's opposition to the Tariff of Abominations during the Nullification Crisis of 1832–1833, but came over to Jackson's side as Calhoun moved towards advocating secession. Thereafter, Polk remained loyal to Jackson as the President sought to assert federal authority. Polk condemned secession and supported the Force Bill against South Carolina, which had claimed the authority to nullify federal tariffs. The matter was settled by Congress passing a compromise tariff.\n\nIn December 1833, after being elected to a fifth consecutive term, Polk, with Jackson's backing, became the chairman of Ways and Means, a powerful position in the House. In that position, Polk supported Jackson's withdrawal of federal funds from the Second Bank. Polk's committee issued a report questioning the Second Bank's finances, and another supporting Jackson's actions against it. In April 1834, the Ways and Means Committee reported a bill to regulate state deposit banks, which, when passed, enabled Jackson to deposit funds in pet banks, and Polk got legislation passed to allow the sale of the government's stock in the Second Bank.\n\nIn June 1834, Speaker of the House Andrew Stevenson resigned from Congress to become Minister to the United Kingdom. With Jackson's support, Polk ran for Speaker against fellow Tennessean John Bell, Calhoun disciple Richard Henry Wilde, and Joel Barlow Sutherland of Pennsylvania. After ten ballots, Bell, who had the support of many opponents of the administration, defeated Polk. Jackson called in political debts to try to get Polk elected Speaker at the start of the next Congress in December 1835, assuring Polk in a letter he meant him to burn that New England would support him for Speaker. They were successful; Polk defeated Bell to take the Speakership.\n\nAccording to Thomas M. Leonard in his book on Polk, \"by 1836, while serving as Speaker of the House of Representatives, Polk approached the zenith of his congressional career. He was at the center of Jacksonian Democracy on the House floor, and, with the help of his wife, he ingratiated himself into Washington's social circles.\" The prestige of the Speakership caused them to abandon life in a Washington boarding house for their own residence on Pennsylvania Avenue. In the 1836 presidential election, Vice President Martin Van Buren, Jackson's chosen successor, defeated multiple Whig candidates, including Tennessee Senator Hugh Lawson White. Greater Whig strength in Tennessee helped White carry his state, though Polk's home district went for Van Buren. Ninety percent of Tennessee voters had supported Jackson in 1832, but many in the state disliked the destruction of the Second Bank, or were unwilling to support Van Buren.\n\nAs Speaker, Polk worked for the policies of Jackson and later Van Buren. Polk appointed committees with Democratic chairs and majorities, including the New York radical C. C. Cambreleng as the new Ways and Means chair, although he tried to maintain the Speaker's traditional nonpartisan appearance. The two major issues during Polk's speakership were slavery and, after the Panic of 1837, the economy. Polk firmly enforced the \"gag rule\", by which the House of Representatives would not accept or debate citizen petitions regarding slavery. This ignited fierce protests from John Quincy Adams, who was by then a congressman from Massachusetts and an abolitionist. Instead of finding a way to silence Adams, Polk frequently engaged in useless shouting matches, leading Jackson to conclude that the Speaker should have shown better leadership. Van Buren and Polk faced pressure to rescind the Specie Circular, Jackson's 1836 order that payment for government lands be in gold and silver. Some believed this had led to the crash by causing a lack of confidence in paper currency issued by banks. Despite such arguments, with support from Polk and his cabinet, Van Buren chose to back the Specie Circular. Polk and Van Buren attempted to establish an Independent Treasury system that would allow the government to oversee its own deposits (rather than using pet banks), but the bill was defeated in the House. It eventually passed in 1840.\n\nUsing his thorough grasp of the House's rules, Polk attempted to bring greater order to its proceedings. Unlike many of his peers, he never challenged anyone to a duel no matter how much they insulted his honor. The economic downturn cost the Democrats seats, so that when he faced re-election as Speaker in December 1837, he won by only 13 votes, and he foresaw defeat in 1839. Polk by then had presidential ambitions, but was well aware that no Speaker had ever become president (Polk is still the only one to have held both offices). After seven terms in the House, two as Speaker, he announced that he would not seek re-election, choosing instead to run for Governor of Tennessee in the 1839 election.\n\nIn 1835, the Democrats had lost the governorship of Tennessee for the first time in their history, and Polk decided to return home to help the party. Polk returned to a Tennessee afire for White and Whiggism; the state had changed greatly in its political loyalties since the days of Jacksonian domination. Polk undertook his first statewide campaign, against the Whig incumbent, Newton Cannon, who sought a third two-year term as governor. The fact that Polk was the one called upon to \"redeem\" Tennessee from the Whigs tacitly acknowledged him as head of the state Democratic Party.\n\nPolk campaigned on national issues, whereas Cannon stressed matters local to Tennessee. After being bested by Polk in the early debates, the governor retreated to Nashville, by then the state capital, alleging important official business. Polk made speeches across the state, seeking to become known more widely than in his native Middle Tennessee. When Cannon came back on the campaign trail in the final days, Polk pursued him, hastening the length of the state to be able to debate the governor again. On Election Day, August 1, 1839, Polk defeated Cannon, 54,102 to 51,396, as the Democrats recaptured the state legislature and won back three congressional seats in Tennessee.\n\nTennessee's governor had limited power—there was no gubernatorial veto, and the small size of the state government limited any political patronage. But Polk saw the office as a springboard for his national ambitions, seeking to be nominated as Van Buren's vice presidential running mate at the 1840 Democratic National Convention in Baltimore in May. Polk hoped to be the replacement if Vice President Richard Mentor Johnson was dumped from the ticket; Johnson was disliked by many Southern whites for fathering two daughters by a biracial mistress, and attempting to introduce them into white society. Johnson was from Kentucky, so Polk's Tennessee residence would keep the New Yorker Van Buren's ticket balanced. The convention chose to endorse no one for vice president, stating that a choice would be made once the popular vote was cast. Three weeks after the convention, recognizing that Johnson was too popular in the party to be ousted, Polk withdrew his name. The Whig presidential candidate, General William Henry Harrison, conducted a rollicking campaign with the motto \"Tippecanoe and Tyler Too\", easily winning both the national vote and that in Tennessee. Polk campaigned in vain for Van Buren and was embarrassed by the outcome; Jackson, who had returned to his home, the Hermitage, near Nashville, was horrified at the prospect of a Whig administration. Harrison's death after a month in office in 1841 left the presidency to Vice President John Tyler, who soon broke with the Whigs.\n\nPolk's three major programs during his governorship; regulating state banks, implementing state internal improvements, and improving education all failed to win the approval of the legislature. His only major success as governor was his politicking to secure the replacement of Tennessee's two Whig U.S. senators with Democrats. Polk's tenure was hindered by the continuing nationwide economic crisis that had followed the Panic of 1837 and which had caused Van Buren to lose the 1840 election.\n\nEncouraged by the success of Harrison's campaign, the Whigs ran a freshman legislator from frontier Wilson County, James C. Jones against Polk in 1841. \"Lean Jimmy\" had proven one of their most effective gadflies against Polk, and his lighthearted tone at campaign debates was very effective against the serious Polk. The two debated the length of Tennessee, and Jones's support of distribution to the states of surplus federal revenues, and of a national bank, struck a chord with Tennessee voters. On election day in August 1841, Polk was defeated by 3,000 votes, the first time he had been beaten at the polls. Polk returned to Columbia and the practice of law, and prepared for a rematch against Jones in 1843, but though the new governor took less of a joking tone, it made little difference to the outcome, as Polk was beaten again, this time by 3,833 votes. In the wake of his second statewide defeat in three years, Polk faced an uncertain political future.\n\nDespite his loss, Polk was determined to become the next vice president of the United States, seeing it as a path to the presidency. Van Buren was the frontrunner for the 1844 Democratic nomination, and Polk engaged in a careful campaign to become his running mate. The former president faced opposition from Southerners who feared his views on slavery, while his handling of the Panic of 1837—he had refused to rescind the Specie Circular—aroused opposition from some in the West (today's Midwest) who believed his hard money policies had hurt their section of the country. Many Southerners backed Calhoun's candidacy, Westerners rallied around Senator Lewis Cass of Michigan, and former Vice President Johnson also maintained a strong following among Democrats. Jackson assured Van Buren by letter that Polk in his campaigns for governor had \"fought the battle well and fought it alone\". Polk hoped to gain Van Buren's support, hinting in a letter that a Van Buren/Polk ticket could carry Tennessee, but found him unconvinced.\n\nThe biggest political issue in the United States at that time was territorial expansion. The Republic of Texas had successfully revolted against Mexico in 1836. With the republic largely populated by American emigres, those on both sides of the Sabine River border between the U.S. and Texas deemed it inevitable that Texas would join the United States, but this would anger Mexico, which considered Texas a breakaway province, and threatened war if the United States annexed it. Jackson, as president, had recognized Texas independence, but the initial momentum toward annexation had stalled. Britain was seeking to expand her influence in Texas: Britain had abolished slavery, and if Texas did the same, it would provide a western haven for runaways to match one in the North. A Texas not in the United States would also stand in the way of what was deemed America's Manifest Destiny to overspread the continent.\n\nClay was nominated for president by acclamation at the April 1844 Whig National Convention, with New Jersey's Theodore Frelinghuysen his running mate. A Kentucky slaveholder at a time when opponents of Texas annexation argued that it would give slavery more room to spread, Clay sought a nuanced position on the issue. Jackson, who strongly supported a Van Buren/Polk ticket, was delighted when Clay issued a letter for publication in the newspapers opposing Texas annexation, only to be devastated when he learned Van Buren had done the same thing. Van Buren did this because he feared losing his base of support in the Northeast, but his supporters in the old Southwest were stunned at his action. Polk, on the other hand, had written a pro-annexation letter that had been published four days before Van Buren's. Jackson wrote sadly to Van Buren that no candidate who opposed annexation could be elected, and decided Polk was the best person to head the ticket. Jackson met with Polk at the Hermitage on May 13, 1844 and explained to his visitor that only an expansionist from the South or Southwest could be elected—and, in his view, Polk had the best chance. Polk was at first startled, calling the plan \"utterly abortive\", but he agreed to accept it. Polk immediately wrote to instruct his lieutenants at the convention to work for his nomination as president.\n\nDespite Jackson's quiet efforts on his behalf, Polk was skeptical that he could win. Nevertheless, because of the opposition to Van Buren by expansionists in the West and South, Polk's key lieutenant at the 1844 Democratic National Convention in Baltimore, Gideon Johnson Pillow, believed Polk could emerge as a compromise candidate. Publicly, Polk, who remained in Columbia during the convention, professed full support for Van Buren's candidacy, and was believed to be seeking the vice presidency. Polk was one of the few major Democrats to have declared for the annexation of Texas.\n\nThe convention opened on May 27, 1844. A crucial question was whether the nominee needed two-thirds of the delegate vote, as had been the case at previous Democratic conventions, or merely a majority. A vote for two-thirds would doom Van Buren's candidacy due to the opposition to him. With the support of the Southern states, the two-thirds rule was passed. Van Buren won a majority on the first presidential ballot, but failed to win the necessary two-thirds, and his support slowly faded on subsequent ballots. Cass, Johnson, Calhoun and James Buchanan had also received votes on the first ballot, and Cass took the lead on the fifth ballot. After seven ballots, the convention remained deadlocked: Cass could not attract the support necessary to reach two-thirds, and Van Buren's supporters were more and more discouraged about the former president's chances. Delegates were ready to consider a new candidate who might break the stalemate.\n\nWhen the convention adjourned after the seventh ballot, Pillow, who had been waiting for an opportunity to press Polk's name, conferred with George Bancroft of Massachusetts, a politician and historian who was a longtime Polk correspondent, and who had planned to nominate Polk for vice president. Bancroft had supported Van Buren's candidacy, and was willing to see New York Senator Silas Wright head the ticket, but Wright would not consider taking a nomination that Van Buren wanted. Pillow and Bancroft decided if Polk were nominated for president, Wright might accept the second spot. Before the eighth ballot, former Attorney General Benjamin F. Butler, head of the New York delegation, read a pre-written letter from Van Buren to be used if he could not be nominated, withdrawing in Wright's favor. But Wright (who was in Washington) had also entrusted a pre-written letter to a supporter, in which he refused to be considered as a presidential candidate, and stated in the letter that he agreed with Van Buren's position on Texas. Had Wright's letter not been read he most likely would have been nominated, but without him, Butler began to rally Van Buren supporters for Polk as the best possible candidate, and Bancroft placed Polk's name before the convention. On the eighth ballot, Polk received only 44 votes to Cass's 114 and Van Buren's 104, but the deadlock showed signs of breaking. Butler formally withdrew Van Buren's name, many delegations declared for the Tennessean, and on the ninth ballot Polk received 233 ballots to Cass's 29, making him the Democratic nominee for president. The nomination was then made unanimous.\n\nThis left the question of the vice presidential candidate. Butler urged Wright's nomination, and the convention agreed to this, with only eight Georgia delegates dissenting. As the convention waited, word of Wright's nomination was sent to him in Washington via telegraph. Having by proxy declined an almost certain presidential nomination, Wright would not accept the second place. Senator Robert J. Walker of Mississippi, a close Polk ally, suggested former senator George M. Dallas of Pennsylvania. Dallas was acceptable enough to all factions, and gained the vice presidential nomination on the second ballot. The delegates passed a platform, and adjourned on May 30.\n\nAlthough many contemporary politicians, including Pillow and Bancroft, claimed credit in the years to come for getting Polk the nomination, Walter R. Borneman felt that most credit was due to Jackson and Polk, \"the two who had done the most were back in Tennessee, one an aging icon ensconced at the Hermitage and the other a shrewd lifelong politician waiting expectantly in Columbia\". Whigs mocked Polk with the chant \"Who is James K. Polk?\", affecting never to have heard of him. Though he had experience as Speaker of the House and Governor of Tennessee, all previous presidents had served as Vice President, Secretary of State, or as a high-ranking general. Polk has been described as the first \"dark horse\" presidential nominee, although his nomination was less of a surprise than that of future nominees such as Franklin Pierce or Warren G. Harding. Despite his party's gibes, Clay recognized that Polk could unite the Democrats.\n\nRumors of Polk's nomination reached Nashville on June 4, much to Jackson's delight; they were substantiated later that day. The dispatches were sent on to Columbia, arriving the same day, and letters and newspapers describing what had happened at Baltimore were in Polk's hands by June 6. He accepted his nomination by letter dated June 12, alleging that he had never sought the office, and stating his intent to serve only one term. Wright was embittered by what he called the \"foul plot\" against Van Buren, and demanded assurances that Polk had played no part; it was only after Polk professed that he had remained loyal to Van Buren that Wright supported his campaign. Following the custom of the time that presidential candidates avoid electioneering or appearing to seek the office, Polk remained in Columbia and made no speeches. He engaged in an extensive correspondence with Democratic Party officials as he managed his campaign. Polk made his views known in his acceptance letter and through responses to questions sent by citizens that were printed in newspapers, often by arrangement.\n\nA potential pitfall for Polk's campaign was the issue of whether the tariff should be for revenue only, or with the intent to protect American industry. Polk finessed the tariff issue in a published letter. Recalling that he had long stated that tariffs should only be sufficient to finance government operations, he maintained that stance, but wrote that within that limitation, government could and should offer \"fair and just protection\" to American interests, including manufacturers. He refused to expand on this stance, acceptable to most Democrats, despite the Whigs pointing out that he had committed himself to nothing. In September, a delegation of Whigs from nearby Giles County came to Columbia, armed with specific questions on Polk's views regarding the current tariff, the Whig-passed Tariff of 1842, and with the stated intent of remaining in Columbia until they got answers. Polk took several days to respond, and chose to stand by his earlier statement, provoking an outcry in the Whig papers.\n\nAnother concern was the third-party candidacy of President Tyler, which might split the Democratic vote. Tyler had been nominated by a group of loyal officeholders. Under no illusions he could win, he believed he could rally states' rights supporters and populists to hold the balance of power in the election. Only Jackson had the stature to resolve the situation, which he did with two letters to friends in the Cabinet, that he knew would be shown to Tyler, stating that the President's supporters would be welcomed back into the Democratic fold. Jackson wrote that once Tyler withdrew, many Democrats would embrace him for his pro-annexation stance. The former president also used his influence to stop Francis Preston Blair and his \"Globe\" newspaper, the semi-official organ of the Democratic Party, from attacking Tyler. These proved enough; Tyler withdrew from the race in August.\n\nParty troubles were a third concern. Polk and Calhoun made peace when a former South Carolina congressman, Francis Pickens visited Tennessee and came to Columbia for two days and to the Hermitage for sessions with the increasingly ill Jackson. Calhoun wanted the \"Globe\" dissolved, and that Polk would act against the 1842 tariff and promote Texas annexation. Reassured on these points, Calhoun became a strong supporter.\n\nPolk was aided regarding Texas when Clay, realizing his anti-annexation letter had cost him support, attempted in two subsequent letters to clarify his position. These angered both sides, which attacked Clay as insincere. Texas also threatened to divide the Democrats sectionally, but Polk managed to appease most Southern party leaders without antagonizing Northern ones. As the election drew closer, it became clear that most of the country favored the annexation of Texas, and some Southern Whig leaders supported Polk's campaign due to Clay's anti-annexation stance.\n\nThe campaign was vitriolic; both major party candidates were accused of various acts of malfeasance; Polk was accused of being both a duelist and a coward. The most damaging smear was the Roorback forgery; in late August an item appeared in an abolitionist newspaper, part of a book detailing fictional travels through the South of a Baron von Roorback, an imaginary German nobleman. The Ithaca \"Chronicle\" printed it without labeling it as fiction, and inserted a sentence alleging that the traveler had seen forty slaves who had been sold by Polk after being branded with his initials. The item was withdrawn by the \"Chronicle\" when challenged by the Democrats, but it was widely reprinted. Borneman suggested that the forgery backfired on Polk's opponents as it served to remind voters that Clay too was a slaveholder, John Eisenhower, in his journal article on the election, stated that the smear came too late to be effectively rebutted, and likely cost Polk Ohio. Southern newspapers, on the other hand, went far in defending Polk, one Nashville newspaper alleging that his slaves preferred their bondage to freedom. Polk himself implied to newspaper correspondents that the only slaves he owned had either been inherited or had been purchased from relatives in financial distress; this paternalistic image was also painted by surrogates like Gideon Pillow. This was not true, though not known at the time; by then he had bought over thirty slaves, both from relatives and others, mainly for the purpose of procuring labor for his Mississippi cotton plantation.\n\nThere was no uniform election day in 1844; states voted between November 1 and 12. Polk won the election with 49.5% of the popular vote and 170 of the 275 electoral votes. Becoming the first president elected despite losing his state of residence (Tennessee), Polk also lost his birth state, North Carolina. However, he won Pennsylvania and New York, where Clay lost votes to the antislavery Liberty Party candidate James G. Birney, who got more votes in New York than Polk's margin of victory. Had Clay won New York, he would have been elected president.\n\nPolk presided over a country whose population had doubled every twenty years since the American Revolution and which had reached demographic parity with Great Britain. Polk's tenure saw continued technological improvements, including the continued expansion of railroads and increased use of the telegraph. These improved communications and growing demographics increasingly made the United States into a strong military power, while also stoking expansionism.\n\nPolk set four clearly defined goals for his administration:\nBULLET::::- Reestablish the Independent Treasury System—the Whigs had abolished the one created under Van Buren.\nBULLET::::- Reduce tariffs.\nBULLET::::- Acquire some or all of the Oregon Country.\nBULLET::::- Acquire California and its harbors from Mexico.\n\nWhile his domestic aims represented continuity with past Democratic policies, successful completion of Polk's foreign policy goals would represent the first major American territorial gains since the Adams–Onís Treaty of 1819.\n\nAfter being informed of his victory on November 15, 1844, Polk turned his attention to forming a geographically-balanced Cabinet. He consulted Jackson and one or two other close allies, and decided that the large states of New York, Pennsylvania and Virginia should have representation in the six-member Cabinet, as should his home state of Tennessee. At a time when an incoming president might retain some or all of his predecessor's department heads, Polk wanted an entirely fresh Cabinet, but this proved delicate. Tyler's final Secretary of State was Calhoun, leader of a considerable faction of the Democratic Party, but, when approached by emissaries, he did not take offense and was willing to step down.\n\nPolk did not want his Cabinet to contain presidential hopefuls, though he chose to nominate James Buchanan of Pennsylvania, whose ambition for the presidency was well-known, as Secretary of State. Tennessee's Cave Johnson, a close friend and ally of Polk, was nominated for the position of Postmaster General, with George Bancroft, the historian who had placed a crucial role in Polk's nomination, as Navy Secretary. Polk's choices met with the approval of Andrew Jackson, whom Polk met with in January 1845 for the last time, as Jackson died that June.\n\nTyler's last Navy Secretary, John Y. Mason of Virginia, Polk's friend since college days and a longtime political ally, was not on the original list. As Cabinet choices were affected by factional politics and President Tyler's drive to resolve the Texas issue before leaving office, Polk at the last minute chose him as Attorney General. Polk also chose Mississippi Senator Walker as Secretary of the Treasury and New York's William Marcy as Secretary of War. All gained Senate confirmation after Polk took office. The members worked well together, and few replacements were necessary. One reshuffle was required in 1846 when Bancroft, who wanted a diplomatic posting, became U.S. minister to Britain.\n\nAs Polk put together his Cabinet, President Tyler sought to complete the annexation of Texas. While the Senate had defeated an earlier treaty that would annex the republic, Tyler urged Congress to pass a joint resolution, relying on its constitutional power to admit states. There were disagreements about the terms under which Texas would be admitted and Polk became involved in negotiations to break the impasse. With Polk's help, the annexation resolution narrowly cleared the Senate. Tyler was unsure whether to sign the resolution or leave it for Polk, and sent Calhoun to consult with the President-elect, who declined to give any advice. On his final evening in office, March 3, 1845, Tyler offered annexation to Texas according to the terms of the resolution.\n\nEven before his inauguration, Polk wrote to Cave Johnson, \"I intend to be President of the U.S.\" He would gain a reputation as a hard worker, spending ten to twelve hours at his desk, and rarely leaving Washington. Polk wrote, \"No President who performs his duty faithfully and conscientiously can have any leisure. I prefer to supervise the whole operations of the government myself rather than intrust the public business to subordinates, and this makes my duties very great.\" When he took office on March 4, 1845, Polk, at 49, became the youngest president to that point. Polk's inauguration was the first inaugural ceremony to be reported by telegraph, and first to be shown in a newspaper illustration (in \"The Illustrated London News\").\n\nIn his inaugural address, delivered in a steady rain, Polk made clear his support for annexation by referring to the 28 states, thus including Texas. He proclaimed his fidelity to Jackson's principles by quoting his famous toast, \"Every lover of his country must shudder at the thought of the possibility of its dissolution and will be ready to adopt the patriotic sentiment, 'Our Federal Union—it must be preserved.'\" He stated his opposition to a national bank, and repeated that the tariff could include incidental protection. Although he did not mention slavery specifically, he alluded to it, decrying those who would tear down an institution protected by the Constitution.\n\nPolk devoted the second half of his speech to foreign affairs, and specifically to expansion. He applauded the annexation of Texas, warning that Texas was no affair of any other nation, and certainly none of Mexico's. He spoke of the Oregon Country, and of the many who were migrating, pledging to safeguard America's rights there, and to protect the settlers.\n\nAs well as appointing Cabinet officers to advise him, Polk made his sister's son, J. Knox Walker, his personal secretary, an especially important position because, other than his slaves, Polk had no staff at the White House. Walker, who lived at the White House with his growing family (two children were born to him while living there), performed his duties competently through his uncle's presidency. Other Polk relatives visited at the White House, some for extended periods.\n\nBritain derived its claim to the Oregon Country from the voyages of Captains James Cook and George Vancouver, the Americans from the explorations of the Lewis and Clark expedition and from the discovery of the Columbia River by the American sea captain, Robert Gray. By treaty, Russia had waived any claim south of the southern border of Alaska, which it possessed until 1867, and Spain, which until the Mexican Revolution owned the Pacific Coast to the 42nd parallel, ceded any claims it might have north of that to the United States under the Adams–Onís Treaty of 1819.\n\nRather than war over the distant and low-population territory, the United States and Britain had negotiated. Since the signing of the Treaty of 1818, the Oregon Country had been under the joint occupation and control of the United Kingdom and the United States. Previous U.S. administrations had offered to divide the region along the 49th parallel, which was not acceptable to Britain, as it had commercial interests along the Columbia River. Britain's preferred partition was unacceptable to Polk, as it would have awarded Puget Sound and all lands north of the Columbia River to Britain, and Britain was unwilling to accept the 49th parallel extended to the Pacific, as it meant the entire opening to Puget Sound would be in American hands, isolating its settlements along the Fraser River. Edward Everett, President Tyler's ambassador to Great Britain, had informally proposed dividing the territory at the 49th parallel with the strategic Vancouver Island granted to the British, thus allowing an opening to the Pacific, but when the new British minister in Washington, Richard Pakenham arrived in 1844 prepared to follow up, he found that many Americans desired the entire territory. Oregon had not been a major issue in the 1844 election, but the heavy influx of settlers, mostly American, to the Oregon Country in 1845, and the rising spirit of expansionism in the United States as Texas and Oregon seized the public's eye, made a treaty with Britain more urgent. Many Democrats believed that the United States should span from coast to coast, a philosophy described as Manifest Destiny.\n\nThough both sides sought an acceptable compromise, each also saw the territory as an important geopolitical asset that would play a large part in determining the dominant power in North America. In his inaugural address, Polk announced that he viewed the American claim to the land as \"clear and unquestionable\", provoking threats of war from British leaders should Polk attempt to take control of the entire territory. Polk had refrained in his address from asserting a claim to the entire territory, which extended north to 54 degrees, 40 minutes north latitude, although the Democratic Party platform called for such a claim. Despite Polk's hawkish rhetoric, he viewed war over Oregon as unwise, and Polk and Buchanan began negotiations with the British. Like his predecessors, Polk again proposed a division along the 49th parallel, which was immediately rejected by Pakenham. Secretary of State Buchanan was wary of a two-front war with Mexico and Britain, but Polk was willing to risk war with both countries in pursuit of a favorable settlement. In his annual message to Congress in December 1845, Polk requested approval of giving Britain a one-year notice (as required in the Treaty of 1818) of his intention to terminate the joint occupancy of Oregon. In that message, he quoted from the Monroe Doctrine to denote America's intention of keeping European powers out, the first significant use of it since its origin in 1823. After much debate, Congress eventually passed the resolution in April 1846, attaching its hope that the dispute would be settled amicably.\n\nWhen the British Foreign Secretary, Lord Aberdeen, learned of the proposal rejected by Pakenham, Aberdeen asked the United States to re-open negotiations, but Polk was unwilling unless a proposal was made by the British. With Britain moving towards free trade with the repeal of the Corn Laws, good trade relations with the United States were more important to Aberdeen than a distant territory. In February 1846, Polk allowed Buchanan to inform Louis McLane, the American ambassador to Britain, that Polk's administration would look favorably on a British proposal to divide the continent at the 49th parallel. In June 1846, Pakenham presented an offer to the Polk administration, calling for a boundary line at the 49th parallel, with the exception that Britain would retain all of Vancouver Island, and there would be limited navigation rights for British subjects on the Columbia River until the expiration of the charter of the Hudson's Bay Company in 1859. Polk and most of his Cabinet were prepared to accept the proposal, but Buchanan, in a reversal, urged that the United States seek control of all of the Oregon Territory. Polk deemed Buchanan's about-face linked to his presidential ambitions.\n\nAfter winning the reluctant approval of Buchanan, and choosing to have the Senate weigh in (favorably) on the draft treaty, Polk submitted the full treaty to the Senate for ratification. The Senate ratified the Oregon Treaty in a 41–14 vote, with opposition from diehards who sought the full territory. Polk's willingness to risk war with Britain had frightened many, but his tough negotiation tactics may have gained the United States concessions from the British (particularly regarding the Columbia River) that a more conciliatory president might not have won.\n\nThe annexation resolution signed by Tyler gave the president the choice of asking Texas to approve annexation, or reopening negotiations; Tyler immediately sent a messenger to the U.S. representative in Texas, Andrew Jackson Donelson, choosing the former option. Thus, Polk's first major decision in office was whether to recall Tyler's courier to Texas.\n\nThough it was within Polk's power to recall the messenger, he chose to allow him to continue, with the hope that Texas would accept the offer. He also sent Congressman Archibald Yell of Arkansas as his personal emissary, taking his private assurance that the United States would defend Texas, and would fix its southern border at the Rio Grande, as claimed by Texas, rather than at the Nueces River, as claimed by Mexico. Polk retained Donelson in his post, and the diplomat sought to convince Texas' leaders to accept annexation under the terms proposed by the Tyler administration. Though public sentiment in Texas favored annexation, some leaders, including President Anson Jones, hoped negotiation would bring better terms. Britain had offered to work a deal whereby Texas would gain Mexican recognition in exchange for a pledge never to annex itself to another country, but after consideration, the influential former president, Sam Houston, rejected it, as did the Texas Congress.\n\nIn July 1845, a convention ratified annexation, and thereafter voters approved it. In December 1845, Polk signed a resolution annexing Texas, and it became the 28th state. Mexico had broken diplomatic relations with the United States on passage of the joint resolution in March 1845; annexation increased tensions with that nation, which had never recognized Texan independence.\n\nFollowing the Texan ratification of annexation in 1845, both Mexicans and Americans saw conflict as a likely possibility. Polk began preparations for a potential war with Mexico over Texas, sending an army there, led by Brigadier General Zachary Taylor. Taylor and Commodore David Conner of the U.S. Navy, commanding American ships off the Mexican coast, were both ordered to avoid provoking a war, while preparing for conflict, and to respond to any Mexican aggression. Although Polk had the military prepare for war, he did not believe it would come to that; he thought Mexico would give in under duress.\n\nPolk hoped that a show of force by the U.S. military under Taylor and Conner could avert war and lead to negotiations with the Mexican government. In late 1845, Polk sent diplomat John Slidell to Mexico to purchase New Mexico and California for $20–40 million, as well as securing Mexico's agreement to a Rio Grande border. Slidell arrived in Mexico City in December 1845. Mexican President José Joaquín de Herrera was unwilling to receive him because of the hostility of the public towards the United States. Slidell's ambassadorial credentials were refused by a Mexican council of government, and Herrera soon thereafter was deposed by a military coup led by General Mariano Paredes, a hard-liner who pledged to take back Texas from the United States. Dispatches from Slidell and from the U.S. consul in Mexico City, John Black, made clear their views that U.S. aims for territorial expansion could not be accomplished without war.\n\nTaylor's instructions were to repel any incursion by Mexico north of the Rio Grande, but initially, his army did not advance further than Corpus Christi, at the mouth of the Nueces. On January 13, 1846, Polk ordered Taylor to proceed to the Rio Grande, though it took him time to prepare for the march. Polk was convinced that sending Taylor to the Nueces Strip would prompt war; even if it did not, he was prepared to have Congress declare it. As he waited, Polk considered supporting a potential coup led by the exiled Mexican General Antonio López de Santa Anna with the hope that Santa Anna would sell parts of California.\n\nSlidell returned to Washington in May 1846 and gave his opinion that negotiations with the Mexican government were unlikely to be successful. Polk regarded the treatment of his diplomat as an insult and an \"ample cause of war\", and he prepared to ask Congress to declare it. Meanwhile, in late March, General Taylor had reached the Rio Grande, and his army camped across the river from Matamoros, Tamaulipas. In April, after Mexican general Pedro de Ampudia demanded that Taylor return to the Nueces River, Taylor began a blockade of Matamoros. A skirmish on the northern side of the Rio Grande on April 25 ended in the death or capture of dozens of American soldiers, and became known as the Thornton Affair. Word did not reach Washington until May 9, and Polk immediately convened the Cabinet and obtained their approval of his plan to send a war message to Congress on the ground that Mexico had, as Polk put it in his message, \"shed American blood on the American soil\". Polk's message was crafted to present the war as a just and necessary defense of the country against a neighbor that had long troubled the United States.\n\nThe House overwhelmingly approved a resolution declaring war and authorizing the president to accept 50,000 volunteers into the military. Some of those voting in favor were unconvinced that the U.S. had just cause to go to war, but feared to be deemed unpatriotic. In the Senate, war opponents led by Calhoun also questioned Polk's version of events. Nonetheless, the House resolution passed the Senate in a 40–2 vote, with Calhoun abstaining, marking the beginning of the Mexican–American War.\n\nAfter the initial skirmishes, Taylor and much of his army marched away from the river to secure the supply line, leaving a makeshift base, Fort Texas. On the way back to the Rio Grande, Mexican forces under General Mariano Arista attempted to block Taylor's way as other troops laid siege to Fort Texas, forcing the American general to the attack if he hoped to relieve the fort. In the Battle of Palo Alto, the first major engagement of the war, Taylor's troops forced Arista's from the field, suffering only four dead to hundreds for the Mexicans. The next day, Taylor led the army to victory in the Battle of Resaca de la Palma, putting the Mexican Army to rout. The early successes boosted support for the war, which despite the lopsided votes in Congress had deeply divided the nation. Many Northern Whigs opposed the war, as did others; they felt Polk had used patriotism to manipulate the nation into fighting a war the goal of which was to give slavery room to expand.\n\nPolk distrusted the two senior officers, Major General Winfield Scott and Taylor, as both were Whigs, and would have replaced them with Democrats, but felt Congress would not approve it. He offered Scott the position of top commander in the war, which the general accepted. Polk and Scott already knew and disliked each other: the President made the appointment despite the fact that Scott had sought his party's presidential nomination in 1840. Polk came to believe that Scott was too slow in getting himself and his army away from Washington and to the Rio Grande, and was outraged to learn Scott was using his influence in Congress to defeat the administration's plan to expand the number of generals. The news of Taylor's victory at Resaca de la Palma arrived then, and Polk decided to have Taylor take command in the field, and Scott to remain in Washington. Polk also ordered Commodore Conner to allow Santa Anna to return to Mexico from his exile in Havana, and sent an army expedition led by Stephen W. Kearny towards Santa Fe.\n\nIn 1845, Polk, fearful of French or British intervention, had sent Lieutenant Archibald H. Gillespie to California with orders to foment a pro-American rebellion that could be used to justify annexation of the territory. After meeting with Gillespie, Army captain John C. Frémont led settlers in northern California to overthrow the Mexican garrison in Sonoma in what became known as the Bear Flag Revolt. In August 1846, American forces under Kearny captured Santa Fe, capital of the province of New Mexico, without firing a shot. Almost simultaneously, Commodore Robert F. Stockton landed in Los Angeles and proclaimed the capture of California. After American forces put down a revolt, the United States held effective control of New Mexico and California. Nevertheless, the Western theater of the war would prove to be a political headache for Polk, as a dispute between Frémont and Kearny led to a break between Polk and the powerful Missouri senator (and father-in-law of Frémont), Thomas Hart Benton.\n\nThe initial public euphoria over the victories at the start of the war slowly dissipated. In August 1846, Polk asked Congress to appropriate $2 million as a down payment for the potential purchase of Mexican lands. Polk's request ignited opposition, as he had never before made public his desire to annex parts of Mexico (aside from lands claimed by Texas). It was unclear whether such newly acquired lands would be slave or free, and there was angry sectional debate. A freshman Democratic Congressman, David Wilmot of Pennsylvania, previously a firm supporter of Polk's administration, offered an amendment to the bill—the \"Wilmot Proviso\"—that would ban slavery in any land acquired using the money. The appropriation bill, with the Wilmot Proviso attached, passed the House, but died in the Senate. This discord cost Polk's party, as Democrats lost control of the House in the 1846 elections. In early 1847, though, Polk was successful in passing a bill raising further regiments, and he also finally won approval for the appropriation.\n\nIn July 1846, American envoy Alexander Slidell Mackenzie had met with Santa Anna, offering terms by which the US would pay to acquire San Francisco Bay and other parts of Alta California. Santa Anna seemed receptive, but after returning to Mexico, taking control of the government, he stated that he would fight against the Americans, and placed himself at the head of the army. This caused Polk to harden his position on Mexico, and he ordered an American landing at Veracruz, the most important Mexican port on the Gulf of Mexico. From there, troops were to march to Mexico City, which it was hoped would end the war. Continuing to advance in northeast Mexico, Taylor defeated a Mexican army led by Ampudia in the September 1846 Battle of Monterrey, but allowed Ampudia's forces to withdraw from the town, much to Polk's consternation. Polk believed Taylor had not aggressively pursued the enemy, and reluctantly offered command of the Veracruz expedition to Scott.\n\nThe lack of trust Polk had in Taylor was returned by the Whig general, who feared the partisan president was trying to destroy him. Accordingly, Taylor disobeyed orders to remain near Monterrey. In March 1847, Polk learned that Taylor had continued to march south, capturing the northern Mexican town of Saltillo. Continuing beyond Saltillo, Taylor's army decimated a larger Mexican force, led by Santa Anna, in the Battle of Buena Vista. Mexican casualties were five times that of the Americans, and the victory made Taylor even more of a military hero in the public's eyes, though Polk preferred to credit the bravery of the soldiers rather than the Whig general. In March 1847, Scott landed in Veracruz, and quickly won control of the city. With the capture of Veracruz, Polk dispatched Nicholas Trist, Buchanan's chief clerk, to accompany Scott's army and negotiate a peace treaty with Mexican leaders. Trist was instructed to seek the cession of Alta California, New Mexico, and Baja California, recognition of the Rio Grande as the southern border of Texas, and American access across the Isthmus of Tehuantepec. Trist was authorized to make a payment of up to $30 million in exchange for these concessions.\n\nIn August 1847, as he advanced towards Mexico City, Scott defeated Santa Anna at the Battle of Contreras and the Battle of Churubusco. With the Americans at the gates of Mexico City, Trist negotiated with commissioners, but the Mexicans were willing to give up little. Scott prepared to take Mexico City, which he did in mid-September. In the United States, a heated political debate emerged regarding how much of Mexico the United States should seek to annex, Whigs such as Henry Clay arguing that the United States should only seek to settle the Texas border question, and some expansionists arguing for the annexation of all of Mexico. War opponents were also active; Whig Congressman Abraham Lincoln of Illinois introduced the \"exact spot\" resolutions, calling on Polk to state exactly where American blood had been shed on American soil to start the war, but the House refused to consider them.\n\nFrustrated by a lack of progress in negotiations, Polk ordered Trist to return to Washington, but the diplomat, when the notice of recall arrived in mid-November 1847, decided to remain, writing a lengthy letter to Polk the following month to justify his decision. Polk considered having Butler, designated as Scott's replacement, forcibly remove him from Mexico City. Though outraged by Trist's decision, Polk decided to allow him some time to negotiate a treaty.\n\nThroughout January 1848, Trist regularly met with officials in Mexico City, though at the request of the Mexicans, the treaty signing took place in Guadalupe Hidalgo, a small town near Mexico City. Trist was willing to allow Mexico to keep Baja California, as his instructions allowed, but successfully haggled for the inclusion of the important harbor of San Diego in a cession of Alta California. Provisions included the Rio Grande border and a $15 million payment to Mexico. On February 2, 1848, Trist and the Mexican delegation signed the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. Polk received the document on February 19, and, after the Cabinet met on the 20th, decided he had no choice but to accept it. If he turned it down, with the House by then controlled by the Whigs, there was no assurance Congress would vote funding to continue the war. Both Buchanan and Walker dissented, wanting more land from Mexico, a position with which the President was sympathetic, though he considered Buchanan's view motivated by his ambition.\n\nSome senators opposed the treaty because they wanted to take no Mexican territory; others hesitated because of the irregular nature of Trist's negotiations. Polk waited in suspense for two weeks as the Senate considered it, sometimes hearing that it would likely be defeated, and that Buchanan and Walker were working against it. He was relieved when the two Cabinet officers lobbied on behalf of the treaty. On March 10, the Senate ratified the treaty in a 38–14 vote, on a vote that cut across partisan and geographic lines. The Senate made some modifications to the treaty before ratification, and Polk worried that the Mexican government would reject them. On June 7, Polk learned that Mexico had ratified the treaty. Polk declared the treaty in effect as of July 4, 1848, thus ending the war. With the acquisition of California, Polk had accomplished all four of his major presidential goals. With the exception of the territory acquired by the 1853 Gadsden Purchase, the territorial acquisitions under Polk established the modern borders of the Contiguous United States.\n\nPolk had been anxious to establish a territorial government for Oregon once the treaty was effective in 1846, but the matter became embroiled in the arguments over slavery, though few thought Oregon suitable for that institution. A bill to establish an Oregon territorial government passed the House after being amended to bar slavery; the bill died in the Senate when opponents ran out the clock on the congressional session. A resurrected bill, still barring slavery, again passed the House in January 1847 but it was not considered by the Senate before Congress adjourned in March. By the time Congress met again in December, California and New Mexico were in U.S. hands, and Polk in his annual message urged the establishment of territorial governments in all three. The Missouri Compromise had settled the issue of the geographic reach of slavery within the Louisiana Purchase territories by prohibiting slavery in states north of 36°30′ latitude, and Polk sought to extend this line into the newly acquired territory. If extended to the Pacific, this would have made slavery illegal in San Francisco, but allowed it in Monterey and Los Angeles. A plan to accomplish the extension was defeated in the House by a bipartisan alliance of Northerners. As the last congressional session before the 1848 election came to a close, Polk signed the lone territorial bill passed by Congress, which established the Territory of Oregon and prohibited slavery in it.\n\nWhen Congress reconvened in December 1848, Polk asked it in his annual message to establish territorial governments in California and New Mexico, a task made especially urgent by the onset of the California Gold Rush. The divisive issue of slavery blocked any such legislation, though congressional action continued until the final hours of Polk's term. When the bill was amended to have the laws of Mexico apply to the southwest territories until Congress changed them (thus effectively banning slavery), Polk made it clear that he would veto it, considering it the Wilmot Proviso in another guise. It was not until the Compromise of 1850 that the matter of the territories was resolved.\n\nPolk's ambassador to the Republic of New Granada, Benjamin Alden Bidlack, negotiated the Mallarino–Bidlack Treaty. Though Bidlack had initially only sought to remove tariffs on American goods, Bidlack and New Granadan Foreign Minister Manuel María Mallarino negotiated a broader agreement that deepened military and trade ties between the two countries. The treaty also allowed for the construction of the Panama Railway. In an era of slow overland travel, the treaty gave the United States a route for a quicker journey between its eastern and western coasts. In exchange, Bidlack agreed to have the United States guarantee New Granada's sovereignty over the Isthmus of Panama. The treaty won ratification in both countries in 1848. The agreement helped to establish a stronger American influence in the region, as the Polk administration sought to ensure that Great Britain would not dominate Central America. The United States would use the rights granted under the Mallarino-Bidlack Treaty as a justification for its military interventions in Latin America through the remainder of the 19th century.\n\nIn mid-1848, President Polk authorized his ambassador to Spain, Romulus Mitchell Saunders, to negotiate the purchase of Cuba and offer Spain up to $100 million, a large sum at the time for one territory, equal to $ in present-day terms. Cuba was close to the United States and had slavery, so the idea appealed to Southerners but was unwelcome in the North. However, Spain was still making profits in Cuba (notably in sugar, molasses, rum and tobacco), and thus the Spanish government rejected Saunders's overtures. Though Polk was eager to acquire Cuba, he refused to support the filibuster expedition of Narciso López, who sought to invade and take over the island as a prelude to annexation.\n\nIn his inaugural address, Polk called upon Congress to re-establish the Independent Treasury System under which government funds were held in the Treasury and not in banks or other financial institutions. President Van Buren had previously established a similar system, but it had been abolished during the Tyler administration. Polk made clear his opposition to a national bank in his inaugural address, and in his first annual message to Congress in December 1845, he called for the government to keep its funds itself. Congress was slow to act; the House passed a bill in April 1846 and the Senate in August, both without a single Whig vote. Polk signed the Independent Treasury Act into law on August 6, 1846. The act provided that the public revenues were to be retained in the Treasury building and in sub-treasuries in various cities, separate from private or state banks. The system would remain in place until the passage of the Federal Reserve Act in 1913.\n\nPolk's other major domestic initiative was the lowering of the tariff. Polk directed Secretary of the Treasury Robert Walker to draft a new and lower tariff, which Polk submitted to Congress. After intense lobbying by both sides, the bill passed the House and, in a close vote that required Vice President Dallas to break a tie, the Senate in July 1846. Dallas, although from protectionist Pennsylvania, voted for the bill, having decided his best political prospects lay in supporting the administration. Polk signed the Walker Tariff into law, substantially reducing the rates that had been set by the Tariff of 1842. The reduction of tariffs in the United States and the repeal of the Corn Laws in Great Britain led to a boom in Anglo-American trade.\n\nCongress passed the Rivers and Harbors Bill in 1846 to provide $500,000 to improve port facilities, but Polk vetoed it. Polk believed that the bill was unconstitutional because it unfairly favored particular areas, including ports that had no foreign trade. Polk considered internal improvements to be matters for the states, and feared that passing the bill would encourage legislators to compete for favors for their home district—a type of corruption that he felt would spell doom to the virtue of the republic. In this regard he followed his hero Jackson, who had vetoed the Maysville Road Bill in 1830 on similar grounds.\n\nOpposed by conviction to Federal funding for internal improvements, Polk stood strongly against all such bills. Congress, in 1847, passed another internal improvements bill; he pocket vetoed it and sent Congress a full veto message when it met in December. Similar bills continued to advance in Congress in 1848, though none reached his desk. When he came to the Capitol to sign bills on March 3, 1849, the last day of the congressional session and his final full day in office, he feared that an internal improvements bill would pass Congress, and he brought with him a draft veto message. The bill did not pass, so it was not needed, but feeling the draft had been ably written, he had it preserved among his papers.\nAuthoritative word of the discovery of gold in California did not arrive in Washington until after the 1848 election, by which time Polk was a lame duck. Polk's political adversaries had claimed California was too far away to be useful, and was not worth the price paid to Mexico. The President was delighted by the news, seeing it as validation of his stance on expansion, and referred to the discovery several times in his final annual message to Congress that December. Shortly thereafter, actual samples of the California gold arrived, and Polk sent a special message to Congress on the subject. The message, confirming less authoritative reports, caused large numbers of people to move to California, both from the U.S. and abroad, thus helping to spark the California Gold Rush.\n\nOne of Polk's last acts as President was to sign the bill creating the Department of the Interior (March 3, 1849). This was the first new cabinet position created since the early days of the Republic. Polk had misgivings about the federal government usurping power over public lands from the states. Nevertheless, the delivery of the legislation on his last full day in office gave him no time to find constitutional grounds for a veto, or to draft a sufficient veto message, so he signed the bill.\n\nPolk appointed the following justices to the U.S. Supreme Court:\n\nJusticePositionBegan activeserviceEnded activeservice\n\nThe 1844 death of Justice Henry Baldwin left a vacant place on the Supreme Court, but Tyler had been unable to get the Senate to confirm a nominee. At the time, it was the custom to have geographic balance on the Supreme Court, and Baldwin had been from Pennsylvania. Polk's efforts to fill Baldwin's seat became embroiled in Pennsylvania politics and the efforts of factional leaders to secure the lucrative post of Collector of Customs for the Port of Philadelphia. As Polk attempted to find his way through the minefield of Pennsylvania politics, a second position on the high court became vacant with the death, in September 1845, of Justice Joseph Story; his replacement was expected to come from his native New England. Because Story's death had occurred while the Senate was not in session, Polk was able to make a recess appointment, choosing Senator Levi Woodbury of New Hampshire, and when the Senate reconvened in December 1845, Woodbury was confirmed. Polk's initial nominee for Baldwin's seat, George W. Woodward, was rejected by the Senate in January 1846, in large part due to the opposition of Buchanan and Pennsylvania Senator Simon Cameron.\n\nDespite Polk's anger at Buchanan, he eventually offered the Secretary of State the seat, but Buchanan, after some indecision, turned it down. Polk subsequently nominated Robert Cooper Grier of Pittsburgh, who won confirmation. Justice Woodbury died in 1851, but Grier served until 1870 and in the slavery case of \"Dred Scott v. Sandford\" (1857) wrote an opinion stating that slaves were property and could not sue.\n\nPolk appointed eight other federal judges, one to the United States Circuit Court of the District of Columbia, and seven to various United States district courts.\n\nHonoring his pledge to serve only one term, Polk declined to seek re-election. At the 1848 Democratic National Convention, Cass led on every ballot, though it was not until the fourth that he attained a two-thirds vote. William Butler, who had replaced Winfield Scott as the commanding general in Mexico City, won the vice presidential nomination. The 1848 Whig National Convention nominated Taylor for president and former congressman Millard Fillmore of New York for vice president.\n\nNew York Democrats remained bitter because of what they deemed shabby treatment of Van Buren in 1844, and the former president had drifted from the party in the years since. Many of Van Buren's faction of the party, the Barnburners, were younger men who strongly opposed the spread of slavery, a position with which, by 1848, Van Buren agreed. Senator Cass was a strong expansionist, and slavery might find new fields under him; accordingly the Barnburners bolted the Democratic National Convention upon his nomination, and, in June, joined by anti-slavery Democrats from other states, they held a convention, nominating Van Buren for president. Polk was surprised and disappointed by his former ally's political conversion, and worried about the divisiveness of a sectional party devoted to abolition. Polk did not give speeches for Cass, remaining at his desk at the White House. He did remove some Van Buren supporters from federal office during the campaign.\n\nIn the election, Taylor won 47.3% of the popular vote and a majority of the electoral vote. Cass won 42.5% of the vote, while Van Buren finished with 10.1% of the popular vote, much of his support coming from northern Democrats. Polk was disappointed by the outcome as he had a low opinion of Taylor, seeing the general as someone with poor judgment and few opinions on important public matters. Nevertheless, Polk observed tradition and welcomed President-elect Taylor to Washington, hosting him at a gala White House dinner. Polk departed the White House on March 3, leaving behind him a clean desk, though he worked from his hotel or the Capitol on last-minute appointments and bill signings. He attended Taylor's inauguration on March 5 (March 4, the presidential inauguration day until 1937, fell on a Sunday, and thus the ceremony was postponed a day), and though he was unimpressed with the new President, wished him the best.\n\nPolk's time in the White House took its toll on his health. Full of enthusiasm and vigor when he entered office, Polk left the presidency exhausted by his years of public service. He left Washington on March 6 for a pre-arranged triumphal tour of the South, to end in Nashville. Polk had two years previously arranged to buy a house there, afterwards dubbed Polk Place, that had once belonged to his old mentor, Felix Grundy.\n\nJames and Sarah Polk progressed down the Atlantic coast, and then westward through the Deep South. He was enthusiastically received and banqueted. By the time the Polks reached Alabama, he was suffering from a bad cold, and soon became concerned by reports of cholera—a passenger on Polk's riverboat died of it, and it was rumored to be common in New Orleans, but it was too late to change plans. Worried about his health, he would have departed the city quickly, but was overwhelmed by Louisiana hospitality. Several passengers on the riverboat up the Mississippi died of the disease, and Polk felt so ill that he went ashore for four days, staying in a hotel. A doctor assured him he did not have cholera, and Polk made the final leg, arriving in Nashville on April 2 to a huge reception.\n\nAfter a visit to James's mother in Columbia, the Polks settled into Polk Place. The exhausted former president seemed to gain new life, but in early June, he fell ill again, by most accounts of cholera. Attended by several doctors, he lingered for several days, and chose to be baptized into the Methodist Church, which he had long admired, though his mother arrived from Columbia with her Presbyterian clergyman, and his wife was also a devout Presbyterian.\n\nPolk's funeral was held at the McKendree Methodist Church in Nashville. Following his death, Sarah Polk lived at Polk Place for 42 years and died on August 14, 1891. Their house, Polk Place, was demolished in 1901, a decade after Sarah's death.\n\nOf all dead U.S. presidents, Polk's \"sleep\" has arguably been interrupted more so than any other president in American History. After his death, he was buried in what is now Nashville City Cemetery, due to a legal requirement related to his infectious disease death. Polk was then moved to a tomb on the grounds of Polk Place (as specified in his will) in 1850.\n\nThen, in 1893, the bodies of James and Sarah Polk were relocated to their current resting place on the grounds of the Tennessee State Capitol in Nashville. Their burial grounds remained untouched for 124 years until March 2017, the Tennessee Senate approved a resolution considered a \"first step\" toward relocating the Polks' remains to the family home in Columbia; as well as support by state lawmakers, the move requires approval by the courts and the Tennessee Historical Commission. If the move is approved, Polk's body would be moved a total of three different times since his death; however, a year later, it subsequently was declined by Tennessee lawmakers before being taken up again being approved and reaching unsigned approval by Tennessee governor Bill Haslam.\n\nWhile other presidents have had their resting place moved somewhere else (such as Washington and Adams), they generally have only been moved once and their resting place has remained the same for almost 200 years.\n\nPolk was a slaveholder for most of his adult life. His father, Samuel Polk, in 1827 left Polk more than 8,000 acres (32 km²) of land, and divided about 53 slaves among his widow and children in his will. James inherited twenty of his father's slaves, either directly or from deceased brothers. In 1831, he became an absentee cotton planter, sending slaves to clear plantation land that his father had left him near Somerville, Tennessee. Four years later Polk sold his Somerville plantation and, together with his brother-in-law, bought 920 acres (3.7 km²) of land, a cotton plantation near Coffeeville, Mississippi, hoping to increase his income. The land in Mississippi was richer than that in Somerville, and Polk transferred his Tennessee slaves there, taking care to conceal from them that they were to be sent south. From the start of 1839, Polk, having bought out his brother-in-law, owned all of the Mississippi plantation, and ran it on a mostly absentee basis for the rest of his life. He occasionally visited—for example, he spent much of April 1844 on his Mississippi plantation, right before the Democratic convention.\n\nAdding to the inherited slaves, in 1831, Polk purchased five more, mostly buying them in Kentucky, and expending $1,870; the youngest had a recorded age of 11. As older children sold for a higher price, slave sellers routinely lied about age. Between 1834 and 1835, he bought five more, aged from 2 to 37, the youngest a granddaughter of the oldest. The amount expended was $2,250. In 1839, he bought eight slaves from his brother William at a cost of $5,600. This represented three young adults and most of a family, though not including the father, whom James Polk had previously owned, and who had been sold to a slave trader as a chronic runaway.\n\nThe expenses of four campaigns (three for governor, one for the presidency) in six years kept Polk from making more slave purchases until after he was living in the White House. In an era when the presidential salary was expected to cover wages for the White House servants, Polk replaced them with slaves from his home in Tennessee. Polk did not purchase slaves with his presidential salary, likely for political reasons. Instead, he reinvested earnings from his plantation in the purchase of slaves, enjoining secrecy on his agent: \"that as my \"private business\" does not concern the public, you will keep it to yourself\".\n\nPolk saw the plantation as his route to a comfortable existence after his presidency for himself and his wife; he did not intend to return to the practice of law. Hoping the increased labor force would increase his retirement income, he purchased seven slaves in 1846, through an agent, aged roughly between 12 and 17. The 17 year old and one of the 12 year olds were purchased together at an estate sale; the agent within weeks resold the younger boy to Polk's profit. The year 1847 saw the purchase of nine more. Three he purchased from Gideon Pillow, and his agent purchased six slaves, aged between 10 and 20. By the time of the purchase from Pillow, the Mexican War had begun and Polk sent payment with the letter in which he offered Pillow a commission in the Army. The purchase from Pillow was a slave Polk had previously owned and had sold for being a disruption, and his wife and child. None of the other slaves Polk purchased as President, all younger than 20, came with a parent, and as only in the one case were two slaves bought together, most likely none had an accompanying sibling as each faced life on Polk's plantation.\n\nDiscipline for those owned by Polk varied over time. At the Tennessee plantation, he employed an overseer named Herbert Biles, who was said to be relatively indulgent. Biles's illness in 1833 resulted in Polk replacing him with Ephraim Beanland, who tightened discipline and increased work. Polk backed his overseer, returning runaways who complained of beatings and other harsh treatment, \"even though every report suggested that the overseer was a heartless brute\". Beanland was hired for the Mississippi plantation, but was soon dismissed by Polk's partner, who deemed Beanland too harsh as the slaves undertook the arduous task of clearing the timber from the new plantation so it could be used for cotton farming. His replacement was discharged after a year for being too indulgent; the next died of dysentery in 1839. Others followed, and it was not until 1845 that Polk found a satisfactory overseer, John Mairs, who remained the rest of Polk's life and was still working at the plantation for Sarah Polk in 1860, when the widow sold a half-share in many of her slaves. There had been a constant stream of runaways under Mairs' predecessors, many seeking protection at the plantation of Polk relatives or friends; only one ran away between the time of Mairs' hiring and the end of 1847, but the overseer had to report three absconded slaves (including the one who had fled earlier) to Polk in 1848 and 1849.\n\nPolk's will, dated February 28, 1849, a few days before the end of his presidency, contained the nonbinding expectation that his slaves were to be freed when both he and Sarah Polk were dead. The Mississippi plantation was expected to be the support of Sarah Polk during her widowhood. Sarah Polk lived until 1891, but the slaves were freed in 1865 by the Thirteenth Amendment, which abolished slavery in the United States. By selling a half-interest in the slaves in 1860, Sarah Polk had given up the sole power to free them, and it is unlikely that her new partner, having paid $28,500 for a half-interest in the plantation and its slaves, would have allowed the laborers to go free had she died while slavery was legal.\n\nLike Jackson, Polk saw the politics of slavery as a side issue compared to more important matters such as territorial expansion and economic policy. The issue of slavery became increasingly polarizing during the 1840s, and Polk's expansionary policies increased its divisiveness. During his presidency, many abolitionists harshly criticized him as an instrument of the \"Slave Power\", and claimed that spreading slavery was the reason he supported Texas Annexation and later war with Mexico. Polk did support the expansion of slavery's realm, with his views informed by his own family's experience of settling Tennessee, bringing slaves with them. He believed in Southern rights, meaning both the right of slave states not to have that institution interfered with by the Federal government, and the right of individual Southerners to bring their slaves with them into the new territory. Though Polk opposed the Wilmot Proviso, he also condemned southern agitation on the issue, and he accused both northern and southern leaders of attempting to use the slavery issue for political gain.\n\nOn March 4, 2017, new tombstones for three of his slaves, Elias Polk, Mary Polk and Matilda Polk, were placed in the Nashville City Cemetery. Elias and Mary Polk both survived slavery, dying in the 1880s; Matilda Polk died still in slavery in 1849, at the age of about 110.\n\nAfter his death, Polk's historic reputation was initially formed by the attacks made on him in his own time. Whig politicians claimed that he was drawn from a well-deserved obscurity. Sam Houston is said to have observed that Polk, a teetotaler, was \"a victim of the use of water as a beverage\". Little was published about him but two biographies released in the wake of his death. Polk was not again the subject of a major biography until 1922, when Eugene I. McCormac published \"James K. Polk: A Political Biography\". McCormac relied heavily on Polk's presidential diary, first published in 1909. When historians began ranking the presidents in 1948, Polk ranked 10th in Arthur M. Schlesinger Sr.'s poll, and has subsequently ranked 8th in Schlesinger's 1962 poll, 11th in the Riders-McIver Poll (1996), and 14th in the 2017 survey by C-SPAN.\n\nBorneman deemed Polk the most effective president prior to the Civil War, and noted that Polk expanded the power of the presidency, especially in its power as commander in chief and its oversight over the Executive Branch. Steven G. Calabresi and Christopher S. Yoo, in their history of presidential power, praised Polk's conduct of the Mexican War, \"it seems unquestionable that his management of state affairs during this conflict was one of the strongest examples since Jackson of the use of presidential power to direct specifically the conduct of subordinate officers.\"\n\nHarry S. Truman called Polk \"a great president. Said what he intended to do and did it.\" Bergeron noted that the matters that Polk settled, he settled for his time. The questions of the banking system, and of the tariff, which Polk had made two of the main issues of his presidency, were not significantly revised until the 1860s. Similarly, the Gadsden Purchase, and that of Alaska (1867), were the only major U.S. expansions until the 1890s.\n\nPaul H. Bergeron wrote in his study of Polk's presidency: \"Virtually everyone remembers Polk and his expansionist successes. He produced a new map of the United States, which fulfilled a continent-wide vision.\" \"To look at that map,\" Robert W. Merry concluded, \"and to take in the western and southwestern expanse included in it, is to see the magnitude of Polk's presidential accomplishments.\" Amy Greenberg, in her history of the Mexican War, found Polk's legacy to be more than territorial, \"during a single brilliant term, he accomplished a feat that earlier presidents would have considered impossible. With the help of his wife, Sarah, he masterminded, provoked and successfully prosecuted a war that turned the United States into a world power.\" Borneman noted that in securing this expansion, Polk did not consider the likely effect on Mexicans and Native Americans, \"That ignorance may well be debated on moral grounds, but it cannot take away Polk's stunning political achievement.\" James A. Rawley wrote in his \"American National Biography\" piece on Polk, \"he added extensive territory to the United States, including Upper California and its valuable ports, and bequeathed a legacy of a nation poised on the Pacific rim prepared to emerge as a superpower in future generations\".\n\nHistorians have criticized Polk for not perceiving that his territorial gains set the table for civil war. Pletcher stated that Polk, like others of his time, failed \"to understand that sectionalism and expansion had formed a new, explosive compound\". Fred I. Greenstein, in his journal article on Polk, noted that Polk \"lacked a far-seeing awareness of the problems that were bound to arise over the status of slavery in the territory acquired from Mexico\" William Dusinberre, in his volume on Polk as slave owner, suggested \"that Polk's deep personal involvement in the plantation slavery system ... colored his stance on slavery-related issues\".\n\nGreenberg noted that Polk's war served as the training ground for that later conflict:\n\nBULLET::::- List of Presidents of the United States\nBULLET::::- List of Presidents of the United States, sortable by previous experience\nBULLET::::- List of Presidents of the United States who owned slaves\nBULLET::::- James Polk presidential campaign, 1844\nBULLET::::- US Presidents on US postage stamps\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- , short popular biography.\nBULLET::::- Letter to Dean Acheson (unsent), August 26, 1960\n\nBULLET::::- Chaffin, Tom. \"Met His Every Goal? James K. Polk and the Legends of Manifest Destiny\" (University of Tennessee Press; 2014) 124 pages.\nBULLET::::- De Voto, Bernard. \"The Year of Decision: 1846\". Houghton Mifflin, 1943.\nBULLET::::- Dusinberre, William. \"President Polk and the Politics of Slavery\". \"American Nineteenth Century History\" 3.1 (2002): 1–16. . Argues he misrepresented strength of abolitionism, grossly exaggerated likelihood of slaves' massacring white families and seemed to condone secession.\nBULLET::::- Kornblith, Gary J. \"Rethinking the Coming of the Civil War: a Counterfactual Exercise\". \"Journal of American History\" 90.1 (2003): 76–105. . Asks what if Polk had not gone to war.\nBULLET::::- McCormac, Eugene Irving. \"James K. Polk: A Political Biography to the End of a Career, 1845–1849\". Univ. of California Press, 1922. (1995 reprint has .) hostile to Jacksonians.\nBULLET::::- Morrison, Michael A. \"Martin Van Buren, the Democracy, and the Partisan Politics of Texas Annexation\". \"Journal of Southern History\" 61.4 (1995): 695–724. . Discusses the election of 1844. online edition.\nBULLET::::- Sellers, Charles. \"James K. Polk, Jacksonian, 1795–1843\" (1957) vol 1 online; and \"James K. Polk, Continentalist, 1843–1846\". (1966) vol 2 online; long scholarly biography.\nBULLET::::- Smith, Justin Harvey. \"The War with Mexico, Vol 1.\" (2 vol 1919), full text online.\nBULLET::::- Smith, Justin Harvey. \"The War with Mexico, Vol. 2\". (2 vol 1919). full text online; Pulitzer prize; still the standard source.\n\nBULLET::::- Cutler, Wayne, et al. \"Correspondence of James K. Polk\". 1972–2004. . Ten vol. scholarly edition of the complete correspondence to and from Polk.\nBULLET::::- Polk, James K. \"The Diary of James K. Polk During His Presidency, 1845–1849\" edited by Milo Milton Quaife, 4 vols. 1910. Abridged version by Allan Nevins. 1929, online.\n\nBULLET::::- White House biography\nBULLET::::- James K. Polk Presidential Papers Collection, The American Presidency Project at the University of California, Santa Barbara\nBULLET::::- James K. Polk: A Resource Guide, from the Library of Congress\nBULLET::::- James K. Polk's Personal Correspondence Shapell Manuscript Foundation\nBULLET::::- Extensive essay on James K. Polk and shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs\nBULLET::::- Inaugural Address of James K. Polk from The Avalon Project at the Yale Law School\nBULLET::::- President James K. Polk State Historic Site, Pineville, North Carolina from a State of North Carolina website\nBULLET::::- \"Life Portrait of James K. Polk\", from C-SPAN's \"\", May 28, 1999\n"}
{"id": "15982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15982", "title": "January 4", "text": "January 4\n\nBULLET::::- 46 BC – Julius Caesar fights Titus Labienus in the Battle of Ruspina.\nBULLET::::- 871 – Battle of Reading: Æthelred of Wessex and his brother Alfred are defeated by a Danish invasion army.\nBULLET::::- 1649 – English Civil War: The Rump Parliament votes to put Charles I on trial.\nBULLET::::- 1717 – The Netherlands, Great Britain, and France sign the Triple Alliance in an attempt to maintain the Treaty of Utrecht; Britain having signed a preliminary alliance with France on November 28 (November 17, 1716).\nBULLET::::- 1762 – Great Britain declares war on Spain, thus entering the Seven Years' War.\nBULLET::::- 1798 – Constantine Hangerli arrives in Bucharest, Wallachia, as its new Prince, invested by the Ottoman Empire.\nBULLET::::- 1853 – After having been kidnapped and sold into slavery in the American South, Solomon Northup regains his freedom; his memoir \"Twelve Years a Slave\" later becomes a national bestseller.\nBULLET::::- 1854 – The McDonald Islands are discovered by Captain William McDonald aboard the \"Samarang\".\nBULLET::::- 1863 – The New Apostolic Church, a Christian and chiliastic church, is established in Hamburg, Germany.\nBULLET::::- 1878 – Russo-Turkish War (1877–78): Sofia is liberated from Ottoman rule and designated the capital of Liberated Bulgaria.\nBULLET::::- 1884 – The Fabian Society is founded in London, United Kingdom.\nBULLET::::- 1896 – Utah is admitted as the 45th U.S. state.\nBULLET::::- 1903 – Topsy, an elephant, is electrocuted by the owners of Luna Park, Coney Island. The Edison film company records the film \"Electrocuting an Elephant\" of Topsy's death.\nBULLET::::- 1912 – The Scout Association is incorporated throughout the British Empire by royal charter.\nBULLET::::- 1918 – The Finnish Declaration of Independence is recognized by Russia, Sweden, Germany and France.\nBULLET::::- 1944 – World War II: Operation Carpetbagger, involving the dropping of arms and supplies to resistance fighters in Europe, begins.\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Burma gains its independence from the United Kingdom becoming an independent republic, named the Union of Burma, with Sao Shwe Thaik as its first President and U Nu its first Prime Minister.\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Korean War: Chinese and North Korean forces capture Seoul.\nBULLET::::- 1956 – The Greek National Radical Union is formed by Konstantinos Karamanlis.\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Sputnik 1, the first artificial Earth satellite, launched by the Soviet Union in 1957, falls to Earth from orbit.\nBULLET::::- 1959 – \"Luna 1\" becomes the first spacecraft to reach the vicinity of the Moon.\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Rose Heilbron becomes the first female judge to sit at the Old Bailey in London, UK.\nBULLET::::- 1976 – The Troubles: The Ulster Volunteer Force shoots dead six Irish Catholic civilians in County Armagh, Northern Ireland. The next day, gunmen would shoot dead ten Protestant civilians nearby in retaliation.\nBULLET::::- 1987 – The Maryland train collision: An Amtrak train \"en route\" to Boston from Washington, D.C., collides with Conrail engines in Chase, Maryland, United States, killing 16 people.\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Second Gulf of Sidra incident: A pair of Libyan MiG-23 \"Floggers\" are shot down by a pair of US Navy F-14 Tomcats during an air-to-air confrontation.\nBULLET::::- 1990 – In Pakistan's deadliest train accident an overloaded passenger train collides with an empty freight train, resulting in 307 deaths and 700 injuries.\nBULLET::::- 1998 – A massive ice storm hits eastern Canada and the northeastern United States, continuing through January 10 and causing widespread destruction.\nBULLET::::- 1999 – Former professional wrestler Jesse Ventura is sworn in as governor of Minnesota, United States.\nBULLET::::- 2004 – \"Spirit\", a NASA Mars rover, lands successfully on Mars at 04:35 UTC.\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Mikheil Saakashvili is elected President of Georgia following the November 2003 Rose Revolution.\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Ehud Olmert becomes acting Prime Minister of Israel after the incumbent, Ariel Sharon, suffers a second, apparently more serious stroke.\nBULLET::::- 2007 – The 110th United States Congress convenes, electing Nancy Pelosi as the first female Speaker of the House in U.S. history.\nBULLET::::- 2010 – The Burj Khalifa, the current tallest building in the world, officially opens in Dubai.\nBULLET::::- 2013 – A gunman kills eight people in a house-to-house rampage in Kawit, Cavite, Philippines.\nBULLET::::- 2018 – Hennenman–Kroonstad train crash: A passenger train operated by Shosholoza Meyl collides with a truck on a level crossing at Geneva Station between Hennenman and Kroonstad, Free State, South Africa. Twenty people are killed and 260 injured.\n\nBULLET::::- 659 – Ali ibn Husayn Zayn al-Abidin (d.680) (d. 1100)\nBULLET::::- 1077 – Emperor Zhezong of China (d. 1100)\nBULLET::::- 1334 – Amadeus VI, Count of Savoy (d. 1383)\nBULLET::::- 1467 – Bodo VIII, Count of Stolberg-Wernigerode (d. 1538)\nBULLET::::- 1581 – James Ussher, Irish archbishop and historian (d. 1656)\nBULLET::::- 1643 – Isaac Newton, English mathematician and physicist (d. 1727)\nBULLET::::- 1654 – Lars Roberg, Swedish physician and academic (d. 1742)\nBULLET::::- 1672 – Hugh Boulter, English-Irish archbishop (d. 1742)\nBULLET::::- 1710 – Giovanni Battista Pergolesi, Italian composer, violinist, and organist (d. 1736)\nBULLET::::- 1720 – Johann Friedrich Agricola, German organist and composer (d. 1774)\nBULLET::::- 1785 – Jacob Grimm, German philologist and mythologist (d. 1863)\nBULLET::::- 1809 – Louis Braille, French educator, invented Braille (d. 1852)\nBULLET::::- 1813 – Isaac Pitman, English linguist and educator (d. 1897)\nBULLET::::- 1832 – George Tryon, English admiral (d. 1893)\nBULLET::::- 1838 – General Tom Thumb, American circus performer (d. 1883)\nBULLET::::- 1839 – Carl Humann, German archaeologist, architect, and engineer (d. 1896)\nBULLET::::- 1848 – Katsura Tarō, Japanese general and politician, 6th Prime Minister of Japan (d. 1913)\nBULLET::::- 1858 – Carter Glass, American publisher and politician, 47th United States Secretary of the Treasury (d. 1946)\nBULLET::::- 1864 – Clara Emilia Smitt, Swedish author (d. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 1869 – Tommy Corcoran, American baseball player and umpire (d. 1960)\nBULLET::::- 1874 – Josef Suk, Czech violinist and composer (d. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 1877 – Marsden Hartley, American painter and poet (d. 1943)\nBULLET::::- 1878 – A. E. Coppard, English poet and short story writer (d. 1957)\nBULLET::::- 1878 – Augustus John, Welsh painter and illustrator (d. 1961)\nBULLET::::- 1881 – Wilhelm Lehmbruck, German sculptor (d. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 1883 – Max Eastman, American author and poet (d. 1969)\nBULLET::::- 1883 – Johanna Westerdijk, Dutch pathologist and academic (d. 1961)\nBULLET::::- 1884 – Guy Pène du Bois, American painter, critic, and educator (d. 1958)\nBULLET::::- 1889 – M. Patanjali Sastri, Indian lawyer and jurist, 2nd Chief Justice of India (d. 1963)\nBULLET::::- 1891 – Edward Brooker, English-Australian sergeant and politician, 31st Premier of Tasmania (d. 1948)\nBULLET::::- 1895 – Leroy Grumman, American engineer and businessman, co-founded Grumman Aeronautical Engineering Co. (d. 1982)\nBULLET::::- 1896 – Everett Dirksen, American politician (d. 1969)\nBULLET::::- 1896 – André Masson, French painter and illustrator (d. 1987)\nBULLET::::- 1897 – Chen Cheng, Chinese politician, Vice President of the Republic of China (d. 1965)\nBULLET::::- 1900 – James Bond, American ornithologist and zoologist (d. 1989)\nBULLET::::- 1901 – C. L. R. James, Trinidadian journalist and theorist (d. 1989)\nBULLET::::- 1902 – John A. McCone, American businessman and politician, 6th Director of Central Intelligence (d. 1991)\nBULLET::::- 1905 – Sterling Holloway, American actor (d. 1992)\nBULLET::::- 1913 – Malietoa Tanumafili II, Samoan ruler (d. 2007)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Slim Gaillard, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 1991)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Lionel Newman, American pianist and composer (d. 1989)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Robert Parrish, American actor and director (d. 1995)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – William Colby, American intelligence officer, 10th Director of Central Intelligence (d. 1996)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Marianne Werner, German shot putter\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Veikko Hakulinen, Finnish skier and technician (d. 2003)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Paul Desmarais, Canadian businessman and philanthropist (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Barbara Rush, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1929 – Günter Schabowski, German journalist and politician (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Sorrell Booke, American actor and director (d. 1994)\nBULLET::::- 1931 – William Deane, Australian judge and politician, 22nd Governor-General of Australia\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Coşkun Özarı, Turkish footballer and coach (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Clint Hill, American secret service agent and author\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Carlos Saura, Spanish director and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Rudolf Schuster, Slovak politician, 2nd President of Slovakia\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Floyd Patterson, American boxer (d. 2006)\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Grace Bumbry, American operatic soprano\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Dyan Cannon, American actress, director, producer, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Gao Xingjian, Chinese novelist, playwright, and critic, Nobel Prize laureate\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Brian Josephson, Welsh physicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate\nBULLET::::- 1941 – George P. Cosmatos, Italian-Canadian director and screenwriter (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Kalpnath Rai, Indian politician (d. 1999)\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Bolaji Akinyemi, Nigerian political scientist, academic, and politician\nBULLET::::- 1942 – John McLaughlin, English guitarist and songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Doris Kearns Goodwin, American historian and author\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Hwang Sok-yong, South Korean author and educator\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Richard R. Schrock, American chemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Arthur Conley, American singer-songwriter (d. 2003)\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Marie-Thérèse Letablier, French sociologist and academic\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Kostas Davourlis, Greek footballer (d. 1992)\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Cissé Mariam Kaïdama Sidibé, Malian civil servant and politician, Prime Minister of Mali\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Khondakar Ashraf Hossain, Bangladesh poet and academic (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Norberto Alonso, Argentinian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Tina Knowles, American fashion designer, founded House of Deréon\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Ann Magnuson, American actress and performance artist\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Zehava Gal-On, Israeli politician\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Bernard Sumner, English singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Patty Loveless, American singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Matt Frewer, American-Canadian actor\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Michael Stipe, American singer-songwriter and producer\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Dave Foley, Canadian comedian, actor, director, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Susan Devoy, New Zealand squash player\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Guy Forget, French tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Craig Revel Horwood, Australian-English dancer, choreographer, and director\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Julia Ormond, English actress and producer\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Deana Carter, American singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1967 – David Toms, American golfer and philanthropist\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Dominik Hrbatý, Slovak tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Miguel Monteiro, Portuguese footballer\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Gökhan Gönül, Turkish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Al Jefferson, American basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1986 – James Milner, English footballer\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Toni Kroos, German footballer\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Kris Bryant, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Ante Žižić, Croatian basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1998 – Liza Soberano, Filipina actress\nBULLET::::- 871 – Æthelwulf, Saxon ealdorman\nBULLET::::- 874 – Hasan al-Askari, eleventh of the Twelve Imams (probable; b. 846)\nBULLET::::- 1248 – Sancho II of Portugal (b. 1209)\nBULLET::::- 1344 – Robert de Lisle, 1st Baron Lisle, English peer (b. 1288)\nBULLET::::- 1399 – Nicholas Eymerich, Catalan theologian and inquisitor\nBULLET::::- 1424 – Muzio Sforza, Italian condottiero\nBULLET::::- 1428 – Frederick I, Elector of Saxony (b. 1370)\nBULLET::::- 1584 – Tobias Stimmer, Swiss painter and illustrator (b. 1539)\nBULLET::::- 1604 – Ferenc Nádasdy, Hungarian noble (b. 1555)\nBULLET::::- 1695 – François-Henri de Montmorency, duc de Luxembourg, French general (b. 1628)\nBULLET::::- 1752 – Gabriel Cramer, Swiss mathematician and physicist (b. 1704)\nBULLET::::- 1761 – Stephen Hales, English clergyman and physiologist (b. 1677)\nBULLET::::- 1782 – Ange-Jacques Gabriel, French architect, designed École Militaire (b. 1698)\nBULLET::::- 1786 – Moses Mendelssohn, German philosopher and theologian (b. 1729)\nBULLET::::- 1804 – Charlotte Lennox, English author and poet (b. 1730)\nBULLET::::- 1821 – Elizabeth Ann Seton, American nun and saint (b. 1774)\nBULLET::::- 1825 – Ferdinand I of the Two Sicilies (b. 1751)\nBULLET::::- 1863 – Roger Hanson, American general (b. 1827)\nBULLET::::- 1874 – Thomas Gregson, English-Australian lawyer and politician, 2nd Premier of Tasmania (b. 1798)\nBULLET::::- 1877 – Cornelius Vanderbilt, American businessman and philanthropist (b. 1794)\nBULLET::::- 1880 – Anselm Feuerbach, German painter and educator (b. 1829)\nBULLET::::- 1880 – Edward William Cooke, English painter and illustrator (b. 1811)\nBULLET::::- 1882 – John William Draper, English-American physician, chemist, and photographer (b. 1811)\nBULLET::::- 1883 – Antoine Chanzy, French general (b. 1823)\nBULLET::::- 1891 – Antoine Labelle, Canadian priest (b. 1833)\nBULLET::::- 1896 – Joseph Hubert Reinkens, German bishop and academic (b. 1821)\nBULLET::::- 1900 – Stanisław Mieroszewski, Polish-born politician, writer, historian and member of the Imperial Council of Austria (b. 1827)\nBULLET::::- 1901 – Nikolaos Gyzis, Greek painter and academic (b. 1842)\nBULLET::::- 1904 – Anna Winlock, American astronomer and academic (b. 1857)\nBULLET::::- 1910 – Léon Delagrange, French pilot and sculptor (b. 1873)\nBULLET::::- 1912 – Clarence Dutton, American geologist and soldier (b. 1841)\nBULLET::::- 1919 – Georg von Hertling, German academic and politician, 7th Chancellor of the German Empire (b. 1843)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Benito Pérez Galdós, Spanish author and playwright (b. 1843)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Alfred Grünfeld, Austrian pianist and composer (b. 1852)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Nellie Cashman, American nurse, restaurateur, entrepreneur, and gold prospector (b. 1845)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Süleyman Nazif, Turkish poet and civil servant (b. 1870)\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Art Acord, American actor and stuntman (b. 1890)\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Louise, Princess Royal of the United Kingdom (b. 1867)\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Mohammad Ali Jouhar, Indian journalist, activist, and scholar (b. 1878)\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Flora Finch, English-American actress and producer (b. 1867)\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Henri Bergson, French philosopher and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1859)\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Jerzy Iwanow-Szajnowicz, Greek-Polish swimmer and water polo player (b. 1911)\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Kaj Munk, Danish playwright and pastor (b. 1898)\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Jean Tatlock, American psychiatrist and physician (b. 1914)\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Albert Camus, French novelist, philosopher, and journalist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1913)\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Erwin Schrödinger, Austrian physicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1887)\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Hans Lammers, German jurist and politician (b. 1879)\nBULLET::::- 1965 – T. S. Eliot, American-English poet, playwright, and critic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1888)\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Donald Campbell, English racing driver and world speed record holder (b. 1921)\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Paul Chambers, American bassist and composer (b. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Carlo Levi, Italian painter, author, and activist (b. 1902)\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Brian Horrocks, Indian-English general (b. 1895)\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Christopher Isherwood, English-American author and academic (b. 1904)\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Phil Lynott, Irish singer-songwriter, bass player, and producer (b. 1949)\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Lily Laskine, French harp player (b. 1893)\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Harold Eugene Edgerton, American engineer and academic (b. 1903)\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Henry Bolte, Australian sergeant and politician, 38th Premier of Victoria (b. 1908)\nBULLET::::- 1994 – R. D. Burman, Indian film composer and music director (b. 1939)\nBULLET::::- 1995 – Eduardo Mata, Mexican conductor and composer (b. 1942)\nBULLET::::- 1995 – Sol Tax, American anthropologist and academic (b. 1907)\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Harry Helmsley, American businessman (b. 1909)\nBULLET::::- 1998 – Mae Questel, American actress (b. 1908)\nBULLET::::- 1999 – Iron Eyes Cody, American actor and stuntman (b. 1904)\nBULLET::::- 2000 – Spyros Markezinis, Greek lawyer and politician, 170th Prime Minister of Greece (b. 1909)\nBULLET::::- 2000 – Tom Fears, Mexican-American football player and coach (b. 1922)\nBULLET::::- 2001 – Les Brown, American bandleader and composer (b. 1912)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Brian Gibson, English director and screenwriter (b. 1944)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Joan Aiken, English author (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – John Toland, American historian and author (b. 1912)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Bud Poile, Canadian ice hockey player, coach, and manager (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Frank Harary, American mathematician and academic (b. 1921)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Humphrey Carpenter, English radio host and author (b. 1946)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Robert Heilbroner, American economist and historian (b. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Irving Layton, Romanian-Canadian poet and academic (b. 1912)\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Maktoum bin Rashid Al Maktoum, Emirati politician, 1st Prime Minister of the United Arab Emirates (b. 1946)\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Milton Himmelfarb, American sociographer, author, and academic (b. 1918)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Helen Hill, American director and producer (b. 1970)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Steve Krantz, American screenwriter and producer (b. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Marais Viljoen, South African politician, 5th State President of South Africa (b. 1915)\nBULLET::::- 2008 – Xavier Chamorro Cardenal, Nicaraguan journalist (b. 1932)\nBULLET::::- 2009 – Gert Jonke, Austrian poet, playwright, and author (b. 1946)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – Johan Ferrier, Surinamese educator and politician, 1st President of Suriname (b. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – Tsutomu Yamaguchi, Japanese engineer (b. 1916)\nBULLET::::- 2011 – Coen Moulijn, Dutch footballer (b. 1937)\nBULLET::::- 2011 – Gerry Rafferty, Scottish singer-songwriter (b. 1947)\nBULLET::::- 2011 – Salmaan Taseer, Pakistani businessman and politician, 26th Governor of Punjab, Pakistan (b. 1944)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Eve Arnold, American photographer and journalist (b. 1912)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Rod Robbie, English-Canadian architect, designed the Canadian Pavilion and Rogers Centre (b. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Anwar Shamim, Pakistani general (b. 1931)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Zoran Žižić, Montenegrin politician, 4th Prime Minister of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (b. 1951)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Pino Daniele, Italian singer-songwriter and guitarist (b. 1955)\nBULLET::::- 2016 – S. H. Kapadia, Indian lawyer, judge, and politician, 38th Chief Justice of India (b. 1947)\nBULLET::::- 2016 – Stephen W. Bosworth, American academic and diplomat, United States Ambassador to South Korea (b. 1939)\nBULLET::::- 2017 – Milt Schmidt, Canadian ice hockey player, coach and general manager (b. 1918)\nBULLET::::- 2017 – Georges Prêtre, French orchestral and opera conductor (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 2019 – Harold Brown, 14th United States Secretary of Defense (b. 1927)\n\nBULLET::::- Christian feast day:\nBULLET::::- Angela of Foligno\nBULLET::::- Elizabeth Ann Seton\nBULLET::::- Ferréol of Uzès\nBULLET::::- Mavilus\nBULLET::::- Pharaildis of Ghent\nBULLET::::- Rigobert\nBULLET::::- January 4 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)\nBULLET::::- The eleventh of the Twelve Days of Christmas. (Western Christianity)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Myanmar), celebrates the independence of Myanmar from the United Kingdom in 1948.\nBULLET::::- Day of the Fallen against the Colonial Repression (Angola)\nBULLET::::- Day of the Martyrs (Democratic Republic of the Congo)\nBULLET::::- Hwinukan mukee (Okinawa Islands, Japan)\nBULLET::::- Ogoni Day (Movement for the Survival of the Ogoni People)\nBULLET::::- World Braille Day\n\nBULLET::::- Chōna-hajimeshiki at Tsurugaoka Hachiman-gū (Kamakura, Kanagawa, Japan)\nBULLET::::- Funaiwai at Koshigoe (Kamakura, Kanagawa, Japan)\nBULLET::::- January 4 Tokyo Dome Show: The annual Wrestle Kingdom event run by New Japan Pro Wrestling\n\nBULLET::::- BBC: On This Day\nBULLET::::- On This Day in Canada\n"}
