{"id": "18360", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18360", "title": "Lombok", "text": "Lombok\n\nLombok is an island in West Nusa Tenggara province, Indonesia. It forms part of the chain of the Lesser Sunda Islands, with the Lombok Strait separating it from Bali to the west and the Alas Strait between it and Sumbawa to the east. It is roughly circular, with a \"tail\" (Sekotong Peninsula) to the southwest, about across and a total area of about . The provincial capital and largest city on the island is Mataram. \n\nLombok is somewhat similar in size and density, and shares some cultural heritage with the neighboring island of Bali to the west. However, it is administratively part of West Nusa Tenggara, along with the larger and more sparsely populated island of Sumbawa to the east. Lombok is surrounded by a number of smaller islands locally called Gili.\n\nThe island is home to some 3.35 million Indonesians as recorded in the decennial 2014 census. \n\nLombok is under the administration of the Governor of the province of West Nusa Tenggara (\"Nusa Tenggara Barat\"). The province is administered from the provincial capital of Mataram in West Lombok.\n\nThe island is administratively divided into four \"kabupaten\" (regencies) and one \"kota\" (city). They are as follows, with their areas and populations at the 2010 Census and according to the latest (January 2014) official estimates:\n\n! Name !! Area in <br> km !! Population <br> 2005 estimate !! Population <br> 2010 Census !! Population <br> 2014 Census !! Capital \n\nThe 14th century Majapahit manuscript Nagarakretagama canto 14 mentioned \"Lombok Mirah\" as one of island identified under Majapahit suzerainty. Other than the \"Babad Lombok\" document which records the 1257 Samalas eruption, little is known about Lombok before the seventeenth century. Before this time it was made up of numerous competing and feuding petty states each of which were presided over by a Sasak 'prince'. This disunity was taken advantage of by the neighbouring Balinese who took control of western Lombok in the early seventeenth century. \n\nThe Makassarese meanwhile invaded eastern Lombok from their colonies in neighbouring Sumbawa. The Dutch had first visited Lombok in 1674 and the Dutch East India Company concluded its first treaty with the Sasak Princess of Lombok. The Balinese had managed to take over the whole island by 1750, but Balinese infighting resulted in the island being split into four feuding Balinese kingdoms. In 1838, the Mataram kingdom brought its rivals under control.\n\nRelations between the Sasak and Balinese in western Lombok were largely harmonious and intermarriage was common. In the island's east, however, relations were less cordial and the Balinese maintained control from garrisoned forts. While Sasak village government remained in place, the village head became little more than a tax collector for the Balinese. Villagers became a kind of serf and Sasak aristocracy lost much of its power and land holdings.\nDuring one of the many Sasak peasant rebellions against the Balinese, Sasak chiefs sent envoys to the Dutch in Bali and invited them to rule Lombok. In June 1894, the governor general of the Dutch East Indies, Van der Wijck, signed a treaty with Sasak rebels in eastern Lombok. He sent a large army to Lombok and the Balinese raja capitulated to Dutch demands. (see Dutch intervention in Lombok) The younger princes however overruled the raja and attacked and pushed back the Dutch. The Dutch counterattacked overrunning Mataram and the raja surrendered. The entire island was annexed to the Netherlands East Indies in 1895. The Dutch ruled over Lombok's 500,000 people with a force of no more than 250 by cultivating the support of the Balinese and Sasak aristocracy. The Dutch are remembered in Lombok as liberators from Balinese hegemony.\n\nDuring World War II a Japanese invasion force comprising elements of the 2nd Southern Expeditionary Fleet invaded and occupied the Lesser Sunda Islands, including the island of Lombok. They sailed from Soerabaja harbour at 09:00 hrs on 8 March 1942 and proceeded towards Lombok Island. On 9 March 1942 at 17:00 hrs the fleet sailed into port of Ampenan on Lombok Island. The Dutch defenders were soon defeated and the island occupied.\n\nFollowing the cessation of hostilities the Japanese forces occupying Indonesia were withdrawn and Lombok returned temporarily to Dutch control. Following the subsequent Indonesian independence from the Dutch, the Balinese and Sasak aristocracy continued to dominate Lombok. In 1958, the island was incorporated into the province of West Nusa Tenggara with Mataram becoming the provincial capital. Mass killings of communists occurred across the island following the abortive coup attempt in Jakarta and Central Java. During President Suharto's New Order administration (1967–1998), Lombok experienced a degree of stability and development but not to the extent of the boom and wealth in Java and Bali. Crop failures led to famine in 1966 and food shortages in 1973. The national government's \"transmigrasi\" program moved a lot of people out of Lombok. The 1980s saw external developers and speculators instigate a nascent tourism boom although local's share of earnings was limited. Indonesia's political and economic crises of the late 1990s hit Lombok hard. In January 2000, riots broke out across Mataram with Christians and ethnic Chinese the main victims, with alleged \"agents provocateur\" from outside Lombok. Tourism slumped, but in recent years has seen a renewed growth.\nThe July 2018 Lombok earthquake killed 20 people and injured hundreds more, the earthquake caused significant damage to Lombok island and was the foreshock of a larger earthquake that followed eight days later. The 5 August 2018 Lombok earthquake had a moment magnitude of 7.0, and it caused catastrophic damage to North Lombok and also caused damage to nearby Bali; it caused over 550 deaths and more than 7000 are injured. Another Lombok earthquake occurred on 19 August 2018, killing 13 people and damaging 1800 buildings.\n\nThe island is to the immediate east of the Lombok Strait which marks the biogeographical division between the fauna of the Indomalayan ecozone and the distinctly different fauna of Australasia; this distinction, known as the \"Wallace Line\" (or \"Wallace's Line\") takes its name from Alfred Russel Wallace (1823–1913). Wallace was the first person to comment on the division between the two regions, as well as on the abrupt boundary between the two biomes.\n\nTo the east of Lombok lies the Alas Strait, a narrow body of water separating the island of Lombok from the nearby island of Sumbawa.\n\nThe island's topography is dominated by the centrally-located stratovolcano Mount Rinjani, the second-highest volcano in Indonesia, which rises to , making Lombok the 8th-highest island. The most recent eruption of Rinjani occurred in September 2016 at Gunung Barujari. In a 2010 eruption, ash was reported as rising into the atmosphere from the Barujari cone in Rinjani's caldera lake of Segara Anak. Lava flowed into the caldera lake, raising its temperature, while ash fall damaged crops on the slopes of Rinjani. The volcano and its crater lake, Segara Anak (child of the sea), are protected by the Gunung Rinjani National Park established in 1997. Recent evidence indicates an ancient volcano, Mount Samalas, of which now only a caldera remains, was the source of the 1257 Samalas eruption, one of the largest volcanic eruptions in recorded history, which caused worldwide changes in weather.\n\nThe highlands of Lombok are forest-clad and mostly undeveloped. The lowlands are highly cultivated. Rice, soybeans, coffee, tobacco, cotton, cinnamon, cacao, cloves, cassava, corn, coconuts, copra, bananas and vanilla are the major crops grown in the fertile soils of the island. The southern part of the island is fertile but drier, especially toward the southern coastline.\n\nLombok is surrounded by many islets, including:\n\nBULLET::::- Northwest: colloquially the Gili Islands (North Lombok Regency)\nBULLET::::- Gili Trawangan\nBULLET::::- Gili Meno\nBULLET::::- Gili Air\nBULLET::::- Northeast (East Lombok Regency)\nBULLET::::- Gili Lawang\nBULLET::::- Gili Sulat\nBULLET::::- Gili Petagan\nBULLET::::- Gili Bidara (Pasaran)\nBULLET::::- Gili Lampu\nBULLET::::- Gili Puyu\nBULLET::::- Gili Kondo\nBULLET::::- East Coast of Nusa Tenggara\nBULLET::::- Gili Puyuh\nBULLET::::- Gili Sulat\nBULLET::::- Southeast (East Lombok Regency)\nBULLET::::- Gili Indah\nBULLET::::- Gili Merengke\nBULLET::::- Gili Belek\nBULLET::::- Gili Ular\nBULLET::::- South Coast (West Lombok Regency)\nBULLET::::- Gili Solet\nBULLET::::- Gili Sarang Burung\nBULLET::::- Gili Kawu\nBULLET::::- Gili Puyuh\nBULLET::::- Southwest (Sekotong Peninsula, West Lombok Regency)\nBULLET::::- Gili Nanggu\nBULLET::::- Gili Sudak\nBULLET::::- Gili Tangkong\nBULLET::::- Gili Kedis\nBULLET::::- Gili Poh\nBULLET::::- Gili Genting\nBULLET::::- Gili Lontar\nBULLET::::- Gili Layar\nBULLET::::- Gili Amben\nBULLET::::- Gili Gede\nBULLET::::- Gili Anyaran\nBULLET::::- Gili Layar\nBULLET::::- Gili Asahan\nThe water supply in Lombok is stressed and this places strain both upon the water supply of the provincial capital, Mataram, and upon that of the island in general. The southern and central areas are reported to be the most critically affected. West Nusa Tenggara province in general is threatened with a water crisis caused by increasing forest and water table damage and degradation. 160 thousand hectares of a total of 1960 thousand hectares are thought to have been affected. The Head of Built Environment and Security Forest Service Forest West Nusa Tenggara Andi Pramari stated in Mataram on Wednesday, May 6, 2009 that, \"If this situation is not addressed it can be expected that within five years it may be difficult for people to obtain water in this part of NTB (West Nusa Tenggara). Not only that, the productivity of agriculture in value added will fall, and the residents are experiencing water deficiency in their wells\". High cases of timber theft in the region of NTB are contributing to this problem.\n\nIn September 2010 in Central Lombok, some villagers reportedly walked for several hours to fetch a single pail of water. Nieleando, a small coastal village about 50 kilometers from the provincial capital, Mataram, has seen dry wells for years. It has been reported that occasionally the problem escalates sufficiently for disputes and fighting between villagers to occur. The problems have been reported to be most pronounced in the districts of Jonggat, Janapria, Praya Timur, Praya Barat, Praya Barat Daya and Pujut. In 2010 provincial authorities declared all six districts drought areas. Sumbawa, the other main island of the province, also experienced severe drought in 2010, making it a province-wide issue.\n\nAreas in southern Lombok Island were classified as arid and prone to water shortages due to low rainfall and lack of water sources. On May 2011, groundbreaking began on Pandanduri dam construction, which will span about 430 hectares and cost an estimated Rp.800 billion ($92.8 million). When finished, the dam will accommodate about 25.7 million cubic meters of water and be able to irrigate 10,350 hectares of farmland. Project construction was expected to last five years.\n\nThe island's inhabitants are 85% Sasak, whose origins are thought to have migrated from Java in the first millennium BC. Other residents include an estimated 10–15% Balinese, with the small remainder being Tionghoa-peranakan, Javanese, Sumbawa and Arab Indonesians.\n\nThe Sasak population are culturally and linguistically closely related to the Balinese, but unlike the Hindu Balinese, the majority are Muslim and the landscape is punctuated with mosques and minarets. Islamic traditions and holidays influence the Island's daily activities.\n\nIn 2008 the Island of Lombok had 866,838 households and an average of 3.635 persons per household.\n\nThe 2014 census recorded a population of 4,773,795 people in the province of NTB, of which 70.24% reside on Lombok, giving it a population of 3,352,988 at that date.\n\nThe island's indigenous Sasak people are predominantly Muslim however before the arrival of Islam Lombok experienced a long period of Hindu and Buddhist influence that reached the island through Java. A minority Balinese Hindu culture remains in Lombok. Islam may have first been brought to Lombok by traders arriving from Sumbawa in the 17th century who then established a following in eastern Lombok. Other accounts describe the first influences arriving in the first half of the sixteenth century. The palm leaf manuscript Babad Lombok which contains the history of Lombok describes how Sunan Prapen was sent by his father The Susuhunan Ratu of Giri on a military expedition to Lombok and Sumbawa in order to convert the population and propagate the new religion. However, the new religion took on a highly syncretistic character, frequently mixing animist and Hindu-Buddhist beliefs and practices with Islam.\n\nA more orthodox version of Islam increased in popularity in the early twentieth century. The Indonesian government religionization programs (acquiring of a religion) in Lombok during 1967 and 1968 led to a period of some considerable confusion in religious allegiances and practices. These religionization programs later led to the emergence of more conformity in religious practices in Lombok. The Hindu minority religion is still practised in Lombok alongside the majority Muslim religion.\n\nHinduism is followed by ethnic Balinese and by a minority of the indigenous Sasak. All the main Hindu religious ceremonies are celebrated in Lombok and there are many villages throughout Lombok that have a Hindu majority population. According to local legends two of the oldest villages on the island, Bayan, and Sembalun, were founded by a prince of Majapahit. According to the 2010 population census declared adherents of Hinduism numbered 101,000 people with the highest concentration in the Mataram Regency where they accounted for 14% of the population. The Ditjen Bimas Hindu (DBH)/ Hindu Religious Affairs Directorate's own analysis conducted in close association with Hindu communities throughout the country found that the number of Hindus in the population is much higher than counted in the government census. The survey carried out in 2012 found the Hindu population of Lombok to be 445,933. This figure is more in line with the commonly stated view that 10–15% of the Islands population is Hindu.\n\nThe Nagarakertagama, the 14th-century palm leaf poem that was found on Lombok places the island as one of the vassals of the Majapahit empire. This manuscript contained detailed descriptions of the Majapahit Kingdom and also affirmed the importance of Hindu-Buddhism in the Majapahit empire by describing temple, palaces and several ceremonial observances.\n\nChristianity is practised by a small minority including some ethnic Chinese and immigrants from Bali and East Nusa Tenggara. There are Roman Catholic churches and parishes in Ampenan, Mataram, Praya and Tanjung. There is a catholic hospital in Mataram as well. Two Buddhist temples can be visited in and around Tanjung where about 800 Buddhists live.\n\nThe history of a small Arab community in Lombok has history dating back to early settlement by traders from Yemen. The community is still evident mainly in Ampenan, the old Port of Mataram. Due to the siting of a UNHCR refugee centre in Lombok some refugees from middle eastern countries have intermarried with Lombok people.\n\nA non-orthodox Islamic group found only on Lombok are the Wektu Telu (\"Three times\"), who pray three times daily, instead of the five times stipulated in the Quran. Waktu Telu beliefs are entwined with animism, and is influenced not only by Islam, but also Hinduism and pantheistic beliefs. There are also remnants of Boda who maintain Pagan Sasak beliefs and could be representative of an original Sasak culture, undiluted by later Islamic innovations.\n\nMany influences of animist belief prevail within the Sasak people, most of whom believe in the existence of spirits or \"ghosts\". They regard both food and prayer as indispensable whenever they seek to communicate with spirits, including the dead and ritualistic traditional practices endure. Traditional magic is practised to ward off evil and illness and to seek solutions to disputations and antipathy. Magic may be practised by an individual alone but normally a person experienced in such things is sought out to render a service. Normally money or gifts are made to this person and the most powerful practitioners are treated with considerable respect.\n\nMany of the visitors to Lombok and much of the islands goods come across the Lombok Strait by sea or air links from Bali. Only separate the two islands. Lombok is often marketed as \"an unspoiled Bali,\" or \"Bali's sister island.\" With support from the central government, Lombok and Sumbawa are being developed as Indonesia's second destination for international and domestic tourism. Lombok has retained a more natural, uncrowded and undeveloped environment, which attract travelers who come for its relaxed pace and the opportunity to explore the island's unspoiled natural environment. The more contemporary marketing campaigns for Lombok/Sumbawa seek to differentiate from Bali and promote the island of Lombok as a standalone destination. The opening of the Lombok International Airport on 1 October 2011 assisted in this endeavor.\n\nNusa Tenggara Barat and Lombok may be considered economically depressed by First World standards and a large majority of the population live in poverty. Still, the island is fertile, has sufficient rainfall in most areas for agriculture, and possesses a variety of climate zones. Consequently, food in abundant quantity and variety is available inexpensively at local farmer's markets, though locals still suffer from famine due to drought and subsistence farming. A family of 4 can eat rice, vegetables, and fruit for as little as US$0.50. Even though a family's income may be as small as US$1.00 per day from fishing or farming, many families are able to live a contented and productive life on a low income. However, the people of Lombok are coming under increasing pressure from rising food and fuel prices. Access to housing, education and health services remains difficult for many of the island's indigenous population although public education is free throughout the province and elementary schools are tried to be present in even remote areas.\n\nThe percentage of the population living in poverty in urban areas of Nusa Tenggara Barat in 2008 was 29.47% and in 2009 it was 28.84%. For those living in rural areas in 2008 it was 19.73% and in 2009 it reduced marginally to 18.40%. For combined urban and village the figures were 23.81% and in 2009 it fell slightly to 22.78%.\n\nIn Mataram in 2008 the percentage of the population that was unmarried was 40.74%, married 52.01%, divorced 2.51% and widowed 4.75%.\n\nTourism is an important source of income on Lombok. The most developed tourism area of the island is on the west coast of the island and is centered about the township of Senggigi. The immediate surrounds of the township contain the most developed tourism facilities. The west coast coastal tourism strip is spread along a strip following the coastal road north from Mataram and the old airport at Ampenan. The principal tourism area extends to Tanjung in the northwest at the foot of Mount Rinjani and includes the Sire and Medana Peninsulas and the highly popular Gili Islands lying immediately offshore. These three small islands are most commonly accessed by boat from Bangsal near Pemenang, Teluk Nare a little to the south, or from further south at Senggigi and Mangsit beach. Many hotels and resorts offer accommodations ranging from budget to luxurious. Recently direct fast boat services have been running from Bali making a direct connection to the Gili islands. Although rapidly changing in character, the Gili islands still provide both a lay-back backpacker's retreat and a high-class resort destination.\n\nOther tourist destinations include Mount Rinjani, Gili Bidara, Gili Lawang, Narmada Park and Mayura Park and Kuta (distinctly different from Kuta, Bali). Sekotong, in southwest Lombok, is popular for its numerous and diverse scuba diving locations.\n\nThe Kuta area is also famous for its largely deserted, white sand beaches. The Smalltown is rapidly developing since the opening of the International airport in Praya. Increasing amounts of surfers from around the globe come here seeking out perfect surf and the slow and rustic feel of Lombok. South Lombok surfing is considered some of the best in the world. Large polar lows push up through the Indian Ocean directing long range, high period swell from as far south as Heard Island from late March through to September or later. This coincided with the dry season and South-East trade winds that blow like clockwork. Lombok is famous for its diversity of breaks, which includes world-renowned \"Desert Point\" at Banko Banko in the southwest of the island.\n\nThe northern west coast near Tanjung has many new upmarket hotel and villa developments centered about the Sire and Medana peninsular nearby to the Gili islands and a new boating marina at Medana Bay. These new developments complement the already existing five-star resorts and a large golf course already established there.\n\nTourist development started in the mid-1980s when Lombok attracted attention as an 'unspoiled' alternative to Bali. Initially, low budget bungalows proliferated at places like the Gili islands and Kuta, Lombok on the South Coast. These tourist accommodations were largely owned by and operated by local business entrepreneurs. Areas in proximity to the airport, places like Senggigi, experienced rampant land speculation for prime beachfront land by big businesses from outside Lombok.\n\nIn the 1990s the national government in Jakarta began to take an active role in planning for and promoting Lombok's tourism. Private organizations like the Bali Tourism Development Corporation (BTDC) and the Lombok Tourism Development Corporation (LTDC) were formed. LTDC prepared detailed land use plans with maps and areas zoned for tourist facilities. Large hotels provide primary employment for the local population. Ancillary business, ranging from restaurants to art shops have been started by local businessmen. These businesses provide secondary employment for local residents.\n\nThe 1997 Asian Financial Crisis and the fall of Suharto regime in 1998 marked the beginning a decade of setbacks for tourism. Spurred by rapid devaluation of the currency and the transition to true democracy caused all of Indonesia to experience a period of domestic unrest. Many of Indonesian Provinces struggled with elements of the population desiring autonomy or independence from the Republic of Indonesia. At the same time, fanatical Islamic terrorism in Indonesia further aggravated domestic unrest across the archipelago.\n\nIn January 2000, radical Islamic agitators from the newly formed Jemaah Islamiyah provoked religious and ethnic violence in the Ampenan area of Mataram and the southern area of Senggigi. Many foreign expatriates and tourists were temporarily evacuated to Bali. Numerous foreign embassies issued Travel Warnings advising of the potential danger of traveling to Indonesia.\n\nSubsequently, the 2002 Bali bombings, the 2005 Bali bombings and the Progress of the SARS outbreak in Asia all dramatically impacted tourism activities in Lombok. Tourism was slow to return to Lombok, provoked in part by a worldwide reluctance to travel because of global tensions. Only since 2007–2008, when most developed countries lifted their Travel Warnings has tourism recovered to pre-2000 levels.\n\nThe years leading up to 2010 has seen a rapid revival and promotion of tourism recovery in the tourism industry. The number of visitors has far surpassed pre-2000 levels. All signs indicate the long-term trend will see a steady increase in the number of visitor arrivals.\n\nBoth the local government and many residents recognize that tourism and services related to tourism will continue to be a major source of income for the island. The island's natural environment and the customary hospitality of its residents make it an obvious tourist destination.\n\nLombok retains the allure of an undeveloped and natural environment. Tourism visits to this tropical island are increasing again as both international and local tourists are re-discovering the charms of Lombok. With this new interest comes the development of a number of boutique resorts on the island providing quality accommodation, food, and drinks in near proximity to the relatively unspoiled countryside.\n\nThe Indonesian government is actively promoting both Lombok and neighboring Sumbawa as Indonesia's number two tourist destination after Bali. Then–President of Indonesia, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, Ministry of Cultural and Tourism and the regional Governor had made public statements supporting the development of Lombok as a tourism destination and setting a goal of 1 million visitors annually by the year 2012 for the combined destination of Lombok and Sumbawa. This has seen infrastructure improvements to the island including road upgrades and the construction of a much delayed new International airport in the islands south. Bali Tourism Development Corporation (BTDC) has been empowered to develop Mandalika Resort Area at southern part of the island, extending from Kuta along 8 kilometers of sandy beach. Despite this, Sumbawa retains a very rustic feel compared to Lombok.\n\nLombok International Airport (\"Bandara Internasional Lombok\") is south west of the small regional city of Praya in South central Lombok. It commenced operations on 1 October 2011. It replaced Selaparang airport near Ampenan. It is the only operational international airport within the province of West Nusa Tenggara (\"Nusa Tenggara Barat\").\n\nSelaparang Airport in Ampenan was closed for operations on the evening of 30 September 2011. It previously provided facilities for domestic services to Java, Bali, and Sumbawa and international services to Singapore to Kuala Lumpur via Surabaya and Jakarta. It was the island's original airport and is situated on Jalan Adi Sucipto on the north western outskirts of Mataram. The terminals and basic airport infrastructure remain intact but it is closed to all civil airline traffic.\n\nLembar Harbor seaport in the southwest has shipping facilities and a ferry for road vehicles and passenger services. In 2013, the gross tonnage is 4.3 million Gross Tonnages or increase by 72 percent from 2012 data means in Lombok and West Nusa Tenggara the economy progress significantly.\nLabuhan Lombok ferry port on the east coast provides a ferry for road vehicles and passenger services to Poto Tano on Sumbawa.\n\nPelni Shipping Line provides a national network of passenger ship services throughout the Indonesian archipelago. Pelni have offices in Ampenan.\n\nFlights from Ngurah Rai International Airport to Zainuddin Abdul Madjid International Airport take about 40 minutes. Lombok international airport is located in southwest Lombok, 1.5 hours drive to Senggigi main tourist areas in the west Lombok, 2 hours drive to the jetty of Teluk Nara before you cross to Gili Islands and about 30 minutes drive to Kuta south Lombok.\n\nPublic Ferries depart from Padang Bai (Southeast Bali) and Lembar (Southwest Lombok) every hour, taking a minimum of 4–5 hours make the crossing in either direction.\n\nFastboat services are available from various departure points on Bali and principally serve the Gili Islands, with some significant onward traffic to the Lombok mainland. Arrival points on Lombok are dependent upon the operator, at either Teluk Nare/Teluk Kodek, Bangsal harbour or the township of Senggigi, all on the northwest coast. Operating standards vary widely.\n\nBULLET::::- Tanak Tepong\n\nBULLET::::- Tropenmuseam Collection of historic photos from Lombok\nBULLET::::- Lombok Indonesia Tourism\nBULLET::::- Mount Rinjani Lombok National Park\nBULLET::::- NY Times on Lombok\nBULLET::::- The Australian reports on Lombok: The New Bali\nBULLET::::- Kabupaten Lombok Utara the Regency of North Lombok\nBULLET::::- Kabupaten Lombok Tengah, the Regency of Central Lombok\nBULLET::::- Kabupaten Lombok Timur, the Regency of East Lombok\nBULLET::::- Kabupaten Lombok Barat, the Regency of West Lombok\nBULLET::::- Kota Mataram, City of Mataram\nBULLET::::- Gili Asahan\n"}
{"id": "18362", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18362", "title": "Lego", "text": "Lego\n\nLego ( , ; stylised as LEGO) is a line of plastic construction toys that are manufactured by The Lego Group, a privately held company based in Billund, Denmark. The company's flagship product, Lego, consists of colourful interlocking plastic bricks accompanying an array of gears, figurines called minifigures, and various other parts. Lego pieces can be assembled and connected in many ways to construct objects, including vehicles, buildings, and working robots. Anything constructed can be taken apart again, and the pieces reused to make new things.\n\nThe Lego Group began manufacturing the interlocking toy bricks in 1949. Movies, games, competitions, and six Legoland amusement parks have been developed under the brand. As of July 2015, 600 billion Lego parts had been produced.\n\nIn February 2015, Lego replaced Ferrari as Brand Finance's \"world's most powerful brand\".\n\nThe Lego Group began in the workshop of Ole Kirk Christiansen (1891–1958), a carpenter from Billund, Denmark, who began making wooden toys in 1932. In 1934, his company came to be called \"Lego\", derived from the Danish phrase , which means \"play well\". In 1947, Lego expanded to begin producing plastic toys. In 1949 Lego began producing, among other new products, an early version of the now familiar interlocking bricks, calling them \"Automatic Binding Bricks\". These bricks were based on the Kiddicraft Self-Locking Bricks, which had been patented in the United Kingdom in 1939 and released in 1947. Lego had received a sample of the Kiddicraft bricks from the supplier of an injection-molding machine that it purchased. The bricks, originally manufactured from cellulose acetate, were a development of the traditional stackable wooden blocks of the time.\n\nThe Lego Group's motto is which means \"the best is not too good\". This motto, which is still used today, was created by Christiansen to encourage his employees never to skimp on quality, a value he believed in strongly. By 1951 plastic toys accounted for half of the Lego company's output, even though the Danish trade magazine \"Legetøjs-Tidende\" (\"Toy Times\"), visiting the Lego factory in Billund in the early 1950s, felt that plastic would never be able to replace traditional wooden toys. Although a common sentiment, Lego toys seem to have become a significant exception to the dislike of plastic in children's toys, due in part to the high standards set by Ole Kirk.\n\nBy 1954, Christiansen's son, Godtfred, had become the junior managing director of the Lego Group. It was his conversation with an overseas buyer that led to the idea of a toy system. Godtfred saw the immense potential in Lego bricks to become a system for creative play, but the bricks still had some problems from a technical standpoint: their locking ability was limited and they were not versatile. In 1958, the modern brick design was developed; it took five years to find the right material for it, ABS (acrylonitrile butadiene styrene) polymer. The modern Lego brick design was patented on 28 January 1958.\n\nThe Lego Group's Duplo product line was introduced in 1969 and is a range of simple blocks whose lengths measure twice the width, height, and depth of standard Lego blocks and are aimed towards younger children.\n\nIn 1978, Lego produced the first minifigures, which have since become a staple in most sets.\n\nIn May 2011, Space Shuttle Endeavour mission STS-134 brought 13 Lego kits to the International Space Station, where astronauts built models to see how they would react in microgravity, as a part of the Lego Bricks in Space program.\n\nIn May 2013, the largest model ever created was displayed in New York City and was made of over 5 million bricks; a 1:1 scale model of an X-wing fighter. Other records include a tower and a railway.\n\nIn February 2015, Lego replaced Ferrari as the \"world's most powerful brand.\"\n\nLego's popularity is demonstrated by its wide representation and usage in many forms of cultural works, including books, films and art work. It has even been used in the classroom as a teaching tool. In the US, Lego Education North America is a joint venture between Pitsco, Inc. and the educational division of the Lego Group.\n\nIn 1998, Lego bricks were one of the original inductees into the National Toy Hall of Fame at The Strong in Rochester, New York.\n\nLego pieces of all varieties constitute a universal system. Despite variation in the design and the purposes of individual pieces over the years, each piece remains compatible in some way with existing pieces. Lego bricks from 1958 still interlock with those made in the current time, and Lego sets for young children are compatible with those made for teenagers. Six bricks of 2 × 4 studs can be combined in 915,103,765 ways.\n\nEach Lego piece must be manufactured to an exacting degree of precision. When two pieces are engaged they must fit firmly, yet be easily disassembled. The machines that manufacture Lego bricks have tolerances as small as 10 micrometres.\nPrimary concept and development work takes place at the Billund headquarters, where the company employs approximately 120 designers. The company also has smaller design offices in the UK, Spain, Germany, and Japan which are tasked with developing products aimed specifically at these markets. The average development period for a new product is around twelve months, split into three stages. The first stage is to identify market trends and developments, including contact by the designers directly with the market; some are stationed in toy shops close to holidays, while others interview children. The second stage is the design and development of the product based upon the results of the first stage. As of September 2008 the design teams use 3D modelling software to generate CAD drawings from initial design sketches. The designs are then prototyped using an in-house stereolithography machine. These prototypes are presented to the entire project team for comment and for testing by parents and children during the \"validation\" process. Designs may then be altered in accordance with the results from the focus groups. Virtual models of completed Lego products are built concurrently with the writing of the user instructions. Completed CAD models are also used in the wider organisation, for marketing and packaging.\n\nLego Digital Designer is an official piece of Lego software for Mac OS X and Windows which allows users to create their own digital Lego designs. The program once allowed customers to order their custom designs with a service to ship physical models from Digital Designer to consumers; the service ended in 2012.\n\nSince 1963, Lego pieces have been manufactured from a strong, resilient plastic known as acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS). As of September 2008, Lego engineers use the NX CAD/CAM/CAE PLM software suite to model the elements. The software allows the parts to be optimised by way of mould flow and stress analysis. Prototype moulds are sometimes built before the design is committed to mass production. The ABS plastic is heated to until it reaches a dough-like consistency. It is then injected into the moulds at pressures between 25 and 150 tonnes, and takes approximately 15 seconds to cool. The moulds are permitted a tolerance of up to twenty micrometres, to ensure the bricks remain connected. Human inspectors check the output of the moulds, to eliminate significant variations in colour or thickness. According to the Lego Group, about eighteen bricks out of every million fail to meet the standard required. Lego factories recycle all but about 1 percent of their plastic waste from the manufacturing process. If the plastic cannot be re-used in Lego bricks, it is processed and sold on to industries that can make use of it. Lego has a self-imposed 2030 deadline to find a more eco-friendly alternative to the ABS plastic it currently uses in its bricks.\n\nManufacturing of Lego bricks occurs at several locations around the world. Moulding is done in Billund, Denmark; Nyíregyháza, Hungary; Monterrey, Mexico and most recently in Jiaxing, China. Brick decorations and packaging are done at plants in Denmark, Hungary, Mexico and Kladno in the Czech Republic. The Lego Group estimates that in five decades it has produced 400 billion Lego blocks. Annual production of Lego bricks averages approximately 36 billion, or about 1140 elements per second. According to an article in \"BusinessWeek\" in 2006, Lego could be considered the world's No. 1 tire manufacturer; the factory produces about 306 million small rubber tires a year. The claim was reiterated in 2012.\n\nIn December 2012, the BBC's \"More or Less\" radio program asked the Open University's engineering department to determine \"how many Lego bricks, stacked one on top of the other, it would take for the weight to destroy the bottom brick?\" Using a hydraulic testing machine, the engineering department determined the average maximum force a 2×2 Lego brick can stand is 4,240 newtons; since an average 2×2 Lego brick has a mass of , according to their calculations it would take a stack of 375,000 bricks to cause the bottom brick to collapse, which represents a stack in height.\n\nPrivate tests have shown several thousand assembly-disassembly cycles before the bricks begin to wear out, although Lego tests show fewer cycles.\n\nIn 2018, Lego announced that it will be using bio-derived polyethylene to make its botanical elements (parts such as leaves, bushes and trees).\n\nSince the 1950s, the Lego Group has released thousands of sets with a variety of themes, including space, robots, pirates, trains, Vikings, castle, dinosaurs, undersea exploration, and wild west. Some of the classic themes that continue to the present day include Lego City (a line of sets depicting city life introduced in 1973) and Lego Technic (a line aimed at emulating complex machinery, introduced in 1977).\n\nOver the years, Lego has licensed themes from numerous cartoon and film franchises and even some from video games. These include \"Batman\", \"Indiana Jones\", \"Pirates of the Caribbean\", \"Harry Potter\", \"Star Wars\", and \"Minecraft\". Although some of the licensed themes, Lego Star Wars and Lego Indiana Jones, had highly successful sales, Lego has expressed a desire to rely more upon their own characters and classic themes, and less upon licensed themes related to movie releases.\n\nFor the 2012 Summer Olympics in London, Lego released a special Team GB Minifigures series exclusively in the United Kingdom to mark the opening of the games. For the 2016 Summer Olympics and 2016 Summer Paralympics in Rio de Janeiro, Lego released a kit with the Olympic and Paralympic mascots Vinicius and Tom.\n\nOne of the largest Lego sets commercially produced was a minifig-scaled edition of the Star Wars Millennium Falcon. Designed by Jens Kronvold Fredericksen, it was released in 2007 and contained 5,195 pieces. It was surpassed by a 5,922-piece Taj Mahal. A redesigned Millennium Falcon recently retook the top spot in 2017 with 7,541 pieces.\n\nLego also initiated a robotics line of toys called 'Mindstorms' in 1999, and has continued to expand and update this range ever since. The roots of the product originate from a programmable brick developed at the MIT Media Lab, and the name is taken from a paper by Seymour Papert, a computer scientist and educator who developed the educational theory of constructionism, and whose research was at times funded by the Lego Group.\n\nThe programmable Lego brick which is at the heart of these robotics sets has undergone several updates and redesigns, with the latest being called the 'EV3' brick, being sold under the name of Lego Mindstorms EV3. The set includes sensors that detect touch, light, sound and ultrasonic waves, with several others being sold separately, including an RFID reader.\n\nThe intelligent brick can be programmed using official software available for Windows and Mac computers, and is downloaded onto the brick via Bluetooth or a USB cable. There are also several unofficial programs and compatible programming languages that have been made to work with the brick, and many books have been written to support this community.\n\nThere are several robotics competitions which use the Lego robotics sets. The earliest is Botball, a national U.S. middle- and high-school competition stemming from the MIT 6.270 Lego robotics tournament. Other Lego robotics competitions include Junior FIRST LEGO League (Jr.FLL) for students ages 6–9 and FIRST Lego League (FLL) for students ages 9–16 (age 9–14 in the United States, Canada, and Mexico). Jr.FLL and FLL offer real-world engineering challenges to participants. FLL uses Lego-based robots to complete tasks. Jr.FLL participants build models out of Lego elements. In its 2010 season, there were 16,070 FLL teams in over 55 countries. In its 2010 season, there were 2,147 Jr.FLL teams with 12,882 total student participants in the United States and Canada. The international RoboCup Junior football competition involves extensive use of Lego Mindstorms equipment which is often pushed to its extreme limits.\n\nThe capabilities of the Mindstorms range have now been harnessed for use in Iko Creative Prosthetic System, a prosthetic limbs system designed for children. Designs for these Lego prosthetics allow everything from mechanical diggers to laser-firing spaceships to be screwed on to the end of a child's limb. Iko is the work of the Chicago-based Colombian designer Carlos Arturo Torres, and is a modular system that allows children to customise their own prosthetics with the ease of clicking together plastic bricks. Designed with Lego's Future Lab, the Danish toy company's experimental research department, and Cirec, a Colombian foundation for physical rehabilitation, the modular prosthetic incorporates myoelectric sensors that register the activity of the muscle in the stump and send a signal to control movement in the attachment. A processing unit in the body of the prosthetic contains an engine compatible with Lego Mindstorms, the company's robotics line, which lets the wearer build an extensive range of customised, programmable limbs.\n\nThe definitive shape of the Lego bricks, with the inner tubes, was patented by the Lego Group in 1958. Several competitors have attempted to take advantage of Lego's popularity by producing blocks of similar dimensions, and advertising them as being compatible with Lego bricks. In 2002, Lego sued the CoCo Toy Company in Beijing for copyright infringement over its \"Coko bricks\" product. CoCo was ordered to cease manufacture of the products, publish a formal apology and pay damages. Lego sued the English company Best-Lock Construction Toys in German courts in 2004 and 2009; the Federal Patent Court of Germany denied Lego trademark protection for the shape of its bricks for the latter case. In 2005, the Lego Company sued Canadian company Mega Bloks for trademark violation, but the Supreme Court of Canada upheld Mega Bloks' rights to sell their product. In 2010, the European Court of Justice ruled that the eight-peg design of the original Lego brick \"merely performs a technical function [and] cannot be registered as a trademark.\"\n\nFirst launched in 1996, the Lego website has developed over the years, and provides many extra services beyond an online store and a product catalogue. There are also moderated message boards that were founded in 2001. The site also includes instruction booklets for all Lego sets dating back to 2002.\n\n\"My Lego Network\" is a social networking site that involves items, blueprints, ranks, badges which are earned for completing certain tasks, trading and trophies called masterpieces which allow users to progress to go to the next rank. The website has a built in inbox which allows users to send pre written messages to one another. The Lego Network includes automated non-player characters within called \"Networkers\", who are able to do things which normal users cannot do, sending custom messages, and selling masterpieces and blueprints. The site also has modules which are set up on the user's page that give the user items, or that display picture compositions. Before My Lego Network, there were Lego Club Pages, which essentially held the same purpose, although the design lacked complex interaction.\n\nMerlin Entertainments operates eight Legoland amusement parks, the original in Billund, Denmark, the second in Windsor, England, the third in Günzburg, Germany, the fourth in Carlsbad, California, the fifth in Winter Haven, Florida, the sixth in Nusajaya, Malaysia, the seventh in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, and the eighth in Nagoya, Japan. A ninth is planned to open in 2020 in Goshen, New York, United States, and a tenth in 2022 in Shanghai, China. On 13 July 2005, the control of 70% of the Legoland parks was sold for $460 million to the Blackstone Group of New York while the remaining 30% is still held by Lego Group. There are also eight Legoland Discovery Centres, two in Germany, four in the United States, one in Japan and one in the United Kingdom. Two Legoland Discovery Centres opened in 2013: one at the Westchester Ridge Hill shopping complex in Yonkers, New York, and one at the Vaughan Mills in Vaughan, Ontario, Canada. Another opened at the Meadowlands complex in East Rutherford, New Jersey, in 2014.\n\nLego operates 132 so-called \"Lego Store\" retail shops. There are stores at the Downtown Disney shopping complexes at Disneyland and Walt Disney World Resorts as well as in Mall of America in Bloomington, Minnesota. The opening of each store is celebrated with weekend-long event in which a Master Model Builder creates, with the help of volunteers—most of whom are children—a larger-than-life Lego statue, which is then displayed at the new store for several weeks.\n\nSince around 2000, the Lego Group has been promoting \"Lego Serious Play\", a form of business consultancy fostering creative thinking, in which team members build metaphors of their organizational identities and experiences using Lego bricks. Participants work through imaginary scenarios using visual three-dimensional Lego constructions, imaginatively exploring possibilities in a serious form of play.\n\nLego branched out into the video game market in 1997 by founding Lego Media International Limited, and \"Lego Island\" was released that year by Mindscape. After this Lego released titles such as \"Lego Creator\" and \"Lego Racers\".\n\nAfter Lego closed down their publishing subsidiary, they moved on to a partnership with Traveller's Tales, and went on to make games like \"\", \"\", \"\", and many more including the very well-received \"Lego Marvel Super Heroes\" game, featuring New York City as the overworld and including Marvel characters from the Avengers, the Fantastic Four, the X-Men, and more. More recently, Lego has created a game based on \"The Lego Movie\", due to its popularity.\n\nLego Games launched in 2009, was a series of Lego-themed board games designed by Cephas Howard and Reiner Knizia in which the players usually build the playing board out of Lego bricks and then play with Lego-style players. Examples of the games include \"Minotaurus\", in which players roll dice to move characters within a brick-build labyrinth, \"Creationary\", in which players must build something which appears on a card, or \"Ramses Pyramid\", in which players collect gems and climb up a customisable pyramid. Like many board games, the games use dice. In Lego Games, the dice are Lego, with Lego squares with symbols on Lego studs on the dice, surrounded by rubber. The games vary from simple to complex, some are similar to \"traditional\" board games, while others are completely different.\n\nSeveral straight-to-DVD computer animated Bionicle and Hero Factory movies were produced, and \"\" was released on DVD in February 2010, a computer-animated film made by Tinseltown Toons.\n\n\"The Lego Movie\", a feature film based on Lego toys, was released by Warner Bros. in February 2014. It featured Chris Pratt in the lead role, with substantial supporting characters voiced by Elizabeth Banks, Will Arnett, Morgan Freeman, Liam Neeson, Alison Brie, Will Ferrell and Nick Offerman. A contest was held for contestants to submit designs for vehicles to be used in the film. After the release of \"The Lego Movie\", independent Canadian toy retailers reported issues with shortages of Lego products and cited cancellations of Lego pre-orders without warning as a motive to stock compatible, rival products.\n\nA spin-off of \"The Lego Movie\", entitled \"The Lego Batman Movie\", directed by Chris McKay was released in the US in February 2017.\n\nIn June 2013, it was reported that Warner Bros. was developing a feature film adaptation of Lego Ninjago. Brothers Dan Hageman and Kevin Hageman were attached to write the adaptation, while Dan Lin and Roy Lee, along with Phil Lord and Chris Miller, were announced as producers. The film, \"The Lego Ninjago Movie\", was released in September 2017. A computer-generated animated series based on \"\" began in 2011, and another based on \"Legends of Chima\" began in 2013. A television series of \"Lego City\" has also been announced.\n\nLego has an ongoing deal with publisher Dorling Kindersley (DK), who are producing a series of illustrated hardback books looking at different aspects of the construction toy. The first was \"The Ultimate Lego Book\", published in 1999. More recently, in 2009, the same publisher produced \"The LEGO Book\", which was sold within a slipcase along with \"Standing Small: A celebration of 30 years of the LEGO minifigure\", a smaller book focused on the minifigure. In 2012, a revised edition was published. Also in 2009, DK also published books on Lego Star Wars and a range of Lego-based sticker books.\n\nAlthough no longer being published in the United States by Scholastic, books covering events in the Bionicle storyline are written by Greg Farshtey. They are still being published in Europe by AMEET. Bionicle comics, also written by Farshtey, are compiled into graphic novels and were released by Papercutz. This series ended in 2009, after nine years.\n\nThere is also the Lego Club and Brickmaster magazine, the latter discontinued in 2011.\n\nKabooki, a Danish company founded in 1993, produces clothes branded as \"Lego Wear\" under licence from the Lego Group.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18364", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18364", "title": "Li people", "text": "Li people\n\nThe Li, Lizu, or Hlai are a Kra–Dai speaking ethnic group, one of the 56 ethnic groups officially recognized by the People's Republic of China. The vast majority live off the southern coast of China on Hainan Island, where they are the largest minority ethnic group. Divided into the five branches of the Qi (Gei), Ha, Run (Zwn), Sai (Tai, Jiamao), and Meifu (Moifau), the Li have their own distinctive culture and customs.\n\nLi is the Chinese transcription of their native name, which is \"Hlai\". They are sometimes also known as the \"Sai\" or \"Say\". During China's Sui Dynasty, they were known by the name Liliao.\n\nThe Li are believed to be descendants of the Rau people, Kra-Dai speaking tribes of ancient China, who settled on the island thousands of years ago. DNA analysis carried out amongst the modern Li population indicate a close relationship with populations in the southern Chinese province of Guangxi, most of them have Y-DNA O1a and O1b.\n\nDuring the Japanese invasion of Hainan (1939–1945), the Li suffered extremely heavily due to their communist resistance activities especially in the western Hainan. Li villages were frequently targeted for extermination and rape by Nationalist and Japanese soldiers. In four towns alone, the Japanese slaughtered more than 10,000 Li people. In another incident, Nationalist forces massacred over 7,000 Li in a village. Nationalist officers had 9,000 Li and 3,000 Miao executed after tricking them to the war fronts during a fake conscription campaign. Japanese also killed 2,180 Miao civilians in Baisha and Baoting counties. Tens of thousands of Li were also killed in Japanese labour camps, as unlike Chinese civilians they and the Tanka were not evacuated by Chinese Nationalists to safety zones.\n\nThey are held in high esteem by the Beijing government because they fought on the side of the CPC against Chinese Nationalist rule during the Chinese Civil War. Hainan Li-Miao Autonomous Prefecture was created in 1952 (abolished in 1988). Ironically, the Li continued suffering far greater deaths than the rest of ethnic groups on the island as they were specifically subjected to violent and intensive collectivastion campaigns implemented on the Li by communists authorities that lead to widespread starvation deaths among the Li.\n\nThe Li speak the Hlai languages, a member of the Kra–Dai language family, but most can understand or speak Hainanese and Standard Chinese. The language spoken natively by the Sai (also known as Tai or Jiamao) subgroup has been noted for its dissimilarity to the dialects or languages spoken by the other subgroups of the Li.\n\nAmong the Li, the women have a custom of tattooing their arms and backs after a certain age is reached.\nThe Li play a traditional wind instrument called \"kǒuxiāo\" (口箫), and another called \"lìlāluó\" (利拉罗). The Li people were considered to be barbaric and primitive and were among the lower classes in Hainan. The Li in Wenchang assimilated into the \nlocal population and pretended to be Hainanese while most of the Li population was exterminated in most other parts of Hainan only a small portion of the Li survived and fled to the mountains where they still maintain a Li identity.\n\nBULLET::::- Su Yunying, singer\n"}
{"id": "18365", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18365", "title": "Luminance", "text": "Luminance\n\nLuminance is a photometric measure of the luminous intensity per unit area of light travelling in a given direction. It describes the amount of light that passes through, is emitted from, or is reflected from a particular area, and falls within a given solid angle. \n\nBrightness is the term for the \"subjective\" impression of the \"objective\" luminance measurement standard (see for the importance of this contrast).\n\nThe SI unit for luminance is candela per square metre (cd/m), as defined by the International System of Units (SI is from the French \"Système international d'unités\") standard for the modern metric system. A non-SI term for the same unit is the nit. The unit in the Centimetre–gram–second system of units (CGS) (which predated the SI system) is the stilb, which is equal to one candela per square centimetre or 10 kcd/m. \n\nLuminance is often used to characterize emission or reflection from flat, diffuse surfaces. Luminance levels indicate how much luminous power could be detected by the human eye looking at a particular surface from a particular angle of view. Luminance is thus an indicator of how bright the surface will appear. In this case, the solid angle of interest is the solid angle subtended by the eye's pupil. \n\nLuminance is used in the video industry to characterize the brightness of displays. A typical computer display emits between 50 and . The sun has a luminance of about at noon.\n\nLuminance is invariant in geometric optics. This means that for an ideal optical system, the luminance at the output is the same as the input luminance. \n\nFor real, passive optical systems, the output luminance is \"at most\" equal to the input. As an example, if one uses a lens to form an image that is smaller than the source object, the luminous power is concentrated into a smaller area, meaning that the illuminance is higher at the image. The light at the image plane, however, fills a larger solid angle so the luminance comes out to be the same assuming there is no loss at the lens. The image can never be \"brighter\" than the source.\n\nRetinal damage can occur when the eye is exposed to high luminance. Damage can occur because of local heating of the retina. Photochemical effects can also cause damage, especially at short wavelengths.\n\nA luminance meter is a device used in photometry that can measure the luminance in a particular direction and with a particular solid angle. The simplest devices measure the luminance in a single direction while imaging luminance meters measure luminance in a way similar to the way a digital camera records color images.\n\nThe luminance of a specified point of a light source, in a specified direction, is defined by the derivative\n\nwhere\nBULLET::::- is the luminance (cd/m),\nBULLET::::- d is the luminous flux (lm) leaving the area d in any direction contained inside the solid angle d,\nBULLET::::- d is an infinitesimal area (m) of the source containing the specified point,\nBULLET::::- d is an infinitesimal solid angle (sr) containing the specified direction,\nBULLET::::- is the angle between the normal n to the surface d and the specified direction.\n\nIf light travels through a lossless medium, the luminance does not change along a given light ray. As the ray crosses an arbitrary surface \"S\", the luminance is given by\n\nwhere\nBULLET::::- d is the infinitesimal area of \"S\" seen from the source inside the solid angle d,\nBULLET::::- d is the infinitesimal solid angle subtended by d as seen from d,\nBULLET::::- is the angle between the normal n to d and the direction of the light.\n\nMore generally, the luminance along a light ray can be defined as\n\nwhere\nBULLET::::- d is the etendue of an infinitesimally narrow beam containing the specified ray,\nBULLET::::- d is the luminous flux carried by this beam,\nBULLET::::- is the index of refraction of the medium.\n\nThe luminance of a reflecting surface is related to the illuminance it receives:\n\nwhere the integral covers all the directions of emission , and\nBULLET::::- is the surface's luminous exitance\nBULLET::::- is the received illuminance, and\nBULLET::::- is the reflectance.\n\nIn the case of a perfectly diffuse reflector (also called a Lambertian reflector), the luminance is isotropic, per Lambert's cosine law. Then the relationship is simply\n\nA variety of units have been used for luminance, besides the candela per square metre.\n\nOne candela per square metre is equal to:\nBULLET::::- 10 stilbs (the CGS unit of luminance)\nBULLET::::- π apostilbs\nBULLET::::- π×10 lamberts\nBULLET::::- 0.292 foot-lamberts\n\nBULLET::::- Relative luminance\nBULLET::::- Orders of magnitude (luminance)\nBULLET::::- Diffuse reflection\nBULLET::::- Etendue\nBULLET::::- Lambertian reflectance\nBULLET::::- Lightness (color)\nBULLET::::- Luma, the representation of luminance in a video monitor\nBULLET::::- Lumen (unit)\nBULLET::::- Radiance, radiometric quantity analogous to luminance\nBULLET::::- Brightness, the subjective impression of luminance\nBULLET::::- Glare (vision)\n\nBULLET::::- A Kodak guide to Estimating Luminance and Illuminance using a camera's exposure meter. Also available in PDF form.\nBULLET::::- Autodesk Design Academy Measuring Light Levels\n"}
{"id": "18366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18366", "title": "Lycos", "text": "Lycos\n\nLycos, Inc., is a web search engine and web portal established in 1994, spun out of Carnegie Mellon University. Lycos also encompasses a network of email, web hosting, social networking, and entertainment websites. The company is based in Waltham, Massachusetts, and is a subsidiary of Kakao.\n\nThe word \"Lycos\" is short for \"Lycosidae\", which is Latin for \"wolf spider\".\n\nLycos is a university spin-off that began in May 1994 as a research project by Michael Loren Mauldin of Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh. Lycos Inc. was formed with approximately US$2 million in venture capital funding from CMGI. Bob Davis became the CEO and first employee of the new company in 1995, and concentrated on building the company into an advertising-supported web portal. Lycos enjoyed several years of growth during the 1990s and became the most visited online destination in the world in 1999, with a global presence in more than 40 countries.\n\nIn April 1996, the company completed the fastest initial public offering from inception to offering in NASDAQ (LCOS) history, ending its first day with a market value of $300 million. It also became the first search engine to go public, before its big rivals Yahoo! and Excite. In 1997, it became one of the first profitable Internet businesses in the world. In 1998, Lycos acquired Tripod.com for $58 million in an attempt to \"break into the portal market\".\n\nLycos started offering e-mail services in October 1997.\n\nLycos Europe was a joint venture between Lycos and the Bertelsmann transnational media corporation, but it has always been a distinct corporate entity. Although Lycos Europe remains the largest of Lycos's overseas ventures, several other Lycos subsidiaries also entered into joint venture agreements including Lycos Canada, Lycos Korea and Lycos Asia.\n\nLycos was one of the most popular websites on the internet, ranking 8th in 1997, and peaking at 4th in both 1999 and 2001.\n\nNear the peak of the dot-com bubble on May 16, 2000, Lycos announced its intent to be acquired by Terra Networks, the Internet arm of the Spanish telecommunications giant Telefónica, for $12.5 billion. The acquisition price represented a return of nearly 3,000 times the company's initial venture capital investment and about 20 times its initial public offering valuation. The transaction closed in October 2000 and the merged company was renamed Terra Lycos, although the Lycos brand continued to be used in the United States. Overseas, the company continued to be known as Terra Networks.\n\nHaving been set back by the dot-com bubble burst, Lycos abandoned its own search crawler in late 2001, and started using FAST.\n\nIn August 2004, Terra announced that it was selling Lycos to Seoul, South Korea–based Daum Communications Corporation, now Kakao, for $95.4 million in cash, less than 2% of Terra's initial multibillion-dollar investment. In October 2004, the transaction closed and the company name was changed back to Lycos. The remaining Terra half was reacquired by Telefónica.\n\nUnder new ownership, Lycos began to refocus its strategy. The company moved away from being a search-centric portal and toward a community destination for broadband entertainment content. With a new management team in place, Lycos also began divesting properties that were not core to its new strategy. In July 2006, Wired News, which had been part of Lycos since the purchase of Wired Digital in 1998, was sold to Condé Nast Publications and re-merged with \"Wired Magazine\". The Lycos Finance division, best known for Quote.com and RagingBull.com, was sold to FT Interactive Data Corporation in February 2006, while its online dating site, Matchmaker.com, was sold to Date.com. In 2006, Lycos regained ownership of the Lycos trademark from Carnegie Mellon University, allowing the company to rename to Lycos, Inc.\n\nDuring 2006, Lycos introduced several media services, including Lycos Phone which combined video chat, real-time video on demand, and an MP3 player. In November 2006, Lycos began to roll out applications centered on social media, including its video application, Lycos Cinema, that featured simultaneous watch and chat functionality. In February 2007, Lycos MIX was launched, allowing users to pull video clips from YouTube, Google Video, Yahoo! Video and MySpace Video. Lycos MIX also allowed users to create playlists where other users could add video comments and chat in real-time.\n\nAs part of a corporate restructuring to focus on mobile, social networks and location-based services, Daum sold Lycos for $36 million in August 2010 to Ybrant Digital, an Internet marketing company based in Hyderabad, India. Ybrant Digital paid $20 million at signing and there has been a legal dispute over magnitude of the second installment between Ybrant and Daum. In 2018, a New York court ruled in favor of Daum and appointed Daum (by then merged with Kakao) as receiver of Ybrant's 56% ownership interest in Lycos.\n\nIn May 2012, Lycos announced the appointment of former employee Rob Balazy as CEO of Media division of Lycos.\n\nIn September 2014, Ed Noel was appointed in place of Rob and manages the operations under the title of General Manager of Lycos Media.\n\nIn June 2015, Lycos announced a pair of wearable devices, called Band and Ring.\n\nAs of August 2019, Lycos searches in Europe and Australia yield no results, showing a generic \"no results\" message. Results are still available in Mexico, and possibly some other countries.\n\nLycos renamed Brightcom Brightcom Group.\n\nBULLET::::- Angelfire, a Lycos property providing free web hosting, blogging and web publishing tools\nBULLET::::- InsiderInfo\nBULLET::::- Tripod.com, a Lycos property providing free web hosting, blogging and web publishing tools\nBULLET::::- Weather Zombie, a Lycos property providing weather forecasts, with a zombie theme, via AccuWeather.\nBULLET::::- WhoWhere.com, a people search engine\n\nBULLET::::- Lycos Chat, a photo chatting community.\nBULLET::::- Lycos Domains, Internet domain name purchasing\nBULLET::::- Lycos Mail, an e-mail provider formerly known as Mailcity.com. (As of 15 May 2018 providing only paid services.)\nBULLET::::- Lycos Weather\nBULLET::::- Lycos Yellow Pages\n\nBULLET::::- Gamesville, Lycos multi-player gaming site\nBULLET::::- GetRelevant.com, a Lycos online advertising site\nBULLET::::- Hotbot, a search engine\nBULLET::::- Lycos Radio, allowed users to create and host their own free Internet radio shows\nBULLET::::- Matchmaker.com, a dating site\nBULLET::::- Quote.com and RagingBull.com, finance sites\nBULLET::::- Webmonkey, web-building help and tutorials\nBULLET::::- Wired.com, the online arm of \"Wired\" magazine\n"}
{"id": "18367", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18367", "title": "Luton Town F.C.", "text": "Luton Town F.C.\n\nLuton Town Football Club () is a professional association football club based in the town of Luton, Bedfordshire, England, that competes in the Championship, the second tier of the English football league system. Founded in 1885, it is nicknamed 'the Hatters' and affiliated to the Bedfordshire County Football Association. The team plays its home matches at Kenilworth Road, where it has been based since 1905. The club's history includes major trophy wins, several financial crises, numerous promotions and relegations, and some spells of sustained success. It was perhaps most prominent between 1982 and 1992, when it was a member of English football's top division, at that time the First Division; the team won its only major honour, the Football League Cup, in 1988.\n\nThe club was the first in southern England to turn professional, making payments to players as early as 1890 and turning fully professional a year later. It joined the Football League before the 1897–98 season, left in 1900 because of financial problems, and rejoined in 1920. Luton reached the First Division in 1955–56 and contested a major final for the first time when playing Nottingham Forest in the 1959 FA Cup Final. The team was then relegated from the top division in 1959–60, and demoted twice more in the following five years, playing in the Fourth Division from the 1965–66 season. However, it was promoted back to the top level by 1974–75.\n\nLuton Town's most recent successful period began in 1981–82, when the club won the Second Division, and thereby gained promotion to the First. Luton defeated Arsenal 3–2 in the 1988 Football League Cup Final and remained in the First Division until relegation at the end of the 1991–92 season. Between 2007 and 2009, financial difficulties caused the club to fall from the second tier of English football to the fifth in successive seasons. The last of these relegations came during the 2008–09 season, when 30 points were docked from Luton's record for various financial irregularities. Luton thereafter spent five seasons in non-League football before winning the Conference Premier in 2013–14, securing promotion back into the Football League.\n\nLuton Town Football Club was formed on 11 April 1885. Before this there were many clubs in the town, the most prominent of which were Luton Wanderers and Luton Excelsior. A Wanderers player, George Deacon, came up with the idea of a 'Town' club which would include all the best players in Luton. Wanderers secretary Herbert Spratley seized upon Deacon's idea and arranged a secret meeting on 13 January 1885 at the St Matthews school rooms in High Town. The Wanderers committee resolved to rename the club Luton Town—which was not well received by the wider community. The local newspapers referred to the club as 'Luton Town (late Wanderers)'. When George Deacon and John Charles Lomax then arranged a public meeting with the purpose of forming a 'Luton Town Football Club', Spratley protested, saying there was already a Luton Town club; and the atmosphere was tense when the meeting convened in the town hall on the 11 April 1885. The meeting, attended by most football lovers in the town, heard about Spratley's secret January meeting and voted down his objections. The motion to form a 'Luton Town Football Club', put forward by G H Small and seconded by E H Lomax, was carried. A club committee was elected by ballot and the team colours were agreed to be pink and dark blue shirts and caps.\n\nInitially based at Excelsior's Dallow Lane ground, Luton Town began making payments to certain individual players in 1890. The following year, Luton became the first club in southern England to be fully professional. The club was a founder member of the Southern Football League in the 1894–95 season and finished as runners-up in its first two seasons. It then left to help form the United League and came second in that league's inaugural season before joining the Football League (then based mostly in northern and central England) for 1897–98, concurrently moving to a new ground at Dunstable Road. The club continued to enter a team to the United League for two more seasons, and won the title in 1897–98. Poor attendance, high wages and the high travel and accommodation costs that resulted from Luton's distance from the northern heartlands of the Football League crippled the club financially, and made it too expensive to compete in that league. A return to the Southern League was therefore arranged for the 1900–01 season.\n\nEight years after arriving at Dunstable Road, Luton moved again, settling at their current ground, Kenilworth Road, in 1905. Captain and left winger Bob Hawkes became Luton's first international player when he was picked to play for England against Ireland on 16 February 1907. A poor 1911–12 season saw Luton relegated to the Southern League's Second Division; the club won promotion back two years later. After the First World War broke out, Luton took part in The London Combination during 1915–16, and afterwards filled each season with friendly matches. A key player of the period was Ernie Simms, a forward. Simms was invalided back to England after being wounded on the Italian front, but recovered enough to regain his place in the Luton team and scored 40 goals during the 1916–17 season.\n\nThe Luton side first played in the white and black colours which it has retained for much of its history during the 1920–21 season, when the club rejoined the Football League; the players had previously worn an assortment of colour combinations, most permanently sky blue shirts with white shorts and navy socks. Such was the quality of Luton's team at this time that despite playing in the third tier, a fixture between Ireland and England at Windsor Park on 22 October 1921 saw three Luton players on the pitch—Louis Bookman and Allan Mathieson for Ireland, and the club's top goalscorer, Simms, for England. However, after Luton finished fourth in the division, the squad was broken up as Simms, Bookman and Mathieson joined South Shields, Port Vale and Exeter City respectively. Luton stayed in the Third Division South until 1936–37, when the team finished top and won promotion to the Second Division, at that time the second tier of English football. During the promotion season, striker Joe Payne scored 55 goals in 39 games; during the previous season he had scored 10 in one match against Bristol Rovers, which remains a Football League record today.\n\nDuring the early 1950s, one of Luton's greatest sides emerged under manager Dally Duncan. The team included Gordon Turner, who went on to become Luton's all-time top goalscorer, Bob Morton, who holds the record for the most club appearances, and Syd Owen, an England international. During this period, Luton sides also featured two England international goalkeepers, Ron Baynham and Bernard Streten, as well as Irish internationals Seamus Dunne, Tom Aherne and George Cummins. This team reached the top flight for the first time in 1955–56, after finishing the season in second place behind Birmingham City on goal average. A few years of success followed, including an FA Cup Final appearance against Nottingham Forest in 1958–59; at the end of the season, Owen was voted FWA Footballer of the Year. However, the club was relegated the following season and, by 1964–65, was playing in the fourth tier.\n\nIn yo-yo club fashion, Luton were to return. A team including Bruce Rioch, John Moore and Graham French won the Fourth Division championship in 1967–68 under the leadership of former player Allan Brown; two years later Malcolm Macdonald's goals helped them to another promotion, while comedian Eric Morecambe became a director of the club. Luton Town won promotion back to the First Division in 1973–74, but were relegated the following season by a solitary point. Former Luton player David Pleat was made manager in 1978, and by 1982–83 the team was back in the top flight. The team which Pleat assembled at Kenilworth Road was notable at the time for the number of black players it included; during an era when many English squads were almost entirely white, Luton often fielded a mostly black team. Talented players such as Ricky Hill, Brian Stein and Emeka Nwajiobi made key contributions to the club's success during this period, causing it to accrue \"a richer history of black stars than any in the country\", in the words of journalist Gavin Willacy.\n\nOn the last day of the 1982–83 season, the club's first back in the top tier, it narrowly escaped relegation: playing Manchester City at Maine Road, Luton needed to win to stay up, while City could escape with a draw. A late winner by Yugoslavian substitute Raddy Antić saved the team and prompted Pleat to dance across the pitch performing a \"jig of joy\", an image that has become iconic. The club achieved its highest ever league position, seventh, under John Moore in 1986–87, and, managed by Ray Harford, won the Football League Cup a year later with a 3–2 win over Arsenal. With ten minutes left on the clock and Arsenal 2–1 ahead, a penalty save from stand-in goalkeeper Andy Dibble sparked a late Luton rally: Danny Wilson equalised, before Brian Stein scored the winner with the last kick of the match. The club reached the League Cup Final once more in 1988–89, but lost 3–1 to Nottingham Forest.\n\nThe club was relegated from the top division at the end of the 1991–92 season, and sank to the third tier four years later. Luton stayed in the third-tier Second Division until relegation at the end of the 2000–01 season. Under the management of Joe Kinnear, who had arrived halfway through the previous season, the team won promotion from the fourth tier at the first attempt. \"Controversial\" owner John Gurney unsettled the club in 2003, terminating Kinnear's contract on his arrival in May; Gurney replaced Kinnear with Mike Newell before leaving Luton as the club entered administration. Newell's team finished as champions of the rebranded third-tier Football League One in 2004–05.\n\nWhile Newell's place was taken first by Kevin Blackwell and later former player Mick Harford, the team was then relegated twice in a row, starting in 2006–07, and spent the latter part of the 2007–08 season in administration, thus incurring a ten-point deduction from that season's total. The club then had a total of 30 points docked from its 2008–09 record by the Football Association and the Football League for financial irregularities dating back several years. These deductions proved to be too large an obstacle to overcome, but Luton came from behind in the final of the Football League Trophy to win the competition for the first time.\n\nRelegation meant that 2009–10 saw Luton playing in the Conference Premier, a competition in which the club had never before participated. The club unsuccessfully contested the promotion play-offs three times in four seasons during their time as a non-League club, employing five different managers. In the 2012–13 FA Cup fourth round, Luton won their away tie against Premier League club Norwich City 1–0 and, in doing so, became the first non-League team to beat a side from England's top division since 1989. In the 2013–14 season, under the management of John Still, Luton won the Conference Premier title with three games to spare, and thereby secured a return to the Football League from 2014–15. After reaching the League Two play-offs in 2016–17, when they were beaten 6–5 on aggregate by Blackpool in the semi-final, Luton were promoted back to League One the following season as runners-up. Luton achieved a second successive promotion in 2018–19, after they won the League One title, marking the club's return to the Championship after a 12-year absence.\n\nThe club's nickname, \"the Hatters\", reflects Luton's historical connection with the hat making trade, which has been prominent there since the 17th century. The nickname was originally a variant on the now rarely seen straw-plaiters. Supporters of the club are also called Hatters.\n\nThe club is associated with two very different colour schemes—white and black (first permanently adopted in 1920), and orange, navy and white (first used in 1973, and worn by the team as of the 2015–16 season). Luton mainly wore a combination of light blue and white before 1920, when white shirts and black shorts were first adopted. These colours were retained for over half a century, with the colour of the socks varying between white and black, until Luton changed to orange, navy and white at the start of the 1973–74 season. Luton began playing in white shirts, shorts and socks in 1979, with the orange and navy motif reduced to trim; navy shorts were adopted in 1984. This palette was retained until the 1999–2000 season, when the team played in orange shirts and blue shorts. From 2000 to 2008, Luton returned to white shirts and black shorts; orange was included as trim until 2007. The white, navy and orange palette favoured in the 1980s was brought back in 2008, following the results of a club poll, but a year later the colours were changed yet again, this time to a predominantly orange strip with white shorts. Navy shorts were readopted in 2011. Luton are wearing orange shirts, navy shorts and white socks during the 2015–16 season.\n\nLuton Town have traditionally used the town's crest as its own in a manner similar to many other teams. The club's first badge was a white eight-pointed star, which was emblazoned across the team's shirts (then a deep cochineal red) in 1892. Four years later a crest comprising the club's initials intertwined was briefly adopted. The shirts were thereafter plain until 1933, when Luton first adopted a badge depicting a straw boater, which appeared on Luton shirts. The letters \"LTFC\" were added in 1935, and this basic design remained until 1947. The club then played without a badge until 1970, when the club began to wear the town crest regularly, having first done so in the 1959 FA Cup Final.\n\nIn 1973, concurrently with the club's switch to the orange kit, a new badge was introduced featuring the new colours. The new emblem depicted a stylised orange football, bearing the letters \"Lt\", surrounded by the club's name in navy blue text. In 1987, the club switched back to a derivative of the town emblem, with the shield portion of the heraldic crest becoming the team's badge; the only similarity with the previous design was the inclusion of the club name around the shield in navy blue. The \"rainbow\" badge, introduced in 1994, featured the town crest below an orange and blue bow which curved around to meet two footballs, positioned on either side of the shield, with the club name underneath. This badge was used until 2005, when a replacement very similar to the 1987 version was adopted, featuring black text rather than blue and a straw boater in place of the outstretched arm depicted in the older design. The club's founding year, 1885, was added in 2008. The badge was altered once more during the 2009–10 pre-season, with the red of the town crest being replaced with orange to better reflect the club colours.\n\nThe first sponsor to appear on a Luton Town shirt was Tricentrol, a local motor company based in Dunstable, who sponsored the club from March 1980 to 1982; the deal was worth £50,000. Subsequent sponsors have been Bedford Trucks (1982 to 1990), Vauxhall (1990 to 1991), Universal Salvage Auctions (1991 to 1999), SKF (1999 to 2003), Travel Extras (2003 to 2005), Electrolux (2005 to 2008), Carbrini Sportswear (2008 to 2009), EasyJet and NICEIC (concurrently, 2009 to 2015), and Barnfield College and NICEIC (concurrently, 2015 to 2016). Since June 2016, the club's kit has been sponsored by NICEIC and SsangYong Motor UK.\n\nThe club released the song \"Hatters, Hatters\", a collaboration between the Luton team and the Bedfordshire-based musical comedy group the Barron Knights, in 1974. Eight years later another song featuring vocals by the Luton players, \"We're Luton Town\", was released to celebrate the club's promotion to the First Division.\n\nLuton Town's first ground was at Dallow Lane, the former ground of Excelsior. The ground was next to the Dunstable to Luton railway line, and players regularly claimed to have trouble seeing the ball because of smoke from the trains. A damaging financial loss during 1896–97 forced Luton to sell the stadium to stay afloat and, as a result, the club moved across the tracks to a stadium between the railway and Dunstable Road. The Dunstable Road ground was opened by Herbrand Russell, 11th Duke of Bedford, who also donated £50 towards the £800 building costs. When the site was sold for housing in 1905, the club was forced to move again at short notice, to its present Kenilworth Road site, in time for the start of the 1905–06 season.\n\nThe stadium now has an all-seater capacity of 10,356 and is situated in the Bury Park area of Luton. It was named after the road that runs along one end of it, although the official address of the club is 1 Maple Road. Opposite the eponymous Kenilworth Stand is the Oak Road End, which has evolved from a stand first used exclusively by Luton supporters, then later by away supporters, and now used by both except in times of high ticket demand from away clubs. The Main Stand is flanked by the David Preece Stand, and opposite them stands a row of executive boxes. These boxes replaced the Bobbers Stand in 1986, as the club sought to maximise income.\n\nThe original Main Stand burnt down in 1921, and was replaced by the current stand before the 1922–23 season. The ground underwent extensive redevelopment during the 1930s, and the capacity by the start of the Second World War was 30,000. Floodlights were installed before the 1953–54 season, but it was 20 years before any further modernisation was carried out. In 1973 the Bobbers Stand became all-seated, and in 1985 the grass pitch was replaced with an artificial playing surface; it quickly became unpopular and was derided as \"the plastic pitch\".\n\nA serious incident involving hooliganism before, during and after a match against Millwall in 1985 caused the club's then chairman, Conservative MP David Evans, to introduce a scheme effective from the start of 1986–87 banning all visiting supporters from the ground, and requiring home fans to carry membership cards when attending matches. Conversion to an all-seater ground also began in 1986. Away fans returned for 1990–91, and grass a year later. The David Preece Stand was erected in 1991, and the conversion of the Kenilworth Stand to an all-seater was completed in 2005.\n\nThe club first expressed an interest in building a new stadium away from Kenilworth Road in 1955, the year it won promotion to the First Division for the first time. Even then the ground was small compared to those of most First and Second Division clubs, and its location made significant redevelopment difficult. The team has since made several attempts to relocate. Leaving Luton for the nearby new town of Milton Keynes was unsuccessfully proposed several times, most notably in the 1980s. The club sold Kenilworth Road to Luton Council in 1989, and has since leased it. A planning application for a new 20,000-seater indoor stadium, the \"Kohlerdome\" proposed by chairman David Kohler in 1995, was turned down by the Secretary of State in 1998, and Kohler left soon after.\n\nIn 2007, the club's then-owners proposed a controversial plan to relocate to a site near Junction 12 of the M1 motorway, near Harlington and Toddington. A planning application was made on the club's behalf by former chairman Cliff Bassett, but the application was withdrawn almost immediately following the club's takeover in 2008. In 2009, the club began an independent feasibility study to determine a viable location to move to. The club did not rule out redeveloping Kenilworth Road and, in October 2012, entered talks to buy the stadium back from Luton Borough Council. By 2015, these plans had been dropped in favour of a move to a new location, with managing director Gary Sweet confirming that the club was in a position to \"buy land, secure the best possible professional advice ... and to see the [planning] application process through to the receipt of consent.\"\n\nIn April 2016, the club announced its intention to build and move into a 17,500-capacity stadium on the Power Court site in central Luton. Planning permission for this ground, with potential to expand to 23,000 seats, was granted by Luton Borough Council on 16 January 2019.\n\nDuring the 2014–15 season, Luton Town had an average home league attendance of 8,702—the second highest in League Two behind only Portsmouth. In the 2013–14 season, when the club were in the Conference Premier, the club had significantly higher support than the other clubs in its league, with an average home attendance of 7,387; more than twice compared to the second highest of 3,568. Average attendances at Kenilworth Road fell with the installation of seats and the club's reduction in stature, dropping from 13,452 in 1982–83 to their 2014–15 level—a slump of 35% over 32 years. A supporters' trust, Trust in Luton, owns shares in the club and elects a representative to the club's board. The club's official supporters' group, Luton Town Supporters' Club, merged with Trust in Luton in 2014. The club is associated with another supporters' group, the breakaway Loyal Luton Supporters Club. Trust in Luton has, since March 2014, held the legal right to veto any changes to the club's identity, including name, nickname, colours, club crest and mascot.\n\nThe club produces an official match programme for home games, \"Talk of the Town\". A character known as Happy Harry, a smiling man wearing a straw boater, serves as the team's mascot and appears on the Kenilworth Road pitch before matches. In December 2014, after the seafront statue of Eric Morecambe in his birthplace Morecambe was restored, Luton and Morecambe F.C. jointly announced that the winners of future Luton–Morecambe fixtures would be awarded the \"Eric Morecambe Trophy\".\n\nLuton Town supporters maintain a bitter rivalry with Hertfordshire-based Watford. Watford have remained the higher ranked team at the end of every season since 1997. However, overall Luton still hold the superior record in the fixture between the two clubs; out of 118 competitive matches there have been 53 Luton victories and 36 for Watford, with 29 draws. A more recent survey taken in August 2019 showed that there was also animosity between Luton Town fans and those of West London club Queens Park Rangers, Stevenage, Cambridge United and Milton Keynes Dons.\n\nThe record for the most appearances for Luton is held by Bob Morton, who turned out for Luton 562 times in all competitions. Morton also holds the record for the most Football League appearances for the club, with 495. Fred Hawkes holds the record for the most league appearances for Luton, having played in 509 league matches. Six players, Gordon Turner, Andy Rennie, Brian Stein, Ernie Simms, Herbert Moody and Steve Howard, have scored more than 100 goals for Luton.\n\nThe first player to be capped while playing for Luton was left winger Robert Hawkes, who took to the field for England against Ireland at Goodison Park on 16 February 1907. The most capped player is Mal Donaghy, who earned 58 Northern Ireland caps while at the club. The first player to score in an international match was Joe Payne, who scored twice in his only game for England against Finland on 20 May 1937. Payne also holds the Football League record for the most goals in a game—he hit 10 past Bristol Rovers on 13 April 1936.\n\nThe club's largest wins have been a 15–0 victory over Great Yarmouth Town on 21 November 1914 in the FA Cup and a 12–0 win over Bristol Rovers in the Third Division South on 13 April 1936. Luton's heaviest loss was a 9–0 defeat against Small Heath in the Second Division on 12 November 1898.\n\nLuton's highest home attendances are 30,069 against Blackpool in the FA Cup on 4 March 1959 and 27,911 against Wolverhampton Wanderers in the First Division on 5 November 1955.\n\nThe highest transfer fee received for a Luton Town player is the £6 million+ Leicester City paid for young full-back James Justin on 28 June 2019. The most expensive player Luton Town have ever bought was Croatian goalkeeper Simon Sluga, who cost €1.5m from HNK Rijeka on 19 July 2019.\n\nThe youngest player to make a first-team appearance for Luton Town is Connor Tomlinson at 15 years and 199 days old in the EFL Trophy, replacing Zane Banton as a 92nd-minute substitute in a 2–1 win over Gillingham on 30 August 2016, after the club were given permission for him to play from his headteacher.\n\nThe club operates a Development Squad, made up of contracted senior players, youth team scholars and trialists, which plays in the Southern Division of The Central League. The club also fields an under-18 team in the Football League Youth Alliance South East Conference. Luton's youth set-up consists of ten Soccer Centres across Bedfordshire and North Hertfordshire, two Centres of Excellence (one in Luton, one in Dunstable), and an Academy in Baldock that caters for players in the under-9 to under-16 age groups.\n\nBULLET::::- Chairman: David Wilkinson\nBULLET::::- Chief executive officer: Gary Sweet\nBULLET::::- Directors: Paul Ballantyne, Stephen Browne, Bob Curson, Mike Herrick, Rob Stringer\nBULLET::::- Finance director: Simon Gibb\n\nBULLET::::- Manager: Graeme Jones\nBULLET::::- Assistant manager: Gary Brabin\nBULLET::::- First team coach: Iñigo Idiakez\nBULLET::::- Goalkeeping coach: Kevin Dearden\nBULLET::::- Head of sports science: James Redden\nBULLET::::- Performance analyst: Peter Booker\nBULLET::::- Chief recruitment officer: Mick Harford\nBULLET::::- Physiotherapist: Simon Parsell\nBULLET::::- First team therapist: Oscar Brau\nBULLET::::- Assistant therapist and kitman: Darren Cook\nBULLET::::- Academy and development manager: Andy Awford\n\n!scope=colName\n!scope=colNation\n!scope=colFrom\n!scope=col class=\"unsortable\"To\n!scope=colM\n!scope=colW\n!scope=colD\n!scope=colL\n!scope=colWin %\n!align=left scope=row\nalign=left\nalign=left\nalign=left\n!align=left scope=row\nalign=left\nalign=left\nalign=left\n!align=left scope=row\nalign=left\nalign=left\nalign=left\n!align=left scope=row\nalign=left\nalign=left\nalign=left\n!align=left scope=row\nalign=left\nalign=left\nalign=left\n!align=left scope=row\nalign=left\nalign=left\nalign=left\n!align=left scope=row\nalign=left\nalign=left\nalign=left\n!align=left scope=row\nalign=left\nalign=left\nalign=left\n!align=left scope=row\nalign=left\nalign=left\nalign=left\n!align=left scope=row\nalign=left\nalign=left\nalign=left\n!align=left scope=row\nalign=left\nalign=left\nalign=left\n!align=left scope=row\nalign=left\nalign=left\nalign=left\n!align=left scope=row\nalign=left\nalign=left\nalign=left\n!align=left scope=row\nalign=left\nalign=left\nalign=left\n!align=left scope=row\nalign=left\nalign=left\nalign=left\n!align=left scope=row\nalign=left\nalign=left\nalign=left\n!align=left scope=row\nalign=left\nalign=left\nalign=left\n!align=left scope=row\nalign=left\nalign=left\nalign=left\n!align=left scope=row\nalign=left\nalign=left\nalign=left\n!align=left scope=row\nalign=left\nalign=left\nalign=left\n!align=left scope=row\nalign=left\nalign=left\nalign=left\n!align=left scope=row\nalign=left\nalign=left\nalign=left\n!align=left scope=row\nalign=left\nalign=left\nalign=left\n\n!scope=colHonour\n!scope=colYears as winners\n!scope=colYears as runners-up\n!scope=row\n1958–59\n!scope=row\n1987–88\n1988–89\n!scope=row\n1981–82\n1954–55, 1973–74\n!scope=row\n1936–37 (South), 2004–05, 2018–19\n1935–36 (South), 1969–70\n!scope=row\n1967–68\n2001–02, 2017–18\n!scope=row\n1987–88\n!scope=row\n2008–09\n\n\nBULLET::::- Luton Town official website\nBULLET::::- Luton Today's Luton Town News Page\n"}
{"id": "18369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18369", "title": "Lunar calendar", "text": "Lunar calendar\n\nA lunar calendar is a calendar based upon the monthly cycles of the Moon's phases (synodic months), in contrast to solar calendars, whose annual cycles are based only directly upon the solar year. The most commonly used calendar, the Gregorian calendar, is a solar calendar system that originally evolved out of a lunar calendar system. A purely lunar calendar is also distinguished from a lunisolar calendar, whose lunar months are brought into alignment with the solar year through some process of intercalation. The details of when months begin varies from calendar to calendar, with some using new, full, or crescent moons and others employing detailed calculations.\n\nSince each lunation is approximately  days (29 days, 12 hours, 44 minutes, 3 seconds, or days), it is common for the months of a lunar calendar to alternate between 29 and 30 days. Since the period of 12 such lunations, a lunar year, is only 354 days, 8 hours, 48 minutes, 34 seconds ( days), purely lunar calendars lose around 11 days per year relative to the Gregorian calendar. In purely lunar calendars like the Islamic calendar, the lack of intercalation causes the lunar months to cycle through all the seasons of the Gregorian year over the course of a 33 lunar-year cycle.\n\nAlthough the Gregorian calendar is in common and legal use in most countries, traditional lunar and lunisolar calendars continue to be used throughout the Old World to determine religious festivals and national holidays. Examples of such holidays include Ramadan (Islamic calendar); Easter; the Chinese, Japanese, Korean, Vietnamese, and Mongolian New Year (Chinese, Japanese, Korean, Vietnamese, and Mongolian calendars); the Nepali New Year (Nepali calendar); the Mid-Autumn Festival and Chuseok (Chinese and Korean calendars); Loi Krathong (Thai calendar); Sunuwar calendar; Vesak/Buddha's Birthday (Buddhist calendar); Diwali (Hindu calendars); and Rosh Hashanah (Hebrew calendar).\n\nA lunar calendar was found at Warren Field in Scotland and has been dated to , during the Mesolithic period. Some scholars argue for lunar calendars still earlier—Rappenglück in the marks on a  year-old cave painting at Lascaux and Marshack in the marks on a  year-old bone baton—but their findings remain controversial. Scholars have argued that ancient hunters conducted regular astronomical observations of the Moon back in the Upper Palaeolithic. Samuel L. Macey dates the earliest uses of the Moon as a time-measuring device back to 28,000-30,000 years ago.\n\nMost calendars referred to as \"lunar\" calendars are in fact lunisolar calendars. Their months are based on observations of the lunar cycle, with intercalation being used to bring them into general agreement with the solar year. The solar \"civic calendar\" that was used in ancient Egypt showed traces of its origin in the earlier lunar calendar, which continued to be used alongside it for religious and agricultural purposes. Present-day lunisolar calendars include the Chinese, Hindu, and Thai calendars.\n\nSynodic months are 29 or 30 days in length, making a lunar year of 12 months about 11 days shorter than a solar year. Some lunar calendars do not use intercalation, such as most Islamic calendars. For those that do, such as the Hebrew calendar, the most common form of intercalation is to add an additional month every second or third year. Some lunisolar calendars are also calibrated by annual natural events which are affected by lunar cycles as well as the solar cycle. An example of this is the lunar calendar of the Banks Islands, which includes three months in which the edible palolo worms mass on the beaches. These events occur at the last quarter of the lunar month, as the reproductive cycle of the palolos is synchronized with the moon.\n\nLunar and lunisolar calendars differ as to which day is the first day of the month. In some lunisolar calendars, such as the Chinese calendar, the first day of a month is the day when an astronomical new moon occurs in a particular time zone. In others, such as some Hindu calendars, each month begins on the day after the full moon or the new moon. Others were based in the past on the first sighting of a lunar crescent, such as the Hebrew calendar and the Hijri calendar.\n\nThe length of each lunar cycle varies slightly from the average value. In addition, observations are subject to uncertainty and weather conditions. Thus to avoid uncertainty about the calendar, there have been attempts to create fixed arithmetical rules to determine the start of each calendar month.\n\nThe average length of the synodic month is days. Thus it is convenient if months generally alternate between 29 and 30 days (sometimes termed respectively “\"hollow\"” and “\"full\"”). The distribution of \"hollow\" and \"full\" months can be determined using continued fractions, and examining successive approximations for the length of the month in terms of fractions of a day. In the list below, after the number of days listed in the numerator of the fraction in the first columns, an integer number of months as listed in the denominator have been completed; the second column records the deviation accumulated with respect to the true synodic month duration and the time needed to achieve that deviation:\n\n! scope=\"col\" style=\"text-align: center;\" Fraction\n! scope=\"col\" style=\"text-align: left;\" Approximate deviation\nstyle=\"text-align: center;\"\nstyle=\"text-align: center;\"\nstyle=\"text-align: center;\"\nstyle=\"text-align: center;\"\nstyle=\"text-align: center;\"\nstyle=\"text-align: center;\"\nstyle=\"text-align: center;\"\nstyle=\"text-align: center;\"\nNot accurate due to the multi-millennialchange of the synodic month length.\n\nThese fractions can be used to construct a lunar calendar, or in combination with a solar calendar to produce a lunisolar calendar. A 49-month cycle was proposed as the basis of an alternative Easter computation by Isaac Newton around 1700. The tabular Islamic calendar's 360-month cycle is equivalent to 24×15 months, minus a correction of one day.\n\nBULLET::::- Gezer Calendar\nBULLET::::- Haida\nBULLET::::- Islamic calendar\nBULLET::::- Nepal Sambat\nBULLET::::- Javanese calendar\nBULLET::::- Assyrian calendar\nBULLET::::- Yoruba calendar\nBULLET::::- Igbo calendar\nBULLET::::- Myanmar calendar\n\nBULLET::::- Babylonian calendar\nBULLET::::- Celtic calendar\nBULLET::::- Chinese, Japanese, Korean, Vietnamese, and Mongolian calendars\nBULLET::::- Egyptian calendar\nBULLET::::- Epact\nBULLET::::- Hindu calendar\nBULLET::::- Iranian and Hebrew calendars\nBULLET::::- Islamic calendar\nBULLET::::- Lunar phase\nBULLET::::- Mayan calendar\nBULLET::::- Paschal Full Moon\nBULLET::::- Roman calendar\nBULLET::::- Thai lunar calendar\nBULLET::::- Tibetan calendar\nBULLET::::- Ancient Macedonian calendar\nBULLET::::- Ancient Greek calendars\n"}
{"id": "18372", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18372", "title": "Mount Lykaion", "text": "Mount Lykaion\n\nMount Lykaion (, \"Lýkaion Óros\"; ) is a mountain in Arcadia, Greece. Lykaion has two peaks: \"Stefani\" to the north and St. Ilias (, \"Agios Īlías\") to the south where the altar of Zeus is located.\n\nThe northern peak is higher, 1,421 m, than the southern, 1,382 m (). Mount Lykaion was sacred to Zeus Lykaios, who was said to have been born and brought up on it, and was the home of Pelasgus and his son Lycaon, who were said to have founded the ritual of Zeus practiced on its summit. This seems to have involved a human sacrifice and a feast in which the man who received the portion of a human victim was changed to a wolf, as Lycaon had been after sacrificing a child. The altar of Zeus consists of a great mound of ashes with a retaining wall. It was said that no shadows fell within the precincts and that any who entered it died within the year. The sanctuary of Zeus played host to athletic games held every four years, the \"Lykaia\".\n\nArchaeological excavations were first carried out in 1897 by K. Kontopoulos for the Greek Archaeological Service, followed by K. Kourouniotes between 1902 and 1909.\n\nThe Mt. Lykaion Excavation and Survey Project, a joint effort of the University of Pennsylvania and the University of Arizona began work at the site in 2004, with the aim of continuing the topographical survey begun in 1996 and carrying out a full topographical and architectural analysis not only of the altar and \"temenos\", but of the nearby valley where the Lykaian Games were held. The detailed digital records and drawings of every architectural stone block. To date, a complete map of the area has been made, including not only the Ash Altar and \"temenos\", but also two fountains, including the Hagno fountain mentioned by Pausanias, the hippodrome, the stadium, a building that was probably a bathhouse, the \"xenon\" (hotel), a stoa, several rows of seats, and a group of statue bases.\n\nMany of these buildings seem to have been planned in relation to each other: the baths at the northern end of the hippodrome are on the same alignment as it is, and the stoa, the \"xenon\", the lower fountain, and the rows of seats all appear to have been built in an intentionally similar alignment. Just to the north of the stoa four rows of seats were excavated, with the remains of a group of stelae and statue bases nearby. These would have bordered the hippodrome's southern edge, and correspond to an earlier excavated row of seats on the south-eastern edge of the racetrack. The majority of the spectators of events in the hippodrome, however, would have sat on the surrounding hills.\n\nMt. Lykaion, its religious significance, and its quadrennial athletic games appear with some frequency in the ancient literary sources. The 2nd-century Greek geographer Pausanias provides the greatest amount of information in the eighth book of his \"Description of Greece\", where he discusses Lykaion's mythological, historical, and physical characteristics in detail. More isolated references occur, however, in sources ranging from Plato to Virgil.\n\nPausanias states that the Arcadians claimed Cretea atop Mt. Lykaion as the birthplace of Zeus, although tradition had handed down at least two other locations for Zeus’ birth.\n\nLycaon, son of Pelasgus, the mythical founder of the Greek race, is said to have instituted the worship of Zeus at Mt. Lykaion, giving the god the epithet Lykaios and establishing games in his honor. The \"Bibliotheca\", a Roman-era mythological compendium, adds the story that Lycaon attempted to test Zeus’ omniscience by tricking him into eating a sacrifice mixed with human flesh. In punishment, Zeus slew Lycaon and his fifty sons. Other sources, including the Roman poet Ovid, claim instead that Lycaon's punishment was transformation into a wolf, an early example of lycanthropy.\n\nAccording to Pausanias and the Greek historian Polybius, an inscribed pillar (\"stele\") was erected near the altar of Zeus on Mt. Lykaion during the Second Messenian War, a revolt against the Spartans. The inscription supposedly commemorated the execution of Aristocrates of Arcadia, who had betrayed the Messenian hero Aristomenes at the battle of the Great Trench.\n\nThucydides, a Greek historian of the Peloponnesian War, writes that the Spartan king Pleistoanax lived on Mt. Lykaion while in exile from the mid-440s BC until 427, where he built a house straddling the sacred region (\"temenos\") of Zeus to avoid further persecution.\n\nIn his \"Stratagems\", the 2nd-century Macedonian rhetorician Polyaenus describes a battle between the Spartans and Demetrius of Macedon in 294 BC. Mt. Lykaion extended between the camps of the two sides, causing some consternation among the Macedonians due to their unfamiliarity with the terrain. Nevertheless, Demetrius’ forces won the battle with relative ease.\n\nPolybius and Plutarch, a Greek author writing under the Roman empire, cite a battle at Mt. Lykaion in 227 BC between the Achaean League under Aratus and the Spartans under Cleomenes III. Although the details are vague, both authors make it clear that the Achaeans were defeated and that Aratus was killed shortly thereafter.\n\nMt. Lykaion was an important site of religious worship in ancient Greece. Pausanias describes a sanctuary of Pan surrounded by a grove of trees. At the sanctuary were bases of statues, which by Pausanias’ time had been deprived of the statues themselves, as well as a hippodrome, where the athletic games had once been held. References to Lykaian Pan are especially abundant in Latin poetry, as for instance in Virgil's epic, the \"Aeneid\": “\"Lupercal / Parrhasio dictum Panos de more Lycaei\",” “...the Lupercal, named after the Parrhasian worship of Lykaian Pan,” and in Horace's Odes: “\"Velox amoenum saepe Lucretilem / mutat Lycaeo Faunus\",” “Often swift Faunus [Pan] exchanges Lykaion for pleasant Lucretilis.”\n\nPausanias records the presence of a mound of earth on the highest point of the mountain, an altar to Zeus Lykaios. He describes two pillars near the altar which had once been topped by golden eagles. Although Pausanias alludes to secret sacrifices which took place on this altar, he explains that he was reluctant to inquire into these rites due to their extreme antiquity. Pausanias also discusses the \"temenos\" of Zeus, a sacred precinct which humans were forbidden to enter. He notes the common belief that any person entering the \"temenos\" would die within a year, along with the legend that all creatures, human and animal alike, cast no shadow while inside the sacred area.\n\nThe athletic competitions at Lykaion, held every four years, receive occasional mention in the literary record. Authors are in disagreement as to when exactly the games were first instituted: Aristotle is said to have ranked the Lykaion games fourth in order of institution after the Eleusinia, the Panathenaia, and the Argive games, while Pausanias argues for the Lykaian competition's priority to the Panathenaia. Pliny the Elder, an imperial Roman polymath, states that the games at Lykaion were the first to introduce gymnastic competition. The ancient Greek lyric poet Pindar records the victories of several athletes in his \"Victory Odes\", and two inscribed \"stelae\" recently excavated from the Lykaian hippodrome provide information about the events, participants, and winners at the games.\n\nAfter 1832, when Greece had gained independence from the Ottoman Empire, European travelers and scholars began to systematically tour Sparta and the Peloponnese. Ernst Curtius, Charles Beulé, and Guillaume Blouet published scholarly studies of the area, and discussions of the region appeared in German and British travelogues as well. Many of these writers used Pausanias as their guide to the geography and sights of the region, but were also concerned to correlate modern Greek place-names with ancient evidence.\n\nBeulé described the hippodrome and surrounding area, including large stones that he assumed formed had formed the seats of the judges and magistrates, and the remains of a building he called a temple to Pan, but which probably corresponds to the stoa of the modern excavations. The German writer Ross described the bathhouse and its ancient but still-visible cisterns, which site he noted the locals called the Skaphidia.\n\nMt. Lykaion was initially excavated by the Greek Archaeological Service, first in 1897 by archaeologist K. Kontopoulos and again in 1902 by K. Kourouniotes. Kontopoulos dug several trial trenches near the hippodrome and the altar. Kourouniotes's excavations of the altar and surrounding area (the \"temenos\") were particularly informative; he learned that the altar consisted of a raised mound of blackened earth as described by Pausanias. Excavation of the earth of the altar yielded burnt stones, small animal (cow and pig) bones, tiny pottery fragments, iron knives, clay figures, coins from Aegina, a clay figure of a bird, and two small bronze tripods. Further trenches dug in the \"temenos\" produced several bronze figures, some iron objects, and roof tiles. In 1909 Kourouniotes excavated an area at the east of the mountain and beneath the summit, the site of the hippodrome, stadium, and bathhouse.\n\nSince Kourouniotes's excavation, anthropologists and scholars of Arcadian religion have studied the site in terms of its development as a sanctuary, but there was no further systematic or scientific investigation until 1996, when Dr. David Gilman Romano of the University of Pennsylvania conducted a topographical and architectural survey of the site. Romano continued his work with the Mt. Lykaion Excavation and Survey Project under the auspices of the University of Pennsylvania and the University of Arizona. A preliminary planning phase of cleaning and surveying took place in 2004 and 2005, and was followed by a five-year excavation program beginning in June 2006. A two-year period during which the findings will be studied is scheduled to begin in the summer of 2011.\n\nThe hippodrome at Mount Lykaion, located in a valley below and to the north of the altar, is the only extant hippodrome from Greek antiquity, and is therefore crucial to our understanding of Greek athletic festivals. The hippodrome was constructed on roughly a north-south orientation with a retaining wall of about 140 meters along the eastern side curving around the northern end. Modern excavations have discovered portions tapering column drums that may belonged to the turning posts at either end of the race-course, from whose location it appears that the hippodrome could have had a length of 320 meters and a width of 140. A bath building is being excavated about 35 meters to the northeast of the hippodrome; a large portion of it appears to have been dedicated to a cistern, and large stone basins from the middle of the structure have been uncovered\n\nThe Lykaian hippodrome is further unique in apparently having encompassed the stadium racecourse. The early 20th century excavator of Lykaion, Kouriouniotis discovered stone blocks in the middle of the hippodrome that would have formed the starting line of the stadium. The topological survey of 1996 confirmed 6 starting line blocks, four of which were grouped together and were thus possibly found near their original orientation and position. From this, archaeologist David Romano speculated that a stadium racecourse of 170–180 meters would have been enclosed within the hippodrome. The apparently double-use of the space is particularly interesting because inscriptional evidence concerning the Lykaian Games of the 4th century BCE indicates that horse and foot-races were held during the same festivals, and possibly on the same day.\n\nTwo inscriptions were uncovered in the excavations of Kouriouniotis that give the names of winning athletes in the various contests of the Lykaian Games that were held every four years between 320 and 304 BCE. These contests included footraces for men and for boys, various chariot races with teams of adult and juvenile horses, boxing, wrestling, and a pentathlon.\n\nA circular altar of blackened earth about 1.5 meters in height and 30 meters in diameter seems to date from before the migration of Indo-European peoples into the area. The excavations of Kourouniotes in 1903 of the altar and its nearby \"temenos\" determined definite cult activity at the Lykaion altar from the late 7th century b.c.e, including animals bones, miniature tripods, knives, and statuettes of Zeus holding an eagle and a lightning bolt. These objects were primarily found in the \"temenos\". The earth-altar may correspond to a Linear B mention of an \"open-fire altar\"; Linear B (14th–13th centuries BCE) inscriptions also give the first mentions of offerings to Zeus and of the sacred precinct (temenos) near the altar, such as has been excavated at Lykaion.\n\nExcavation in 2007 revealed pottery fragments and signs of activity in the ash altar believed to have been used as early as 3000 BCE. Nearby Olympia (only 22 miles away) has a similar ash altar, and both settlements held ancient athletic games. The extremely early date of activity at Lykaion could suggest that these customs originated there. Stratigraphic analysis from the most recent excavations showed prehistoric human activity at the altar site, which seems to have been in continuous use from the Late Neolithic period through to the Hellenistic era. A number of drinking vessels and bones of sheep and goats from the Late Helladic period indicates that the altar was the site of Mycenean drinking and feasting rituals, probably in honor of Zeus. An especially interesting discovery was a seal ring from the Late Minoan period (1500–1400 BCE), which could indicate some interaction between Mt. Lykaion and Crete, both of which are given as the birthplace of Zeus by ancient sources.\n\nRecent excavations of a 30-meter ash altar on Mount Lykaion in Greece, once worshipped as the birthplace of Zeus, have revealed a 3000-year-old skeleton of an adolescent boy thought to be a human sacrifice, The Boston Globe reports. The altar is not a cemetery, the researchers note, and the skeleton was lined with stones, showing that it was not a typical human burial. Plato and other ancient writers linked Mount Lykaion specifically to human sacrifices to Zeus—the legends say a sacrificed boy would be cooked with sacrificed animal meat and those who consumed the human portion would become a wolf for 9 years.\n\nBULLET::::- Lykaion Excavation and Survey Project\n"}
{"id": "18374", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18374", "title": "Lake Eyre", "text": "Lake Eyre\n\nLake Eyre ( ), officially known as Kati Thanda–Lake Eyre, contains the lowest natural point in Australia, at approximately below sea level (AHD), and, on the rare occasions that it fills, is the largest lake in Australia, covering . The shallow endorheic lake is the depocentre of the vast Lake Eyre basin and is found in Northern South Australia, some north of Adelaide.\n\nWhen the lake is full, it has the same salinity level as the sea, but as the lake dries up and the water evaporates, salinity increases.\n\nThe lake was named by Europeans in honour of Edward John Eyre, who was the first European to see it, in 1840. The lake's official name was changed in December 2012 to combine the name \"Lake Eyre\" with the indigenous name, Kati Thanda. The native title over the lake and surrounding region is held by the Arabana people.\n\nKati Thanda–Lake Eyre is in the deserts of central Australia, in northern South Australia. The Lake Eyre Basin is a large endorheic system surrounding the lakebed, the lowest part of which is filled with the characteristic salt pan caused by the seasonal expansion and subsequent evaporation of the trapped waters. Even in the dry season, there is usually some water remaining in Kati Thanda–Lake Eyre, normally collecting in over 200 smaller sub-lakes within its margins. The lake was formed by aeolian processes after tectonic upwarping occurred to the south subsequent to the end of the Pleistocene epoch.\n\nDuring the rainy season, rivers from the north-east part of the Lake Eyre Basin—in outback (south-west and central) Queensland—flow towards the lake through the Channel Country. The amount of water from the monsoon determines whether water will reach the lake and, if it does, how deep the lake will get. The average rainfall in the area of the lake is per year.\n\nThe altitude usually attributed to Kati Thanda–Lake Eyre refers to the deepest parts of the lake floor, in Belt Bay and the Madigan Gulf. The shoreline lies at . The lake is the area of maximum deposition of sediment in the Lake Eyre Basin.\n\nLake Eyre is divided into two sections which are joined by the Goyder Channel. These are known as Lake Eyre North, which is in length and wide, and Lake Eyre South, which measures . The salt crusts are thickest—up to —in the southern Belt Bay, Jackboot Bay and Madigan Gulf sub-basins of Lake Eyre North.\n\nSince 1883, proposals have been made to flood Lake Eyre with seawater brought to the basin via a canal or pipeline. The purpose was, in part, to increase evaporation and thereby increase rainfall in the region downwind of an enlarged Lake Eyre. The added rainfall has been modeled as small. Due to the basin's low elevation below sea level and the region's high annual evaporation rate (between ), such schemes have generally been considered impractical, as it is likely that accumulation of salt deposits would rapidly block the engineered channel. At a rate of evaporation per day, a viaduct flowing a would supply enough water to create a sea. If brine water was not sent back to the ocean, it would precipitate of salt every year.\n\nThe salinity in the lake increases as the salt crust dissolves over a period of six months of a major flood, resulting in a massive fish kill. When over deep, the lake is no more salty than the sea, but salinity increases as the water evaporates, with saturation occurring at about a depth. The lake takes on a pink hue when saturated, due to the presence of beta-carotene pigment caused by the algae \"Dunaliella salina\".\n\nTypically a flood occurs every three years, a flood every decade, and a fill or near fill a few times a century. The water in the lake soon evaporates, with a minor or medium flood drying by the end of the following summer. Most of the water entering the lakes arrives via Warburton River.\n\nIn strong La Niña years, the lake can fill. Since 1885, this has occurred in 1886–1887, 1889–1890, 1916–1917, 1950, 1955, 1974–1977, and 1999–2001, with the highest flood of in 1974. Local rain can also fill Kati Thanda–Lake Eyre to , as occurred in 1984 and 1989. Torrential rain in January 2007 took about six weeks to reach the lake but only placed a small amount of water into it.\n\nWhen recently flooded, the lake is almost fresh, and native freshwater fish, including bony bream (\"Nematolosa erebi\"), the Lake Eyre Basin sub-species of golden perch (\"Macquaria ambigua\") and various small hardyhead species (\"Craterocephalus\" spp.) can survive in it. \n\nThe 2009 Lake Eyre flood peaked at deep in late May, which is a quarter of its maximum recorded depth of . of water crossed the Queensland–South Australian border with most of it coming from massive floods in the Georgina River. However, owing to the very low rainfall in the lower reaches of these rivers (contrasting with heavy rainfall in the upper catchments), the greater proportion soaked into the desert or evaporated en route to the lake, leaving less than in the lake, which covered an area of , or 12% of the total. As the flood did not start filling the lake's deepest point (Belt Bay) until late March, little bird life appeared, preferring instead to nest in the upper reaches of the Lake Eyre Basin, north of Birdsville, where large lakes appeared in January as a result of monsoonal rain.\n\nThe high rainfall in summer 2010 sent flood water into the Diamantina, Georgina and Cooper Creek catchments of the Lake Eyre basin, with the Cooper Creek reaching the lake for the first time since 1990. The higher rainfall prompted many different birds to migrate back to the area for breeding.\n\nHeavy local rain in early March 2011 in the Stuart Creek and Warriner catchments filled Lake Eyre South, with Lake Eyre North about 75 per cent covered with water firstly from the Neales and Macumba Rivers, and later from the Warburton River.\n\nIn late 2015, water began flowing into Lake Eyre following heavy rain in the north-east of the state.\n\nIn late March 2019, floodwaters began arriving as a result of torrential rains in northern Queensland in January. In the past, the water had taken anywhere from three to 10 months to reach the lake, but this time it arrived in two. The first flooding would be closely followed by another surge, following rains produced by Cyclone Trevor. Traditional owners and graziers agree that it is essential that the river run its course and should not be harvested during floods, as any interference in the natural systems could damage the ecosystem.\n\nThe Lake Eyre Yacht Club is a dedicated group of sailors who sail on the lake's floods, including recent trips in 1997, 2000, 2001, 2004, 2007 and 2009. A number of trailer sailers sailed on Kati Thanda–Lake Eyre in 1975, 1976, and 1984, when the flood depth reached . In July 2010 The Yacht Club held its first regatta since 1976 and its first on Lake Killamperpunna, a freshwater lake on Cooper Creek. The Cooper had reached Kati Thanda–Lake Eyre for the first time since 1990.\n\nWhen the lake is full, a notable phenomenon is that around midday the surface can often become very flat. The surface then reflects the sky in a way that leaves both the horizon and water surface virtually impossible to see. The commodore of the Lake Eyre Yacht Club has stated that sailing during this time has the appearance of sailing in the sky.\n\nKati Thanda–Lake Eyre has been a site for various land speed record attempts on its salt flats, similar to those found in the Bonneville Salt Flats, especially those by Donald Campbell with the Bluebird-Proteus CN7.\n\nPhytoplankton in the lake includes \"Nodularia spumigena\" and a number of species of \"Dunaliella\".\n\nBirds such as pelicans and banded stilts are drawn to a filled lake from southern coastal regions of Australia, and from as far afield as Papua New Guinea. During the 1989–1990 flood, it was estimated that 200,000 pelicans, 80% of Australia's total population, came to feed & roost at Lake Eyre. Scientists are presently unable to determine how such birds appear able to detect the filling of the lake, even when hundreds or thousands of kilometres away from the basin.\n\nThe extent of the lake is covered by two protected areas declared by the Government of South Australia - the Kati Thanda-Lake Eyre National Park and the Elliot Price Conservation Park.\n\nLake Eyre is on the list of wetlands of national importance known as A Directory of Important Wetlands in Australia.\n\nLake Eyre has been identified by BirdLife International as an Important Bird Area (IBA) known as the Lake Eyre Important Bird Area, because, when flooded, it supports major breeding events of the Banded stilt and Australian pelican, as well as over 1% of the world populations of Red-necked avocets, Sharp-tailed sandpipers, Red-necked stints, Silver gulls and Caspian terns.\n\nBULLET::::- Lake Torrens\nBULLET::::- List of lakes of Australia\nBULLET::::- Pluvial lake\nBULLET::::- Eyre (disambiguation)\n\n\nBULLET::::- Dr Vincent Kotwicki: \"Floods of Lake Eyre\" - interesting site with lots of data, including Lake Eyre inflows 1885-2012.\nBULLET::::- \"Salt\" - documentary film by Murray Fredericks and Michael Angus (synopsis)\n\nBULLET::::- NASA Earth Observatory: Lake Eyre Filling Peaks - 21 June 2009\n\nBULLET::::- Lake Eyre Yacht Club website\n"}
{"id": "18375", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18375", "title": "Locksmithing", "text": "Locksmithing\n\nLocksmithing is the science and art of making and defeating locks.\n\nLocksmithing is a traditional trade and in most countries requires completion of an apprenticeship. The level of formal education required varies from country to country, from a simple training certificate awarded by an employer, to a full diploma from an engineering college (such as in Australia) in addition to time spent working as an apprentice.\n\nA lock is a mechanism that secures buildings, rooms, cabinets, objects, or other storage facilities. A \"smith\" of any type is one who shapes metal pieces, often using a forge or mould, into useful objects or to be part of a more complex structure. Locksmithing, as its name implies, is the assembly and designing of locks and their respective keys.\n\nLocks have been constructed for over 2500 years, initially out of wood and later out of metal. Historically, locksmiths would make the entire lock, working for hours hand cutting screws and doing much file-work. Lock designs became significantly more complicated in the 18th century, and locksmiths often specialised in repairing or designing locks. After the rise of cheap mass production, the vast majority of locks are repaired by swapping of parts or like-for-like replacement or upgraded to modern mass-production items. Until more recently, safes and strongboxes were the exceptions to this, and to this day large vaults are custom designed and built at great cost, as the cost of this is lower than the very limited scope for mass production would allow, and the risk of a copy being obtained and defeated as practice is removed.\n\nAlthough fitting of keys to replace lost keys to automobiles and homes and the changing of keys for homes and businesses to maintain security are still an important part of locksmithing, locksmiths today are primarily involved in the installation of higher quality lock-sets and the design, implementation and management of keying and key control systems. Most locksmiths also do electronic lock servicing, such as making keys for transponder-equipped vehicles and the implementation and application of access control systems protecting individuals and assets for many large institutions.\n\nIn terms of physical security, a locksmith's work frequently involves making a determination of the level of risk to an individual or institution and then recommending and implementing appropriate combinations of equipment and policies to create \"security layers\" which exceed the reasonable gain to an intruder or attacker. The more different security layers are implemented, the more the requirement for additional skills and knowledge and tools to defeat them all. But because each layer comes at an expense to the customer, the application of appropriate levels without exceeding reasonable costs to the customer is often very important and requires a skilled and knowledgeable locksmith to determine.\n\nLocksmiths may be commercial (working out of a storefront), mobile (working out of a vehicle), institutional (employed by an institution) or investigatory (forensic locksmiths) or may specialise in one aspect of the skill, such as an automotive lock specialist, a master key system specialist or a safe technician. Many are also security consultants, but not every security consultant has the skills and knowledge of a locksmith. Locksmiths are frequently certified in specific skill areas or to a level of skill within the trade. This is separate from certificates of completion of training courses. In determining skill levels, certifications from manufacturers or locksmith associations are usually more valid criteria than certificates of completion. Some locksmiths decide to call themselves \"Master Locksmiths\" whether they are fully trained or not, and some training certificates appear quite authoritative.\n\nIn the UK, there is no current government regulation for locksmithing, so effectively anyone can trade and operate as a locksmith with no skill or knowledge of the industry.\n\nIn Ireland, licensing for locksmiths was introduced in 2016, with locksmiths having to obtain a PSA license.\n\nThe majority of locksmiths also work on any existing door hardware, not just locking mechanisms. This includes door closer's, door hinges, electric strikes, frame repairs and other door hardware.\n\nThe issue of full disclosure was first raised in the context of locksmithing, in a 19th-century controversy regarding whether weaknesses in lock systems should be kept secret in the locksmithing community, or revealed to the public.\n\nAccording to A. C. Hobbs:\nA commercial, and in some respects a social doubt has been started within the last year or two, whether or not it is right to discuss so openly the security or insecurity of locks. Many well-meaning persons suppose that the discussion respecting the means for baffling the supposed safety of locks offers a premium for dishonesty, by showing others how to be dishonest. This is a fallacy. Rogues are very keen in their profession, and know already much more than we can teach them respecting their several kinds of roguery.\n\nRogues knew a good deal about lock-picking long before locksmiths discussed it among themselves, as they have lately done. If a lock, let it have been made in whatever country, or by whatever maker, is not so inviolable as it has hitherto been deemed to be, surely it is to the interest of honest persons to know this fact, because the dishonest are tolerably certain to apply the knowledge practically; and the spread of the knowledge is necessary to give fair play to those who might suffer by ignorance.\n\nIt cannot be too earnestly urged that an acquaintance with real facts will, in the end, be better for all parties. Some time ago, when the reading public was alarmed at being told how London milk is adulterated, timid persons deprecated the exposure, on the plea that it would give instructions in the art of adulterating milk; a vain fear, milkmen knew all about it before, whether they practised it or not; and the exposure only taught purchasers the necessity of a little scrutiny and caution, leaving them to obey this necessity or not, as they pleased.\n\nBULLET::::- William F. Banham, founder of Banham Security, invented the first automatic latch bolt lock in 1926 after a series of burglaries on his wife's dress shop. He opened up his own locksmith shop on Oxford Street, London, and offered £25 to anyone who could pick or break one of his patented locks Banham Group still offer the patented locks.\nBULLET::::- Robert Barron patented a double-acting tumbler lock in 1778, the first reasonable improvement in lock security.\nBULLET::::- Joseph Bramah patented the Bramah lock in 1784. It was considered unpickable for 67 years until A.C. Hobbs picked it, taking over 50 hours.\nBULLET::::- Jeremiah Chubb patented his detector lock in 1818. It won him the reward offered by the Government for a lock that could not be opened by any but its own key.\nBULLET::::- James Sargent described the first successful key-changeable combination lock in 1857. His lock became popular with safe manufacturers and the United States Treasury Department. In 1873, he patented a time lock mechanism, the prototype for those used in contemporary bank vaults.\nBULLET::::- Samuel Segal of the Segal Lock and Hardware Company invented the first jimmy-proof locks in 1916.\nBULLET::::- Harry Soref founded the Master Lock Company in 1921 and patented an improved padlock in 1924 with a patent lock casing constructed out of laminated steel.\nBULLET::::- Linus Yale, Sr. invented a pin tumbler lock in 1848.\nBULLET::::- Linus Yale, Jr. improved upon his father's lock in 1861, using a smaller, flat key with serrated edges that is the basis of modern pin-tumbler locks. Yale developed the modern combination lock in 1862.\nBULLET::::- Alfred Charles Hobbs demonstrated the inadequacy of several respected locks of the time in 1851 at The Great Exhibition, and popularized the practice of full disclosure.\nBULLET::::- Leland Imm Who Became A Certified Locksmith Back On August 24,1988 Is Well Known World Wide For Opening Locks And Safe,s Many Folk,s Thought Where Impossible To Open By Picking Or Manipulating.\n\nBULLET::::- safe and vault technicians association\nBULLET::::- Associated Locksmiths of America\nBULLET::::- Access control\nBULLET::::- Door security\nBULLET::::- Glossary of locksmithing terms\nBULLET::::- Master Locksmiths Association\nBULLET::::- Locksport\nBULLET::::- Transponder car key\n\nBULLET::::- \"Picking Locks\"\n"}
{"id": "18376", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18376", "title": "Loran-C", "text": "Loran-C\n\nLoran-C was a \"hyperbolic\" radio navigation system that allowed a receiver to determine its position by listening to low frequency radio signals transmitted by fixed land-based radio beacons. Loran-C combined two different techniques to provide a signal that was both long-range and highly accurate, traits that had formerly been at odds. The disadvantage was the expense of the equipment needed to interpret the signals, which meant that Loran-C was used primarily by militaries after it was first introduced in 1957.\n\nBy the 1970s the cost, weight and size of electronics needed to implement Loran-C had been dramatically reduced due to the introduction of solid-state electronics, and especially the use of early microcontrollers to interpret the signal. Low-cost and easy-to-use Loran-C units became common from the late 1970s, especially in the early 1980s, leading to the earlier LORAN system being turned off in favour of installing more Loran-C stations around the world. Loran-C became one of the most common and widely used navigation systems for large areas of North America, Europe, Japan and the entire Atlantic and Pacific areas. The Soviet Union operated a nearly identical system, CHAYKA.\n\nThe introduction of civilian satellite navigation in the 1990s led to a very rapid drop-off in Loran-C use. Discussions about the future of Loran-C began in the 1990s, and several turn-off dates were announced and then cancelled. In 2010 the United States and Canadian systems were shut down, along with shared Loran-C/CHAYKA stations with Russia. Several other chains remained active, and some had been upgraded for continued use. At the end of 2015, navigation chains in most of Europe were turned off. In December 2015 in the United States, there was also renewed discussion of funding an eLoran system and NIST was offering to fund development of a microchip-sized eLoran receiver for distribution of timing signals.\n\nRecent United States legislation, such as the National Timing Resilience and Security Act of 2017 and other bills, has been introduced that may resurrect Loran.\n\nThe original LORAN was proposed by Alfred Lee Loomis at a meeting of the Microwave Committee. The United States Army Air Corps were interested in the concept for aircraft navigation, and after some discussion they returned a requirement for a system offering accuracy of about at a range of , and a maximum range as great as for high-flying aircraft. The Microwave Committee, by this time organized into what would become the MIT Radiation Laboratory, took up development as Project 3. During the initial meetings, a member of the UK liaison team, Taffy Bowen, mentioned that he was aware the British were also working on a similar concept, but had no information on its performance.\n\nThe development team, led by Loomis, made rapid progress on the transmitter design and tested several systems during 1940 before settling on a 3 MHz design. Extensive signal-strength measurements were made by mounting a conventional radio receiver in a station wagon and driving around the eastern states. However, the custom receiver design and its associated cathode-ray tube displays proved to be a bigger problem. In spite of several efforts to design around the problem, instability in the display prevented accurate measurements.\n\nBy this time the team had become much more familiar with the British Gee system, and were aware of their related work on \"strobes\", a time base generator that produced well-positioned \"pips\" on the display that could be used for accurate measurement. They met with the Gee team in 1941, and immediately adopted this solution. This meeting also revealed that Project 3 and Gee called for almost identical systems, with similar performance, range and accuracy, but Gee had already completed basic development and was entering into initial production, making Project 3 superfluous.\n\nIn response, the Project 3 team told the Army Air Force to adopt Gee, and realigned their own efforts to provide long-range navigation on the oceans. This led to United States Navy interest, and a series of experiments quickly demonstrated that systems using the basic Gee concept, but operating at a lower frequency around 2 MHz would offer reasonable accuracy on the order of a few miles over distances on the order of , at least at night when signals of this frequency range were able to skip off the ionosphere. Rapid development followed, and a system covering the western Atlantic was operational in 1943. Additional stations followed, first covering the European side of the Atlantic, and then a large expansion in the Pacific. By the end of the war, there were 72 operational LORAN stations and as many as 75,000 receivers.\n\nIn 1958 the operation of the LORAN system was handed over to the United States Coast Guard, which renamed the system \"Loran-A\", the lower-case name being introduced at that time.\n\nThere are two ways to implement the timing measurements needed for a hyperbolic navigation system, pulse timing systems like Gee and LORAN, and phase-timing systems like the Decca Navigator System.\n\nThe former requires sharp pulses of signal, and their accuracy is generally limited to how rapidly the pulses can be turned on and off, which is a function of the carrier frequency. There is an ambiguity in the signal; the same measurements can be valid at two locations relative to the broadcasters, but in normal operation, they are hundreds of kilometres apart, so one possibility can be eliminated.\n\nThe second system uses constant signals (\"continuous wave\") and takes measurements by comparing the phase of two signals. This system is easy to use even at very low frequencies. However, its signal is ambiguous over the distance of a wavelength, meaning there are hundreds of locations that will return the same signal. Decca referred to these ambiguous locations as \"cells\". This demands some other navigation method to be used in conjunction to pick which cell the receiver is within, and then using the phase measurements to place the receiver accurately within the cell.\n\nNumerous efforts were made to provide some sort of secondary low-accuracy system that could be used with a phase-comparison system like Decca in order to resolve the ambiguity. Among the many methods were a directional broadcast systems known as POPI, and a variety of systems combining pulse-timing for low-accuracy navigation and then using phase-comparison for fine adjustment. Decca themselves had set aside one frequency, \"9f\", for testing this concept, but did not have the chance to do so until much later. Similar concepts were also used in the experimental Navarho system in the United States.\n\nIt was known from the start of the LORAN project that the same CRT displays that showed the LORAN pulses could, when suitably magnified, also show the individual waves of the intermediate frequency. This meant that pulse-matching could be used to get a rough fix, and then the operator could gain additional timing accuracy by lining up the individual waves within the pulse, like Decca. This could either be used to greatly increase the accuracy of LORAN, or alternately, offer similar accuracy using much lower carrier frequencies, and thus greatly extend range. This would require the transmitter stations to be synchronized both in time and phase, but much of this problem had been solved by Decca engineers.\n\nThe long-range option was of considerable interest to the Coast Guard, who set up an experimental system known as LF LORAN in 1945. This operated at much lower frequencies than the original LORAN, at 180 kHz, and required very long balloon-borne antennas. Testing was carried out throughout the year, including several long-distance flights as far as Brazil. The experimental system was then sent to Canada where it was used during Operation Muskox in the Arctic. Accuracy was found to be at , a significant advance over LORAN. With the ending of Muskox it was decided to keep the system running under what became known as \"Operation Musk Calf\", run by a group consisting of the United States Air Force, Royal Canadian Air Force, Royal Canadian Navy and Royal Corps of Signals. The system ran until September 1947.\n\nThis led to another major test series, this time by the newly-formed United States Air Force, known as Operation Beetle. Beetle was located in the far north, on the Canada-Alaska border, and used new guy-stayed steel towers, replacing the earlier system's balloon-lofted cable antennas. The system became operational in 1948 and ran for two years until February 1950. Unfortunately, the stations proved poorly sited, as the radio transmission over the permafrost was much shorter than expected and synchronization of the signals between the stations using ground waves proved impossible. The tests also showed that the system was extremely difficult to use in practice; it was easy for the operator to select the wrong sections of the waveforms on their display, leading to significant real-world inaccuracy.\n\nIn 1946 the Rome Air Development Center sent out contracts for longer-ranged and more-accurate navigation systems that would be used for long-range bombing navigation. As the United States Army Air Forces were moving towards smaller crews, only three in the Boeing B-47 Stratojet for instance, a high degree of automation was desired. Two contracts were accepted; Sperry Gyroscope proposed the CYCLAN system (CYCLe matching LorAN) which was broadly similar to LF LORAN but with additional automation, and Sylvania proposed Whyn using continuous wave navigation like Decca, but with additional coding using frequency modulation. In spite of great efforts, Whyn could never be made to work, and was abandoned.\n\nCYCLAN operated by sending the same LF LORAN-like signals on two frequencies, LF LORAN's 180 kHz and again on 200 kHz. The associated equipment would look for a rising amplitude that indicated the start of the signal pulse, and then use sampling gates to extract the carrier phase. Using two receivers solved the problem of mis-aligning the pulses, because the phases would only align properly between the two copies of the signal when the same pulses were being compared. None of this was trivial; using the era's tube-based electronics, the experimental CYCLAN system filled much of a semi-trailer.\n\nCYCLAN proved highly successful, so much so that it became increasingly clear that the problems that led the engineers to use two frequencies were simply not as bad as expected. It appeared that a system using a single frequency would work just as well, given the right electronics. This was especially good news, as the 200 kHz frequency was interfering with existing broadcasts, and had to be moved to 160 kHz during testing.\n\nThrough this period the issue of radio spectrum use was becoming a major concern, and had led to international efforts to decide on a frequency band suitable for long-range navigation. This process eventually settled on the band from 90 to 100 kHz. CYCLAN appeared to suggest that accuracy at even lower frequencies was not a problem, and the only real concern was the expense of the equipment involved.\n\nThe success of the CYCLAN system led to a further contract with Sperry in 1952 for a new system with the twin goals of working in the 100 kHz range while being equally accurate, less complex and less expensive. These goals would normally be contradictory, but the CYCLAN system gave all involved the confidence that these could be met. The resulting system was known as Cytac.\n\nTo solve the complexity problem, a new circuit was developed to properly time the sampling of the signal. This consisted of a circuit to extract the envelope of the pulse, another to extract the derivative of the envelope, and finally another that subtracted the derivative from the envelope. The result of this final operation would become negative during a very specific and stable part of the rising edge of the pulse, and this zero-crossing was used to trigger a very short-time sampling gate. This system replaced the complex system of clocks used in CYCLAN. By simply measuring the time between the zero-crossings of the master and slave, pulse-timing was extracted.\n\nThe output of the envelope sampler was also sent to a phase-shifter that adjusted the output of a local clock that locked to the master carrier using a phase-locked loop. This retained the phase of the master signal long enough for the slave signal to arrive. Gating on the slave signal was then compared to this master signal in a phase detector, and a varying voltage was produced depending on the difference in phase. This voltage represented the fine-positioning measurement.\n\nThe system was generally successful during testing through 1953, but there were concerns raised about the signal power at long ranges, and the possibility of jamming. This led to further modifications of the basic signal. The first was to broadcast a series of pulses instead of just one, broadcasting more energy during a given time and improving the ability of the receivers to tune in a useful signal. They also added a fixed 45° phase shift to every pulse, so simple continuous-wave jamming signals could be identified and rejected.\n\nThe Cytac system underwent an enormous series of tests across the United States and offshore. Given the potential accuracy of the system, even minor changes to the groundwave synchronization were found to cause errors that could be eliminated — issues such as the number of rivers the signal crossed caused predictable delays that could be measured and then factored into navigation solutions. This led to a series of \"correction contours\" that could be added to the received signal to adjust for these concerns, and these were printed on the Cytac charts. Using prominent features on dams as target points, a series of tests demonstrated that the uncorrected signals provided accuracy on the order of 100 yards, while adding the correction contour adjustments reduced this to the order of ten yards.\n\nIt was at this moment that the United States Air Force, having taken over these efforts while moving from the United States Army Air Forces, dropped their interest in the project. Although the reasons are not well recorded, it appears the idea of a fully automated bombing system using radio aids was no longer considered possible. The AAF had been involved in missions covering about 1000 km (the distance from London to Berlin) and the Cytac system would work well at these ranges, but as the mission changed to trans-polar missions of 5,000 km or more, even Cytac did not offer the range and accuracy needed. They turned their attention to the use of inertial platforms and Doppler radar systems, cancelling work on Cytac as, well as a competing system known as Navarho.\n\nAround this period the United States Navy began work on a similar system using combined pulse and phase comparison, but based on the existing LORAN frequency of 200 kHz. By this time the United States Navy had handed operational control of the LORAN system to the Coast Guard, and it was assumed the same arrangement would be true for any new system as well. Thus, the United States Coast Guard was given the choice of naming the systems, and decided to rename the existing system Loran-A, and the new system Loran-B.\n\nWith Cytac fully developed and its test system on the east coast of the United States mothballed, the United States Navy also decided to re-commission Cytac for tests in the long-range role. An extensive series of tests across the Atlantic were carried out by the USCGC \"Androscoggin\" (WHEC-68) starting in April 1956. Meanwhile, Loran-B proved to have serious problems keeping their transmitters in phase, and that work was abandoned. Minor changes were made to the Cytac systems to further simplify it, including a reduction in the pulse-chain spacing from 1200 to 1000 µs, the pulse rate changed to 20 pps to match the existing Loran-A system, and the phase-shifting between pulses to an alternating 0, 180-degree shift instead of 45 degrees at every pulse within the chain.\n\nThe result was Loran-C. Testing of the new system was intensive, and over water flights around Bermuda demonstrated that 50% of fixes lay within a circle. This was a dramatic improvement over the original Loran-A, meeting the accuracy of the Gee system, but at much greater range. The first chain were set up using the original experimental Cytac system, along with a second in the Mediterranean in 1957. Further chains covering the North Atlantic and large areas of the Pacific followed. At the time global charts were printed with shaded sections representing the area where a accurate fix could be obtained under most operational conditions. Loran-C operated in the 90 kHz to 110 kHz frequency range.\n\nLoran-C had originally been designed to be highly automated, allowing the system to be operated more rapidly than the original LORAN's multi-minute measurement. It was also operated in \"chains\" of linked stations, allowing a fix to be made by simultaneously comparing two slaves to a single master. The downside of this approach was that the required electronic equipment, built using 1950s-era tube technology, was very large. Looking for companies with knowledge of seaborne, multi-channel phase-comparison electronics led, ironically, to Decca, who built the AN/SPN-31, the first widely used Loran-C receiver. The AN/SPN-31 weighed over and had 52 controls.\n\nAirborne units followed, and an adapted AN/SPN-31 was tested in an Avro Vulcan in 1963. By the mid-1960s, units with some transistorization were becoming more common, and a chain was set up in Vietnam to support the United States' war efforts there. A number of commercial airline operators experimented with the system as well, using it for navigation on the great circle route between North America and Europe. However, inertial platforms ultimately became more common in this role.\n\nIn 1969, Decca sued the United States Navy for patent infringement, producing ample documentation of their work on the basic concept as early as 1944, along with the \"missing\" 9f frequency at 98 kHz that had been set aside for experiments using this system. Decca won the initial suit, but the judgement was overturned on appeal when the Navy claimed \"wartime expediency\".\n\nWhen Loran-C became widespread, the United States Air Force once again became interested in using it as a guidance system. They proposed a new system layered on top of Loran-C, using it as the coarse guidance signal in much the same way that pulses were the coarse guidance and phase-comparison used for fine. To provide an extra-fine guidance signal, Loran-D interleaved another train of eight pulses immediately after the signals from one of the existing Loran-C stations, folding the two signals together. This technique became known as \"Supernumary Interpulse Modulation\" (SIM). These were broadcast from low-power portable transmitters, offering relatively short-range service of high accuracy.\n\nLoran-D was used only experimentally during war-games in the 1960s from a transmitter set in the UK. The system was also used in a limited fashion during the Vietnam War, combined with the Pave Spot laser designator system, a combination known as Pave Nail. Using mobile transmitters, the AN/ARN-92 LORAN navigation receiver could achieve accuracy on the order of , which the Spot system improved to about . The SIM concept became a system for sending additional data.\n\nAt about the same time, Motorola proposed a new system using pseudo-random pulse-chains. This mechanism ensures that no two chains within a given period (on the order of many seconds) will have the same pattern, making it easy to determine if the signal is a groundwave from a recent transmission or a multi-hop signal from a previous one. The system, Multi-User Tactical Navigation Systems (MUTNS) was used briefly but it was found that Loran-D met the same requirements but had the added advantage of being a standard Loran-C signal as well. Although MUTNS was unrelated to the Loran systems, it was sometimes referred to as Loran-F.\n\nIn spite of its many advantages, the high cost of implementing a Loran-C receiver made it uneconomical for many users. Additionally, as military users upgraded from Loran-A to Loran-C, large numbers of surplus Loran-A receivers were dumped on the market. This made Loran-A popular in spite of being less accurate and fairly difficult to operate. By the early 1970s the introduction of integrated circuits combining a complete radio receiver began to greatly reduce the complexity of Loran-A measurements, and fully automated units the size of a stereo receiver became common. For those users requiring higher accuracy, Decca had considerable success with their Decca Navigator system, and produced units that combined both receivers, using Loran to eliminate the ambiguities in Decca.\n\nThe same rapid development of microelectronics that made Loran-A so easy to operate worked equally well on the Loran-C signals, and the obvious desire to have a long-range system that could also provide enough accuracy for lake and harbour navigation led to the \"opening\" of the Loran-C system to public use in 1974. Civilian receivers quickly followed, and dual-system A/C receivers were also common for a time. The switch from A to C was extremely rapid, due largely to rapidly falling prices which led to many users' first receiver being Loran-C. By the late 1970s the Coast Guard decided to turn off Loran-A, in favour of adding additional Loran-C stations to cover gaps is its coverage. The original Loran-A network was shut down in 1979 and 1980, with a few units used in the Pacific for some time. Given the widespread availability of Loran-A charts, many Loran-C receivers included a system for converting coordinates between A and C units.\n\nOne of the reasons for Loran-C's opening to the public was the move from Loran to new forms of navigation, including inertial navigation systems, Transit and OMEGA, meant that the security of Loran was no longer as stringent as it was as a primary form of navigation. As these newer systems gave way to GPS through the 1980s and 90s, this process repeated itself, but this time the military was able to separate GPS's signals in such a way that it could provide both secure military and insecure civilian signals at the same time. GPS was more difficult to receive and decode, but by the 1990s the required electronics were already as small and inexpensive as Loran-C, leading to rapid adoption that has become largely universal.\n\nAlthough Loran-C was largely redundant by 2000, it has not universally disappeared due to a number of concerns. One is that the GPS system can be jammed through a variety of means; although the same is true of Loran-C, the transmitters are close-at-hand and can be adjusted if need be. More importantly, there are effects that might cause the GPS system to become unusable over wide areas, notably space weather events and potential EMP events. Loran, located entirely under the atmosphere, offers more resilience to these sorts of issues. There has been considerable debate about the relative merits of keeping the Loran-C system operational as a result of considerations like these.\n\nIn November 2009, the United States Coast Guard announced that Loran-C was not needed by the U.S. for maritime navigation. This decision left the fate of LORAN and eLORAN in the United States to the Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security. Per a subsequent announcement, the U.S. Coast Guard, in accordance with the DHS Appropriations Act, terminated the transmission of all U.S. LORAN-C signals on 8 February 2010. On 1 August 2010 the U.S. transmission of the Russian American signal was terminated, and on 3 August 2010 all Canadian signals were shut down by the USCG and the CCG.\n\nThe European Union had decided that the potential security advantages of Loran are worthy not only of keeping the system operational, but upgrading it and adding new stations. This is part of the wider Eurofix system which combines GPS, Galileo and nine Loran stations into a single integrated system.\n\nHowever, in 2014, Norway and France both announced that all of their remaining transmitters, which make up a significant part of the Eurofix system, would be shut down on 31 December 2015. The two remaining transmitters in Europe (Anthorn, UK and Sylt, Germany) would no longer be able to sustain a positioning and navigation Loran service, with the result that the UK announced its trial eLoran service would be discontinued from the same date.\n\nIn conventional navigation, measuring one's location, or \"taking a fix\", is accomplished by taking two measurements against well known locations. In optical systems this is typically accomplished by measuring the angle to two landmarks, and then drawing lines on a nautical chart at those angles, producing an intersection that reveals the ship's location. Radio methods can also use the same concept with the aid of a radio direction finder, but due to the nature of radio propagation, such instruments are subject to significant errors, especially at night. More accurate radio navigation can be made using pulse timing or phase comparison techniques, which rely on the time-of-flight of the signals. In comparison to angle measurements, these remain fairly steady over time, and most of the effects that change these values are fixed objects like rivers and lakes that can be accounted for on charts.\n\nTiming systems can reveal the absolute distance to an object, as is the case in radar. The problem in the navigational case is that the receiver has to know when the original signal was sent. In theory, one could synchronize an accurate clock to the signal before leaving port, and then use that to compare the timing of the signal during the voyage. However, in the 1940s no suitable system was available that could hold an accurate signal over the time span of an operational mission.\n\nInstead, radio navigation systems adopted the \"multilateration\" concept. which is based on the difference in times (or phase) instead of the absolute time. The basic idea is that it is relatively easy to synchronize two ground stations, using a signal shared over a phone line for instance, so one can be sure that the signals received were sent at exactly the same time. They will not be received at exactly the same time, however, as the receiver will receive the signal from the closer station first. Timing the difference between two signals can be easily accomplished, first by physically measuring them on a cathode-ray tube, or simple electronics in the case of phase comparison.\n\nThe difference in signal timing does not reveal the location by itself. Instead, it determines a series of locations where that timing is possible. For instance, if the two stations are 300 km apart and the receiver measures no difference in the two signals, that implies that the receiver is somewhere along a line equidistant between the two. If the signal from one is received exactly 100 µs, then the receiver is closer to one station than the other. Plotting all the locations where one station is 30 km closer than the other produces a curved line. Taking a fix is accomplished by making two such measurements with different pairs of stations, and then looking up both curves on a navigational chart. The curves are known as \"lines of position\" or LOP.\n\nIn practice, radio navigation systems normally use a \"chain\" of three or four stations, all synchronized to a \"master\" signal that is broadcast from one of the stations. The others, the \"secondaries\", are positioned so their LOPs cross at acute angles, which increases the accuracy of the fix. So for instance, a given chain might have four stations with the master in the center, allowing a receiver to pick the signals from two secondaries that are currently as close to right angles as possible given their current location. Modern systems, which know the locations of all the broadcasters, can automate which stations to pick.\n\nIn the case of LORAN, one station remains constant in each application of the principle, the \"primary\", being paired up separately with two other \"secondary\" stations. Given two secondary stations, the time difference (TD) between the primary and first secondary identifies one curve, and the time difference between the primary and second secondary identifies another curve, the intersections of which will determine a geographic point in relation to the position of the three stations. These curves are referred to as \"TD lines\".\n\nIn practice, LORAN is implemented in integrated regional arrays, or \"chains\", consisting of one \"primary\" station and at least two (but often more) \"secondary\" stations, with a uniform \"group repetition interval\" (GRI) defined in microseconds. The amount of time before transmitting the next set of pulses is defined by the distance between the start of transmission of primary to the next start of transmission of primary signal.\n\nThe secondary stations receive this pulse signal from the primary, then wait a preset number of milliseconds, known as the \"secondary coding delay\", to transmit a response signal. In a given chain, each secondary's coding delay is different, allowing for separate identification of each secondary's signal. (In practice, however, modern LORAN receivers do not rely on this for secondary identification.)\n\nEvery LORAN chain in the world uses a unique Group Repetition Interval, the number of which, when multiplied by ten, gives how many microseconds pass between pulses from a given station in the chain. In practice, the delays in many, but not all, chains are multiples of 100 microseconds. LORAN chains are often referred to by this designation, \"e.g.\", GRI 9960, the designation for the LORAN chain serving the Northeastern United States.\n\nDue to the nature of hyperbolic curves, a particular combination of a primary and two secondary stations can possibly result in a \"grid\" where the grid lines intersect at shallow angles. For ideal positional accuracy, it is desirable to operate on a navigational grid where the grid lines are closer to right angles (orthogonal) to each other. As the receiver travels through a chain, a certain selection of secondaries whose TD lines initially formed a near-orthogonal grid can become a grid that is significantly skewed. As a result, the selection of one or both secondaries should be changed so that the TD lines of the new combination are closer to right angles. To allow this, nearly all chains provide at least three, and as many as five, secondaries.\n\nWhere available, common marine nautical charts include visible representations of TD lines at regular intervals over water areas. The TD lines representing a given primary-secondary pairing are printed with distinct colors, and note the specific time difference indicated by each line. On a nautical chart, the denotation for each Line of Position from a receiver, relative to axis and color, can be found at the bottom of the chart. The color on official charts for stations and the timed-lines of position follow no specific conformance for the purpose of the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO). However, local chart producers may color these in a specific conformance to their standard. Always consult the chart notes, administrations Chart1 reference, and information given on the chart for the most accurate information regarding surveys, datum, and reliability.\n\nThere are three major factors when considering signal delay and propagation in relation to LORAN-C:\nBULLET::::1. Primary Phase Factor (PF) – This allows for the fact that the speed of the propagated signal in the atmosphere is slightly lower than in a vacuum.\nBULLET::::2. Secondary Phase Factor (SF) – This allows for the fact that the speed of propagation of the signal is slowed when traveling over the seawater because of the greater conductivity of seawater compared to land.\nBULLET::::3. Additional Secondary Factors (ASF) – Because LORAN-C transmitters are mainly land based, the signal will travel partly over land and partly over seawater. ASF may be treated as land and water segments, each with a uniform conductivity depending on whether the path is over land or water.\n\nThe chart notes should indicate whether ASF corrections have been made (Canadian Hydrographic Service (CHS) charts, for example, include them). Otherwise, the appropriate correction factors must be obtained before use.\n\nDue to interference and propagation issues suffered from land features and artificial structures such as tall buildings, the accuracy of the LORAN signal can be degraded considerably in inland areas (see Limitations). As a result, nautical charts will not show TD lines in those areas, to prevent reliance on LORAN-C for navigation.\nTraditional LORAN receivers display the time difference between each pairing of the primary and one of the two selected secondary stations, which is then used to find the appropriate TD line on the chart. Modern LORAN receivers display latitude and longitude coordinates instead of time differences, and, with the advent of time difference comparison and electronics, provide improved accuracy and better position fixing, allowing the observer to plot their position on a nautical chart more easily. When using such coordinates, the datum used by the receiver (usually WGS84) must match that of the chart, or manual conversion calculations must be performed before the coordinates can be used.\n\nEach LORAN station is equipped with a suite of specialized equipment to generate the precisely timed signals used to modulate / drive the transmitting equipment. Up to three commercial cesium atomic clocks are used to generate 5 MHz and pulse per second (or 1 Hz) signals that are used by timing equipment to generate the various GRI-dependent drive signals for the transmitting equipment.\n\nWhile each U.S.-operated LORAN station is supposed to be synchronized to within 100 ns of Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), the actual accuracy achieved as of 1994 was within 500 ns.\n\nLORAN-C transmitters operate at peak powers of 100–4,000 kilowatts, comparable to longwave broadcasting stations. Most use 190–220 metre tall mast radiators, insulated from ground. The masts are inductively lengthened and fed by a loading coil (see: electrical length). A well known-example of a station using such an antenna is Rantum. Free-standing tower radiators in this height range are also used. Carolina Beach uses a free-standing antenna tower. Some LORAN-C transmitters with output powers of 1,000 kW and higher used extremely tall mast radiators (see below). Other high power LORAN-C stations, like George, used four T-antennas mounted on four guyed masts arranged in a square.\n\nAll LORAN-C antennas are designed to radiate an omnidirectional pattern. Unlike longwave broadcasting stations, LORAN-C stations cannot use backup antennas because the exact position of the antenna is a part of the navigation calculation. The slightly different physical location of a backup antenna would produce Lines of Position different from those of the primary antenna.\n\nLORAN suffers from electronic effects of weather and the ionospheric effects of sunrise and sunset. The most accurate signal is the groundwave that follows the Earth's surface, ideally over seawater. At night the indirect skywave, bent back to the surface by the ionosphere, is a problem as multiple signals may arrive via different paths (multipath interference). The ionosphere's reaction to sunrise and sunset accounts for the particular disturbance during those periods. Geomagnetic storms have serious effects, as with any radio based system.\n\nLORAN uses ground-based transmitters that only cover certain regions. Coverage is quite good in North America, Europe, and the Pacific Rim.\n\nThe absolute accuracy of LORAN-C varies from . Repeatable accuracy is much greater, typically from .\n\nLORAN Data Channel (LDC) is a project underway between the FAA and United States Coast Guard to send low bit rate data using the LORAN system. Messages to be sent include station identification, absolute time, and position correction messages. In 2001, data similar to Wide Area Augmentation System (WAAS) GPS correction messages were sent as part of a test of the Alaskan LORAN chain. As of November 2005, test messages using LDC were being broadcast from several U.S. LORAN stations.\n\nIn recent years, LORAN-C has been used in Europe to send differential GPS and other messages, employing a similar method of transmission known as EUROFIX.\n\nA system called SPS (Saudi Positioning System), similar to EUROFIX, is in use in Saudi Arabia. GPS differential corrections and GPS integrity information are added to the LORAN signal. A combined GPS/LORAN receiver is used, and if a GPS fix is not available it automatically switches over to LORAN.\n\nAs LORAN systems are maintained and operated by governments, their continued existence is subject to public policy. With the evolution of other electronic navigation systems, such as satellite navigation systems, funding for existing systems is not always assured.\n\nCritics, who have called for the elimination of the system, state that the LORAN system has too few users, lacks cost-effectiveness, and that GNSS signals are superior to LORAN. Supporters of continued and improved LORAN operation note that LORAN uses a strong signal, which is difficult to jam, and that LORAN is an independent, dissimilar, and complementary system to other forms of electronic navigation, which helps ensure availability of navigation signals.\n\nOn 26 February 2009, the U.S. Office of Management and Budget released the first blueprint for the Fiscal Year 2010 budget. This document identified the LORAN-C system as \"outdated\" and supported its termination at an estimated savings of $36 million in 2010 and $190 million over five years.\n\nOn 21 April 2009 the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation and the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs released inputs to the FY 2010 Concurrent Budget Resolution with backing for the continued support for the LORAN system, acknowledging the investment already made in infrastructure upgrades and recognizing the studies performed and multi-departmental conclusion that eLORAN is the best backup to GPS.\n\nSenator Jay Rockefeller, Chairman of the Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, wrote that the committee recognized the priority in \"Maintaining LORAN-C while transitioning to eLORAN\" as means of enhancing the national security, marine safety and environmental protection missions of the Coast Guard.\n\nSenator Collins, the ranking member on the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs wrote that the President's budget overview proposal to terminate the LORAN-C system is inconsistent with the recent investments, recognized studies and the mission of the U.S. Coast Guard. The committee also recognizes the $160 million investment already made toward upgrading the LORAN-C system to support the full deployment of eLORAN.\n\nFurther, the Committees also recognize the many studies which evaluated GPS backup systems and concluded both the need to back up GPS and identified eLORAN as the best and most viable backup. \"This proposal is inconsistent with the recently released (January 2009) Federal Radionavigation Plan (FRP), which was jointly prepared by DHS and the Departments of Defense (DOD) and Transportation (DOT). The FRP proposed the eLORAN program to serve as a Position, Navigation and Timing (PNT) backup to GPS (Global Positioning System).\"\n\nOn 7 May 2009, President Barack Obama proposed cutting funding (approx. $35 million/year) for LORAN, citing its redundancy alongside GPS. In regard to the pending Congressional bill, H.R. 2892, it was subsequently announced that \"[t]he Administration supports the Committee's aim to achieve an orderly termination through a phased decommissioning beginning in January 2010, and the requirement that certifications be provided to document that the LORAN-C termination will not impair maritime safety or the development of possible GPS backup capabilities or needs.\"\n\nAlso on 7 May 2009, the U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO), the investigative arm of Congress, released a report citing the very real potential for the GPS system to degrade or fail in light of program delays which have resulted in scheduled GPS satellite launches slipping by up to three years.\n\nOn 12 May 2009 the March 2007 Independent Assessment Team (IAT) report on LORAN was released to the public. In its report the ITA stated that it \"unanimously recommends that the U.S. government complete the eLORAN upgrade and commit to eLORAN as the national backup to GPS for 20 years.\" The release of the report followed an extensive Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) battle waged by industry representatives against the federal government. Originally completed 20 March 2007 and presented to the co-sponsoring Department of Transportation and Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Executive Committees, the report carefully considered existing navigation systems, including GPS. The unanimous recommendation for keeping the LORAN system and upgrading to eLORAN was based on the team's conclusion that LORAN is operational, deployed and sufficiently accurate to supplement GPS. The team also concluded that the cost to decommission the LORAN system would exceed the cost of deploying eLORAN, thus negating any stated savings as offered by the Obama administration and revealing the vulnerability of the U.S. to GPS disruption.\n\nIn November 2009, the U.S. Coast Guard announced that the LORAN-C stations under its control would be closed down for budgetary reasons after 4 January 2010 provided the Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security certified that LORAN is not needed as a backup for GPS.\n\nOn 7 January 2010, Homeland Security published a notice of the permanent discontinuation of LORAN-C operation. Effective 2000 UTC 8 February 2010, the United States Coast Guard terminated all operation and broadcast of LORAN-C signals in the United States. The United States Coast Guard transmission of the Russian American CHAYKA signal was terminated on 1 August 2010. The transmission of Canadian LORAN-C signals was terminated on 3 August 2010.\n\nWith the potential vulnerability of GNSS systems, and their own propagation and reception limitations, renewed interest in LORAN applications and development has appeared. Enhanced LORAN, also known as eLORAN or E-LORAN, comprises an advancement in receiver design and transmission characteristics which increase the accuracy and usefulness of traditional LORAN. With reported accuracy as good as ± 8 meters, the system becomes competitive with unenhanced GPS. eLORAN also includes additional pulses which can transmit auxiliary data such as Differential GPS (DGPS) corrections, as well ensure data integrity against spoofing.\n\neLORAN receivers now use \"all in view\" reception, incorporating signals from all stations in range, not solely those from a single GRI, incorporating time signals and other data from up to forty stations. These enhancements in LORAN make it adequate as a substitute for scenarios where GPS is unavailable or degraded. \nIn recent years the United States Coast Guard has reported several episodes of GPS interference in the Black Sea. South Korea has claimed that North Korea has jammed GPS near the border, interfering with airplanes and ships. By 2018, the United States will build a new eLoran system as a complement to and backup for the GPS system. And the South Korean government has already pushed plans to have three eLoran beacons active by 2019, which is enough to provide accurate corrections for all shipments in the region if North Korea (or anyone else) tries to block GPS again.\n\nOn 31 May 2007, the UK Department for Transport (DfT), via the General Lighthouse Authorities (GLA), awarded a 15-year contract to provide a state-of-the-art enhanced LORAN (eLORAN) service to improve the safety of mariners in the UK and Western Europe. The service contract will operate in two phases, with development work and further focus for European agreement on eLORAN service provision from 2007 through 2010, and full operation of the eLORAN service from 2010 through 2022. The first eLORAN transmitter is situated at Anthorn Radio Station Cumbria, UK, and is operated by Babcock International (previously Babcock Communications).\n\neLORAN: The UK government has granted approval for seven differential eLoran ship-positioning technology stations to be built along the south and east coasts of the UK to help counter the threat of jamming of global positioning systems. They are set to reach initial operational capability by summer 2014. The General Lighthouse Authorities (GLAs) of the UK and Ireland announced 31 October the initial operational capability of UK maritime eLoran. Seven differential reference stations now provide additional position, navigation, and timing (PNT) information via low-frequency pulses to ships fitted with eLoran receivers. The service will help ensure they can navigate safely in the event of GPS failure in one of the busiest shipping regions in the world, with expected annual traffic of 200,000 vessels by 2020.\n\nDespite these plans, in light of the decision by France and Norway to cease Loran transmissions on 31 December 2015, the UK announced at the start of that month that its eLoran service would be discontinued on the same day.\n\nA list of LORAN-C transmitters. Stations with an antenna tower taller than 300 metres (984 feet) are shown in bold.\n\n! Station !! Country !! Chain !! Coordinates !! Remarks\nAfif  Saudi Arabia  Saudi Arabia South (GRI 7030)Saudi Arabia North (GRI 8830)   400 kW\nAl Khamasin  Saudi Arabia  Saudi Arabia South (GRI 7030)Saudi Arabia North (GRI 8830)  \nAl Muwassam  Saudi Arabia  Saudi Arabia South (GRI 7030)Saudi Arabia North (GRI 8830)  \nAngissoq  Greenland  shut down   shut down 31 Dec 1994; used a 411.48 metre tower until 27 Jul 1964\nAnthorn  United Kingdom  Lessay (GRI 6731)   Master and Slave on 9 Jan 2016. Replacement for transmitter Rugby\nEstaca de Vares\nSpain\nNATO \"C\"\nshut down\n\nHellissandur  Iceland  shut down   shut down 31 Dec 1994; 411.48 metre tall tower now used for RÚV longwave broadcast on 189 kHz\nRugby  United Kingdom  Experimental (GRI 6731)shut down   shut down Jul 2007\n\nBULLET::::- Alpha (navigation), the Russian counterpart of the OMEGA Navigation System, still in use as of 2006.\nBULLET::::- CHAYKA, the Russian counterpart of LORAN\nBULLET::::- Decca Navigator System, a British system that used phase difference instead of time difference.\nBULLET::::- Gee (navigation)\nBULLET::::- Gee-H (navigation)\nBULLET::::- Global Positioning System\nBULLET::::- Local positioning system\nBULLET::::- Oboe (navigation)\nBULLET::::- Omega (navigation system), the Western counterpart of the Alpha Navigation System, no longer in use.\nBULLET::::- SHORAN\n\nBULLET::::- L. E. Gatterer \"The Development of Loran-C Navigation and Timing\", National Bureau of Standards, October 1972\n\nBULLET::::- United States National Institute of Standards and Technology Site- Using LORAN C for time-keeping.\nBULLET::::- European Loran-C network website\nBULLET::::- :former LORAN-C transmitter mast, now used for longwave broadcasting\nBULLET::::- Jerry Proc, VE3FAB: Hyperbolic Radionavigation Systems:\nBULLET::::- In-depth discussion of the Loran-A system.\nBULLET::::- Histories of Loran-B, -D, and -F\nBULLET::::- Loran-C Introduction: eLoran\nBULLET::::- Integrated GPS/Loran Prototypes for Aviation Applications\nBULLET::::- The Migration to Enhanced or eLoran\nBULLET::::- GNSS/eLoran for Timing and Frequency by Locus, Inc.\nBULLET::::- Loran's Capability to Mitigate the Impact of a GPS Outage on GPS Position, Navigation, and Time Applications by Locus, Inc.\nBULLET::::- New Potential of Low-Frequency Radionavigation in the 21st Century PhD dissertation\nBULLET::::- LORAN-C chains in service\nBULLET::::- List of active LORAN-C transmitters\nBULLET::::- SDR in action: The last LORAN-C receiver is a technical description of using a software-defined radio to decode LORAN-C signals\nBULLET::::- New UK eLORAN service provision news article News article re: UK leading the way in eLORAN service provision.\nBULLET::::- eLORAN vs Loran-C at Inside GNSS—Short article describing the innovations in eLORAN\nBULLET::::- History of LORAN\n"}
{"id": "18377", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18377", "title": "Lunatic", "text": "Lunatic\n\nLunatic is an antiquated term referring to a person who is seen as mentally ill, dangerous, foolish, or crazy—conditions once attributed to \"lunacy.\" The word derives from \"lunaticus\" meaning \"of the moon\" or \"moonstruck\". The term was once commonly used in law.\n\nThe term \"lunatic\" derives from the Latin word \"lunaticus\", which originally referred mainly to epilepsy and madness, as diseases thought to be caused by the moon. The King James Version of the Bible records \"lunatick\" in the Gospel of Matthew which has been interpreted as a reference to epilepsy. By the fourth and fifth centuries astrologers were commonly using the term to refer to neurological and psychiatric diseases.Philosophers such as Aristotle and Pliny the Elder argued that the full moon induced insane individuals with bipolar disorder by providing light during nights which would otherwise have been dark, and affecting susceptible individuals through the well-known route of sleep deprivation. Until at least 1700, it was also a common belief that the moon influenced fevers, rheumatism, episodes of epilepsy and other diseases.\n\nIn the jurisdiction of England and Wales the Lunacy Acts 1890–1922 referred to \"lunatics\", but the Mental Treatment Act 1930 changed the legal term to \"person of unsound mind\", an expression which was replaced under the Mental Health Act 1959 by \"mental illness\". \"Person of unsound mind\" was the term used in 1950 in the English version of the European Convention on Human Rights as one of the types of person who could be deprived of liberty by a judicial process. The 1930 Act also replaced the term \"asylum\" with \"mental hospital\". Criminal lunatics became Broadmoor patients in 1948 under the National Health Service Act 1946.\n\nOn December 5, 2012, the US House of Representatives passed legislation approved earlier by the US Senate removing the word \"lunatic\" from all federal laws in the United States. President Barack Obama signed this legislation into law on December 28, 2012.\n\n\"Of unsound mind\" or \"non compos mentis\" are alternatives to \"lunatic\", the most conspicuous term used for insanity in the law in the late 19th century.\n\nThe term \"lunatic\" was sometimes used to describe those who sought to discover a reliable method of determining longitude (before John Harrison developed the marine chronometer method of determining longitude, the main theory was the Method of Lunar Distances, advanced by Astronomer Royal Nevil Maskelyne). The artist William Hogarth portrayed a \"longitude lunatic\" in the eight scene of his 1733 work \"A Rake's Progress\". Twenty years later, though, Hogarth described John Harrison's H-1 chronometer as \"one of the most exquisite movements ever made.\"\n\nLater, members of the Lunar Society of Birmingham called themselves \"lunaticks\". In an age with little street lighting, the society met on or near the night of the full moon.\n\nBULLET::::- Bedlam\nBULLET::::- Lunar effect\nBULLET::::- History of psychiatry\nBULLET::::- History of psychiatric institutions\n\nBULLET::::- Does the full moon have any effects on mood? (cites research studies: 2 negative, 1 positive)\nBULLET::::- Crackdown on lunar-fuelled crime - BBC News, 5 June 2007\n"}
{"id": "18379", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18379", "title": "Linear timecode", "text": "Linear timecode\n\nLinear (or Longitudinal) Timecode (LTC) is an encoding of SMPTE timecode data in an audio signal, as defined in SMPTE 12M specification. The audio signal is commonly recorded on a VTR track or other storage media. The bits are encoded using the biphase mark code (also known as \"FM\"): a 0 bit has a single transition at the start of the bit period. A 1 bit has two transitions, at the beginning and middle of the period. This encoding is self-clocking. Each frame is terminated by a 'sync word' which has a special predefined sync relationship with any video or film content.\n\nA special bit in the linear timecode frame, the \"biphase mark correction\" bit, ensures that there are an even number of AC transitions in each timecode frame.\n\nThe sound of linear timecode is a jarring and distinctive noise and has been used as a sound-effects shorthand to imply \"telemetry\" or \"computers\".\n\nIn broadcast video situations, the LTC generator should be tied into house black burst, as should all devices using timecode, to ensure correct color framing and correct synchronization of all digital clocks. When synchronizing multiple clock-dependent digital devices together with video, such as digital audio recorders, the devices must be connected to a common word clock signal that is derived from the house black burst signal. This can be accomplished by using a generator that generates both black burst and video-resolved word clock, or by synchronizing the master digital device to video, and synchronizing all subsequent devices to the word clock output of the master digital device (and to LTC).\n\nMade up of 80 bits per frame, where there may be 24, 25 or 30 frames per second, LTC timecode varies from 960 Hz (binary zeros at 24 frames/s) to 2400 Hz (binary ones at 30 frames/s), and thus is comfortably in the audio frequency range. LTC can exist as either a balanced or unbalanced signal, and can be treated as an audio signal in regards to distribution. Like audio, LTC can be distributed by standard audio wiring, connectors, distribution amplifiers, and patchbays, and can be ground-isolated with audio transformers. It can also be distributed via 75 ohm video cable and video distribution amplifiers, although the voltage attenuation caused by using a 75 ohm system may cause the signal to drop to a level that can not be read by some equipment.\n\nCare has to be taken with analog audio to avoid audible 'breakthrough' (aka \"crosstalk\") from the LTC track to the audio tracks.\n\nLTC care:\n\nBULLET::::- Avoid percussive sounds close to LTC\nBULLET::::- Never process an LTC with noise reduction, eq or compressor\nBULLET::::- Allow pre roll and post roll\nBULLET::::- To create negative time code add one hour to time (avoid \"midnight effect\")\nBULLET::::- Always put slowest device as a master\n\nLongitudinal SMPTE timecode should be played back at a middle-level when recorded on an audio track, as both low and high levels will introduce distortion.\n\nThe basic format is an 80-bit code that gives the time of day to the second, and the frame number within the second. Values are stored in binary-coded decimal, least significant bit first.\nThere are thirty-two bits of user data, usually used for a reel number and date.\n\n+ SMPTE linear timecode\n! Bit  Weight  Meaning\nrowspan=17\n! Bit  Weight  Meaning\nrowspan=17\n! Bit  Weight  Meaning\nrowspan=17\n! Bit  Weight  Meaning\nrowspan=17\n! Bit  Value  Meaning\nbgcolor=#ccffff 64 bgcolor=#ccffff 0 rowspan=16 bgcolor=#ccffff Sync word,fixed bitpattern0011 11111111 1101\nbgcolor=#ccffff 65 bgcolor=#ccffff 0\nbgcolor=#ccffff 66 bgcolor=#ccffff 1\nbgcolor=#ccffff 67 bgcolor=#ccffff 1\nbgcolor=#ccffff 68 bgcolor=#ccffff 1\nbgcolor=#ccffff 69 bgcolor=#ccffff 1\nbgcolor=#ccffff 70 bgcolor=#ccffff 1\nbgcolor=#ccffff 71 bgcolor=#ccffff 1\nbgcolor=#ccffff 72 bgcolor=#ccffff 1\nbgcolor=#ccffff 73 bgcolor=#ccffff 1\nbgcolor=#ffcccc 10 bgcolor=#ffcccc D bgcolor=#ffcccc Drop frame flag.\nbgcolor=ffcccc 58 bgcolor=ffcccc BGF1 bgcolor=ffcccc Clock flag\nbgcolor=#ccffff 74 bgcolor=#ccffff 1\nbgcolor=#ccffff 75 bgcolor=#ccffff 1\nbgcolor=#ccffff 76 bgcolor=#ccffff 1\nbgcolor=#ccffff 77 bgcolor=#ccffff 1\nbgcolor=#ccffff 78 bgcolor=#ccffff 0\nbgcolor=#ccffff 79 bgcolor=#ccffff 1\nBULLET::::- Bit 10 is set to 1 if drop frame numbering is in use; frame numbers 0 and 1 are skipped during the first second of every minute, except multiples of 10 minutes. This converts 30 frame/second time code to the 29.97 frame/second NTSC standard.\nBULLET::::- Bit 11, the color framing bit, is set to 1 if the time code is synchronized to a color video signal. The frame number modulo 2 (for NTSC and SECAM) or modulo 4 (for PAL) should be preserved across cuts in order to avoid phase jumps in the chrominance subcarrier.\nBULLET::::- Bits 27, 43, and 59 differ between 25 frame/s time code, and other frame rates (30, 29.97, or 24). The bits are:\nBULLET::::- \"Polarity correction bit\" (bit 59 at 25 frame/s, bit 27 at other rates): this bit is chosen to provide an even number of 0 bits in the whole frame, including the sync code. (Since the frame is an even number of bits long, this implies an even number of 1 bits, and is thus an even parity bit. Since the sync code includes an odd number of 1 bits, it is an odd parity bit over the data.) This keeps the phase of each frame consistent, so it always starts with a rising edge at the beginning of bit 0. This allows seamless splicing of different time codes, and lets it be more easily read with an oscilloscope.\nBULLET::::- \"Binary group flag\" bits BGF0 and BGF2 (bits 27 and 43 at 25 frame/s, bits 43 and 59 at other rates): these indicate the format of the user bits. Both 0 indicates no (or unspecified) format. Only BGF0 set indicates four 8-bit characters (transmitted little-endian). The combinations with BGF2 set are reserved.\nBULLET::::- Bit 58, unused in earlier versions of the specification, is now defined as \"binary group flag 1\" and indicates that the time code is synchronized to an external clock. if zero, the time origin is arbitrary.\nBULLET::::- The sync pattern in bits 64 through 79 includes 12 consecutive 1 bits, which cannot appear anywhere else in the time code. Assuming all user bits are set to 1, the longest run of 1 bits that can appear elsewhere in the time code is 10, bits 9 to 18 inclusive.\nBULLET::::- The sync pattern is preceded by 00 and followed by 01. This is used to determine whether an audio tape is running forward or backward.\n\nBULLET::::- Vertical interval timecode\nBULLET::::- Burnt-in timecode\nBULLET::::- MIDI timecode\nBULLET::::- CTL timecode\nBULLET::::- AES-EBU embedded timecode\nBULLET::::- Rewritable consumer timecode\nBULLET::::- VTR\nBULLET::::- Manchester Code\nBULLET::::- Biphase Mark Code\n\nBULLET::::- LGPL library to en/decode LTC in software\n"}
{"id": "18381", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18381", "title": "John William Strutt, 3rd Baron Rayleigh", "text": "John William Strutt, 3rd Baron Rayleigh\n\nJohn William Strutt, 3rd Baron Rayleigh, (; 12 November 1842 – 30 June 1919), was a British scientist who made extensive contributions to both theoretical and experimental physics. He spent all of his academic career at the University of Cambridge. Among many honours, he received the 1904 Nobel Prize in Physics \"for his investigations of the densities of the most important gases and for his discovery of argon in connection with these studies.\" He served as President of the Royal Society from 1905 to 1908 and as Chancellor of the University of Cambridge from 1908 to 1919.\n\nRayleigh provided the first theoretical treatment of the elastic scattering of light by particles much smaller than the light's wavelength, a phenomenon now known as \"Rayleigh scattering\", which notably explains why the sky is blue. He studied and described transverse surface waves in solids, now known as \"Rayleigh waves\". He contributed extensively to fluid dynamics, with concepts such as the Rayleigh number (a dimensionless number associated with natural convection), Rayleigh flow, the Rayleigh–Taylor instability, and Rayleigh's criterion for the stability of Taylor–Couette flow. He also formulated the circulation theory of aerodynamic lift. In optics, Rayleigh proposed a well known criterion for angular resolution. His derivation of the Rayleigh–Jeans law for classical black-body radiation later played an important role in birth of quantum mechanics (see Ultraviolet catastrophe). Rayleigh's textbook \"The Theory of Sound\" (1877) is still used today by acousticians and engineers.\n\nStrutt was born on 12 November 1842 at Langford Grove in Maldon, Essex. In his early years he suffered from frailty and poor health. He attended Eton College and Harrow School (each for only a short period), before going on to the University of Cambridge in 1861 where he studied mathematics at Trinity College, Cambridge. He obtained a Bachelor of Arts degree (Senior Wrangler and 1st Smith's Prize) in 1865, and a Master of Arts in 1868. He was subsequently elected to a Fellowship of Trinity. He held the post until his marriage to Evelyn Balfour, daughter of James Maitland Balfour, in 1871. He had three sons with her. In 1873, on the death of his father, John Strutt, 2nd Baron Rayleigh, he inherited the Barony of Rayleigh.\n\nHe was the second Cavendish Professor of Physics at the University of Cambridge (following James Clerk Maxwell), from 1879 to 1884. He first described dynamic soaring by seabirds in 1883, in the British journal \"Nature\". From 1887 to 1905 he was Professor of Natural Philosophy at the Royal Institution.\n\nAround the year 1900 Rayleigh developed the \"duplex\" (combination of two) theory of human sound localisation using two binaural cues, interaural phase difference (IPD) and interaural level difference (ILD) (based on analysis of a spherical head with no external pinnae). The theory posits that we use two primary cues for sound lateralisation, using the difference in the phases of sinusoidal components of the sound and the difference in amplitude (level) between the two ears.\n\nDuring the First World War, he was president of the government's \"Advisory Committee for Aeronautics\", which was located at the National Physical Laboratory, and chaired by Richard Glazebrook. \n\nIn 1919, Rayleigh served as President of the Society for Psychical Research. As an advocate that simplicity and theory be part of the scientific method, Rayleigh argued for the principle of similitude.\n\nRayleigh was elected Fellow of the Royal Society on 12 June 1873, and served as president of the Royal Society from 1905 to 1908. From time to time Rayleigh participated in the House of Lords; however, he spoke up only if politics attempted to become involved in science.\n\nHe died on 30 June 1919, at his home in Witham, Essex. He was succeeded, as the 4th Lord Rayleigh, by his son Robert John Strutt, another well-known physicist. Lord Rayleigh was buried in the graveyard of All Saints' Church in Terling in Essex.\n\nRayleigh was an Anglican. Though he did not write about the relationship of science and religion, he retained a personal interest in spiritual matters. When his scientific papers were to be published in a collection by the Cambridge University Press, Strutt wanted to include a religious quotation from the Bible, but he was discouraged from doing so, as he later reported:\n\nStill, he had his wish and the quotation was printed in the five-volume collection of scientific papers.\n\nIn a letter to a family member, he wrote about his rejection of materialism and spoke of Jesus Christ as a moral teacher:\n\nHe held an interest in parapsychology and was an early member of the Society for Psychical Research (SPR). He was not convinced of spiritualism but remained open to the possibility of supernatural phenomena. Rayleigh was the president of the SPR in 1919. He gave a presidential address in the year of his death but did not come to any definite conclusions.\n\nThe lunar crater \"Rayleigh\" as well as the Martian crater \"Rayleigh\" were named in his honour. The asteroid 22740 Rayleigh was named after him on 1 June 2007. A type of surface waves are known as Rayleigh waves. The rayl, a unit of specific acoustic impedance, is also named for him. Rayleigh was also awarded with (in chronological order):\nBULLET::::- Smith's Prize (1864)\nBULLET::::- Royal Medal (1882)\nBULLET::::- Matteucci Medal (1894)\nBULLET::::- Member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences (1897)\nBULLET::::- Copley Medal (1899)\nBULLET::::- Nobel Prize in Physics (1904)\nBULLET::::- Elliott Cresson Medal (1913)\nBULLET::::- Rumford Medal (1914)\n\nLord Rayleigh was among the original recipients of the Order of Merit (OM) in the 1902 Coronation Honours list published on 26 June 1902, and received the order from King Edward VII at Buckingham Palace on 8 August 1902.\n\nHe received the degree of \"Doctor mathematicae (honoris causa)\" from the Royal Frederick University on 6 September 1902, when they celebrated the centennial of the birth of mathematician Niels Henrik Abel.\n\nSir William Ramsay, his co-worker in the investigation to discover Argon described Rayleigh as \"the greatest man alive\" while speaking to Lady Ramsay during his last illness.\n\nH. M. Hyndman said of Rayleigh that \"no man ever showed less consciousness of great genius\".\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Theory of Sound vol. I\" (London : Macmillan, 1877, 1894) (alternative link: Bibliothèque Nationale de France OR (Cambridge: University Press, reissued 2011, )\nBULLET::::- \"The Theory of Sound vol.II\" (London : Macmillan, 1878, 1896) (alternative link: Bibliothèque Nationale de France) OR (Cambridge: University Press, reissued 2011, )\nBULLET::::- \"Scientific papers (Vol. 1: 1869–1881)\" (Cambridge : University Press, 1899–1920, reissued by the publisher 2011, )\nBULLET::::- \"Scientific papers (Vol. 2: 1881–1887)\" (Cambridge : University Press, 1899–1920, reissued by the publisher 2011, )\nBULLET::::- \"Scientific papers (Vol. 3: 1887–1892)\" (Cambridge : University Press, 1899–1920, reissued by the publisher 2011, )\nBULLET::::- \"Scientific papers (Vol. 4: 1892–1901)\" (Cambridge : University Press, 1899–1920, reissued by the publisher 2011, )\nBULLET::::- \"Scientific papers (Vol. 5: 1902–1910)\" (Cambridge : University Press, 1899–1920, reissued by the publisher 2011, )\nBULLET::::- \"Scientific papers (Vol. 6: 1911–1919)\" (Cambridge : University Press, 1899–1920, reissued by the publisher 2011, )\n\nBULLET::::- About John William Strutt\nBULLET::::- Lord Rayleigh – the Last of the Great Victorian Polymaths, GEC Review, Volume 7, No. 3, 1992\n"}
{"id": "18382", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18382", "title": "Lunisolar calendar", "text": "Lunisolar calendar\n\nA lunisolar calendar is a calendar in many cultures whose date indicates both the Moon phase and the time of the solar year. If the solar year is defined as a tropical year, then a lunisolar calendar will give an indication of the season;if it is taken as a sidereal year, then the calendar will predict the constellation near which the full moon may occur.As with all calendars which divide the year into months there is an additional requirement that the year have a whole number of months. In this case ordinary years consist of twelve months but every second or third year is an embolismic year, which adds a thirteenth intercalary, embolismic, or leap month.\n\nThe Hebrew, Jain, Buddhist, Hindu and Kurdish as well as the traditional Burmese, Chinese, Japanese, Tibetan, Vietnamese, Mongolian and Korean calendars (in the east Asian cultural sphere), plus the ancient Hellenic, Coligny, and Babylonian calendars are all lunisolar. Also, some of the ancient pre-Islamic calendars in south Arabia followed a lunisolar system. The Chinese, Coligny and\nHebrew lunisolar calendars track more or less the tropical year whereas the Buddhist and Hindu lunisolar calendars track the sidereal year. Therefore, the first three give an idea of the seasons whereas the last two give an idea of the position among the constellations of the full moon. The Tibetan calendar was influenced by both the Chinese and Buddhist calendars. The Germanic peoples also used a lunisolar calendar before their conversion to Christianity.\n\nThe Islamic calendar is lunar, but not a lunisolar calendar because its date is not related to the Sun. The civil versions of the Julian and Gregorian calendars are solar, because their dates do not indicate the Moon phase — however, both the Gregorian and Julian calendars include undated lunar calendars that allow them to calculate the Christian celebration of Easter, so both are lunisolar calendars in that respect.\n\nA rough idea of the frequency of the intercalary or leap month in all lunisolar calendars can be obtained by the following calculation, using approximate lengths of months and years in days:\nBULLET::::- Year: 365.25, Month: 29.53\nBULLET::::- 365.25/(12 × 29.53) = 1.0307\nBULLET::::- 1/0.0307 = 32.57 common months between leap months\nBULLET::::- 32.57/12 = 2.7 common years between leap years\n\nIntercalation of leap months is frequently controlled by the \"epact\", which is the difference between the lunar and solar years (approximately 11 days). The Metonic cycle, used in the Hebrew calendar and the Julian and Gregorian ecclesiastical calendars, adds seven months during every nineteen-year period. The classic Metonic cycle can be reproduced by assigning an initial epact value of 1 to the last year of the cycle and incrementing by 11 each year. Between the last year of one cycle and the first year of the next the increment is 12. This adjustment, the \"saltus lunae\", causes the epacts to repeat every 19 years. When the epact goes above 29 an intercalary month is added and 30 is subtracted. The intercalary years are numbers 3, 6, 8, 11, 14, 17 and 19. Both the Hebrew calendar and the Julian calendar use this sequence.\n\nThe Buddhist and Hebrew calendars restrict the leap month to a single month of the year; the number of common months between leap months is, therefore, usually 36, but occasionally only 24 months. Because the Chinese and Hindu lunisolar calendars allow the leap month to occur after or before (respectively) any month but use the true motion of the Sun, their leap months do not usually occur within a couple of months of perihelion, when the apparent speed of the Sun along the ecliptic is fastest (now about 3 January). This increases the usual number of common months between leap months to roughly 34 months when a doublet of common years occurs, while reducing the number to about 29 months when only a common singleton occurs.\n\nAn alternative way of dealing with the fact that a solar year does not contain an integer number of months is by including uncounted time in the year that does not belong to any month. Some Coast Salish peoples used a calendar of this kind. For instance, the Chehalis began their count of lunar months from the arrival of spawning chinook salmon (in Gregorian calendar October), and counted 10 months, leaving an uncounted period until the next chinook salmon run.\n\nThe Gregorian calendar has a lunisolar calendar, which is used to determine the date of Easter. The rules are in the Computus.\n\nThe following is a list of lunisolar calendars:\n\nBULLET::::- Assamese calendar\nBULLET::::- Attic calendar\nBULLET::::- Babylonian calendar\nBULLET::::- Bengali calendar\nBULLET::::- Chinese calendar\nBULLET::::- Chula Sakarat\nBULLET::::- Egyptian calendar\nBULLET::::- Gaulish calendar\nBULLET::::- Hebrew calendar\nBULLET::::- Inca Empire\nBULLET::::- Jain calendar\nBULLET::::- Japanese calendar\nBULLET::::- Korean calendar\nBULLET::::- Ancient Macedonian calendar\nBULLET::::- Muisca calendar\nBULLET::::- Nisg̱a'a\nBULLET::::- old Eastern Ojibwe calendar\nBULLET::::- Pyu calendar\nBULLET::::- Thai lunar calendar\nBULLET::::- Tibetan calendar\nBULLET::::- Umma calendar\nBULLET::::- Vietnamese calendar\n\nBULLET::::- Hebrew calendar\nBULLET::::- Tamil calendar\nBULLET::::- Jain calendar\nBULLET::::- Hindu calendar\nBULLET::::- Computus Easter rule for Julian and Gregorian calendars.\nBULLET::::- Intercalation\nBULLET::::- Metonic cycle\nBULLET::::- Callippic cycle\nBULLET::::- Calendar reform\nBULLET::::- Islamic calendar\nBULLET::::- Rune calendar\nBULLET::::- Solunar theory\nBULLET::::- Thai calendar\n\n\nBULLET::::- Introduction to Calendars, US Naval Observatory, Astronomical Applications Department.\nBULLET::::- Lunisolar calendar year 2017-2018 (by Serge Bièvre)\nBULLET::::- Lunisolar Calendar\nBULLET::::- Luni-Solar Calendar\nBULLET::::- Calendar studies\nBULLET::::- Model of lunisolar calendar based on observation of the Sun and Moon position\n"}
{"id": "18383", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18383", "title": "Leonids", "text": "Leonids\n\nThe Leonids ( ) are a prolific meteor shower associated with the comet Tempel–Tuttle, which are also known for their spectacular meteor storms that occur about every 33 years. The Leonids get their name from the location of their radiant in the constellation Leo: the meteors appear to radiate from that point in the sky. Their proper Greek name should be Leon\"t\"ids (Λεοντίδαι, \"Leontídai\"), but the word was initially constructed as a Greek/Latin hybrid and it has been used since. They peak in the month of November.\n\nEarth moves through the meteoroid stream of particles left from the passages of a comet. The stream comprises solid particles, known as meteoroids, ejected by the comet as its frozen gases evaporate under the heat of the Sun when it is close enough – typically closer than Jupiter's orbit. The Leonids are a fast moving stream which encounter the path of Earth and impact at 72 km/s. Larger Leonids which are about 10 mm across have a mass of half a gram and are known for generating bright (apparent magnitude −1.5) meteors. An annual Leonid shower may deposit 12 or 13 tons of particles across the entire planet.\n\nThe meteoroids left by the comet are organized in trails in orbits similar to—though different from—that of the comet. They are differentially disturbed by the planets, in particular Jupiter and to a lesser extent by radiation pressure from the sun, the Poynting–Robertson effect, and the Yarkovsky effect. These trails of meteoroids cause meteor showers when Earth encounters them. Old trails are spatially not dense and compose the meteor shower with a few meteors per minute. In the case of the Leonids, that tends to peak around November 18, but some are spread through several days on either side and the specific peak changes every year. Conversely, young trails are spatially very dense and the cause of meteor outbursts when the Earth enters one. The Leonids also produce meteor storms (large outbursts) about every 33 years, which exceed 1,000 meteors per hour, in contrast to the sporadic background (5 to 8 meteors per hour) and the shower background (several per hour).\n\nThe Leonids are famous because their meteor showers, or storms, can be among the most spectacular. Because of the storm of 1833 and the recent developments in scientific thought of the time (see for example the identification of Halley's Comet), the Leonids have had a major effect on the development of the scientific study of meteors, which had previously been thought to be atmospheric phenomena. Although it has been suggested the Leonid meteor shower and storms have been noted in ancient times, it was the meteor storm of 1833 that broke into people's modern day awareness – it was of truly superlative strength. One estimate of the peak rate is over one hundred thousand meteors an hour, but another, done as the storm abated, estimated in excess of 240,000 meteors during the nine hours of the storm, over the entire region of North America east of the Rocky Mountains.\n\nIt was marked by several nations of Native Americans: the Cheyenne established a peace treaty and the Lakota calendar was reset. Abolitionists including Harriet Tubman and Frederick Douglass as well as slave-owners took note and others. The New York Evening Post carried a series of articles on the event including reports from Canada to Jamaica, it made news in several states beyond New York and though it appeared in North America was talked about in Europe. The journalism of the event tended to rise above the partisan debates of the time and reviewed facts as they could be sought out. Abraham Lincoln commented on it years later. Near Independence, Missouri, in Clay County, a refugee Mormon community watched the meteor shower on the banks of the Missouri River after having been driven from their homes by local settlers. The founder and first leader of Mormonism, Joseph Smith, afterwards noted in his journal his belief that this event was a literal fulfillment of the word of God and a sure sign that the coming of Christ was close at hand. Though it was noted in the midwest and eastern areas it was also noted in the far west.\n\nDenison Olmsted explained the event most accurately. After spending the last weeks of 1833 collecting information, he presented his findings in January 1834 to the \"American Journal of Science and Arts\", published in January–April 1834, and January 1836. He noted the shower was of short duration and was not seen in Europe, and that the meteors radiated from a point in the constellation of Leo and he speculated the meteors had originated from a cloud of particles in space. Accounts of the 1866 repeat of the Leonids counted hundreds per minute/a few thousand per hr in Europe. The Leonids were again seen in 1867, when moonlight reduced the rates to 1000 per hour. Another strong appearance of the Leonids in 1868 reached an intensity of 1000 per hour in dark skies. It was in 1866–67 that information on Comet Tempel-Tuttle was gathered pointing it out as the source of the meteor shower. When the storms failed to return in 1899, it was generally thought that the dust had moved on and storms were a thing of the past.\n\nThen, in 1966, a spectacular storm was seen over the Americas. Historical notes were gathered thus noting the Leonids back to 900AD. Radar studies showed the 1966 storm included a relatively high percentage of smaller particles while 1965's lower activity had a much higher proportion of larger particles. In 1981 Donald K. Yeomans of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory reviewed the history of meteor showers for the Leonids and the history of the dynamic orbit of Comet Tempel-Tuttle. A graph from it was adapted and re-published in Sky and Telescope. It showed relative positions of the Earth and Tempel-Tuttle and marks where Earth encountered dense dust. This showed that the meteoroids are mostly behind and outside the path of the comet, but paths of the Earth through the cloud of particles resulting in powerful storms were very near paths of nearly no activity. But overall the 1998 Leonids were in a favorable position so interest was rising.\n\nLeading up to the 1998 return, an airborne observing campaign was organized to mobilize modern observing techniques by Peter Jenniskens at NASA Ames Research Center. There were also efforts to observe impacts of meteoroids, as an example of transient lunar phenomenon, on the Moon in 1999. A particular reason to observe the Moon is that our vantage from a location on Earth sees only meteors coming into the atmosphere relatively close to us while impacts on the Moon would be visible from across the Moon in a single view. The sodium tail of the Moon tripled just after the 1998 Leonid shower which was composed of larger meteoroids (which in the case of the Earth was witnessed as fireballs.) However, in 1999 the sodium tail of the Moon did not change from the Leonid impacts.\n\nResearch by Kondrat'eva, Reznikov and colleagues at Kazan University had shown how meteor storms could be accurately predicted, but for some years the worldwide meteor community remained largely unaware of these results. The work of David J. Asher, Armagh Observatory and Robert H. McNaught, Siding Spring Observatory and independently by Esko Lyytinen in 1999, following on from the Kazan research, is considered by most meteor experts as the breakthrough in modern analysis of meteor storms. Whereas previously it was hazardous to guess if there would be a storm or little activity, the predictions of Asher and McNaught timed bursts in activity down to ten minutes by narrowing down the clouds of particles to individual streams from each passage of the comet, and their trajectories amended by subsequent passage near planets. However, whether a specific meteoroid trail will be primarily composed of small or large particles, and thus the relative brightness of the meteors, was not understood. But McNaught did extend the work to examine the placement of the Moon with trails and saw a large chance of a storm impacting in 1999 from a trail while there were less direct impacts from trails in 2000 and 2001 (successive contact with trails through 2006 showed no hits.)\n\nViewing campaigns resulted in spectacular footage from the 1999, 2001, and 2002 storms which produced up to 3,000 Leonid meteors per hour. Predictions for the Moon's Leonid impacts also noted that in 2000 the side of the Moon facing the stream was away from the Earth, but that impacts should be in number enough to raise a cloud of particles kicked off the Moon which could cause a detectable increase in the sodium tail of the Moon. Research using the explanation of meteor trails/streams have explained the storms of the past. The 1833 storm was not due to the recent passage of the comet, but from a direct impact with the previous 1800 dust trail. The meteoroids from the 1733 passage of Comet Tempel-Tuttle resulted in the 1866 storm and the 1966 storm was from the 1899 passage of the comet. The double spikes in Leonid activity in 2001 and in 2002 were due to the passage of the comet's dust ejected in 1767 and 1866. This ground breaking work was soon applied to other meteor showers – for example the 2004 June Bootids. Peter Jenniskens has published predictions for the next 50 years. However, a close encounter with Jupiter is expected to perturb the comet's path, and many streams, making storms of historic magnitude unlikely for many decades. Recent work tries to take into account the roles of differences in parent bodies and the specifics of their orbits, ejection velocities off the solid mass of the core of a comet, radiation pressure from the sun, the Poynting–Robertson effect, and the Yarkovsky effect on the particles of different sizes and rates of rotation to explain differences between meteor showers in terms of being predominantly fireballs or small meteors.\n\n! width=\"10%\"  Year\n! width=\"15%\"  Leonids active between\n! width=\"65%\"  Peak of shower\n! width=\"10%\"  ZHR\nPredictions until the end of the 21st century have been published by Mikhail Maslov.\n\nTwo appearances of the Leonids frame the story of the novel Blood Meridian by Cormac McCarthy.\n\nThe 1833 shower is referenced in the fourth section of William Faulkner's short story \"The Bear,\" as published in his novel Go Down, Moses. As Ike reads the entries chronicling the slaves owned by his family, the recording for Tomy lists her death as June 1833, \"Yr stars fell.\"\n\nIn \"Pokémon Omega Ruby and Alpha Sapphire\", the Leonid is referenced as the Litleonids meteor shower (named after the Pokémon species Litleo). This has a big impact in an event in its post game named \"The Delta Episode\" in which one of the meteors contain Deoxys.\n\nThe shower is part of the plot in the first episode of The Brokenwood Mysteries, a New Zealand crime series.\n\nIn season 3, Episode 8 of The Big Bang Theory, Leonard, Howard and Raj are off camping to observe the Leonid meteor shower, eat cannabis laced cookies, and end up missing the shower altogether.\n\nBULLET::::- List of meteor showers\nBULLET::::- \"Stars Fell on Alabama\", based on the 1833 Leonid shower\n\n\nBULLET::::- The Discovery of the Perseid Meteors (after the Leonids and) Prior to 1837, nobody realized the Perseids were an annual event, by Mark Littmann\nBULLET::::- Lunar Leonids: Encounters of the Moon with Leonid dust trails by Robert H. McNaught\nBULLET::::- NASA: Background facts on meteors and meteor showers\nBULLET::::- NASA: Estimate the best viewing times for your part of the world\nBULLET::::- How to hear the Leonid Meteor Shower\nBULLET::::- Observatorio ARVAL – The Leonid Meteors\nBULLET::::- Animation of the Leonid Meteor Shower at shadow&substance.com\n"}
{"id": "18384", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18384", "title": "Labarum", "text": "Labarum\n\nThe labarum () was a \"vexillum\" (military standard) that displayed the \"Chi-Rho\" symbol ☧, a christogram formed from the first two Greek letters of the word \"Christ\" (, or Χριστός) — \"Chi\" (χ) and \"Rho\" (ρ). It was first used by the Roman emperor Constantine the Great. Since the vexillum consisted of a flag suspended from the crossbar of a cross, it was ideally suited to symbolize the crucifixion of Christ.\n\nAncient sources draw an unambiguous distinction between the two terms \"labarum\" and \"Chi-Rho\", even though later usage sometimes regards the two as synonyms. The name labarum was applied both to the original standard used by Constantine the Great and to the many standards produced in imitation of it in the Late Antique world, and subsequently.\n\nBeyond its derivation from Latin \"labarum\", the etymology of the word is unclear. The Oxford English Dictionary offers no further derivation from within Latin. Some derive it from Latin /labāre/ 'to totter, to waver' (in the sense of the \"waving\" of a flag in the breeze) or \"laureum [vexillum]\" (\"laurel standard\"). An origin as a loan into Latin from a Celtic language or Basque has also been postulated. There is a traditional Basque symbol called the lauburu; though the name is only attested from the 19th century onwards the motif occurs in engravings dating as early as the 2nd century AD.\n\nOn the evening of October 27, 312 AD, with his army preparing for the Battle of the Milvian Bridge, the emperor Constantine I claimed to have had a vision which led him to believe he was fighting under the protection of the Christian God.\n\nLactantius states that, in the night before the battle, Constantine was commanded in a dream to \"delineate the heavenly sign on the shields of his soldiers\". Obeying this command, \"he marked on their shields the letter X, with a perpendicular line drawn through it and turned round thus at the top, being the cipher of Christ\". Having had their shields marked in this fashion, Constantine's troops readied themselves for battle.\n\nFrom Eusebius, two accounts of a battle survive. The first, shorter one in the \"Ecclesiastical History\" leaves no doubt that God helped Constantine but does not mention any vision. In his later \"Life of Constantine\", Eusebius gives a detailed account of a vision and stresses that he had heard the story from the emperor himself. According to this version, Constantine with his army was marching somewhere (Eusebius does not specify the actual location of the event, but it clearly is not in the camp at Rome) when he looked up to the sun and saw a cross of light above it, and with it the Greek words \"Ἐν Τούτῳ Νίκα\". The traditionally employed Latin translation of the Greek is \"in hoc signo vinces\"— literally \"In this sign, you will conquer.\" However, a direct translation from the original Greek text of Eusebius into English gives the phrase \"By this, conquer!\"\n\nAt first he was unsure of the meaning of the apparition, but the following night he had a dream in which Christ explained to him that he should use the sign against his enemies. Eusebius then continues to describe the labarum, the military standard used by Constantine in his later wars against Licinius, showing the Chi-Rho sign.\n\nThose two accounts have been merged in popular notion into Constantine seeing the Chi-Rho sign on the evening before the battle. Both authors agree that the sign was not readily understandable as denoting Christ, which corresponds with the fact that there is no certain evidence of the use of the letters chi and rho as a Christian sign before Constantine. Its first appearance is on a Constantinian silver coin from c. 317, which proves that Constantine did use the sign at that time. He made extensive use of the Chi-Rho and the labarum later in the conflict with Licinius.\n\nThe vision has been interpreted in a solar context (e.g. as a solar halo phenomenon), which would have been reshaped to fit with the Christian beliefs of the later Constantine.\n\nAn alternate explanation of the intersecting celestial symbol has been advanced by George Latura, which claims that Plato's visible god in \"Timaeus\" is in fact the intersection of the Milky Way and the Zodiacal Light, a rare apparition important to pagan beliefs that Christian bishops reinvented as a Christian symbol.\n\n\"A Description of the Standard of the Cross, which the Romans now call the Labarum.\"\n\"Now it was made in the following manner. A long spear, overlaid with gold, formed the figure of the cross by means of a transverse bar laid over it. On the top of the whole was fixed a wreath of gold and precious stones; and within this, the symbol of the Saviour’s name, two letters indicating the name of Christ by means of its initial characters, the letter P being intersected by X in its centre: and these letters the emperor was in the habit of wearing on his helmet at a later period. From the cross-bar of the spear was suspended a cloth, a royal piece, covered with a profuse embroidery of most brilliant precious stones; and which, being also richly interlaced with gold, presented an indescribable degree of beauty to the beholder. This banner was of a square form, and the upright staff, whose lower section was of great length, of the pious emperor and his children on its upper part, beneath the trophy of the cross, and immediately above the embroidered banner.\"\n\n\"The emperor constantly made use of this sign of salvation as a safeguard against every adverse and hostile power, and commanded that others similar to it should be carried at the head of all his armies.\"\n\nThe labarum does not appear on any of several standards depicted on the Arch of Constantine, which was erected just three years after the battle. If Eusebius' oath-confirmed account of Constantine's vision and the role it played in his victory and conversion can be trusted, then a grand opportunity for the kind of political propaganda that the Arch was built to present was missed. Many historians have argued that in the early years after the battle, the Emperor had not yet decided to give clear public support to Christianity, whether from a lack of personal faith or because of fear of religious friction. The arch's inscription does say that the Emperor had saved the \"res publica\" (\"by greatness of mind and by instinct [or impulse] of divinity\"). Continuing the iconography of his predecessors, Constantine's coinage at the time was inscribed with solar symbolism, interpreted as representing \"Sol Invictus\" (the Unconquered Sun), Helios, Apollo, or Mithras, but in 325 and thereafter the coinage ceases to be explicitly pagan, and Sol Invictus disappears. And although Eusebius' \"Historia Ecclesiae\" further reports that Constantine had a statue of himself \"holding the sign of the Savior [the cross] in his right hand\" erected after his victorious entry into Rome, there are no other reports to confirm such a monument.\n\nHistorians still dispute whether Constantine was the first Christian Emperor to support a peaceful transition to Christianity during his rule, or an undecided pagan believer until middle age, and also how strongly influenced he was in his political-religious decisions by his Christian mother St. Helena.\n\nAs for the labarum itself, there is little evidence for its use before 317. In the course of Constantine's second war against Licinius in 324, the latter developed a superstitious dread of Constantine's standard. During the attack of Constantine's troops at the Battle of Adrianople the guard of the labarum standard were directed to move it to any part of the field where his soldiers seemed to be faltering. The appearance of this talismanic object appeared to embolden Constantine's troops and dismay those of Licinius. At the final battle of the war, the Battle of Chrysopolis, Licinius, though prominently displaying the images of Rome's pagan pantheon on his own battle line, forbade his troops from actively attacking the labarum, or even looking at it directly.\n\nConstantine felt that both Licinius and Arius were agents of Satan, and associated them with the serpent described in the Book of Revelation (). Constantine represented Licinius as a snake on his coins.\n\nEusebius stated that in addition to the singular labarum of Constantine, other similar standards (labara) were issued to the Roman army. This is confirmed by the two labara depicted being held by a soldier on a coin of Vetranio (illustrated) dating from 350.\n\nA later Byzantine manuscript indicates that a jewelled labarum standard believed to have been that of Constantine was preserved for centuries, as an object of great veneration, in the imperial treasury at Constantinople. The labarum, with minor variations in its form, was widely used by the Christian Roman emperors who followed Constantine.\n\nA miniature version of the labarum became part of the imperial regalia of Byzantine rulers, who were often depicted carrying it in their right hands.\n\nThe term \"labarum\" can be generally applied to any ecclesiastical banner, such as those carried in religious processions.\n\n\"The Holy Lavaro\" were a set of early national Greek flags, blessed by the Greek Orthodox Church. Under these banners the Greeks united throughout the Greek Revolution (1821), a war of liberation waged against the Ottoman Empire.\n\nLabarum also gives its name (Labaro) to a suburb of Rome adjacent to Prima Porta, one of the sites where the 'Vision of Constantine' is placed by tradition.\n\nBULLET::::- Gonfalone\nBULLET::::- Christian symbolism\nBULLET::::- Constantine I and Christianity\nBULLET::::- Cantabrian Labarum\nBULLET::::- Arch of Constantine, triumphal arch to the victory at Milvian Bridge.\nBULLET::::- Christianity\nBULLET::::- Constantinian shift\nBULLET::::- Khorugv\nBULLET::::- Michaelion\nBULLET::::- XI monogram\n\nBULLET::::- Grabar, \"Christian Iconography: A Study of its Origins\" (Princeton University Press) 1968:165ff\nBULLET::::- Grant, Michael (1993), The Emperor Constantine, London.\nBULLET::::- R. Grosse, \"Labarum\", \"Realencyclopädie der klassischen Altertumswissenschaft\" vol. 12, pt 1(Stuttgart) 1924:240-42.\nBULLET::::- H. Grégoire, \"L'étymologie de 'Labarum'\" \"Byzantion\" 4 (1929:477-82).\nBULLET::::- J. Harries (2012) \"Imperial Rome AD 284 to 363\", Ch. 5: \"The Victory of Constantine, AD 311–37\", Edinburgh University Press.\nBULLET::::- A. Lipinsky, \"Labarum\" \"Lexikon der christlichen Ikonographie\" 3 (Rome:1970)\nBULLET::::- Lieu, S.N.C and Montserrat, D. (Ed.s) (1996), From Constantine to Julian, London.\nBULLET::::- Odahl, C.M., (2004) \"Constantine and the Christian Empire,\" Routledge 2004.\nBULLET::::- Smith, J.H., (1971) \"Constantine the Great\", Hamilton,\nBULLET::::- Stephenson, P., (2009) \"Constantine: Unconquered Emperor, Christian Victor\", Quercus, London.\n"}
{"id": "18385", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18385", "title": "Lactantius", "text": "Lactantius\n\nLucius Caecilius Firmianus Lactantius (c. 250 – c. 325) was an early Christian author who became an advisor to the first Christian Roman emperor, Constantine I, guiding his religious policy as it developed, and a tutor to his son Crispus. His most important work is the \"Institutiones Divinae\" (\"The Divine Institutes\"), an apologetic treatise intended to establish the reasonableness and truth of Christianity to pagan critics.\n\nLactantius, a Latin-speaking North African of Berber origin, was not born into a Christian family. He was a pupil of Arnobius who taught at Sicca Veneria, an important city in Numidia. In his early life, he taught rhetoric in his native town, which may have been Cirta in Numidia, where an inscription mentions a certain \"L. Caecilius Firmianus\".\n\nLactantius had a successful public career at first. At the request of the Roman Emperor Diocletian, he became an official professor of rhetoric in Nicomedia; the voyage from Africa is described in his poem \"Hodoeporicum\" (now lost). There, he associated in the imperial circle with the administrator and polemicist Sossianus Hierocles and the pagan philosopher Porphyry; he first met Constantine, and Galerius, whom he cast as villain in the persecutions. Having converted to Christianity, he resigned his post before Diocletian's purging of Christians from his immediate staff and before the publication of Diocletian's first \"Edict against the Christians\" (February 24, 303).\n\nAs a Latin \"rhetor\" in a Greek city, he subsequently lived in poverty according to Saint Jerome and eked out a living by writing until Constantine I became his patron. The persecution forced him to leave Nicomedia, perhaps re-locating to North Africa. The Emperor Constantine appointed the elderly Lactantius Latin tutor to his son Crispus in 309-310 who was probably 10-15 years old at the time. Lactantius followed Crispus to Trier in 317, when Crispus was made Caesar (lesser co-emperor) and sent to the city. Crispus was put to death by order of his father Constantine I in 326, but when Lactantius died and under what circumstances are unknown.\n\nLike so many of the early Christian authors, Lactantius depended on classical models. The early humanists called him the \"Christian Cicero\" (\"Cicero Christianus\"). A translator of the \"Divine Institutes\" wrote: \"Lactantius has always held a very high place among the Christian Fathers, not only on account of the subject-matter of his writings, but also on account of the varied erudition, the sweetness of expression, and the grace and elegance of style, by which they are characterized.\"\n\nHe wrote apologetic works explaining Christianity in terms that would be palatable to educated people who still practiced the traditional religions of the Empire. He defended Christian beliefs against the criticisms of Hellenistic philosophers. His \"Divinae Institutiones\" (\"Divine Institutes\") were an early example of a systematic presentation of Christian thought.\n\nHe was considered somewhat heretical after his death, but Renaissance humanists took a renewed interest in him, more for his elaborately rhetorical Latin style than for his theology. His works were copied in manuscript several times in the 15th century and were first printed in 1465 by the Germans Arnold Pannartz and Konrad Sweynheim at the Abbey of Subiaco. This edition was the first book printed in Italy to have a date of printing, as well as the first use of a Greek alphabet font anywhere, which was apparently produced in the course of printing, as the early pages leave Greek text blank. It was probably the fourth book ever printed in Italy. A copy of this edition was sold at auction in 2000 for more than $1 million.\n\nLike many writers in the first few centuries of the early church, Lactantius took a premillennialist view, holding that the second coming of Christ will precede a millennium or a thousand-year reign of Christ on earth. According to Charles E. Hill, \"With Lactantius in the early fourth century we see a determined attempt to revive a more “genuine” form of chiliasm.\" Lactantius quoted the Sibyls extensively (although the Sibylline Oracles are now known to be pseudepigrapha). Book VII of \"The Divine Institutes\" indicates a familiarity with Jewish, Christian, Egyptian and Iranian apocalyptic material.\n\nNone of the fathers thus far had been more verbose on the subject of the millennial kingdom than Lactantius or more particular in describing the times and events preceding and following. He held to the literalist interpretation of the millennium, that the millennium originates with the second advent of Christ and marks the destruction of the wicked, the binding of the devil and the raising of the righteous dead.\n\nHe depicted Jesus reigning with the resurrected righteous on this earth during the seventh thousand years prior to the general judgment. In the end, the devil, having been bound during the thousand years, is loosed; the enslaved nations rebel against the righteous, who hide underground until the hosts, attacking the Holy City, are overwhelmed by fire and brimstone and mutual slaughter and buried altogether by an earthquake: rather unnecessarily, it would seem, since the wicked are thereupon raised again to be sent into eternal punishment. Next, God renews the earth, after the punishment of the wicked, and the Lord alone is thenceforth worshiped in the renovated earth.\n\nLactantius confidently stated that the beginning of the end would be the fall, or breakup, of the Roman Empire. However, this view fell out of favor with the conversion of Constantine and the improved lot of Christians: \"Many Christians felt that any expectation of the downfall of the empire was as disloyal to God as it was to Rome.\"\n\nAttempts to determine the time of the End were viewed as in contradiction to Acts 1:7: \"It is not for you to know the times or seasons that the Father has established by his own authority,\" and Mark 13:32: \"But of that day or hour, no one knows, neither the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father.\"\n\nBULLET::::- \"De opificio Dei\" (\"The Works of God\"), an apologetic work, written in 303 or 304 during Diocletian's persecution and dedicated to a former pupil, a rich Christian named Demetrianius. The apologetic principles underlying all the works of Lactantius are well set forth in this treatise.\nBULLET::::- \"Institutiones Divinae\" (\"The Divine Institutes\"), written between 303 and 311. This is the most important of the writings of Lactantius. It was \"one of the first books printed in Italy and the first dated Italian imprint.\" As an apologetic treatise, it was intended to point out the futility of pagan beliefs and to establish the reasonableness and truth of Christianity as a response to pagan critics. It was also the first attempt at a systematic exposition of Christian theology in Latin and was planned on a scale sufficiently broad to silence all opponents. Patrick Healy notes, \"The strengths and the weakness of Lactantius are nowhere better shown than in his work. The beauty of the style, the choice and aptness of the terminology, cannot hide the author's lack of grasp on Christian principles and his almost utter ignorance of Scripture.\" Included in this treatise is a quote from the nineteenth of the Odes of Solomon, one of only two known texts of the Odes until the early twentieth century. However, his mockery of the idea of a round earth was criticised by Copernicus as \"childish\".\n\nBULLET::::- An \"Epitome\" of the \"Divine institutes\" is a summary treatment of the subject.\nBULLET::::- \"De ira Dei\" (\"On the Wrath of God\" or \"On the Anger of God\"), directed against the Stoics and Epicureans.\nBULLET::::- \"De mortibus persecutorum\" (\"On the Deaths of the Persecutors\") has an apologetic character but has been treated as a work of history by Christian writers. The point of the work is to describe the deaths of the persecutors of Christians before Lactantius (Nero, Domitian, Decius, Valerian, Aurelian) and the contemporaries of Lactantius himself: Diocletian, Maximian, Galerius, Maximinus. This work is taken as a chronicle of the last and greatest of the persecutions in spite of the moral point that each anecdote has been arranged to tell. Here, Lactantius preserves the story of Constantine's vision of the Chi Rho before his conversion to Christianity. The full text is found in only one manuscript, which bears the title \"Lucii Caecilii liber ad Donatum Confessorem de Mortibus Persecutorum\".\nBULLET::::- Widely attributed to Lactantius although it shows only cryptic signs of Christianity, the poem \"The Phoenix\" (\"de Ave Phoenice\") tells the story of the death and rebirth of that mythical bird. That poem in turn appears to have been the principal source for the famous Anglo-Saxon poem to which the modern title \"The Phoenix\" is given.\nBULLET::::- \"Opera\" (\"Works\") A second edition printed in the monastery at Subiaco, Lazio, is still extant. It remained in Italy until the late eighteenth century, when it was known to be in the library of Prince Vincenzo Maria Carafa in Messina. The Bodleian Library in Oxford, England, acquired this volume in 1817.\n\nBULLET::::- Problem of evil\n\nBULLET::::- Lactantius: links to primary texts and secondary sources\nBULLET::::- Lactantius: text, concordances and frequency list\nBULLET::::- Opera Omnia\nBULLET::::- Bibliography of Lactantius: compiled by Jackson Bryce\nBULLET::::- Lactantius, \"The Divine Institutes\"\n"}
{"id": "18386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18386", "title": "Laconia", "text": "Laconia\n\nLaconia (, \"Lakonía\", ) is a region of Greece in the southeastern part of the Peloponnese peninsula. Its administrative capital is Sparta. The word \"laconic\" is derived from the name of the region by analogy—to speak in a concise way, as the Spartans were reputed by the Athenians to do.\n\nLaconia is bordered by Messenia to the west and Arcadia to the north and is surrounded by the Myrtoan Sea to the east and by the Laconian Gulf and the Mediterranean Sea to the south. It encompasses Cape Malea and Cape Tainaron and a large part of the Mani Peninsula. The Mani Peninsula is in the west region of Lakonia. The islands of Kythira and Antikythera lie to the south, but they administratively belong to the Attica regional unit of islands. The island, Elafonisos, situated between the Laconian mainland and Kythira, is part of Laconia.\n\nThe Eurotas is the longest river in the prefecture. The valley of the Eurotas is predominantly an agricultural region that contains many citrus groves, olive groves, and pasture lands. It is the location of the largest orange production in the Peloponnese and probably in all of Greece. Lakonia, a brand of orange juice, is based in Amykles.\n\nThe main mountain ranges are the Taygetus (2,407 m) in the west and the Parnon (1,961 m) in the northeast. Taygetus, known as Pentadaktylos (\"five-fingers\") throughout the Middle Ages, is west of Sparta and the Eurotas valley. It is the highest mountain in Laconia and the Peloponnese and is mostly covered with pine trees. Two roads join the Messenia and Laconia prefectures: one is a tortuous mountain pass through Taygetus and the other bypasses the mountain via the Mani district to the south.\n\nThe stalactite cave, Dirou, a major tourist attraction, is located south of Areopolis in the southwest of Laconia.\n\nLaconia has a Mediterranean climate with warm winters and hot summers. Snow is rare on the coast throughout the winter but is very common in the mountains.\n\nEvidence of Neolithic settlement in southern Laconia has been found during excavations of the Alepotrypa cave site. In ancient Greece, this was the principal region of the Spartan state. For much of classical antiquity the Spartan sphere of influence expanded to Messenia, whose inhabitants (the Helots) were enslaved. Significant archaeological recovery exists at the Vaphio-tomb site in Laconia. Found here is advanced Bronze Age art as well as evidence of cultural associations with the contemporaneous Minoan culture on Crete. Laconia was at war with the Kingdom of Macedonia and saw several battles; at the end of the Mycenaean period, the population of Laconia sharply declined. From the early-2nd century BC until 395 AD, it was a part of the Roman Empire.\n\nIn the medieval period, Laconia formed part of the Byzantine Empire. Following the Fourth Crusade, it was gradually conquered by the Frankish Principality of Achaea. In the 1260s, however, the Byzantines recovered Mystras and other fortresses in the region and managed to evict the Franks from Laconia, which became the nucleus of a new Byzantine province. By the mid-14th century, this evolved into the Despotate of Morea, held by the last Greek ruling dynasty, the Palaiologoi. With the fall of the Despotate to the Ottomans in 1460, Laconia was conquered as well.\n\nWith the exception of a 30-year interval of Venetian rule, Laconia remained under Ottoman control until the outbreak of the Greek War of Independence of 1821. Following independence, Sparta was selected as the capital of the modern prefecture, and its economy and agriculture expanded. With the incorporation of the British-ruled Ionian Islands into Greece in 1864, Elafonissos became part of the prefecture. After World War II and the Greek Civil War, its population began to somewhat decline, as people moved from the villages toward the larger cities of Greece and abroad.\n\nIn 1992, a devastating fire ruined the finest olive crops in the northern part of the prefecture, and affected the area of Sellasia along with Oinountas and its surrounding areas. Firefighters, helicopters and planes battled for days to put out the horrific fire.\n\nThe Mani portion along with Gytheio became famous in Greece for filming episodes of \"Vendetta\", broadcast on Mega Channel throughout Greece and abroad on Mega Cosmos.\n\nIn early 2006, flooding ruined olive and citrus crops as well as properties and villages along the Eurotas river. In the summer 2006, a terrible fire devastated a part of the Mani Peninsula, ruining forests, crops, and numerous villages.\n\nThe regional unit, Laconia, is subdivided into five municipalities. These are (number as in the map in the infobox):\nBULLET::::- East Mani (\"Anatoliki Mani\", 2)\nBULLET::::- Elafonisos (3)\nBULLET::::- Eurotas (4)\nBULLET::::- Monemvasia (5)\nBULLET::::- Sparta (1)\n\nAs a part of the 2011 Kallikratis government reform, regional unit Laconia was created out of the former prefecture Laconia (). The prefecture had the same territory as the present regional unit. At the same time, the municipalities were reorganised, according to the table below.\n\n! New municipality !! Old municipalities !! Seat\nElafonisosElafonisosElafonisos\nKaryes\n\nBULLET::::- Epidavros Limira Province – Molaoi\nBULLET::::- Gytheio Province – Gytheio\nBULLET::::- Lacedaemonia Province – Sparti\nBULLET::::- Oitylo Province – Areopoli\n\"Note:\" Provinces no longer hold any legal status in Greece.\n\nBULLET::::- 1907: 87,106\nBULLET::::- 1991: 95,696\nBULLET::::- 2001: 94,918\nBULLET::::- 2011: 89,138\n\nThe main cities and towns of Laconia are (ranked by 2011 census population):\nBULLET::::- Sparti 17,408\nBULLET::::- Gytheio 4,717\nBULLET::::- Neapoli 3,130\nBULLET::::- Skala 3,089\n\nBULLET::::- Greek National Road 39, Tripoli – Sparti – Gytheio\nBULLET::::- Greek National Road 82, Pylos – Kalamata – Sparti\nBULLET::::- Greek National Road 86, Gytheio – Monemvasia\nBULLET::::- Molaoi to Leonidi Road, E, NE\n\nBULLET::::- FLY FM 89,7 (Sparta).\nBULLET::::- POLITIA 90,7 – ΠΟΛΙΤΕΙΑ 90.7 (Sparta)\nBULLET::::- Radio Sparti – 92.7 FM (Sparta)\nBULLET::::- Radiofonias Notias Lakonias (Southern Laconia Radio) – 93.5 (Gytheio)\nBULLET::::- Star FM – 94.7\n\nBULLET::::- Ellada TV – UHF 43, Sparta\nBULLET::::- TV Notias Lakonias – Molaoi\n\nBULLET::::- Λακωνικός Τύπος\nBULLET::::- Ελεύθερη Άποψη\nBULLET::::- Νέα Σπάρτη\nBULLET::::- Παρατηρητής της Λακωνίας\n\nBULLET::::- List of settlements in Laconia\nBULLET::::- List of traditional Greek place names\nBULLET::::- Laconic phrase\n"}
{"id": "18387", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18387", "title": "Lanista", "text": "Lanista\n\nLanista is a genus of African bush-crickets (Orthoptera: Tettigoniidae) in the subfamily Conocephalinae.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Lanista affinis\" Bolívar, 1906\nBULLET::::- \"Lanista annulicornis\" (Walker, 1869)\nBULLET::::- \"Lanista crassicollis\" Bolívar, 1906\nBULLET::::- \"Lanista varelai\" Bolívar, 1906\n"}
{"id": "18388", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18388", "title": "Laocoön", "text": "Laocoön\n\nLaocoön (; , ), the son of Acoetes, is a figure in Greek and Roman mythology and the Epic Cycle. He was a Trojan priest who was attacked, with his two sons, by giant serpents sent by the gods. The story of Laocoön has been the subject of numerous artists, both in ancient and in more contemporary times.\n\nThe most detailed description of Laocoön's grisly fate was provided by Quintus Smyrnaeus in \"Posthomerica\", a later, literary version of events following the \"Iliad\". According to Quintus, Laocoön begged the Trojans to set fire to the horse to ensure it was not a trick. Athena, angry with him and the Trojans, shook the ground around Laocoön's feet and painfully blinded him. The Trojans, watching this unfold, assumed Laocoön was punished for the Trojans' mutilating and doubting Sinon, the undercover Greek soldier sent to convince the Trojans to let him and the horse inside their city walls. Thus, the Trojans wheeled the great wooden Horse in. Laocoön did not give up trying to convince the Trojans to burn the horse, and Athena made him pay even further. She sent two giant sea serpents to strangle and kill him and his two sons. In another version of the story, it was said that Poseidon sent the sea serpents to strangle and kill Laocoön and his two sons. \n\nAccording to Apollodorus, it was Apollo who sent the two sea serpents. Laocoön had insulted Apollo by sleeping with his wife in front of the \"divine image\".\n\nVirgil used the story in the \"Aeneid.\" According to Virgil, Laocoön advised the Trojans to not receive the horse from the Greeks. They disregarded Laocoön's advice and were taken in by the deceitful testimony of Sinon. The enraged Laocoön threw his spear at the Horse in response. Minerva then sent sea-serpents to strangle Laocoön and his two sons, Antiphantes and Thymbraeus, for his actions. \"Laocoön, ostensibly sacrificing a bull to Neptune on behalf of the city (lines 201ff.), becomes himself the tragic victim, as the simile (lines 223–24) makes clear. In some sense, his death must be symbolic of the city as a whole,\" S. V. Tracy notes. According to the Hellenistic poet Euphorion of Chalcis, Laocoön is in fact punished for procreating upon holy ground sacred to Poseidon; only unlucky timing caused the Trojans to misinterpret his death as punishment for striking the Horse, which they bring into the city with disastrous consequences. The episode furnished the subject of Sophocles' lost tragedy, \"Laocoön\".\n\nIn \"Aeneid\", Virgil describes the circumstances of Laocoön's death:\n\nThe story of Laocoön is not mentioned by Homer, but it had been the subject of a tragedy, now lost, by Sophocles and was mentioned by other Greek writers, though the events around the attack by the serpents vary considerably. The most famous account of these is now in Virgil's \"Aeneid\" where Laocoön was a priest of Neptune (Poseidon), who was killed with both his sons after attempting to expose the ruse of the Trojan Horse by striking it with a spear.\nVirgil gives Laocoön the famous line \"Equō nē crēdite, Teucrī / Quidquid id est, timeō Danaōs et dōna ferentēs\", or \"Do not trust the Horse, Trojans / Whatever it is, I fear the Greeks even bearing gifts.\" This line is the source of the saying: \"Beware of Greeks bearing gifts.\"\n\nIn Sophocles, however, he was a priest of Apollo who should have been celibate but had married. The serpents killed only the two sons, leaving Laocoön himself alive to suffer. In other versions he was killed for having committed an impiety by making love with his wife in the presence of a cult image in a sanctuary, or simply making a sacrifice in the temple with his wife present. In this second group of versions, the snakes were sent by Poseidon and in the first by Poseidon and Athena, or Apollo, and the deaths were interpreted by the Trojans as proof that the horse was a sacred object. The two versions have rather different morals: Laocoön was either punished for doing wrong, or for being right.\n\nThe death of Laocoön was famously depicted in a much-admired marble \"Laocoön and His Sons\", attributed by Pliny the Elder to the Rhodian sculptors Agesander, Athenodoros, and Polydorus, which stands in the Vatican Museums, Rome. Copies have been executed by various artists, notably Baccio Bandinelli. These show the complete sculpture (with conjectural reconstructions of the missing pieces) and can be seen in Rhodes, at the Palace of the Grand Master of the Knights of Rhodes, Rome, the Uffizi Gallery in Florence and in front of the Archaeological Museum, Odessa, Ukraine, amongst others. Alexander Calder also designed a stabile which he called Laocoön in 1947; it's part of the Eli and Edyth Broad collection in Los Angeles.\n\nThe marble Laocoön provided the central image for Lessing's \"Laocoön\", 1766, an aesthetic polemic directed against Winckelmann and the comte de Caylus. Daniel Albright reengages the role of the figure of Laocoön in aesthetic thought in his book \"Untwisting the Serpent: Modernism in Literature, Music, and Other Arts\". [cite El Greco painting]\n\nIn addition to other literary references, John Barth employs a bust of Laocoön in his novella, \"The End of the Road\". The R.E.M. song \"Laughing\" references Laocoön, rendering him female (\"Laocoön and her two sons\"). The marble's pose is parodied in the comic book \"Asterix and the Laurel Wreath\". American author Joyce Carol Oates also references Laocoön in her 1989 novel \"American Appetites\". In Stave V of \"A Christmas Carol\", by Charles Dickens (1843), Scrooge awakes on Christmas morning, \"making a perfect Laocoon of himself with his stockings\". Barbara Tuchman's \"The March of Folly\" begins with an extensive analysis of the Laocoön story. The American feminist poet and author Marge Piercy includes a poem titled, \"Laocoön is the name of the figure\", in her collection \"Stone, Paper, Knife\" (1983), relating love lost and beginning. John Steinbeck references Laocoön in his American literary classic \"East of Eden\", referring to a picture of “Laocoön completely wrapped in snakes” when describing artwork hanging in classrooms at the Salinas schoolhouse. \n\nIn Hector Berlioz's opera \"Les Troyens\", the death of Laocoön is a pivotal moment of the first act after Aeneas' entrance, sung by eight singers and a double choir (\"ottetto et double chœur\"). It begins with the verse \"Châtiment effroyable\" (\"frightful punishment\").\n\nBULLET::::- 3240 Laocoon, an asteroid named after Laocoön\n\nBULLET::::- Boardman, John ed., \"The Oxford History of Classical Art\", 1993, OUP,\nBULLET::::- Gall, Dorothee and Anja Wolkenhauer (hg). \"Laokoon in Literatur und Kunst: Schriften des Symposions \"Laokoon in Literatur und Kunst\" vom 30.11.2006, Universität Bonn\" (Berlin; New York: Walter de Gruyter, 2009) (Beiträge zur Altertumskunde, 254).\nBULLET::::- Smith, R.R.R., \"Hellenistic Sculpture, a handbook\", Thames & Hudson, 1991,\n\nCompiled by Tracy, 1987:452 note 3, which also mentions a fragmentary line possibly by Nicander.\nBULLET::::- Arctinus, OCT Homer 5.107.23\nBULLET::::- Dionysius of Halicarnassus, \"Roman Antiquities\" 1.48.2\nBULLET::::- Hyginus, \"Fabula\" 135\nBULLET::::- Petronius 89; Servius on \"Aeneid\" 2.201\nBULLET::::- pseudo-Apollodorus, \"Epitome\" 5.18\nBULLET::::- Quintus Smyrnaeus, \"Posthomerica\" 12.445ff\nBULLET::::- John Tzetzes, \"Ad Lycophron\" 347\n\nBULLET::::- Laocoon in the Digital Sculpture Project\nBULLET::::- Towards a Newest Laocoön\n"}
{"id": "18389", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18389", "title": "Limburg an der Lahn", "text": "Limburg an der Lahn\n\nLimburg an der Lahn (officially abbreviated \"Limburg a. d. Lahn\") is the district seat of Limburg-Weilburg in Hesse, Germany.\n\nLimburg lies in western Hessen between the Taunus and the Westerwald on the river Lahn.\n\nThe town lies roughly centrally in a basin within the Rhenish Slate Mountains which is surrounded by the low ranges of the Taunus and Westerwald and called the Limburg Basin (\"Limburger Becken\"). Owing to the favourable soil and climate, the Limburg Basin stands as one of Hesse's richest agricultural regions and moreover, with its convenient Lahn crossing, it has been of great importance to transport since the Middle Ages. Within the basin, the Lahn's otherwise rather narrow lower valley broadens out noticeably, making Limburg's mean elevation only 117 m above sea level.\n\nLimburg forms, together with the town of Diez, a middle centre (in terms of Central place theory) but partially functions as an upper centre to western Middle Hesse.\n\nLimburg's residential neighbourhoods reach beyond the town limits; the neighbouring centres of Elz and Diez run seamlessly together.\n\nSurrounding towns and communities are the community of Elz and the town of Hadamar in the north, the community of Beselich in the northeast, the town of Runkel in the east, the communities of Villmar and Brechen in the southeast, the community of Hünfelden in the south (all in Limburg-Weilburg), the community of Holzheim in the southwest, and the town of Diez and the communities of Aull and Gückingen in the west (all in the Rhein-Lahn-Kreis in Rhineland-Palatinate).\n\nThe nearest major cities are Wetzlar and Gießen to the north east, Wiesbaden and Frankfurt to the south and Koblenz to the west.\n\nThe town consists of eight formerly autonomous \"Ortsteile\" or villages, listed here by population.\n\nBULLET::::1. Limburg: 18,393\nBULLET::::2. Lindenholzhausen: 3,377\nBULLET::::3. Linter: 3,160\nBULLET::::4. Eschhofen: 2,803\nBULLET::::5. Staffel: 2,656\nBULLET::::6. Offheim: 2,572\nBULLET::::7. Dietkirchen: 1,724\nBULLET::::8. Ahlbach: 1,281\n\nBlumenrod is also often called a constituent community, although this is actually only a big residential neighbourhood in the main town’s south end. Its landmark is the \"Domäne Blumenrod\", a former manor house that has been restored and remodelled by the Limburg Free Evangelical community.\n\nLimburg’s biggest outlying centre is Lindenholzhausen (3,329 residents as of June 2006); the second biggest is Linter.\n\nThe derivation of the name “Limburg” is not quite clear and may well hearken back to a castle built here (\"Burg\" means \"castle\" in German). In 910 the town was first mentioned as \"Lintpurc\". Two of the popular theories are:\nBULLET::::- The name was chosen because of the close proximity to the Linterer Bach, a former stream in Linter that has now run dry and that emptied into the Lahn at the Domfelsen (crag). \"Linda\" is the Gaulish word for water.\nBULLET::::- Rather unlikely but very popular is the connection to a dragon saga (see Lindworm) and the connection with the monastery of Saint George the \"Dragon Slayer\" founded in Limburg. However, the monastery was built after the castle and founded around the time of the first written mention of the name.\n\nAbout 800 A.D., the first castle buildings arose on the Limburg crags. This was probably designed for the protection of a ford over the river Lahn. In the decades that followed, the town developed under the castle's protection. Limburg is first mentioned in documents in 910 under the name of \"Lintpurc\" when Louis the Child granted Konrad Kurzbold an estate in the community on which he was to build a church. Konrad Kurzbold laid the foundation stone for Saint George's Monastery Church, where he was also buried. The community soon increased in importance with the monastery's founding and profited from the lively goods trade on the \"Via Publica\".\n\nIn 1150, a wooden bridge was built across the Lahn. The long-distance road from Cologne to Frankfurt am Main subsequently ran through Limburg. In the early 13th century, Limburg Castle was built in its current form. Shortly afterwards, the town passed into the ownership of the Lords of Ysenburg. In 1214, the community was granted town rights. Remains of the fortification wall from the years 1130, 1230 and 1340 with a maximum length of roughly one thousand metres indicate to this day the blossoming town's quick development in the Middle Ages. There is proof of a mint in Limburg in 1180.\n\nOne line of the Lords of Ysenburg resided from 1258 to 1406 at Limburg Castle and took their name from their seat, Limburg. From this line came the House of Limburg-Stirum and also Imagina of Isenburg-Limburg, German King Adolf's wife.\n\nThe ruling class among the mediaeval townsfolk were rich merchant families whose houses stood right near the castle tower and were surrounded by the first town wall once it was built. The area of today's Rossmarkt (\"Horse Market\"), in which many simple craftsmen lived, was only brought within the fortifications once the second town wall was built. The inhabitants there, however, unlike the merchant élite, were accorded no entitlement to a voice in town affairs and were not allowed to send representatives to the town council. Nevertheless, they had to bear the main financial burden of running the town. Only in 1458 were they allowed to send two representatives to town council.\n\nSaint George's Cathedral (\"Sankt-Georgs-Dom\") built on the old monastery church's site, and also called \"Georgsdom\", was consecrated in 1235. On 14 May 1289, a devastating fire wiped out great parts of the inner town, although these were subsequently rebuilt. One of the houses built at that time was the Römer 2-4-6, which is today one of Germany's oldest half-timbered houses. In 1337, Limburg's Jews were expelled from the town. Only in 1341 were they once again able to settle in the town, by royal decree. In 1344 a half share of the town was pledged to the Electorate of Trier, and in 1420, the town passed wholly into the ownership of Trier. This event, along with another town fire in 1342, the Black Death in 1349, 1356 and 1365, but above all the rise of the Territorial Princes, led to a gradual decline. In 1315 and 1346, the old stone Lahn Bridge was built (presumably in two sections).\n\nAgainst the background of the German Peasants' War, unrest also arose among the townsfolk in 1525. After the Elector of Trier had demanded that the townsmen turn a Lutheran preacher out of the town, a board made up of townsmen who were ineligible for council functions handed the council a 30-point comprehensive list of demands on 24 May. It dealt mainly with financial participation and equality in taxation, trade and building issues with the merchant class. In the days that followed, these demands were reduced in negotiations between the council and the board to 16 points, which were likely also taken up with the Elector afterwards. On 5 August, however, Archbishop Richard ordered the council to overturn all concessions to the townsmen. Furthermore, a ban on assembly was decreed, and the ineligible townsmen were stripped of their right to send two representatives to council.\n\nIn 1806, Limburg came into the possession of the newly founded Duchy of Nassau. In 1818 the town wall was torn down. In 1827 the town was raised to a Catholic episcopal seat. In 1866 the Duchy and with it Limburg passed to Prussia in the wake of the Austro-Prussian War. As of 1862, Limburg became a railway hub and from 1886 a district seat. In 1892, the Pallottines settled in town, but only the men; the women came in 1895.\n\nDuring World War I there was a major prisoner of war camp at Limburg an der Lahn. Many Irish members of the British Army were interned there until the end of the war and at one stage they were visited by the Irish republican leader Roger Casement in an attempt to win recruits for the forthcoming Irish rebellion.\n\nFrom 1919 to 1923, Limburg was the \"capital\" of a short-lived state called Free State Bottleneck (or \"Freistaat Flaschenhals\" in German) because it was the nearest unoccupied town to the Weimar Republic.\n\nThe municipal election held on 6 March 2016 yielded the following results:\n-- class=\"bgcolor5\"\ncolspan=\"2\"  Parties and voter communities\nalign=\"center\"  %2016\nalign=\"center\"  seats2016\nalign=\"center\"  %2011\nalign=\"center\"  seats2011\nCDU\nChristian Democratic Union of Germany\nalign=\"right\" 42.8\nalign=\"right\" 42.2\nalign=\"right\" 19\nSPD\nSocial Democratic Party of Germany\nalign=\"right\" 33.0\nalign=\"right\" 27.5\nalign=\"right\" 13\nalign=\"right\" 15.5\nalign=\"right\" 9.0\nFWG\nFreie Wähler Gemeinschaft Limburg\nalign=\"right\" \nalign=\"right\" 5.2\nalign=\"right\" 2\nalign=\"right\" 10.2\nalign=\"right\" 4.7\nalign=\"right\" 2\nBZL\nBürgervereinigung Zukunft Limburg\nalign=\"right\" \nalign=\"right\" 4.1\nalign=\"right\" 2\n-- class=\"bgcolor5\"\ncolspan=\"2\" Total\nalign=\"right\" 100.0\nalign=\"right\" 45\nalign=\"right\" 100.0\nalign=\"right\" 45\n-- class=\"bgcolor5\"\ncolspan=\"2\" voter turnout in %\ncolspan=\"2\" align=\"right\" 45.5\ncolspan=\"2\" align=\"right\" 43.5\n\nThe town's mayor is currently Marius Hahn (SPD).\n\nBULLET::::- Sainte-Foy-lès-Lyon, Rhône, France\nBULLET::::- Oudenburg, West Flanders, Belgium\nBULLET::::- Lichfield, Staffordshire, England, United Kingdom\n\nIn 1956, a \"Patenschaft\" – roughly, a sponsorship – was undertaken for Sudeten Germans driven out of the town of Mährisch Neustadt in the Sternberg district.\n\nLimburg is a traditional transport hub. Already in the Middle Ages, the \"Via Publica\" crossed the navigable Lahn here. Today the A 3 (Emmerich–Oberhausen–Cologne–Frankfurt–Nuremberg–Passau) and \"Bundesstraße\" 8, which both follow the \"Via Publica's\" alignment as closely as possible, run through the town. \"Bundesstraße\" 49 links Limburg to Koblenz towards the west and Wetzlar and Gießen towards the east. The section between Limburg and Wetzlar is currently being widened to four lanes. This section as far as Obertiefenbach is also known as \"Die lange Meil\" (\"The Long Mile\"). \"Bundesstraße\" 54 links Limburg on the one hand with Siegen to the north and on the other by way of Diez with Wiesbaden, which may likewise be reached over \"Bundesstraße\" 417 (\"Hühnerstraße\").\n\nAs early as 1248, a wooden bridge spanned the Lahn, but was replaced after the flooding in 1306 by a stone bridge, the \"Alte Lahnbrücke\". Other road bridges are the \"Lahntalbrücke Limburg\" (1964) on the A 3, the \"Lahnbrücke\" near Staffel and the \"Neue Lahnbrücke\" from 1968, over which run the \"Bundesstraßen\" before they cross under the inner town through the \"Schiedetunnel\", a bypass tunnel.\n\nOnce the \"Lahntalbahn\" had been built, Limburg was joined to the railway network in 1862. Limburg railway station developed into a transport hub. Eschhofen station is also in Limburg. Other railway lines are the \"Unterwesterwaldbahn\", the \"Oberwesterwaldbahn\" and the Main-Lahn Railway. At Niedernhausen station on the \"Main-Lahn Railway\", transfer to the \"Ländchesbahn\" to Wiesbaden is possible. With the exception of the upper section of the \"Lahntalbahn\" and express lines to Koblenz and Frankfurt, which are still served by Deutsche Bahn, all railway lines are run by Vectus Verkehrsgesellschaft mbH, based in Limburg.\n\nOnce the InterCityExpress Cologne-Frankfurt high-speed rail line had been built, Limburg acquired an ICE station. It is the only railway station in Germany at which exclusively ICE trains stop. The high-speed rail line crosses the Lahn over the \"Lahntalbrücke\" and then dives into the \"Limburger Tunnel\".\n\nThe nearest airport is Frankfurt Airport, 63 km away on the A 3. Travel time there on the ICE is roughly 20 minutes. Cologne Bonn Airport is 110 km away and can be reached on the ICE in 44 minutes.\n\nThe Lahn between Lahnstein and Wetzlar is a \"Bundeswasserstraße\" (\"Federal waterway\"). Since the \"Lahntalbahn's\" expansion, however, the waterway's importance has been declining. It is used mainly by tourists with small motorboats, canoes and rowboats. Limburg is the landing site of the tourboat \"Wappen von Limburg\".\n\nBULLET::::- Blechwarenfabrik Limburg GmbH (Metal and plastic packaging)\nBULLET::::- Bundesanzeiger Verlag (publishing house)\nBULLET::::- Harmonic Drive AG\nBULLET::::- MOBA Mobile Automation AG\nBULLET::::- Mundipharma\nBULLET::::- Tetra Pak\nBULLET::::- Vectus Verkehrsgesellschaft mbH (transport)\nBULLET::::- Nassauische Neue Presse (newspaper)\n\nLimburg has four schools which lead to, among other qualifications, the Abitur:\nBULLET::::- Tilemannschule, which has existed since the late 19th century and was named after the famous Limburg chancellory head Tilemann Elhen von Wolfhagen in the 1950s\nBULLET::::- Marienschule, a private Gymnasium (Grammar School), which has existed since 1895 and which belongs to the Bishopric of Limburg.\nBULLET::::- Peter-Paul-Cahensly-Schule with vocational Gymnasium (Grammar School) in the fields of economics and administration, data processing, electrical engineering and machine building\nBULLET::::- Adolf-Reichwein-Schule with vocational Gymnasium in the fields of dietetics and health sciences\n\nProfessional training schools:\nBULLET::::- Peter-Paul-Cahensly-Schule\nBULLET::::- Friedrich-Dessauer-Schule\nBULLET::::- Adolf-Reichwein-Schule\nBULLET::::- Marienschule\n\nHauptschulen and Realschulen:\nBULLET::::- Johann-Wolfgang-von-Goethe-Schule\nBULLET::::- Leo-Sternberg-Schule\nBULLET::::- Theodor-Heuss-Schule\n\nLibraries:\nBULLET::::- Dombibliothek\nBULLET::::- Diözesanbibliothek\n\nThe hospital perched on the Schafsberg overlooking the town has at its disposal 433 beds and 15 specialist departments.\n\nIn Limburg there are various sport clubs; some are even represented in \"Bundesligen\", and even at the world level.\nBULLET::::- Limburger Club für Wassersport 1895/1907 e.V. (training base for the \"Deutscher Ruderverband\")\nBULLET::::- Limburger Hockey Club\nBULLET::::- Schwimmverein Poseidon Limburg e. V. (swimming)\nBULLET::::- various clubs in the outlying centres such as the Turnverein Eschhofen (gymnastics club), the fistball stronghold in Limburg-Weilburg\n\nThe Evangelical Church offers with its \"Jugendfreizeitstätte Limburg\" (JFS for short, meaning \"Youth Leisure Place\") a meeting place for youth with many events. With table football, Internet café and many events, this institution is not only church-based, with two staff and a \"Zivildienstleistender\" supporting the visitors not only with their problems.\n\nThe \"Mütterzentrum Limburg\" is a family meeting place for those with or without children on Hospitalstraße. The club is supported by the town of Limburg and the \"Bundesland\" of Hesse and offers among other things a parents' service that looks after children, a broad array of course offerings for children and adults, a miniature kindergarten and a café.\n\nBULLET::::- Limburg an der Lahn Volunteer Fire brigade, founded 1867 (includes Youth Fire Brigade)\nBULLET::::- Ahlbach Volunteer Fire Brigade, founded 1908 (includes Youth Fire Brigade)\nBULLET::::- Dietkirchen Volunteer Fire Brigade, founded 1934 (includes Youth Fire Brigade)\nBULLET::::- Eschhofen Volunteer Fire Brigade, founded 1901 (includes Youth Fire Brigade)\nBULLET::::- Lindenholzhausen Volunteer Fire Brigade, founded 1933 (includes Youth Fire Brigade)\nBULLET::::- Linter Volunteer Fire Brigade, founded 1935 (includes Youth Fire Brigade)\nBULLET::::- Offheim Volunteer Fire Brigade, founded 1898 (includes Youth Fire Brigade)\nBULLET::::- Staffel Volunteer Fire Brigade, founded 1880 (includes Youth Fire Brigade)\n\nThe cabaret troupe \"Thing\", founded more than 25 years ago, moved after a short time from its initial home in the outlying centre of Staffel to the Josef-Kohlmaier-Halle, a civic event hall, where its stage can now be found in the hall's club rooms. The troupe is run by an independent acting club. On the programme are chanson, cabaret, literature and jazz as well as folk, Rock and performances by singer-songwriters. It makes a point of furthering young artists. Each month, three or four events are staged.\n\nThe dedication of \"Thing\" was recognized on 6 December 2003 when the \"Kulturpreis Mittelhessen\" (\"Middle Hesse Culture Prize\") was awarded to it.\n\nLimburg Cathedral has a famous boys' choir, the Limburger Domsingknaben, which trains at Musical Boarding School in Hadamar, and an excellent girls' choir, the Mädchenkantorei Limburg, both singing at the Limburg Cathedral and internationally.\n\nIn Limburg there are several museums. The most important are:\nBULLET::::- Town of Limburg art collections that offer changing exhibits\nBULLET::::- \"Staurothek\", cathedral treasury and diocesan museum with the \"Limburger Staurothek\" (a cross reliquary)\nBULLET::::- Museum Limburg Navy Museum\nBULLET::::- Pallottine Mission museum\n\nOnly a few towns, like Limburg, have been able to keep a full set of nearly unscathed mediaeval buildings. The formerly walled town core between St. George’s Cathedral, Grabenstraße (a street marking the old town moat) and the 600-year-old Lahn Bridge thus stands today as a whole under monumental protection.\n\nThe \"Altstadt\" (\"Old Town\") boasts a fine cathedral and is full of narrow streets with timber-frame houses, dating mainly from the 17th and 18th centuries. That's why it is located on the German Timber-Frame Road.\nBULLET::::- \"Limburger Dom\", one of the most complete creations of Late Romanesque architecture. It was printed on the reverse of the 1,000 Deutsche Mark note from the second series, which was in circulation from 1960 to 1989. The cathedral was recently renovated and painted to reflect its original appearance.\nBULLET::::- \"Limburger Schloss\", built in early 13th century by Gerlach von Ysenburg\nBULLET::::- \"Burgmannenhaus\", built about 1544; serves as a museum today\nBULLET::::- \"St. Anna-Kirche\" (church), stained glass from third fourth of 14th century with eighteen scenes from the New Testament\nBULLET::::- Old Lahn Bridge, from 1315, place where the \"Via Publica\" (road) crossed the Lahn\nBULLET::::- In the Old Town stand many timber-frame houses from the 13th to 19th centuries. One peculiarity seen among the timber-framed houses of Limburg is the \"hall house\" from the High Middle Ages, which has a great hall on the ground floor. When restoration work began in the Old Town in 1972, the houses were carefully restored. Among the best known timber-frame houses are:\nBULLET::::- \"Haus Kleine Rütsche 4\", narrowest spot on the historic trade road between Frankfurt and Cologne, whose breadth is written at the Haymarket (\"Heumarkt\") in Cologne\nBULLET::::- \"Haus der sieben Laster\" (“House of the Seven Vices”) at Brückengasse 9, built in 1567, timber-frame house with carvings showing Christianity's seven deadly sins, namely pride, greed, envy, lust, gluttony, wrath and sloth\nBULLET::::- \"Werner-Senger-Haus\", a beautiful stone hall house with timber-framed façade dating from the 13th century\nBULLET::::- Houses at the fishmarket. The square's name in the 13th century was still \"Fismart\" (\"Yarn Market\" or \"Wool Market\") in the Limburg dialect, and it was the Limburg wool weavers' trading centre\nBULLET::::- \"Römer 2-4-6\", Germany’s oldest freestanding timbered house; in the garden a mikvah was found\nBULLET::::- \"Rathaus\" (\"Town Hall\"), built in 1899\nBULLET::::- \"Huttig\" (town wall tower remnant)\nBULLET::::- Former noble estate of the Counts of Walderdorff at Fahrgasse 5\n\n(limited to those featuring in Wikipedia (EN) \n\nBULLET::::- Imagina of Isenburg-Limburg (c.1255 – 1313?) was the Queen consort of Adolf of Nassau, King of Germany\nBULLET::::- Alois Anton Führer (1853 – 1930) Indologist\nBULLET::::- Alexej Stachowitsch (1918 – 2013 in Limburg an der Lahn) Austrian-Russian author, pedagogue and songwriter\nBULLET::::- Franz Kamphaus (born 1932), bishop emeritus of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Limburg\nBULLET::::- Theo Geisel (born 1948) physicist, concerned with the behavior of complex systems\nBULLET::::- Christoph Prégardien (born 1956), German lyric tenor\nBULLET::::- Alison Browner (born 1957) Irish mezzo-soprano opera singer, based in Limburg an der Lahn\nBULLET::::- Franz-Peter Tebartz-van Elst (born 1959) prelate of the Catholic Church, resigned as Bishop of Limburg in 2014 following a long-standing public dispute about the costs and financing of a diocesan construction project.\nBULLET::::- Germar Rudolf (born 1964) chemist and a convicted Holocaust denier\nBULLET::::- Veronika Winter (born 1965) soprano, particularly noted for her recordings of Baroque music\nBULLET::::- Stefan Saliger (born 1967) former field hockey player who competed in the 1992 and 1996 Summer Olympics\nBULLET::::- Peter W. Marx (born 1973) Theatre and Performance Studies Scholar\nBULLET::::- Tamara Bach (born 1976), German youth book author\nBULLET::::- David Heiss, convicted of the 2008 murder of British Matthew Pyke, currently sentenced to life in prison in England.\n\nBULLET::::- Stille, Eugen: Limburg an der Lahn und seine Geschichte, Limburger Vereinsdruckerei, Selbstverlag E. Stille, Limburg/Kassel 1971\nBULLET::::- Maibach, Heinz: Limburg an der Lahn in alten Ansichten, Siebte Auflage, Zaltbommel/Niederlande 1993\nBULLET::::- Fügen, Randolf: \"Highlights in Mittelhessen\". 1. Auflage. Wartenberg Verlag Gudensberg-Gleichen 2003\nBULLET::::- Maibach, Heinz: \"Limburg an der Lahn in alten Ansichten.\" Siebte Auflage. Zaltbommel/Niederlande 1993; NA: Sutton, Erfurt 2010, .\nBULLET::::- Maibach, Heinz: \"Dokumente zur Limburger Stadt- und Kreisgeschichte 1870–1945.\" Limburg 1992, .\nBULLET::::- Fuchs, Johann-Georg: \"Limburger Altstadtbauten. Bürger und Begebenheiten.\" 2. Auflage. Limburg 2006.\nBULLET::::- \"Limburg im Fluss der Zeit. Schlaglichter aus 1100 Jahren Stadtgeschichte.\" (Beiträge zur Geschichte der Kreisstadt Limburg a. d. Lahn 1). Limburg 2010, .\nBULLET::::- Marten, Bettina: \"Limburg an der Lahn: Dom- und Stadtführer\". Petersberg 2010, .\nBULLET::::- Waldecker, Christoph: \"Limburg in historischen Ansichten\". Sutton, Erfurt 2010, . (Archivbilder)\nBULLET::::- Wagner, Harald: \"Limburg entdecken!\" Ein Stadtführer für Touristen und Einheimische. Limburg 2011, .\nBULLET::::- Waldecker, Christoph: \"Limburg an der Lahn.\" (Großer Kunstreiseführer 251). 2., erweiterte Auflage. Schnell + Steiner, Regensburg 2011, .\nBULLET::::- \"Limburg im Fluss der Zeit.\" (Beiträge zur Geschichte der Kreisstadt Limburg a. d. Lahn, 2). Vorträge zur Stadtgeschichte. Limburg 2013, .\nBULLET::::- Waldecker, Christoph: \"Zeitsprünge Limburg\". Sutton, Erfurt 2014, .\n\nBULLET::::- Bracht, Horst: \"Galgenfrist. Historischer Limburg-Krimi\". Societäts-Verlag, Frankfurt am Main 2012, .\nBULLET::::- Bracht, Horst: \"Der Klosterbrauer. Limburg-Krimi\". Societäts-Verlag, Frankfurt am Main 2014, .\n\nBULLET::::- Official website\nBULLET::::- Limburg Cathedral\nBULLET::::- Limburg Cathedral Boys' Choir\nBULLET::::- Pictures of Limburg and its cathedral\n"}
{"id": "18390", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18390", "title": "Lavrentiy Beria", "text": "Lavrentiy Beria\n\nLavrentiy Pavlovich Beria (; ; , ; – 23 December 1953) was a Soviet politician, Marshal of the Soviet Union and state security administrator, chief of the Soviet security and secret police apparatus (NKVD) under Joseph Stalin during World War II, and promoted to deputy premier under Stalin from 1941. He later officially joined the Politburo in 1946.\n\nBeria was the longest-lived and most influential of Stalin's secret police chiefs, wielding his most substantial influence during and after World War II. Following the Soviet invasion of Poland in 1939 he was responsible for organizing the Katyn massacre. He simultaneously administered vast sections of the Soviet state and acted as the \"de facto\" Marshal of the Soviet Union in command of NKVD field units responsible for barrier troops and Soviet partisan intelligence and sabotage operations on the Eastern Front during World War II. Beria administered the vast expansion of the Gulag labor camps and was primarily responsible for overseeing the secret detention facilities for scientists and engineers known as \"sharashkas\".\n\nHe attended the Yalta Conference with Stalin, who introduced him to U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt as \"our Himmler\". After the war, he organized the Communist takeover of the state institutions in Central Europe and Eastern Europe and political repressions in these countries. Beria's uncompromising ruthlessness in his duties and skill at producing results culminated in his success in overseeing the Soviet atomic bomb project. Stalin gave it absolute priority and the project was completed in under five years.\n\nAfter Stalin's death in March 1953, Lavrentiy Beria became First Deputy Premier of the Soviet Union and head of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. In this dual capacity, he formed a troika alongside Georgy Malenkov and Vyacheslav Molotov that briefly led the country in Stalin's place. However, in a coup d'état launched by Nikita Khrushchev with help from Marshal of the Soviet Union Georgy Zhukov in June 1953, Beria was ultimately removed from power and subsequently arrested on charges of 357 counts of rape and treason. He was sentenced to death and was executed by Pavel Batitsky on December 23, 1953.\n\nBeria was born in Merkheuli, near Sukhumi, in the Sukhum Okrug of the Kutais Governorate (now Gulripshi District, de facto Republic of Abkhazia, then part of the Russian Empire). He was from the Mingrelian ethnic group and grew up in a Georgian Orthodox family. Beria's mother, Marta Jaqeli (1868–1955), was deeply religious and church-going (she spent much time in church and died in a church building). She was previously married and widowed before marrying Beria's father, Pavel Khukhaevich Beria (1872–1922), a landowner from Abkhazia. Beria also had a brother (name unknown), and a deaf sister named Anna.\n\nIn his autobiography, Lavrentiy Beria mentioned only his sister and his niece, implying that his brother was (or any other siblings were) dead or had no relationship with Beria after he left Merkheuli. Beria attended a technical school in Sukhumi, and joined the Bolsheviks in March 1917 while a student in the Baku Polytechnicum (subsequently known as the Azerbaijan State Oil Academy). As a student, Beria distinguished himself in mathematics and the sciences. The Polytechnicum's curriculum concentrated on the petroleum industry.\n\nBeria also worked for the anti-Bolshevik Mussavatists in Baku. After the Red Army captured the city on 28 April 1920, Beria was saved from execution because there was not enough time to arrange his shooting and replacement, and Sergei Kirov possibly intervened. While in prison, he formed a connection with Nina Gegechkori (1905–10 June 1991) his cellmate's niece, and they eloped on a train. She was 17, a trained scientist from an aristocratic family.\nIn 1919, at the age of twenty, Beria started his career in state security when the security service of the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic hired him while still a student at the Polytechnicum. In 1920 or 1921 (accounts vary) Beria joined the Cheka, the original Bolshevik secret police. At that time, a Bolshevik revolt took place in the Menshevik-controlled Democratic Republic of Georgia, and the Red Army subsequently invaded. The Cheka became heavily involved in the conflict, which resulted in the defeat of the Mensheviks and the formation of the Georgian SSR. By 1922, Beria was deputy head of the Georgian branch of Cheka's successor, the OGPU.\n\nIn 1924, he led the repression of a Georgian nationalist uprising, after which up to 10,000 people were executed. For this display of \"Bolshevik ruthlessness,\" Beria was appointed head of the \"secret-political division\" of the Transcaucasian OGPU and was awarded the Order of the Red Banner.\n\nIn 1926, Beria became head of the Georgian OGPU; Sergo Ordzhonikidze, head of the Transcaucasian party, introduced him to fellow-Georgian Iosef Dzhughashvili, later known as Joseph Stalin. As a result, Beria became an ally in Stalin's rise to power. During his years at the helm of the Georgian OGPU, Beria effectively destroyed the intelligence networks that Turkey and Iran had developed in the Soviet Caucasus, while successfully penetrating the governments of these countries with his agents. He also took over Stalin's holiday security.\n\nBeria was appointed Secretary of the Communist Party in Georgia in 1931, and for the whole Transcaucasian region in 1932. He became a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in 1934. During this time, he began to attack fellow members of the Georgian Communist Party, particularly Gaioz Devdariani, who served as Minister of Education of the Georgian SSR. Beria ordered the executions of Devdariani's brothers George and Shalva, who held important positions in the Cheka and the Communist Party respectively.\n\nHe reportedly won Stalin's favour in the early 1930s, after faking a conspiracy to assassinate the Soviet leader that he then claimed to have foiled. By 1935, Beria had become one of Stalin's most trusted subordinates. He cemented his place in Stalin's entourage with a lengthy oration titled, \"On the History of the Bolshevik Organisations in Transcaucasia\" (later published as a book), which emphasized Stalin's role.When Stalin's purge of the Communist Party and government began in 1934 after the assassination of Leningrad party boss Sergei Kirov (1 December 1934), Beria ran the purges in Transcaucasia. He used the opportunity to settle many old scores in the politically turbulent Transcaucasian republics.\n\nIn June 1937, he said in a speech, \"Let our enemies know that anyone who attempts to raise a hand against the will of our people, against the will of the party of Lenin and Stalin, will be mercilessly crushed and destroyed.\"\n\nIn August 1938, Stalin brought Beria to Moscow as deputy head of the People's Commissariat for Internal Affairs (NKVD), the ministry which oversaw the state security and police forces. Under Nikolai Yezhov, the NKVD carried out the Great Purge: the imprisonment or execution of millions of people throughout the Soviet Union as alleged \"enemies of the people.\" By 1938, however, the oppression had become so extensive that it was damaging the infrastructure, economy and even the armed forces of the Soviet state, prompting Stalin to wind the purge down. Stalin had voted to appoint Georgy Malenkov as head of the NKVD, but he was overruled. In September, Beria was appointed head of the Main Administration of State Security (GUGB) of the NKVD, and in November he succeeded Yezhov as NKVD head. Yezhov was executed in 1940 and one account says he was personally strangled by Beria. The NKVD was purged next, with half of its personnel replaced by Beria loyalists, many of them from the Caucasus.\n\nAlthough Beria's name is closely identified with the Great Purge because of his activities while deputy head of the NKVD, his leadership of the organisation marked an easing of the repression begun under Yezhov. Over 100,000 people were released from the labour camps. The government officially admitted that there had been some injustice and \"excesses\" during the purges, which were blamed entirely on Yezhov. The liberalisation was only relative: arrests and executions continued, and in 1940, as war approached, the pace of the purges again accelerated. During this period, Beria supervised deportations of people identified as political enemies from Poland and the Baltic states after Soviet occupation of those regions.\n\nIn March 1939, Beria became a candidate member of the Communist Party's Politburo. Although he did not become a full member until 1946, he was already one of the senior leaders of the Soviet state. In 1941, Beria was made a Commissar General of State Security, the highest quasi-military rank within the Soviet police system of that time, effectively comparable to a Marshal of the Soviet Union.\n\nOn 5 March 1940, after the Gestapo–NKVD Third Conference was held in Zakopane, Beria sent a note (no. 794/B) to Stalin in which he stated that the Polish prisoners of war kept at camps and prisons in western Belarus and Ukraine were enemies of the Soviet Union, and recommended their execution. Most of them were military officers, but there were also intelligentsia, doctors, priests, and others in a total of 22,000 people. With Stalin's approval, Beria's NKVD executed them in what became known as the Katyn massacre.\n\nFrom October 1940 to February 1942, the NKVD under Beria carried out a new purge of the Red Army and related industries. In February 1941, Beria became Deputy Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars, and in June, following Nazi Germany's invasion of the Soviet Union, he became a member of the State Defense Committee (GKO). During World War II, he took on major domestic responsibilities and mobilized the millions of people imprisoned in NKVD Gulag camps into wartime production. He took control of the manufacture of armaments, and (with Georgy Malenkov) aircraft and aircraft engines. This was the beginning of Beria's alliance with Malenkov, which later became of central importance.\n\nIn 1944, as the Germans were driven from Soviet soil, Beria was in charge of dealing with the various ethnic minorities accused of anti-sovietism and/or collaboration with the invaders, including the Balkars, Karachays, Chechens, Ingush, Crimean Tatars, Kalmyks, Pontic Greeks, and Volga Germans. All these groups were deported to Soviet Central Asia (see \"Population transfer in the Soviet Union.\")\n\nIn December 1944, Beria's NKVD was assigned to supervise the Soviet atomic bomb project (\"Task No. 1\"), which built and tested a bomb by 29 August 1949. The project was extremely labour-intensive. At least 330,000 people, including 10,000 technicians, were involved. The Gulag system provided tens of thousands of people for work in uranium mines and for the construction and operation of uranium processing plants. They also constructed test facilities, such as those at Semipalatinsk and in the Novaya Zemlya archipelago. The NKVD also ensured the necessary security for the project.\n\nIn July 1945, as Soviet police ranks were converted to a military uniform system, Beria's rank was officially converted to that of Marshal of the Soviet Union. Although he had never held a traditional military command, Beria made a significant contribution to the victory of the Soviet Union in World War II through his organization of wartime production and his use of partisans. Stalin personally never thought much of it, and neither commented publicly on his performance nor awarded him recognition (i.e. Order of Victory), as he did for most other Soviet Marshals.\n\nAbroad, Beria had met with Kim Il-sung, the future leader of North Korea, several times when the Soviet troops had declared war on Japan and occupied the northern half of Korea from August 1945. Beria recommended that Stalin install a communist leader in the occupied territories.\n\nWith Stalin nearing 70, a concealed struggle for succession amongst his entourage dominated Kremlin politics in the post-war years. At the end of the war, Andrei Zhdanov seemed the most likely candidate. Zhdanov had served as the Communist Party leader in Leningrad during the war, and by 1946 had charge of all cultural matters. After 1946, Beria formed an alliance with Malenkov to counter Zhdanov's rise.\n\nIn January 1946, Beria resigned as chief of the NKVD while retaining general control over national security matters as Deputy Prime Minister and Curator of the Organs of State Security under Stalin. However, the new NKVD chief, Sergei Kruglov, was not a Beria man. Also, by the summer of 1946, Beria's man Vsevolod Nikolayevich Merkulov was replaced as head of the Ministry for State Security (MGB) by Viktor Abakumov. Abakumov had headed SMERSH from 1943 to 1946; his relationship with Beria involved close collaboration (since Abakumov owed his rise to Beria's support and esteem), but also rivalry. Stalin had begun to encourage Abakumov to form his own network inside the MGB to counter Beria's dominance of the power ministries. Kruglov and Abakumov moved expeditiously to replace Beria's men in the security apparatus leadership with new people. Very soon, Deputy Minister Stepan Mamulov of the Soviet Ministry of Internal Affairs was the only close Beria ally left outside foreign intelligence, on which Beria kept a grip. In the following months, Abakumov started carrying out important operations without consulting Beria, often working in tandem with Zhdanov, and on Stalin's direct orders. These operations were aimed by Stalin—initially tangentially, but with time more directly–at Beria.\n\nOne of the first such moves involved the Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee affair, which commenced in October 1946 and eventually led to the murder of Solomon Mikhoels and the arrest of many other members. This affair damaged Beria; not only had he championed the creation of the committee in 1942, but his own entourage included a substantial number of Jews.\n\nAfter Zhdanov died suddenly in August 1948, Beria and Malenkov consolidated their power by means of a purge of Zhdanov's associates in the so-called \"Leningrad Affair\". Those executed included Zhdanov's deputy, Alexey Kuznetsov; the economic chief, Nikolai Voznesensky; the Party head in Leningrad, Pyotr Popkov; and the Prime Minister of the Russian Republic, Mikhail Rodionov.\n\nDuring the postwar years, Beria supervised installation of Communist regimes in the countries of Eastern Europe and hand-picked the Soviet-backed leaders. Starting in 1948, Abakumov initiated several investigations against these leaders, which culminated with the arrest in November 1951 of Rudolf Slánský, Bedřich Geminder, and others in Czechoslovakia. These men were frequently accused of Zionism, \"rootless cosmopolitanism\", and providing weapons to Israel. Such charges deeply disturbed Beria, as he had directly ordered the sale of large amounts of Czech arms to Israel. Altogether, 14 Czechoslovak Communist leaders, 11 of them Jewish, were tried, convicted, and executed (see Slánský trial). Similar investigations in Poland and other Soviet satellite countries occurred at the same time.\n\nIn 1951, Abakumov was replaced by Semyon Ignatyev, who further intensified the anti-Semitic campaign. On 13 January 1953, the biggest anti-semitic affair in the Soviet Union started with an article in \"Pravda\" – it began what became known as the Doctors' plot, in which a number of the country's prominent Jewish physicians were accused of poisoning top Soviet leaders and arrested. Concurrently, the Soviet press began an anti-semitic propaganda campaign, euphemistically termed the \"struggle against rootless cosmopolitanism\". Initially, 37 men were arrested, but the number quickly grew into hundreds. Scores of Soviet Jews were dismissed from their jobs, arrested, sent to the Gulag, or executed. The \"Doctors' plot\" was presumably invented by Stalin as an excuse to dismiss Beria and replace him with Ignatiev or some other MGB functionary. A few days after Stalin's death on 5 March 1953, Beria freed all the arrested doctors, announced that the entire matter was fabricated, and arrested the MGB functionaries directly involved.\n\nIn other international issues, Beria (along with Mikoyan) correctly foresaw the victory (1949–1950) of Mao Zedong in the Chinese Civil War and greatly helped the Chinese Communists by letting them use Soviet-occupied Manchuria as a staging area and arranging large weapons shipments to the People's Liberation Army, mainly from the recently captured equipment of the Japanese Kwantung Army.\n\nAt Beria's trial in 1953, it became known that he had committed numerous rapes during the years he was NKVD chief. Simon Sebag-Montefiore, a biographer of Stalin, concluded the information \"reveals a sexual predator who used his power to indulge himself in obsessive depravity.\" After his death, charges of sexual abuse and rape were disputed by people close to him including his wife Nina and his son Sergo.\n\nHis case files in the Soviet archives contained the official testimony from Colonel Rafael Semyonovich Sarkisov and Colonel Sardion Nikolaevich Nadaraia, two of Beria's most senior NKVD bodyguards. They stated that, on warm nights during the war years, Beria was often driven slowly through the streets of Moscow in his armored Packard limousine. He would point out young women to be detained and escorted to his mansion, where wine and a feast awaited them. After dining, Beria would take the women into his soundproofed office and rape them. Beria's bodyguards reported that their duties included handing each victim a flower bouquet as she left Beria's house. Accepting it implied that the sex had been consensual; refusal would mean arrest. In one incident, his chief bodyguard, Sarkisov, reported that a woman who had been brought to Beria rejected his advances and ran out of his office; Sarkisov mistakenly handed her the flowers anyway, prompting the enraged Beria to declare, \"Now it's not a bouquet, it's a wreath! May it rot on your grave!\" The NKVD arrested the woman the next day.\n\nWomen also submitted to Beria's sexual advances in exchange for the promise of freeing their relatives from the Gulag. In one case, Beria picked up Tatiana Okunevskaya, a well-known Soviet actress, under the pretence of bringing her to perform for the Politburo. Instead he took her to his dacha, where he offered to free her father and grandmother from NKVD prison if she submitted. He then raped her, telling her: \"Scream or not, it doesn't matter.\" Beria, however, already knew that her relatives had been executed months earlier. Okunevskaya was arrested shortly afterwards and sentenced to solitary confinement in the Gulag, which she survived.\n\nBeria's sexually predatory nature was well known to the Politburo, and though Stalin took an indulgent viewpoint (considering Beria's wartime importance), he said, \"I don't trust Beria.\" In one instance, when Stalin learned his daughter Svetlana was alone with Beria at his house, he telephoned her and told her to leave immediately. When Beria complimented Alexander Poskrebyshev's daughter on her beauty, Poskrebyshev quickly pulled her aside and instructed her, \"Don't ever accept a lift from Beria.\" After taking an interest in Marshal Kliment Voroshilov's daughter-in-law during a party at their summer dacha, Beria shadowed their car closely all the way back to the Kremlin, terrifying Voroshilov's wife.\n\nPrior to and during the war, Beria directed Sarkisov to keep a running list of the names and phone numbers of his sexual encounters. Eventually, he ordered Sarkisov to destroy the list as a security risk, but the colonel retained a secret handwritten copy. When Beria's fall from power began, Sarkisov passed the list to Viktor Abakumov, the former wartime head of SMERSH and now chief of the MGB – the successor to the NKVD. Abakumov was already aggressively building a case against Beria. Stalin, who was also seeking to undermine Beria, was thrilled by the detailed records kept by Sarkisov, demanding: \"Send me everything this asshole writes down!\" Sarkisov reported that Beria's sexual appetite had led to him contracting syphilis during the war, for which he was secretly treated without the knowledge of Stalin or the Politburo (a fact Beria later admitted during his interrogation). Although the Russian government acknowledged Sarkisov's handwritten list of Beria's victims on 17 January 2003, the victims' names will not be released until 2028.\n\nEvidence suggests that not only did Beria abduct and rape women, but that some were also murdered. His villa in Moscow is now the Tunisian Embassy (at ). In the mid 1990s, routine work in the grounds turned up the skeletal remains of several young women buried in the gardens. According to Martin Sixsmith, in a BBC documentary, \"Beria spent his nights having teenagers abducted from the streets and brought here for him to rape. Those who resisted were strangled and buried in his wife's rose garden.\"\n\nThe testimony of Sarkisov and Nadaraia has been partially corroborated by Edward Ellis Smith, an American who served in the U.S. embassy in Moscow after the war. According to historian Amy Knight, \"Smith noted that Beria's escapades were common knowledge among embassy personnel because his house was on the same street as a residence for Americans, and those who lived there saw girls brought to Beria's house late at night in a limousine.\"\n\nKhrushchev wrote in his memoirs that Beria had, immediately after Stalin's stroke, gone about \"spewing hatred against [Stalin] and mocking him.\" When Stalin showed signs of consciousness, Beria dropped to his knees and kissed his hand. When Stalin fell unconscious again, Beria immediately stood and spat.\n\nStalin's aide Vasili Lozgachev reported that Beria and Malenkov were the first members of the Politburo to see Stalin's condition when he was found unconscious. They arrived at Stalin's dacha at Kuntsevo at 03:00 on 2 March, after being called by Khrushchev and Bulganin. The latter two did not want to risk Stalin's wrath by checking themselves. Lozgachev tried in futility to explain to Beria that the then-unconscious Stalin (still in his soiled clothing) was \"sick and needed medical attention.\" Beria angrily dismissed his claims as panic-mongering and quickly left, ordering him, \"Don't bother us, don't cause a panic and don't disturb Comrade Stalin!\" Calling a doctor was deferred for a full 12 hours after Stalin was rendered paralyzed, incontinent, and unable to speak. This decision is noted as \"extraordinary\" by the historian Simon Sebag-Montefiore, but also consistent with the standard Stalinist policy of deferring all decision-making (no matter how necessary or obvious) without official orders from higher authority.\n\nBeria's decision to avoid immediately calling a doctor was tacitly supported (or at least not opposed) by the rest of the Politburo, which was rudderless without Stalin's micromanagement and paralyzed by a legitimate fear he would suddenly recover and wreak violent reprisal on anyone who had dared to act without his orders. Stalin's suspicion of doctors in the wake of the Doctors' Plot was well known. At the time of his sickness, his private physician was already being tortured in the basement of the Lubyanka for suggesting the leader required more bed rest.\n\nAfter Stalin's death, Beria claimed to have killed him. This aborted a final purge of Old Bolsheviks Mikoyan and Molotov, for which Stalin had been laying the groundwork in the year prior to his death. Shortly after Stalin's death, Beria announced triumphantly to the Politburo that he had \"done [Stalin] in\" and \"saved [us] all\", according to Molotov's memoirs. The assertion that Stalin was poisoned by Beria's associates has been supported by Edvard Radzinsky and other authors.\n\nAfter Stalin's death, Beria's ambitions sprang into full force. In the uneasy silence following the cessation of Stalin's last agonies, Beria was the first to dart forward to kiss his lifeless form (a move likened by Sebag-Montefiore to \"wrenching a dead King's ring off his finger\"). While the rest of Stalin's inner circle (even Molotov, saved from certain liquidation) stood sobbing unashamedly over the body, Beria reportedly appeared \"radiant\", \"regenerated\", and \"glistening with ill-concealed relish.\" When Beria left the room, he broke the somber atmosphere by shouting loudly for his driver, his voice echoing with what Stalin's daughter Svetlana Alliluyeva called \"the ring of triumph unconcealed.\"Alliluyeva noticed how the Politburo seemed openly frightened of Beria and unnerved by his bold display of ambition. \"He's off to take power,\" Mikoyan recalled muttering to Khrushchev. That prompted a \"frantic\" dash for their own limousines to intercept him at the Kremlin.\n\nAfter Stalin's death, Beria was appointed First Deputy Premier and reappointed head of the MVD, which he merged with the MGB. His close ally Malenkov was the new Prime Minister and initially the most powerful man in the post-Stalin leadership. Beria was second most powerful, and given Malenkov's personal weakness, was poised to become the power behind the throne and ultimately leader himself. Khrushchev became Party Secretary. Voroshilov became Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet (i.e., the head of state).\n\nBeria undertook some measures of liberalization immediately after Stalin's death. He reorganized the MVD and drastically reduced its economic power and penal responsibilities. A number of costly construction projects such as the Salekhard–Igarka Railway were scrapped, and the remaining industrial enterprises became affiliated under corresponding economic ministries. The Gulag system was transferred to the Ministry of Justice, and a mass release of over a million prisoners, almost half of the Gulag personnel, was announced, although political prisoners were excluded. The amnesty, however, led to a substantial increase in crime and would later be used against Beria by his rivals.\n\nIn an attempt to consolidate power, Beria also took steps to recognize the rights of non-Russian nationalities. He questioned the traditional policy of Russification and encouraged local officials to assert their own identities. He first turned to Georgia, where Stalin's fabricated Mingrelian affair was called off and the republic's key posts were replaced by pro-Beria Georgians. Yet Beria's policies in Ukraine alarmed Khrushchev, for whom Ukraine was a power base. Khrushchev then tried to draw Malenkov to his side, warning that \"Beria is sharpening his knives\".\n\nKhrushchev opposed the alliance between Beria and Malenkov, but he was initially unable to challenge them. Khrushchev's opportunity came in June 1953 when a spontaneous uprising against the East German Communist regime broke out in East Berlin. Based on Beria's own statements, other leaders suspected that in the wake of the uprising, he might be willing to trade the reunification of Germany and the end of the Cold War for massive aid from the United States, as had been received in World War II. The cost of the war still weighed heavily on the Soviet economy. Beria craved the vast financial resources that another (more sustained) relationship with the United States could provide. For example, Beria gave Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania serious prospects of national autonomy, possibly similarly to other Soviet satellite states in Europe. Regarding East Germany Beria said, \"It's not even a real state but one kept in being only by Soviet troops.\"\n\nThe East German uprising convinced Molotov, Malenkov, and Nikolai Bulganin that Beria's policies were dangerous and destabilizing to Soviet power. Within days of the events in Germany, Khrushchev persuaded the other leaders to support a Party \"coup\" against Beria; Beria's principal ally Malenkov abandoned him.\n\nOn 26 June 1953, Beria was arrested and held in an undisclosed location near Moscow. Accounts of Beria's fall vary considerably. By the most likely account, Khrushchev prepared an elaborate ambush, convening a meeting of the Presidium on 26 June, where he suddenly launched a scathing attack on Beria, accusing him of being a traitor and spy in the pay of British intelligence. Beria was taken completely by surprise. He asked, \"What's going on, Nikita Sergeyevich? Why are you picking fleas in my trousers?\" Molotov and others quickly spoke against Beria one after the other, followed by a motion by Khrushchev for his instant dismissal.\n\nWhen Beria finally realized what was happening and plaintively appealed to Malenkov to speak for him, his old friend and crony silently hung his head and refused to meet his gaze. Malenkov pressed a button on his desk as the pre-arranged signal to Marshal Georgy Zhukov and a group of armed officers in a nearby room who burst in and arrested Beria.\n\nBeria was taken first to the Moscow guardhouse and then to the bunker of the headquarters of Moscow Military District. Defence Minister Nikolai Bulganin ordered the Kantemirovskaya Tank Division and Tamanskaya Motor Rifle Division to move into Moscow to prevent security forces loyal to Beria from rescuing him. Many of Beria's subordinates, proteges and associates were also arrested, among them Vsevolod Merkulov, Bogdan Kobulov, Sergey Goglidze, Vladimir Dekanozov, Pavel Meshik, and Lev Vlodzimirskiy. \"Pravda\" did not announce Beria's arrest until 10 July, crediting it to Malenkov and referring to Beria's \"criminal activities against the Party and the State.\"\n\nBeria and the others were tried by a \"special court presence\" () of the Supreme Court of the Soviet Union on 23 December 1953 with no defense counsel and no right of appeal. Marshal Ivan Konev was the chairman of the court.\n\nBeria was found guilty of:\nBULLET::::1. Treason. It was alleged that he had maintained secret connections with foreign intelligence services. In particular, attempts to initiate peace talks with Hitler in 1941 through the ambassador of the Kingdom of Bulgaria were classified as treason, though Beria had been acting on the orders of Stalin and Molotov. It was also alleged that Beria, who in 1942 helped organize the defense of the North Caucasus, tried to let the Germans occupy the Caucasus. Beria's suggestion to his assistants that to improve foreign relations it was reasonable to transfer the Kaliningrad Oblast to Germany, part of Karelia to Finland, the Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic to Romania and the Kuril Islands to Japan also formed part of the allegations against him.\nBULLET::::2. Terrorism. Beria's participation in the Purge of the Red Army in 1941 was classified as an act of terrorism.\nBULLET::::3. Counter-revolutionary activity during the Russian Civil War. In 1919 Beria worked in the security service of the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic. Beria maintained that he was assigned to that work by the Hummet party, which subsequently merged with the Adalat Party, the Ahrar Party, and the Baku Bolsheviks to establish the Azerbaijan Communist Party.\n\nBeria and all the other defendants were sentenced to death on 23 December 1953. When the death sentence was carried out, Beria allegedly pleaded on his knees for mercy before collapsing to the floor and wailing and crying, but to no avail. The other six defendants were executed by firing squad on the same day the trial ended. Beria was executed separately. He was shot through the forehead by General Pavel Batitsky who had to stuff a rag into Beria's mouth to silence him. His final moments bore great similarity to those of his own predecessor, NKVD Chief Nikolai Yezhov, who begged for his life before his execution in 1940. Beria's body was subsequently cremated and the remains buried in a forest near Moscow.\n\nMuhsin al-Shargabi, (B.1949) head of the East German-trained internal security apparatus in Marxist South Yemen, played a major role in establishing the police deep state in Aden and had earned for himself the reputation of being the “Beria of South Yemen\". He is suspected of playing a major role in the unrest in Aden.\n\nBeria is the central character in \"Good Night, Uncle Joe\" by Canadian playwright David Elendune. The play is a fictionalised account of the events leading up to Stalin's death.\n\nGeorgian film director Tengiz Abuladze based the character of dictator Varlam Aravidze on Beria in his 1984 film \"Repentance\". Although banned in the Soviet Union for its semi-allegorical critique of Stalinism, it premiered at the 1987 Cannes Film Festival, winning the FIPRESCI Prize, Grand Prize of the Jury, and the Prize of the Ecumenical Jury.\n\nBritish actor Bob Hoskins played Beria in the 1991 film \"Inner Circle\". He was portrayed by Roshan Seth in the 1992 film \"Stalin\" and, with an Irish accent, by David Suchet in \"Red Monarch\".\n\nSimon Russell Beale played Beria in the 2017 satirical film \"The Death of Stalin\".\n\nIn the 1958 CBS production of \"The Plot to Kill Stalin\" for Playhouse 90, Beria was portrayed by E. G. Marshall.\n\nBeria appears in the third episode (\"Superbomb\") of the four-part 2007 BBC docudrama series \"Nuclear Secrets\", played by Boris Isarov. In the 2008 BBC documentary series \"\", Beria was portrayed by Polish actor .\n\nHe was also an important character in the 2013 Russian mini-series \"Kill Stalin\", produced by Star Media.\n\nRichard Condon's 1959 novel \"The Manchurian Candidate\" describes brainwashed Raymond Shaw, the \"perfectly prefabricated assassin,\" as \"this dream by Lavrenti Beria.\"\n\nIn the 1964 science fiction novel by Arkady and Boris Strugatsky, \"Hard to Be a God\", Beria is personified in the character Don Reba who serves as the king's minister of defence.\n\nAt the opening of Kingsley Amis' \"The Alteration\", Lavrentiy Beria figures as \"Monsignor Laurentius\", paired with the similarly black-clad cleric \"Monsignor Henricus\" of the Holy Office (i.e., the Inquisition); the one to whom Beria was compared by Stalin in our own timeline: Heinrich Himmler. In the novel, both men are on the same side, serving an alternate-world Catholic Empire.\n\nBeria is a significant character in the alternate history/alien invasion novel series Worldwar by Harry Turtledove as well as the \"Axis of Time\" series by John Birmingham\n\nIn the 1981 novel Noble House by James Clavell set in 1963 Hong Kong, the main character Ian Dunross received from Alan Medford Grant a set of secret documents regarding a Soviet spy-ring in Hong Kong code-named \"Sevrin\". The document was signed by an LB, believed by Grant (and the mysterious Tip Tok-Toh) to be Lavrentiy Beria (written as Lavrenti Beria in the novel).\n\nBeria is a significant character in the opening chapters of the 1998 novel \"Archangel\" by British novelist Robert Harris.\n\nBeria is a minor character in the 2009 novel \"The Hundred-Year-Old Man Who Climbed Out the Window and Disappeared\" by Jonas Jonasson. Beria is described as the boss of the Soviet state's security and is in attendance at a meal with the main character and Stalin.\n\nIn 2012, his alleged personal diary from 1938 to 1953 was published in Russia.\n\nBULLET::::- History of the Soviet Union\nBULLET::::- \"Democracy and Totalitarianism\"\n\nBULLET::::- Avtorkhanov, Abdurahman, \"The Mystery of Stalin's Death\", \"Novyi Mir\", #5, 1991, pp. 194–233 (in Russian)\nBULLET::::- Khruschev, Nikita, \"Khruschev Remembers: Last Testament\", Random House, 1977,\nBULLET::::- Yakovlev, A.N., Naumov, V., and Sigachev, Y. (eds), \"Lavrenty Beria, 1953. Stenographic Report of July's Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and Other Documents\", International Democracy Foundation, Moscow, 1999 (in Russian).\nBULLET::::- .\n\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- Interview with Sergo Beria\nBULLET::::- An outline of the Russian Supreme Court decision of 29 May 2000\nBULLET::::- Annotated bibliography for Lavrentiy Beria from the Alsos Digital Library for Nuclear Issues\nBULLET::::- Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Current Intelligence. \"The Reversal of the Doctors' Plot and Its Immediate Aftermath\", 17 July 1953.\nBULLET::::- Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Current Intelligence. \"Purge of L.P. Beria\", 17 April 1954.\nBULLET::::- Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Current Intelligence. \"Summarization of Reports Preceding Beria Purge\", 17 August 1954.\nBULLET::::- Lavrenty Beria performed by Bob Hoskins and other russian historical celebrities played by foreign stars\n"}
{"id": "18391", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18391", "title": "Lyonel Feininger", "text": "Lyonel Feininger\n\nLyonel Charles Feininger (July 17, 1871January 13, 1956) was a German-American painter, and a leading exponent of Expressionism. He also worked as a caricaturist and comic strip artist. He was born and grew up in New York City, traveling to Germany at 16 to study and perfect his art. He started his career as a cartoonist in 1894 and met with much success in this area. He was also a commercial caricaturist for 20 years for magazines and newspapers in the USA and Germany. At the age of 36, he started to work as a fine artist. He also produced a large body of photographic works between 1928 and the mid 1950s, but he kept these primarily within his circle of friends. He was also a pianist and composer, with several piano compositions and fugues for organ extant.\n\nLyonel Feininger was born to German-American violinist and composer Karl Feininger and American singer Elizabeth Feininger. He was born and grew up in New York City, but traveled to Germany at the age of 16 in 1887 to study. In 1888, he moved to Berlin and studied at the Königliche Akademie Berlin under Ernst Hancke. He continued his studies at art schools in Berlin with Karl Schlabitz, and in Paris with sculptor Filippo Colarossi. He started as a caricaturist for several magazines including \"Harper's Round Table\", \"Harper's Young People\", \"Humoristische Blätter\", \"Lustige Blätter\", \"Das Narrenschiff\", \"Berliner Tageblatt\" and \"Ulk\".\n\nIn 1900, he met Clara Fürst, daughter of the painter Gustav Fürst. He married her in 1901, and they had two daughters. In 1905, he separated from his wife after meeting Julia Berg. He married Berg in 1908 and the couple had three boys.\n\nThe artist was represented with drawings at the exhibitions of the annual Berlin Secession in the years 1901 through 1903.\n\nFeininger's career as cartoonist started in 1894. He was working for several German, French and American magazines. In February 1906, when a quarter of Chicago's population was of German descent, James Keeley, editor of The \"Chicago Tribune\" traveled to Germany to procure the services of the most popular humor artists. He recruited Feininger to illustrate two comic strips \"The Kin-der-Kids\" and \"Wee Willie Winkie's World\" for the \"Chicago Tribune\". The strips were noted for their fey humor and graphic experimentation. He also worked as a commercial caricaturist for 20 years for various newspapers and magazines in both the United States and Germany. Later, Art Spiegelman wrote in \"The New York Times Book Review,\" that Feininger's comics have \"achieved a breathtaking formal grace unsurpassed in the history of the medium.\"\n\nFeininger started working as a fine artist at the age of 36. He was a member of the \"Berliner Sezession\" in 1909, and he was associated with German expressionist groups: Die Brücke, the Novembergruppe, Gruppe 1919, the Blaue Reiter circle and Die Blaue Vier (The Blue Four). His first solo exhibit was at Sturm Gallery in Berlin, 1917. When Walter Gropius founded the Bauhaus in Germany in 1919, Feininger was his first faculty appointment, and became the master artist in charge of the printmaking workshop.\nFrom 1909 until 1921, Feininger spent summer vacations on the island of Usedom to recover and to get new inspiration. Typical of works from this period were marine settings from the shores of the Baltic See (Ostsee). He continued to create paintings and drawings of Benz for the rest of his life, even after returning to live in the United States. A tour of the sites appearing in the works of Feininger follows a path with markers in the ground to guide visitors.\n\nHe designed the cover for the Bauhaus 1919 manifesto: an expressionist woodcut 'cathedral'. He taught at the Bauhaus for several years. Among the students who attended his workshops were Ludwig Hirschfeld Mack (German/Australian (1893–1965), Hans Friedrich Grohs (German 1892 - 1981), and Margarete Koehler-Bittkow (German/American, 1898–1964).\n\nWhen the Nazi Party came to power in 1933, the situation became unbearable for Feininger and his wife. The Nazi Party declared his work to be \"degenerate\". They moved to America after his work was exhibited in the 'degenerate art' (\"Entartete Kunst\") in 1936, but before the 1937 exhibition in Munich. He taught at Mills College before returning to New York. He was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Letters in 1955.\n\nIn addition to drawing, Feininger created art with painted toy figures being photographed in front of drawn backgrounds.\n\nFeininger produced a large body of photographic works between 1928 and the mid-1950s. He kept his photographic work within his circle of friends, and it was not shared with the public in his lifetime. He gave some prints away to his colleagues Walter Gropius and Alfred H. Barr Jr..\n\nFeininger also had intermittent activity as a pianist and composer, with several piano compositions and fugues for organ extant.\n\nHis sons, Andreas Feininger and T. Lux Feininger, both became noted artists, the former as a photographer and the latter as a photographer and painter. T. Lux Feininger died July 7, 2011 at the age of 101.\n\nA major retrospective exhibition of Lyonel Feininger's work was put on in 2011-2012: it opened initially at the Whitney Museum of American Art, June 30 through October 16, 2011, subsequently at the Montreal Museum of Fine Arts, January 1 through May 13, 2012. The exhibition is described as \"the first in Feininger's native country in more than forty-five years, and the first ever to include the full breadth of his art\" and as \"accompanied by a richly illustrated monograph with a feature essay that provides a broad overview of Feininger's career...\" Many critics have argued that the artist's work was at its most mature around 1910 in works in which the power of Feininger as illustrator balance his abstract side; however, we have to consider the possibility that Feininger used cubism as a more artistically succinct tool to establish his version of the concept known as the objective correlative.\n\nFeininger was also a composer: in tandem with the Whitney retrospective, the American Symphony Orchestra under Leon Botstein, at Carnegie Hall on 21 October 2011, performed three orchestral fugues written by Feininger. Barbara Haskell, curator of the Whitney exhibit, wrote that for his entire life, Feininger credited Bach with having been his \"master in painting.\" \n\nAt a 2001 Christie's auction in London, Feininger's painting \"The Green Bridge\" (1909) was sold for £2.42 million.\n\nAt a 2007 Sotheby’s auction in New York, Feininger’s oil painting \"Jesuits III\" (1915) sold for $23,280,000.\n\nAt a 2017 Sotheby's auction in New York, Feininger's oil painting \"Fin de séance\" (1910) sold for $5,637,500.\n\nBULLET::::- 1907, \"Der weiße Mann\", (Collection Museo Carmen Thyssen-Bornemisza, Madrid)\nBULLET::::- 1910, \"Straße im Dämmern\", (Sprengel Museum, Hannover)\nBULLET::::- 1913, \"Gelmeroda I\", (Private collection, New York)\nBULLET::::- 1913, \"Leuchtbake\", (Museum Folkwang, Essen, Germany)\nBULLET::::- 1916, \"Grüne Brücke II\" (Green Bridge II), (North Carolina Museum of Art, Raleigh)\nBULLET::::- 1918, \"Teltow II\", (Neue Nationalgalerie, Berlin)\nBULLET::::- 1918, \"Yellow Streets II\", (Musée des Beaux-Arts de Montréal, Montréal)\nBULLET::::- 1920, \"Ostsee-Segelboote II\", (Private collection, Wichita, KS)\nBULLET::::- 1922, \"Church of Heiligenhafen\", (Reynolda House Museum of American Art, Winston-Salem, NC)\nBULLET::::- 1925, \"Barfüßerkirche in Erfurt I\", (Staatsgalerie Stuttgart)\nBULLET::::- 1926, \"Barfüßerkirche II\" (\"Church of the Minorities II\")\nBULLET::::- 1929, \"Halle, Am Trödel\", (Bauhaus-Archive, Berlin)\nBULLET::::- 1931, \"Die Türme über der Stadt (Halle)\", (Museum Ludwig, Köln)\nBULLET::::- 1936, \"Gelmeroda XIII\", (Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York)\nBULLET::::- 1940, \"The River\", (Worcester Art Museum, MA)\n\nBULLET::::- Cubism\n\nBULLET::::- Haskell, Barbara. \"Lyonel Feininger: At The Edge of the World\". Exhibition Catalogue. New York: Whitney Museum of American Art, 2011\nBULLET::::- Muir, Laura and Nathan Timpano. \"Lyonel Feininger: Photographs, 1928-1939\". Cambridge: Harvard Art Museums and Hatje Cantz, 2011\nBULLET::::- Nisbet, Peter. \"Lyonel Feininger: Drawings and Watercolors\". Cambridge: Harvard Art Museums and Hatje Cantz Verlag, 2011\n\nBULLET::::- Feininger retrospective at the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York Lyonel Feininger: At the Edge of the World\nBULLET::::- Lyonel Feininger Project\nBULLET::::- Moeller Fine Art - Lyonel Feininger Moeller Fine Art, New York + Berlin, world expert on Lyonel Feininger\nBULLET::::- The Ohio State University Billy Ireland Cartoon Library & Museum: Lyonel Feininger digital exhibit\nBULLET::::- Lyonel Feininger at Don Markstein's Toonopedia. Archived from the original on April 15, 2015.\nBULLET::::- Available Works and Biography Galerie Ludorff, Düsseldorf, Germany\nBULLET::::- Lyonel Feininger papers at the Smithsonian Archives of American Art\nBULLET::::- Lyonel Feininger Archives at Busch-Reisinger Museum Archives, Harvard Art Museum\nBULLET::::- Biography\n"}
{"id": "18393", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18393", "title": "Life", "text": "Life\n\nLife is a characteristic that distinguishes physical entities that have biological processes, such as signaling and self-sustaining processes, from those that do not, either because such functions have ceased (they have died), or because they never had such functions and are classified as inanimate. Various forms of life exist, such as plants, animals, fungi, protists, archaea, and bacteria. The criteria can at times be ambiguous and may or may not define viruses, viroids, or potential synthetic life as \"living\". Biology is the science concerned with the study of life.\n\nThere is currently no consensus regarding the definition of life. One popular definition is that organisms are open systems that maintain homeostasis, are composed of cells, have a life cycle, undergo metabolism, can grow, adapt to their environment, respond to stimuli, reproduce and evolve. However, several other definitions have been proposed, and there are some borderline cases of life, such as viruses or viroids.\n\nAbiogenesis is the natural process of life arising from non-living matter, such as simple organic compounds. The prevailing scientific hypothesis is that the transition from non-living to living entities was not a single event, but a gradual process of increasing complexity. Life on Earth first appeared as early as 4.28 billion years ago, soon after ocean formation 4.41 billion years ago, and not long after the formation of the Earth 4.54 billion years ago. The earliest known life forms are microfossils of bacteria. Researchers generally think that current life on Earth descends from an RNA world, although RNA-based life may not have been the first life to have existed. The classic 1952 Miller–Urey experiment and similar research demonstrated that most amino acids, the chemical constituents of the proteins used in all living organisms, can be synthesized from inorganic compounds under conditions intended to replicate those of the early Earth. Complex organic molecules occur in the Solar System and in interstellar space, and these molecules may have provided starting material for the development of life on Earth.\n\nSince its primordial beginnings, life on Earth has changed its environment on a geologic time scale, but it has also adapted to survive in most ecosystems and conditions. Some microorganisms, called extremophiles, thrive in physically or geochemically extreme environments that are detrimental to most other life on Earth. The cell is considered the structural and functional unit of life. There are two kinds of cells, prokaryotic and eukaryotic, both of which consist of cytoplasm enclosed within a membrane and contain many biomolecules such as proteins and nucleic acids. Cells reproduce through a process of cell division, in which the parent cell divides into two or more daughter cells.\n\nIn the past, there have been many attempts to define what is meant by \"life\" through obsolete concepts such as odic force, hylomorphism, spontaneous generation and vitalism, that have now been disproved by biological discoveries. Aristotle was the first person to classify organisms. Later, Carl Linnaeus introduced his system of binomial nomenclature for the classification of species. Eventually new groups and categories of life were discovered, such as cells and microorganisms, forcing dramatic revisions of the structure of relationships between living organisms. Though currently only known on Earth, life need not be restricted to it, and many scientists speculate in the existence of extraterrestrial life. Artificial life is a computer simulation or human-made reconstruction of any aspect of life, which is often used to examine systems related to natural life.\n\nDeath is the permanent termination of all biological functions which sustain an organism, and as such, is the end of its life. Extinction is the term describing the dying out of a group or taxon, usually a species. Fossils are the preserved remains or traces of organisms.\n\nThe definition of life has long been a challenge for scientists and philosophers, with many varied definitions put forward. This is partially because life is a process, not a substance. This is complicated by a lack of knowledge of the characteristics of living entities, if any, that may have developed outside of Earth. Philosophical definitions of life have also been put forward, with similar difficulties on how to distinguish living things from the non-living. Legal definitions of life have also been described and debated, though these generally focus on the decision to declare a human dead, and the legal ramifications of this decision.\n\nSince there is no unequivocal definition of life, most current definitions in biology are descriptive. Life is considered a characteristic of something that preserves, furthers or reinforces its existence in the given environment. This characteristic exhibits all or most of the following traits:\nBULLET::::1. Homeostasis: regulation of the internal environment to maintain a constant state; for example, sweating to reduce temperature\nBULLET::::2. Organization: being structurally composed of one or more cells – the basic units of life\nBULLET::::3. Metabolism: transformation of energy by converting chemicals and energy into cellular components (anabolism) and decomposing organic matter (catabolism). Living things require energy to maintain internal organization (homeostasis) and to produce the other phenomena associated with life.\nBULLET::::4. Growth: maintenance of a higher rate of anabolism than catabolism. A growing organism increases in size in all of its parts, rather than simply accumulating matter.\nBULLET::::5. Adaptation: the ability to change over time in response to the environment. This ability is fundamental to the process of evolution and is determined by the organism's heredity, diet, and external factors.\nBULLET::::6. Response to stimuli: a response can take many forms, from the contraction of a unicellular organism to external chemicals, to complex reactions involving all the senses of multicellular organisms. A response is often expressed by motion; for example, the leaves of a plant turning toward the sun (phototropism), and chemotaxis.\nBULLET::::7. Reproduction: the ability to produce new individual organisms, either asexually from a single parent organism or sexually from two parent organisms.\n\nThese complex processes, called physiological functions, have underlying physical and chemical bases, as well as signaling and control mechanisms that are essential to maintaining life.\n\nFrom a physics perspective, living beings are thermodynamic systems with an organized molecular structure that can reproduce itself and evolve as survival dictates. Thermodynamically, life has been described as an open system which makes use of gradients in its surroundings to create imperfect copies of itself. Hence, life is a self-sustained chemical system capable of undergoing Darwinian evolution. A major strength of this definition is that it distinguishes life by the evolutionary process rather than its chemical composition.\n\nOthers take a systemic viewpoint that does not necessarily depend on molecular chemistry. One systemic definition of life is that living things are self-organizing and autopoietic (self-producing). Variations of this definition include Stuart Kauffman's definition as an autonomous agent or a multi-agent system capable of reproducing itself or themselves, and of completing at least one thermodynamic work cycle. This definition is extended by the apparition of novel functions over time.\n\nWhether or not viruses should be considered as alive is controversial. They are most often considered as just replicators rather than forms of life. They have been described as \"organisms at the edge of life\" because they possess genes, evolve by natural selection, and replicate by creating multiple copies of themselves through self-assembly. However, viruses do not metabolize and they require a host cell to make new products. Virus self-assembly within host cells has implications for the study of the origin of life, as it may support the hypothesis that life could have started as self-assembling organic molecules.\n\nTo reflect the minimum phenomena required, other biological definitions of life have been proposed, with many of these being based upon chemical systems. Biophysicists have commented that living things function on negative entropy. In other words, living processes can be viewed as a delay of the spontaneous diffusion or dispersion of the internal energy of biological molecules towards more potential microstates. In more detail, according to physicists such as John Bernal, Erwin Schrödinger, Eugene Wigner, and John Avery, life is a member of the class of phenomena that are open or continuous systems able to decrease their internal entropy at the expense of substances or free energy taken in from the environment and subsequently rejected in a degraded form.\n\nLiving systems are open self-organizing living things that interact with their environment. These systems are maintained by flows of information, energy, and matter.\n\nSome scientists have proposed in the last few decades that a general living systems theory is required to explain the nature of life. Such a general theory would arise out of the ecological and biological sciences and attempt to map general principles for how all living systems work. Instead of examining phenomena by attempting to break things down into components, a general living systems theory explores phenomena in terms of dynamic patterns of the relationships of organisms with their environment.\n\nThe idea that the Earth is alive is found in philosophy and religion, but the first scientific discussion of it was by the Scottish scientist James Hutton. In 1785, he stated that the Earth was a superorganism and that its proper study should be physiology. Hutton is considered the father of geology, but his idea of a living Earth was forgotten in the intense reductionism of the 19th century. The Gaia hypothesis, proposed in the 1960s by scientist James Lovelock, suggests that life on Earth functions as a single organism that defines and maintains environmental conditions necessary for its survival. This hypothesis served as one of the foundations of the modern Earth system science.\n\nThe first attempt at a general living systems theory for explaining the nature of life was in 1978, by American biologist James Grier Miller. Robert Rosen (1991) built on this by defining a system component as \"a unit of organization; a part with a function, i.e., a definite relation between part and whole.\" From this and other starting concepts, he developed a \"relational theory of systems\" that attempts to explain the special properties of life. Specifically, he identified the \"nonfractionability of components in an organism\" as the fundamental difference between living systems and \"biological machines.\"\n\nA systems view of life treats environmental fluxes and biological fluxes together as a \"reciprocity of influence,\" and a reciprocal relation with environment is arguably as important for understanding life as it is for understanding ecosystems. As Harold J. Morowitz (1992) explains it, life is a property of an ecological system rather than a single organism or species. He argues that an ecosystemic definition of life is preferable to a strictly biochemical or physical one. Robert Ulanowicz (2009) highlights mutualism as the key to understand the systemic, order-generating behavior of life and ecosystems.\n\nComplex systems biology (CSB) is a field of science that studies the emergence of complexity in functional organisms from the viewpoint of dynamic systems theory. The latter is also often called systems biology and aims to understand the most fundamental aspects of life. A closely related approach to CSB and systems biology called relational biology is concerned mainly with understanding life processes in terms of the most important relations, and categories of such relations among the essential functional components of organisms; for multicellular organisms, this has been defined as \"categorical biology\", or a model representation of organisms as a category theory of biological relations, as well as an algebraic topology of the functional organization of living organisms in terms of their dynamic, complex networks of metabolic, genetic, and epigenetic processes and signaling pathways. Alternative but closely related approaches focus on the interdependance of constraints, where constraints can be either molecular, such as enzymes, or macroscopic, such as the geometry of a bone or of the vascular system.\n\nIt has also been argued that the evolution of order in living systems and certain physical systems obeys a common fundamental principle termed the Darwinian dynamic. The Darwinian dynamic was formulated by first considering how macroscopic order is generated in a simple non-biological system far from thermodynamic equilibrium, and then extending consideration to short, replicating RNA molecules. The underlying order-generating process was concluded to be basically similar for both types of systems.\n\nAnother systemic definition called the operator theory proposes that \"life is a general term for the presence of the typical closures found in organisms; the typical closures are a membrane and an autocatalytic set in the cell\" and that an organism is any system with an organisation that complies with an operator type that is at least as complex as the cell. Life can also be modeled as a network of inferior negative feedbacks of regulatory mechanisms subordinated to a superior positive feedback formed by the potential of expansion and reproduction.\n\nSome of the earliest theories of life were materialist, holding that all that exists is matter, and that life is merely a complex form or arrangement of matter. Empedocles (430 BC) argued that everything in the universe is made up of a combination of four eternal \"elements\" or \"roots of all\": earth, water, air, and fire. All change is explained by the arrangement and rearrangement of these four elements. The various forms of life are caused by an appropriate mixture of elements.\n\nDemocritus (460 BC) thought that the essential characteristic of life is having a soul (\"psyche\"). Like other ancient writers, he was attempting to explain what makes something a \"living\" thing. His explanation was that fiery atoms make a soul in exactly the same way atoms and void account for any other thing. He elaborates on fire because of the apparent connection between life and heat, and because fire moves.\n\nThe mechanistic materialism that originated in ancient Greece was revived and revised by the French philosopher René Descartes, who held that animals and humans were assemblages of parts that together functioned as a machine. In the 19th century, the advances in cell theory in biological science encouraged this view. The evolutionary theory of Charles Darwin (1859) is a mechanistic explanation for the origin of species by means of natural selection.\n\nHylomorphism is a theory first expressed by the Greek philosopher Aristotle (322 BC). The application of hylomorphism to biology was important to Aristotle, and biology is extensively covered in his extant writings. In this view, everything in the material universe has both matter and form, and the form of a living thing is its soul (Greek \"psyche\", Latin \"anima\"). There are three kinds of souls: the \"vegetative soul\" of plants, which causes them to grow and decay and nourish themselves, but does not cause motion and sensation; the \"animal soul\", which causes animals to move and feel; and the \"rational soul\", which is the source of consciousness and reasoning, which (Aristotle believed) is found only in man. Each higher soul has all of the attributes of the lower ones. Aristotle believed that while matter can exist without form, form cannot exist without matter, and that therefore the soul cannot exist without the body.\n\nThis account is consistent with teleological explanations of life, which account for phenomena in terms of purpose or goal-directedness. Thus, the whiteness of the polar bear's coat is explained by its purpose of camouflage. The direction of causality (from the future to the past) is in contradiction with the scientific evidence for natural selection, which explains the consequence in terms of a prior cause. Biological features are explained not by looking at future optimal results, but by looking at the past evolutionary history of a species, which led to the natural selection of the features in question.\n\nSpontaneous generation was the belief that living organisms can form without descent from similar organisms. Typically, the idea was that certain forms such as fleas could arise from inanimate matter such as dust or the supposed seasonal generation of mice and insects from mud or garbage.\n\nThe theory of spontaneous generation was proposed by Aristotle, who compiled and expanded the work of prior natural philosophers and the various ancient explanations of the appearance of organisms; it held sway for two millennia. It was decisively dispelled by the experiments of Louis Pasteur in 1859, who expanded upon the investigations of predecessors such as Francesco Redi. Disproof of the traditional ideas of spontaneous generation is no longer controversial among biologists.\n\nVitalism is the belief that the life-principle is non-material. This originated with Georg Ernst Stahl (17th century), and remained popular until the middle of the 19th century. It appealed to philosophers such as Henri Bergson, Friedrich Nietzsche, and Wilhelm Dilthey, anatomists like Marie François Xavier Bichat, and chemists like Justus von Liebig. Vitalism included the idea that there was a fundamental difference between organic and inorganic material, and the belief that organic material can only be derived from living things. This was disproved in 1828, when Friedrich Wöhler prepared urea from inorganic materials. This Wöhler synthesis is considered the starting point of modern organic chemistry. It is of historical significance because for the first time an organic compound was produced in inorganic reactions.\n\nDuring the 1850s, Hermann von Helmholtz, anticipated by Julius Robert von Mayer, demonstrated that no energy is lost in muscle movement, suggesting that there were no \"vital forces\" necessary to move a muscle. These results led to the abandonment of scientific interest in vitalistic theories, although the belief lingered on in pseudoscientific theories such as homeopathy, which interprets diseases and sickness as caused by disturbances in a hypothetical vital force or life force.\n\nThe age of the Earth is about 4.54 billion years. Evidence suggests that life on Earth has existed for at least 3.5 billion years, with the oldest physical traces of life dating back 3.7 billion years; however, some theories, such as the Late Heavy Bombardment theory, suggest that life on Earth may have started even earlier, as early as 4.1–4.4 billion years ago, and the chemistry leading to life may have begun shortly after the Big Bang, 13.8 billion years ago, during an epoch when the universe was only 10–17 million years old.\n\nMore than 99% of all species of life forms, amounting to over five billion species, that ever lived on Earth are estimated to be extinct.\n\nAlthough the number of Earth's catalogued species of lifeforms is between 1.2 million and 2 million, the total number of species in the planet is uncertain. Estimates range from 8 million to 100 million, with a more narrow range between 10 and 14 million, but it may be as high as 1 trillion (with only one-thousandth of one percent of the species described) according to studies realized in May 2016. The total number of related DNA base pairs on Earth is estimated at 5.0 x 10 and weighs 50 billion tonnes. In comparison, the total mass of the biosphere has been estimated to be as much as 4 TtC (trillion tons of carbon). In July 2016, scientists reported identifying a set of 355 genes from the Last Universal Common Ancestor (LUCA) of all organisms living on Earth.\n\nAll known life forms share fundamental molecular mechanisms, reflecting their common descent; based on these observations, hypotheses on the origin of life attempt to find a mechanism explaining the formation of a universal common ancestor, from simple organic molecules via pre-cellular life to protocells and metabolism. Models have been divided into \"genes-first\" and \"metabolism-first\" categories, but a recent trend is the emergence of hybrid models that combine both categories.\n\nThere is no current scientific consensus as to how life originated. However, most accepted scientific models build on the Miller–Urey experiment and the work of Sidney Fox, which show that conditions on the primitive Earth favored chemical reactions that synthesize amino acids and other organic compounds from inorganic precursors, and phospholipids spontaneously form lipid bilayers, the basic structure of a cell membrane.\n\nLiving organisms synthesize proteins, which are polymers of amino acids using instructions encoded by deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). Protein synthesis entails intermediary ribonucleic acid (RNA) polymers. One possibility for how life began is that genes originated first, followed by proteins; the alternative being that proteins came first and then genes.\n\nHowever, because genes and proteins are both required to produce the other, the problem of considering which came first is like that of the chicken or the egg. Most scientists have adopted the hypothesis that because of this, it is unlikely that genes and proteins arose independently.\n\nTherefore, a possibility, first suggested by Francis Crick, is that the first life was based on RNA, which has the DNA-like properties of information storage and the catalytic properties of some proteins. This is called the RNA world hypothesis, and it is supported by the observation that many of the most critical components of cells (those that evolve the slowest) are composed mostly or entirely of RNA. Also, many critical cofactors (ATP, Acetyl-CoA, NADH, etc.) are either nucleotides or substances clearly related to them. The catalytic properties of RNA had not yet been demonstrated when the hypothesis was first proposed, but they were confirmed by Thomas Cech in 1986.\n\nOne issue with the RNA world hypothesis is that synthesis of RNA from simple inorganic precursors is more difficult than for other organic molecules. One reason for this is that RNA precursors are very stable and react with each other very slowly under ambient conditions, and it has also been proposed that living organisms consisted of other molecules before RNA. However, the successful synthesis of certain RNA molecules under the conditions that existed prior to life on Earth has been achieved by adding alternative precursors in a specified order with the precursor phosphate present throughout the reaction. This study makes the RNA world hypothesis more plausible.\n\nGeological findings in 2013 showed that reactive phosphorus species (like phosphite) were in abundance in the ocean before 3.5 Ga, and that Schreibersite easily reacts with aqueous glycerol to generate phosphite and glycerol 3-phosphate. It is hypothesized that Schreibersite-containing meteorites from the Late Heavy Bombardment could have provided early reduced phosphorus, which could react with prebiotic organic molecules to form phosphorylated biomolecules, like RNA.\n\nIn 2009, experiments demonstrated Darwinian evolution of a two-component system of RNA enzymes (ribozymes) \"in vitro\". The work was performed in the laboratory of Gerald Joyce, who stated \"This is the first example, outside of biology, of evolutionary adaptation in a molecular genetic system.\"\n\nPrebiotic compounds may have originated extraterrestrially. NASA findings in 2011, based on studies with meteorites found on Earth, suggest DNA and RNA components (adenine, guanine and related organic molecules) may be formed in outer space.\n\nIn March 2015, NASA scientists reported that, for the first time, complex DNA and RNA organic compounds of life, including uracil, cytosine and thymine, have been formed in the laboratory under outer space conditions, using starting chemicals, such as pyrimidine, found in meteorites. Pyrimidine, like polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), the most carbon-rich chemical found in the universe, may have been formed in red giants or in interstellar dust and gas clouds, according to the scientists.\n\nAccording to the panspermia hypothesis, microscopic life—distributed by meteoroids, asteroids and other small Solar System bodies—may exist throughout the universe.\n\nThe diversity of life on Earth is a result of the dynamic interplay between genetic opportunity, metabolic capability, environmental challenges, and symbiosis. For most of its existence, Earth's habitable environment has been dominated by microorganisms and subjected to their metabolism and evolution. As a consequence of these microbial activities, the physical-chemical environment on Earth has been changing on a geologic time scale, thereby affecting the path of evolution of subsequent life. For example, the release of molecular oxygen by cyanobacteria as a by-product of photosynthesis induced global changes in the Earth's environment. Because oxygen was toxic to most life on Earth at the time, this posed novel evolutionary challenges, and ultimately resulted in the formation of Earth's major animal and plant species. This interplay between organisms and their environment is an inherent feature of living systems.\n\nThe biosphere is the global sum of all ecosystems. It can also be termed as the zone of life on Earth, a closed system (apart from solar and cosmic radiation and heat from the interior of the Earth), and largely self-regulating. By the most general biophysiological definition, the biosphere is the global ecological system integrating all living beings and their relationships, including their interaction with the elements of the lithosphere, geosphere, hydrosphere, and atmosphere.\n\nLife forms live in every part of the Earth's biosphere, including soil, hot springs, inside rocks at least deep underground, the deepest parts of the ocean, and at least high in the atmosphere. Under certain test conditions, life forms have been observed to thrive in the near-weightlessness of space and to survive in the vacuum of outer space. Life forms appear to thrive in the Mariana Trench, the deepest spot in the Earth's oceans. Other researchers reported related studies that life forms thrive inside rocks up to below the sea floor under of ocean off the coast of the northwestern United States, as well as beneath the seabed off Japan. In August 2014, scientists confirmed the existence of life forms living below the ice of Antarctica. According to one researcher, \"You can find microbes everywhere—they're extremely adaptable to conditions, and survive wherever they are.\"\n\nThe biosphere is postulated to have evolved, beginning with a process of biopoesis (life created naturally from non-living matter, such as simple organic compounds) or biogenesis (life created from living matter), at least some 3.5 billion years ago. The earliest evidence for life on Earth includes biogenic graphite found in 3.7 billion-year-old metasedimentary rocks from Western Greenland and microbial mat fossils found in 3.48 billion-year-old sandstone from Western Australia. More recently, in 2015, \"remains of biotic life\" were found in 4.1 billion-year-old rocks in Western Australia. In 2017, putative fossilized microorganisms (or microfossils) were announced to have been discovered in hydrothermal vent precipitates in the Nuvvuagittuq Belt of Quebec, Canada that were as old as 4.28 billion years, the oldest record of life on earth, suggesting \"an almost instantaneous emergence of life\" after ocean formation 4.4 billion years ago, and not long after the formation of the Earth 4.54 billion years ago. According to biologist Stephen Blair Hedges, \"If life arose relatively quickly on Earth ... then it could be common in the universe.\"\n\nIn a general sense, biospheres are any closed, self-regulating systems containing ecosystems. This includes artificial biospheres such as Biosphere 2 and BIOS-3, and potentially ones on other planets or moons.\n\nThe inert components of an ecosystem are the physical and chemical factors necessary for life—energy (sunlight or chemical energy), water, heat, atmosphere, gravity, nutrients, and ultraviolet solar radiation protection. In most ecosystems, the conditions vary during the day and from one season to the next. To live in most ecosystems, then, organisms must be able to survive a range of conditions, called the \"range of tolerance.\" Outside that are the \"zones of physiological stress,\" where the survival and reproduction are possible but not optimal. Beyond these zones are the \"zones of intolerance,\" where survival and reproduction of that organism is unlikely or impossible. Organisms that have a wide range of tolerance are more widely distributed than organisms with a narrow range of tolerance.\n\nTo survive, selected microorganisms can assume forms that enable them to withstand freezing, complete desiccation, starvation, high levels of radiation exposure, and other physical or chemical challenges. These microorganisms may survive exposure to such conditions for weeks, months, years, or even centuries. Extremophiles are microbial life forms that thrive outside the ranges where life is commonly found. They excel at exploiting uncommon sources of energy. While all organisms are composed of nearly identical molecules, evolution has enabled such microbes to cope with this wide range of physical and chemical conditions. Characterization of the structure and metabolic diversity of microbial communities in such extreme environments is ongoing.\n\nMicrobial life forms thrive even in the Mariana Trench, the deepest spot in the Earth's oceans. Microbes also thrive inside rocks up to below the sea floor under of ocean.\n\nInvestigation of the tenacity and versatility of life on Earth, as well as an understanding of the molecular systems that some organisms utilize to survive such extremes, is important for the search for life beyond Earth. For example, lichen could survive for a month in a simulated Martian environment.\n\nAll life forms require certain core chemical elements needed for biochemical functioning. These include carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, phosphorus, and sulfur—the elemental macronutrients for all organisms—often represented by the acronym CHNOPS. Together these make up nucleic acids, proteins and lipids, the bulk of living matter. Five of these six elements comprise the chemical components of DNA, the exception being sulfur. The latter is a component of the amino acids cysteine and methionine. The most biologically abundant of these elements is carbon, which has the desirable attribute of forming multiple, stable covalent bonds. This allows carbon-based (organic) molecules to form an immense variety of chemical arrangements. Alternative hypothetical types of biochemistry have been proposed that eliminate one or more of these elements, swap out an element for one not on the list, or change required chiralities or other chemical properties.\n\nDeoxyribonucleic acid is a molecule that carries most of the genetic instructions used in the growth, development, functioning and reproduction of all known living organisms and many viruses. DNA and RNA are nucleic acids; alongside proteins and complex carbohydrates, they are one of the three major types of macromolecule that are essential for all known forms of life. Most DNA molecules consist of two biopolymer strands coiled around each other to form a double helix. The two DNA strands are known as polynucleotides since they are composed of simpler units called nucleotides. Each nucleotide is composed of a nitrogen-containing nucleobase—either cytosine (C), guanine (G), adenine (A), or thymine (T)—as well as a sugar called deoxyribose and a phosphate group. The nucleotides are joined to one another in a chain by covalent bonds between the sugar of one nucleotide and the phosphate of the next, resulting in an alternating sugar-phosphate backbone. According to base pairing rules (A with T, and C with G), hydrogen bonds bind the nitrogenous bases of the two separate polynucleotide strands to make double-stranded DNA. The total amount of related DNA base pairs on Earth is estimated at 5.0 x 10, and weighs 50 billion tonnes. In comparison, the total mass of the biosphere has been estimated to be as much as 4 TtC (trillion tons of carbon).\n\nDNA stores biological information. The DNA backbone is resistant to cleavage, and both strands of the double-stranded structure store the same biological information. Biological information is replicated as the two strands are separated. A significant portion of DNA (more than 98% for humans) is non-coding, meaning that these sections do not serve as patterns for protein sequences.\n\nThe two strands of DNA run in opposite directions to each other and are therefore anti-parallel. Attached to each sugar is one of four types of nucleobases (informally, \"bases\"). It is the sequence of these four nucleobases along the backbone that encodes biological information. Under the genetic code, RNA strands are translated to specify the sequence of amino acids within proteins. These RNA strands are initially created using DNA strands as a template in a process called transcription.\n\nWithin cells, DNA is organized into long structures called chromosomes. During cell division these chromosomes are duplicated in the process of DNA replication, providing each cell its own complete set of chromosomes. Eukaryotic organisms (animals, plants, fungi, and protists) store most of their DNA inside the cell nucleus and some of their DNA in organelles, such as mitochondria or chloroplasts. In contrast, prokaryotes (bacteria and archaea) store their DNA only in the cytoplasm. Within the chromosomes, chromatin proteins such as histones compact and organize DNA. These compact structures guide the interactions between DNA and other proteins, helping control which parts of the DNA are transcribed.\n\nDNA was first isolated by Friedrich Miescher in 1869. Its molecular structure was identified by James Watson and Francis Crick in 1953, whose model-building efforts were guided by X-ray diffraction data acquired by Rosalind Franklin.\n\nThe first known attempt to classify organisms was conducted by the Greek philosopher Aristotle (384–322 BC), who classified all living organisms known at that time as either a plant or an animal, based mainly on their ability to move. He also distinguished animals with blood from animals without blood (or at least without red blood), which can be compared with the concepts of vertebrates and invertebrates respectively, and divided the blooded animals into five groups: viviparous quadrupeds (mammals), oviparous quadrupeds (reptiles and amphibians), birds, fishes and whales. The bloodless animals were also divided into five groups: cephalopods, crustaceans, insects (which included the spiders, scorpions, and centipedes, in addition to what we define as insects today), shelled animals (such as most molluscs and echinoderms), and \"zoophytes\" (animals that resemble plants). Though Aristotle's work in zoology was not without errors, it was the grandest biological synthesis of the time and remained the ultimate authority for many centuries after his death.\n\nThe exploration of the Americas revealed large numbers of new plants and animals that needed descriptions and classification. In the latter part of the 16th century and the beginning of the 17th, careful study of animals commenced and was gradually extended until it formed a sufficient body of knowledge to serve as an anatomical basis for classification.\n\nIn the late 1740s, Carl Linnaeus introduced his system of binomial nomenclature for the classification of species. Linnaeus attempted to improve the composition and reduce the length of the previously used many-worded names by abolishing unnecessary rhetoric, introducing new descriptive terms and precisely defining their meaning. The Linnaean classification has eight levels: domains, kingdoms, phyla, class, order, family, genus, and species.\n\nThe fungi were originally treated as plants. For a short period Linnaeus had classified them in the taxon Vermes in Animalia, but later placed them back in Plantae. Copeland classified the Fungi in his Protoctista, thus partially avoiding the problem but acknowledging their special status. The problem was eventually solved by Whittaker, when he gave them their own kingdom in his five-kingdom system. Evolutionary history shows that the fungi are more closely related to animals than to plants.\n\nAs new discoveries enabled detailed study of cells and microorganisms, new groups of life were revealed, and the fields of cell biology and microbiology were created. These new organisms were originally described separately in protozoa as animals and protophyta/thallophyta as plants, but were united by Haeckel in the kingdom Protista; later, the prokaryotes were split off in the kingdom Monera, which would eventually be divided into two separate groups, the Bacteria and the Archaea. This led to the six-kingdom system and eventually to the current three-domain system, which is based on evolutionary relationships. However, the classification of eukaryotes, especially of protists, is still controversial.\n\nAs microbiology, molecular biology and virology developed, non-cellular reproducing agents were discovered, such as viruses and viroids. Whether these are considered alive has been a matter of debate; viruses lack characteristics of life such as cell membranes, metabolism and the ability to grow or respond to their environments. Viruses can still be classed into \"species\" based on their biology and genetics, but many aspects of such a classification remain controversial.\n\nIn May 2016, scientists reported that 1 trillion species are estimated to be on Earth currently with only one-thousandth of one percent described.\n\nThe original Linnaean system has been modified over time as follows:\nIn the 1960s cladistics emerged: a system arranging taxa based on clades in an evolutionary or phylogenetic tree.\n\nCells are the basic unit of structure in every living thing, and all cells arise from pre-existing cells by division. Cell theory was formulated by Henri Dutrochet, Theodor Schwann, Rudolf Virchow and others during the early nineteenth century, and subsequently became widely accepted. The activity of an organism depends on the total activity of its cells, with energy flow occurring within and between them. Cells contain hereditary information that is carried forward as a genetic code during cell division.\n\nThere are two primary types of cells. Prokaryotes lack a nucleus and other membrane-bound organelles, although they have circular DNA and ribosomes. Bacteria and Archaea are two domains of prokaryotes. The other primary type of cells are the eukaryotes, which have distinct nuclei bound by a nuclear membrane and membrane-bound organelles, including mitochondria, chloroplasts, lysosomes, rough and smooth endoplasmic reticulum, and vacuoles. In addition, they possess organized chromosomes that store genetic material. All species of large complex organisms are eukaryotes, including animals, plants and fungi, though most species of eukaryote are protist microorganisms. The conventional model is that eukaryotes evolved from prokaryotes, with the main organelles of the eukaryotes forming through endosymbiosis between bacteria and the progenitor eukaryotic cell.\n\nThe molecular mechanisms of cell biology are based on proteins. Most of these are synthesized by the ribosomes through an enzyme-catalyzed process called protein biosynthesis. A sequence of amino acids is assembled and joined together based upon gene expression of the cell's nucleic acid. In eukaryotic cells, these proteins may then be transported and processed through the Golgi apparatus in preparation for dispatch to their destination.\n\nCells reproduce through a process of cell division in which the parent cell divides into two or more daughter cells. For prokaryotes, cell division occurs through a process of fission in which the DNA is replicated, then the two copies are attached to parts of the cell membrane. In eukaryotes, a more complex process of mitosis is followed. However, the end result is the same; the resulting cell copies are identical to each other and to the original cell (except for mutations), and both are capable of further division following an interphase period.\n\nMulticellular organisms may have first evolved through the formation of colonies of identical cells. These cells can form group organisms through cell adhesion. The individual members of a colony are capable of surviving on their own, whereas the members of a true multi-cellular organism have developed specializations, making them dependent on the remainder of the organism for survival. Such organisms are formed clonally or from a single germ cell that is capable of forming the various specialized cells that form the adult organism. This specialization allows multicellular organisms to exploit resources more efficiently than single cells. In January 2016, scientists reported that, about 800 million years ago, a minor genetic change in a single molecule, called GK-PID, may have allowed organisms to go from a single cell organism to one of many cells.\n\nCells have evolved methods to perceive and respond to their microenvironment, thereby enhancing their adaptability. Cell signaling coordinates cellular activities, and hence governs the basic functions of multicellular organisms. Signaling between cells can occur through direct cell contact using juxtacrine signalling, or indirectly through the exchange of agents as in the endocrine system. In more complex organisms, coordination of activities can occur through a dedicated nervous system.\n\nThough life is confirmed only on Earth, many think that extraterrestrial life is not only plausible, but probable or inevitable. Other planets and moons in the Solar System and other planetary systems are being examined for evidence of having once supported simple life, and projects such as SETI are trying to detect radio transmissions from possible alien civilizations. Other locations within the Solar System that may host microbial life include the subsurface of Mars, the upper atmosphere of Venus, and subsurface oceans on some of the moons of the giant planets.\nBeyond the Solar System, the region around another main-sequence star that could support Earth-like life on an Earth-like planet is known as the habitable zone. The inner and outer radii of this zone vary with the luminosity of the star, as does the time interval during which the zone survives. Stars more massive than the Sun have a larger habitable zone, but remain on the Sun-like \"main sequence\" of stellar evolution for a shorter time interval. Small red dwarfs have the opposite problem, with a smaller habitable zone that is subject to higher levels of magnetic activity and the effects of tidal locking from close orbits. Hence, stars in the intermediate mass range such as the Sun may have a greater likelihood for Earth-like life to develop. The location of the star within a galaxy may also affect the likelihood of life forming. Stars in regions with a greater abundance of heavier elements that can form planets, in combination with a low rate of potentially habitat-damaging supernova events, are predicted to have a higher probability of hosting planets with complex life. The variables of the Drake equation are used to discuss the conditions in planetary systems where civilization is most likely to exist. Use of the equation to predict the amount of extraterrestrial life, however, is difficult; because many of the variables are unknown, the equation functions as more of a mirror to what its user already thinks. As a result, the number of civilizations in the galaxy can be estimated as low as 9.1 x 10 or as high as 156 million; for the calculations, see Drake equation.\n\nArtificial life is the simulation of any aspect of life, as through computers, robotics, or biochemistry. The study of artificial life imitates traditional biology by recreating some aspects of biological phenomena. Scientists study the logic of living systems by creating artificial environments—seeking to understand the complex information processing that defines such systems. While life is, by definition, alive, artificial life is generally referred to as data confined to a digital environment and existence.\n\nSynthetic biology is a new area of biotechnology that combines science and biological engineering. The common goal is the design and construction of new biological functions and systems not found in nature. Synthetic biology includes the broad redefinition and expansion of biotechnology, with the ultimate goals of being able to design and build engineered biological systems that process information, manipulate chemicals, fabricate materials and structures, produce energy, provide food, and maintain and enhance human health and the environment.\n\nDeath is the permanent termination of all vital functions or life processes in an organism or cell. It can occur as a result of an accident, medical conditions, biological interaction, malnutrition, poisoning, senescence, or suicide. After death, the remains of an organism re-enter the biogeochemical cycle. Organisms may be consumed by a predator or a scavenger and leftover organic material may then be further decomposed by detritivores, organisms that recycle detritus, returning it to the environment for reuse in the food chain.\n\nOne of the challenges in defining death is in distinguishing it from life. Death would seem to refer to either the moment life ends, or when the state that follows life begins. However, determining when death has occurred is difficult, as cessation of life functions is often not simultaneous across organ systems. Such determination therefore requires drawing conceptual lines between life and death. This is problematic, however, because there is little consensus over how to define life. The nature of death has for millennia been a central concern of the world's religious traditions and of philosophical inquiry. Many religions maintain faith in either a kind of afterlife or reincarnation for the soul, or resurrection of the body at a later date.\n\nExtinction is the process by which a group of taxa or species dies out, reducing biodiversity. The moment of extinction is generally considered the death of the last individual of that species. Because a species' potential range may be very large, determining this moment is difficult, and is usually done retrospectively after a period of apparent absence. Species become extinct when they are no longer able to survive in changing habitat or against superior competition. In Earth's history, over 99% of all the species that have ever lived are extinct; however, mass extinctions may have accelerated evolution by providing opportunities for new groups of organisms to diversify.\n\nFossils are the preserved remains or traces of animals, plants, and other organisms from the remote past. The totality of fossils, both discovered and undiscovered, and their placement in fossil-containing rock formations and sedimentary layers (strata) is known as the \"fossil record\". A preserved specimen is called a fossil if it is older than the arbitrary date of 10,000 years ago. Hence, fossils range in age from the youngest at the start of the Holocene Epoch to the oldest from the Archaean Eon, up to 3.4 billion years old.\n\nBULLET::::- Biology, the study of life\nBULLET::::- Astrobiology\nBULLET::::- Biosignature\nBULLET::::- Evolutionary history of life\nBULLET::::- Lists of organisms by population\nBULLET::::- Phylogenetics\nBULLET::::- Viable System Theory\nBULLET::::- Kauffman, Stuart. The Adjacent Possible: A Talk with Stuart Kauffman\nBULLET::::- \"Seeding the Universe With Life\" Legacy Books, Washington D.C., 2000,\nBULLET::::- Walker, Martin G. \"LIFE! Why We Exist ... And What We Must Do to Survive\". Dog Ear Publishing, 2006,\n\nBULLET::::- Life (Systema Naturae 2000)\nBULLET::::- Vitae (BioLib)\nBULLET::::- Biota (Taxonomicon)\nBULLET::::- – a free directory of life\nBULLET::::- Resources for life in the Solar System and in galaxy, and the potential scope of life in the cosmological future\nBULLET::::- \"The Adjacent Possible: A Talk with Stuart Kauffman\"\nBULLET::::- \"Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy\" entry\nBULLET::::- The Kingdoms of Life\n"}
{"id": "18398", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18398", "title": "La Espero", "text": "La Espero\n\n\"La Espero\" () is a poem written by Polish-Jewish doctor L. L. Zamenhof (1859–1917), the initiator of the Esperanto language. The song is often used as the anthem of Esperanto, and is now usually sung to a triumphal march composed by Félicien Menu de Ménil in 1909 (although there is an earlier, less martial tune created in 1891 by Claes Adelsköld, as well as a number of others less well-known). It is sometimes referred to as the hymn of the Esperanto movement.\n\nSome Esperantists object to the use of terms like \"hymn\" or \"anthem\" for \"La Espero\", arguing that these terms have religious and nationalist overtones respectively.\n\n!La Espero\n!The Hope\nstyle=\"white-space:nowrap;\"<poem>En la mondon venis nova sento,\ntra la mondo iras forta voko;\nper flugiloj de facila vento\nnun de loko flugu ĝi al loko.\n\nNe al glavo sangon soifanta\nĝi la homan tiras familion:\nal la mond' eterne militanta\nĝi promesas sanktan harmonion.\n\nSub la sankta signo de l' espero\nkolektiĝas pacaj batalantoj,\nkaj rapide kreskas la afero\nper laboro de la esperantoj.\n\nForte staras muroj de miljaroj\ninter la popoloj dividitaj;\nsed dissaltos la obstinaj baroj,\nper la sankta amo disbatitaj.\n\nSur neŭtrala lingva fundamento,\nkomprenante unu la alian,\nla popoloj faros en konsento\nunu grandan rondon familian.\n\nNia diligenta kolegaro\nen laboro paca ne laciĝos,\nĝis la bela sonĝo de l' homaro\npor eterna ben' efektiviĝos.</poem>\n\n<poem>Into the world came a new feeling,\nthrough the world goes a powerful call;\nby means of wings of a gentle wind\nnow let it fly from place to place.\n\nNot to a bloodthirsty sword\ndoes it draw the human family:\nto the eternally fighting world\nit promises sacred harmony.\n\nUnder the sacred sign of the hope\nthe peaceful fighters gather,\nand this affair quickly grows\nby the labours of those who hope.\n\nWalls of millennia stand firm\nbetween the divided people;\nbut the stubborn barriers will jump apart,\nknocked apart by the sacred love.\n\nOn a neutral language basis,\nunderstanding one another,\nthe people will make in agreement\none great family circle.\n\nOur diligent set of colleagues\nin peaceful labor will never tire,\nuntil the beautiful dream of humanity\nfor eternal blessing is realized.</poem>\n\n"}
{"id": "18400", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18400", "title": "Loonie", "text": "Loonie\n\nThe loonie (), formally the Canadian one-dollar coin, is a gold-coloured coin that was introduced in 1987 and is produced by the Royal Canadian Mint at its facility in Winnipeg. The most prevalent versions of the coin show a common loon, a bird found throughout Canada, on the reverse and Queen Elizabeth II, the nation's head of state, on the obverse. Various commemorative and specimen-set editions of the coin with special designs replacing the loon on the reverse have been minted over the years.\n\nThe coin's outline is an 11-sided curve of constant width. Its diameter of 26.5 mm and its 11-sidedness matched that of the already-circulating Susan B. Anthony dollar in the United States, and its thickness of 1.95 mm was a close match to the latter's 2.0 mm. Its gold colour differed from the silver-coloured Anthony dollar; however, the succeeding Sacagawea and Presidential dollars matched the loonie's overall hue. Other coins using a curve of constant width include the 7-sided British twenty pence and fifty pence coins (the latter of which has similar size and value to the loonie, but is silver in colour).\n\nAfter its introduction, the coin became the symbol of the Canadian dollar: media often discuss the rate at which the \"loonie\" is trading against other currencies. The nickname \"loonie\" became so widely recognized that in 2006, the Royal Canadian Mint secured the rights to it. When the Canadian two-dollar coin was introduced in 1996, it was in turn nicknamed the \"toonie\" (a portmanteau of \"two\" and \"loonie\").\n\nCanada first minted a silver dollar coin in 1935 to celebrate the 25th anniversary of George V's reign as king. The voyageur dollar, so named because it featured an Indigenous person and a French voyageur paddling a canoe on the reverse, was minted in silver until 1967, after which it was composed primarily of nickel. The coins did not see wide circulation, mainly due to their size and weight; the nickel version weighed and was in diameter, and was itself smaller than the silver version.\n\nBy 1982, the Royal Canadian Mint had begun work on a new composition for the dollar coin that it hoped would lead to increased circulation. At the same time, vending machine operators and transit systems were lobbying the Government of Canada to replace the dollar banknotes with more widely circulating coins. A Commons committee recommended in 1985 that the dollar bill be eliminated despite a lack of evidence that Canadians would support the move. The government argued that it would save between $175 million and $250 million over 20 years by switching from bills that had a lifespan of less than a year to coins that would last two decades.\n\nThe government announced on March 25, 1986, that the new dollar coin would be launched the following year as a replacement for the dollar bill, which would be phased out. It was expected to cost $31.8 million to produce the first 300 million coins, but through seigniorage (the difference between the cost of production and the coin's value), expected to make up to $40 million a year on the coins. From the proceeds, a total of $60 million over five years was dedicated toward funding the 1988 Winter Olympics in Calgary.\n\nThe failure of the Susan B. Anthony dollar coin in the United States had been considered and it was believed Americans refused to support the coin due to its similarity to their quarter coin and its lack of esthetic appeal. In announcing the new Canadian dollar coin, the government stated it would be the same overall size as the Susan B. Anthony coin – slightly larger than a quarter – to allow for compatibility with American manufactured vending machines, but would be eleven-sided and gold-coloured.\n\nIt was planned that the coin would continue using the voyageur theme of its predecessor, but the master dies that had been struck in Ottawa were lost in transit en route to the Mint's facility at Winnipeg. A Commons committee struck to investigate the loss discovered that the Mint had no documented procedures for transport of master dies and that it had shipped them via a local courier in a bid to save $43.50. It was also found to be the third time that the Mint had lost master dies within five years. An internal review by the Royal Canadian Mint argued that while a policy existed to ship the obverse and reverse dies separately, the new coin dies were packaged separately but were part of the same shipment. The Mint also disagreed with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police's contention that the dies were simply lost in transit, believing instead that they were stolen. The dies were never recovered.\n\nFearing the possibility of counterfeiting, the government approved a new design for the reverse, replacing the voyageur with a Robert-Ralph Carmichael design of a common loon floating in water. The coin was immediately nicknamed the \"loonie\" across English Canada, and became known as a \"huard\", French for \"loon\", in Quebec. The loonie entered circulation on June 30, 1987, as 40 million coins were introduced into major cities across the country. Over 800 million loonies had been struck by the coin's 20th anniversary.\n\nTwo years after the loonie's introduction, the Bank of Canada ceased production of the dollar banknote. The final dollar bills were printed on June 30, 1989. Initial support for the coin was mixed, but withdrawing the banknote forced acceptance of the coin.\n\nThe loonie has subsequently gained iconic status within Canada, and is now regarded as a national symbol. The term \"loonie\" has since become synonymous with the Canadian dollar itself. The town of Echo Bay, Ontario, home of Robert-Ralph Carmichael, erected a large loonie monument in his honour in 1992 along the highway, similar to Sudbury's 'Big Nickel'.\n\nOfficials for the 2002 Salt Lake Winter Olympics invited the National Hockey League's ice making consultant, Dan Craig, to oversee the city's E Center arena, where the ice hockey tournament was being held. Craig invited a couple of members from the ice crew in his hometown of Edmonton to assist. One of them, Trent Evans, secretly placed a loonie at centre ice. He originally placed a dime, but added the loonie after the smaller coin quickly vanished as the ice surface was built up. He placed the coins after realizing there was no target at centre ice for referees to aim for when dropping the puck for a faceoff. A thin yellow dot was painted on the ice surface over the coins, though the loonie was faintly visible to those who knew to look for it.\n\nKeeping the coin a secret, Evans told only a few people of its placement and swore them to secrecy. Among those told were the players of the men's and women's teams. Both Canadian teams went on to win gold medals. Several members of the women's team kissed the spot where the coin was buried following their victory. After the men won their final, the coin was dug up and given to Wayne Gretzky, the team's executive-director, who revealed the existence of the \"lucky loonie\" at a post-game press conference.\n\nThe lucky loonie quickly became a piece of Canadian lore. The original lucky loonie was donated to the Hockey Hall of Fame, and Canadians have subsequently hidden loonies at several international competitions. Loonies were buried in the foundations of facilities built for the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver.\n\nCapitalizing on the tradition, the Royal Canadian Mint has released a commemorative edition \"lucky loonie\" for each Olympic Games since 2004.\n\nThe weight of the coin was originally specified as 108 grains, equivalent to 6.998 grams. The coin's diameter is 26.5mm.\n\nWhen introduced, loonie coins were made of Aureate, a bronze-electroplated nickel combination. Beginning in 2007, some loonie blanks also began to be produced with a cyanide-free brass plating process. In the spring of 2012, the composition switched to multi-ply brass-plated steel. As a result, the weight dropped from 7.00 to 6.27 grams. This has resulted in the 2012 loonie not being accepted in some vending machines. The Toronto Parking Authority estimates that at about $345 per machine, it will cost about $1 million to upgrade almost 3,000 machines to accept the new coins. The Mint states that multi-ply plated steel technology, already used in Canada's smaller coinage, produces an electromagnetic signature that is harder to counterfeit than that for regular alloy coins; also, using steel provides cost savings and avoids fluctuations in price or supply of nickel.\n\nOn April 10, 2012, the Royal Canadian Mint announced design changes to the loonie and toonie, which include new security features.\n\nAlongside the regular minting of the loonie with the standard image of the common loon on the coin's reverse, the Royal Canadian Mint has also released commemorative editions of the one-dollar coin for a variety of occasions. These coins have a circulation-grade finish and have been made available to the public in five-coin packs and in 25-coin rolls in addition to being released directly into circulation.\n\n!No.\n!Year\n!Theme\n!Artist\n!Mintage\n!Special notes\n1992\n125th anniversary of the Confederation\nRita Swanson\n23,010,000\nShowing children and the Parliament Building. The regular \"loon\" design was also minted that year bearing the double date \"1867–1992\".\n1994\nRemembrance Design\nRCM Staff\n15,000,000\nImage of the National War Memorial in Ottawa.\n1995\nPeacekeeping Monument\nJ. K. Harman, R. G. Enriquez, C. H. Oberlander, Susan Taylor\n41,813,100 (see note)\nIncluded in 1995 Loon Mintage.\n2004\nOlympic Lucky Loonie\nR.R. Carmichael\n6,526,000\n1st Lucky Loonie.\n2005\nTerry Fox\nStan Witten\n12,909,000\nFox is the first Canadian citizen to be featured on a circulated Canadian coin. There are versions that exist without grass on the reverse of the coin.\n2006\nOlympic Lucky Loonie\nJean-Luc Grondin\n10,495,000\n2nd Lucky Loonie.\n2008\nOlympic Lucky Loonie\nJean-Luc Grondin\n10,000,000\n3rd Lucky Loonie. Part of the RBC Vancouver 2010 Coin Set.\n2009\nMontreal Canadiens Centennial Loonie\nSusanna Blunt\n10,000,000\nTo commemorate the 100th anniversary celebration of the Montreal Canadiens professional hockey team\n2010\nOlympic Lucky Loonie\nRCM Staff\n11,000,000\n4th Lucky Loonie with the 2010 Vancouver winter Olympic symbol ilanaaq, an inukshuk. Part of the RBC Vancouver 2010 Coin Set.\n2010\nNavy Centennial\nBonnie Ross\n7,000,000\nTo commemorate the Centennial of the Canadian Navy Features a below anchor, a 1910 naval serviceman and a modern-day female naval officer.\n2010\nSaskatchewan Roughriders Centennial\nSusanna Blunt\n3,000,000\nTo celebrate the 100th anniversary of the Saskatchewan Roughriders. Features the Roughriders logo along with a stylized 100.\n2011\nParks Canada Centennial \nNolin BBDO Montreal\n5,000,000\nTo celebrate Parks Canada's 100th anniversary. Features stylized land, air and aquatic fauna, varieties of flora, as well as a symbolic park building and the silhouette of a hiker framed by a snow-capped mountain range.\n2012\nOlympic Lucky Loonie\nEmily Damstra\n5,000,000\n5th Lucky Loonie. Features a common loon with its wings spread, the Olympic rings, and a laser-etched maple leaf.\n2012\nRCM Staff\n5,000,000\nTo celebrate the 100th Grey Cup. Features the Grey Cup with \"100th Grey Cup\" in English and French\n2014\nOlympic Lucky Loonie\nEmily Damstra\n5,000,000\n6th Lucky Loonie. Features a common loon with its wings spread and sits on a lake water, the Canadian Olympic Team logo, and a laser-etched maple leaf. Same design as the 2012 version of the Lucky Loonie.\n2016\nWomen's Right to Vote\nLaurie McGaw\n5,000,000\nFeatures a women casting a ballot with a girl to commemorate the 100th anniversary of women's suffrage in Canada.\n2016\nOlympic Lucky Loonie\nDerek Wicks\n5,000,000\n7th Lucky Loonie. Released for the 2016 Summer Olympics. Shows the image of a common loon on the water, poised for take-off with its arched body and outstretched wings with a stylized maple leaf in the background.\n2017\nCanada 150\nWesley Klassen\n10,000,000\nCommemorating the 150th anniversary of the Confederation of Canada. The design features the railroad and landmarks such as the Lion's Gate Bridge, a prairie grain elevator, the CN Tower, Quebec City's Chateau Frontenac Hotel and an East Coast lighthouse. The theme of the coin is \"Our Achievements\".\n2017\nToronto Maple Leafs 100th anniversary\nSteven Rosati\n5,150,000\nCelebrating the 100th anniversary of the Toronto Maple Leafs hockey team. The design features the Leafs logo, two hockey sticks crossed under a Canadian maple leaf, and a hockey puck between the words \"Canada Dollar\" written around the top of the coin. \n2019\nLGBT Equality\nJoe Average\nTBA\n50th anniversary of the 1969 decriminalization of homosexuality in Canada. Design will feature two overlapping human faces within a large circle, and the word \"equality\" in both French and English. The design is being issued both as a regular $1 coin and as a limited-edition $10 collector's coin in full colour.\n\nIn 1997, 2002, and each year since 2004, the Royal Canadian Mint has issued a one-dollar coin that depicts a different and unique image of a bird on the coin's reverse. These special loonies have limited mintages and are available only in the six-coin specimen sets.\n\n!Year\n!Theme\n!Artist\n!Mintage\n!Full-Set Issue Price (CAD)\n1997\n10th anniversary of the loonie\nJean-Luc Grondin\n97,595\n\n2002\n15th anniversary of the loonie\nDora de Pédery-Hunt\n67,672\n$39.95\n2004\nJack Miner Bird Sanctuary\nSusan Taylor\n46,493\n$39.95\n2005\nTufted puffin\nMark Hobson\n39,818\n$39.95\n2006\nSnowy owl\nGlen Loates\n39,935\n$44.95\n2007\nTrumpeter swan\nKerri Burnett\n40,000\n$45.95\n2008\nCommon eider\nMark Hobson\n40,000\n$47.95\n2009\nGreat blue heron\nChris Jordison\n40,000\n$47.95\n2010\nNorthern harrier\nArnold Nogy\n35,000\n$49.95\n2011\nGreat gray owl\nArnold Nogy\n35,000\n$49.95\n2012\n25th anniversary of the loonie\nArnold Nogy\n35,000\n$49.95\n2013\nBlue-winged teal\nGlen Loates\n50,000\n$49.95\n2014\nFerruginous hawk\nTrevor Tennant\n50,000\n$49.95\n2015\nBlue jay\nBrent Townsend\n30,000\n$49.95\n2016\nTundra swan\nGlen Scrimshaw\n30,000\n$49.95\n2017\nSnow goose\nPierre Girard\n30,000\n$51.95\n2018\nBurrowing owl\nPierre Girard\n30,000\n$51.95\n\n!Year\n!Theme\n!Mintage\n!Issue Price\n2005\nCommon loon\n$14.95\n2005\nTerry Fox\n$14.95\n2006\nLucky Loonie\n$15.95\n2006\nWith new Mint mark\n$29.95\n\nBULLET::::- Canadian silver dollar\nBULLET::::- Toonie\n\nFootnotes\nBibliography\n\nBULLET::::- Loonie value – 1935 to today\nBULLET::::- The chemistry of the loonie\n"}
{"id": "18401", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18401", "title": "Laminar flow", "text": "Laminar flow\n\nIn fluid dynamics, laminar flow is characterized by fluid particles following smooth paths in layers, with each layer moving smoothly past the adjacent layers with little or no mixing. At low velocities, the fluid tends to flow without lateral mixing, and adjacent layers slide past one another like playing cards. There are no cross-currents perpendicular to the direction of flow, nor eddies or swirls of fluids. In laminar flow, the motion of the particles of the fluid is very orderly with particles close to a solid surface moving in straight lines parallel to that surface.\nLaminar flow is a flow regime characterized by high momentum diffusion and low momentum convection.\n\nWhen a fluid is flowing through a closed channel such as a pipe or between two flat plates, either of two types of flow may occur depending on the velocity and viscosity of the fluid: laminar flow or turbulent flow. Laminar flow occurs at lower velocities, below a threshold at which the flow becomes turbulent. The velocity is determined by a dimensionless parameter characterizing the flow called the Reynolds number, which also depends on the viscosity and density of the fluid and dimensions of the channel. Turbulent flow is a less orderly flow regime that is characterized by eddies or small packets of fluid particles, which result in lateral mixing. In non-scientific terms, laminar flow is \"smooth\", while turbulent flow is \"rough\".\n\nThe type of flow occurring in a fluid in a channel is important in fluid-dynamics problems and subsequently affects heat and mass transfer in fluid systems. The dimensionless Reynolds number is an important parameter in the equations that describe whether fully developed flow conditions lead to laminar or turbulent flow. The Reynolds number is the ratio of the inertial force to the shearing force of the fluid: how fast the fluid is moving relative to how viscous it is, irrespective of the scale of the fluid system. Laminar flow generally occurs when the fluid is moving slowly or the fluid is very viscous. As the Reynolds number increases, such as by increasing the flow rate of the fluid, the flow will transition from laminar to turbulent flow at a specific range of Reynolds numbers, the laminar–turbulent transition range depending on small disturbance levels in the fluid or imperfections in the flow system. If the Reynolds number is very small, much less than 1, then the fluid will exhibit Stokes, or creeping, flow, where the viscous forces of the fluid dominate the inertial forces.\n\nThe specific calculation of the Reynolds number, and the values where laminar flow occurs, will depend on the geometry of the flow system and flow pattern. The common example is flow through a pipe, where the Reynolds number is defined as\n\nwhere:\n\nFor such systems, laminar flow occurs when the Reynolds number is below a critical value of approximately 2,040, though the transition range is typically between 1,800 and 2,100.\n\nFor fluid systems occurring on external surfaces, such as flow past objects suspended in the fluid, other definitions for Reynolds numbers can be used to predict the type of flow around the object. The particle Reynolds number Re would be used for particle suspended in flowing fluids, for example. As with flow in pipes, laminar flow typically occurs with lower Reynolds numbers, while turbulent flow and related phenomena, such as vortex shedding, occur with higher Reynolds numbers.\n\nBULLET::::1. A common application of laminar flow is in the smooth flow of a viscous liquid through a tube or pipe. In that case, the velocity of flow varies from zero at the walls to a maximum along the cross-sectional centre of the vessel. The flow profile of laminar flow in a tube can be calculated by dividing the flow into thin cylindrical elements and applying the viscous force to them.\nBULLET::::2. Another example is the flow of air over an aircraft wing. The boundary layer is a very thin sheet of air lying over the surface of the wing (and all other surfaces of the aircraft). Because air has viscosity, this layer of air tends to adhere to the wing. As the wing moves forward through the air, the boundary layer at first flows smoothly over the streamlined shape of the airfoil. Here, the flow is laminar and the boundary layer is a laminar layer. Prandtl applied the concept of the laminar boundary layer to airfoils in 1904.\nBULLET::::3. An everyday example is the slow, smooth and optically transparent flow of shallow water over a smooth barrier.\nBULLET::::4. When water leaves a tap with little force, it first exhibits laminar flow, but as acceleration by the force of gravity immediately sets in, the Reynolds number of the flow increases with speed, and the laminar flow can transition to turbulent flow. Optical transparency is then reduced or lost entirely.\nBULLET::::5. In waterfalls a large scale version of examples 3 and 4 occurs, as now broad sheets of smoothly flowing water fall over a ridge or edge of the waterfall. Immediately the transition to turbulence sets in with speed due to acceleration (the Reynolds number crosses the threshold for turbulence) and foamy aerated water obscures the falling flow.\n\nLaminar airflow is used to separate volumes of air, or prevent airborne contaminants from entering an area. Laminar flow hoods are used to exclude contaminants from sensitive processes in science, electronics and medicine. Air curtains are frequently used in commercial settings to keep heated or refrigerated air from passing through doorways. A laminar flow reactor (LFR) is a reactor that uses laminar flow to study chemical reactions and process mechanisms.\n\nBULLET::::- Chaos theory\nBULLET::::- Hagen%E2%80%93Poiseuille equation\nBULLET::::- Laminar flow reactor\nBULLET::::- Reynolds number\nBULLET::::- Shell balance\n\n"}
{"id": "18402", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18402", "title": "Luanda", "text": "Luanda\n\nLuanda (), formerly named São Paulo da Assunção de Loanda, is the capital and largest city in Angola, It is Angola's primary port, and its major industrial, cultural and urban centre. Located on Angola's northern coast with the Atlantic Ocean, Luanda is both Angola's chief seaport and its administrative centre. It is also the capital city of Luanda Province. Luanda and its metropolitan area is the most populous Portuguese-speaking capital city in the world, with over 8 million inhabitants in 2019 (a third of Angola's population). Among the oldest colonial cities of Africa, it was founded in January 1576 by Portuguese explorer Paulo Dias de Novais, under the name of \"São Paulo da Assunção de Loanda\". The city served as the centre of the slave trade to Brazil before its prohibition. At the start of the Angolan Civil War in 1975, most of the white Portuguese left as refugees, principally for Portugal. Luanda's population increased greatly from refugees fleeing the war, but its infrastructure was inadequate to handle the increase. This also caused the exacerbation of slums, or musseques, around Luanda. The city is currently undergoing a major reconstruction, with many large developments taking place that will alter its cityscape significantly.\n\nThe industries present in the city include the processing of agricultural products, beverage production, textile, cement, newly car assembly plants, construction materials, plastics, metallurgy, cigarettes and shoes. The city is also notable as an economic centre for oil, and a refinery is located in the city. Luanda has been considered one of the most expensive cities in the world for expatriates. The inhabitants of Luanda are mostly members of the ethnic group of the Ambundu, but in recent times there has been an increase of the number of the Bakongo and the Ovimbundu. There exists a European population, consisting mainly of Portuguese. Luanda was the main host city for the matches of the 2010 African Cup of Nations.\n\nPortuguese explorer Paulo Dias de Novais founded Luanda on 25 January 1576 as \"São Paulo da Assumpção de Loanda\", with one hundred families of settlers and four hundred soldiers. In 1618, the Portuguese built the fortress called \"Fortaleza São Pedro da Barra\", and they subsequently built two more: Fortaleza de São Miguel (1634) and Forte de São Francisco do Penedo (1765-6). Of these, the Fortaleza de São Miguel is the best preserved.\n\nLuanda was Portugal's bridgehead from 1627, except during the Dutch rule of Luanda, from 1640 to 1648, as Fort Aardenburgh. The city served as the centre of slave trade to Brazil from circa 1550 to 1836. The slave trade was conducted mostly with the Portuguese colony of Brazil; Brazilian ships were the most numerous in the port of Luanda. This slave trade also involved local merchants and warriors who profited from the trade. During this period, no large scale territorial conquest was intended by the Portuguese; only a few minor settlements were established in the immediate hinterland of Luanda, some on the last stretch of the Kwanza River.\n\nIn the 17th century, the Imbangala became the main rivals of the Mbundu in supplying slaves to the Luanda market. In the 1750s, between 5,000 and 10,000 slaves were annually sold. By this time, Angola, a Portuguese colony, was in fact like a colony of Brazil, paradoxically another Portuguese colony. A strong degree of Brazilian influence was noted in Luanda until the Independence of Brazil in 1822. In the 19th century, still under Portuguese rule, Luanda experienced a major economic revolution. The slave trade was abolished in 1836, and in 1844, Angola's ports were opened to foreign shipping. By 1850, Luanda was one of the greatest and most developed Portuguese cities in the vast Portuguese Empire outside Continental Portugal, full of trading companies, exporting (together with Benguela) palm and peanut oil, wax, copal, timber, ivory, cotton, coffee, and cocoa, among many other products. Maize, tobacco, dried meat, and cassava flour are also produced locally. The Angolan bourgeoisie was born by this time.\n\nIn 1889, Governor Brito Capelo opened the gates of an aqueduct which supplied the city with water, a formerly scarce resource, laying the foundation for major growth. Like most of Portuguese Angola, the cosmopolitan city of Luanda was not affected by the Portuguese Colonial War (1961–1974); economic growth and development in the entire region reached record highs during this period. In 1972, a report called Luanda the \"Paris of Africa\". Throughout Portugal's Estado Novo period, Luanda grew from a town of 61,208 with 14.6% of those inhabitants being white in 1940, to a wealthy cosmopolitan major city of 475,328 in 1970 with 124,814 Europeans (26.3%) and around 50,000 mixed race inhabitants.\n\nBy the time of Angolan independence in 1975, Luanda was a modern city. The majority of its population was African, but it was dominated by a strong minority of white Portuguese origin. After the Carnation Revolution in Lisbon on April 25, 1974, with the advent of independence and the start of the Angolan Civil War (1975–2002), most of the white Portuguese Luandans left as refugees, principally for Portugal, with many travelling overland to South Africa. There was an immediate crisis, however, as the local African population lacked the skills and knowledge needed to run the city and maintain its well-developed infrastructure.\n\nThe large numbers of skilled technicians among the force of Cuban soldiers sent in to support the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA) government in the Angolan Civil War were able to make a valuable contribution to restoring and maintaining basic services in the city. In the following years. However, slums called \"musseques\" — which had existed for decades — began to grow out of proportion and stretched several kilometres beyond Luanda's former city limits as a result of the decades-long civil war, and because of the rise of deep social inequalities due to large-scale migration of civil war refugees from other Angolan regions. For decades, Luanda's facilities were not adequately expanded to handle this huge increase in the city's population. After 2002, with the end of the civil war and high economic growth rates fuelled by the wealth provided by the increasing oil and diamond production, major reconstruction started. Luanda has also become one of the world's most expensive cities.\n\nLuanda is divided into two parts, the \"Baixa de Luanda\" (lower Luanda, the old city) and the \"Cidade Alta\" (upper city or the new part). The \"Baixa de Luanda\" is situated next to the port, and has narrow streets and old colonial buildings. However, new constructions have by now covered large areas beyond these traditional limits, and a number of previously independent nuclei — like Viana — were incorporated into the city.\n\nUntil 2011, the former Luanda Province comprised what now forms five municipalities. In 2011 the Province was enlarged by the addition of two additional municipalities transferred from Bengo Province, namely Icolo e Bengo, and Quiçama. Excluding these additions, the five municipalities comprise Greater Luanda:\n\n! Name  Area in <br> km  Population<br>Census<br>2014 Population<br>Estimate<br>2019 \n\nTwo new municipalities have been created within Greater Luanda since 2017: Talatona and Kilamba-Kiaxi\n\nThe city of Luanda is divided in six urban districts: Ingombota, Angola Quiluanje, Maianga, Rangel, Samba and Sambizanga.\n\nA completely new satellite city, called Luanda Sul has been built. In Samba and Sambizanga, more high-rise developments are to be built. The capital Luanda is growing constantly - and in addition, increasingly beyond the official city limits and even provincial boundaries.\n\nLuanda is the seat of a Roman Catholic archbishop. It is also the location of most of Angola's educational institutions, including the private Catholic University of Angola and the public University of Agostinho Neto. It is also the home of the colonial Governor's Palace and the Estádio da Cidadela (the \"Citadel Stadium\"), Angola's main stadium, with a total seating capacity of 60,000.\n\nLuanda Sul is a satellite city of Luanda. A small stream flows in southern Luanda Sul, starting near the Quatro de Fevereiro Airport and emptying into the Atlantic Ocean. Luanda International School is in Viana.\n\nLuanda has a hot semi-arid climate (Köppen climate classification: \"BSh\"). The climate is warm to hot but surprisingly dry, owing to the cool Benguela Current, which prevents moisture from easily condensing into rain. Frequent fog prevents temperatures from falling at night even during the completely dry months from June to October. Luanda has an annual rainfall of , but the variability is among the highest in the world, with a co-efficient of variation above 40 percent. Observed records since 1858 range from in 1958 to in 1916. The short rainy season in March and April depends on a northerly counter current bringing moisture to the city: it has been shown clearly that weakness in the Benguela current can increase rainfall about sixfold compared with years when that current is strong.\n\n! style=\"background:#efefef;\"  Year\n! style=\"background:#efefef;\"  Population\n\nThe inhabitants of Luanda are primarily members of African ethnic groups, mainly Ambundu, Ovimbundu, and Bakongo. The official and the most widely used language is Portuguese, although several Bantu languages are also used, chiefly Kimbundu, Umbundu, and Kikongo. There is a sizable minority population of European origin, especially Portuguese (about 260,000), as well Latin Americans (Brazilians). Over the last decades, a significant Chinese community has formed, as has a much smaller Vietnamese community. There is a sprinkling of immigrants from other African countries as well, including a small expatriate South African community. A small number of people of Luanda are of mixed race — European/Portuguese and native African. In recent years, mainly since the mid-2000s, immigration from Portugal has increased due to Portugal's recession and poor economic situation.\n\nThe population of Luanda has grown dramatically in recent years, due in large part to war-time migration to the city, which is safe compared to the rest of the country. Luanda, however, in 2006 saw an increase in violent crime, particularly in the shanty towns that surround the colonial urban core.\n\nAround one-third of Angolans live in Luanda, 53% of whom live in poverty. Living conditions in Luanda are poor for most of the people, with essential services such as safe drinking water and electricity still in short supply, and severe shortcomings in traffic conditions. On the other hand, luxury constructions for the benefit of the wealthy minority are booming. Luanda is one of the world's most expensive cities for resident foreigners.\n\nNew import tariffs imposed in March 2014 made Luanda even more expensive. As an example, a half-litre tub of vanilla ice-cream at the supermarket was reported to cost US$31. The higher import tariffs applied to hundreds of items, from garlic to cars. The stated aim was to try to diversify the heavily oil-dependent economy and nurture farming and industry, sectors which have remained weak. These tariffs have caused much hardship in a country where the average salary was US$260 per month in 2010, the latest year for which data was available. However, the average salary in the booming oil industry was over 20 times higher at US$5,400 per month.\n\nManufacturing includes processed foods, beverages, textiles, cement and other building materials, plastic products, metalware, cigarettes, and shoes/clothes. Petroleum (found in nearby off-shore deposits) is refined in the city, although this facility was repeatedly damaged during the Angolan Civil War of 1975–2002. Luanda has an excellent natural harbour; the chief exports are coffee, cotton, sugar, diamonds, iron, and salt. The city also has a thriving building industry, an effect of the nationwide economic boom experienced since 2002, when political stability returned with the end of the civil war. Economic growth is largely supported by oil extraction activities, although great diversification is taking place. Large investment (domestic and international), along with strong economic growth, has dramatically increased construction of all economic sectors in the city of Luanda. In 2007, the first modern shopping mall in Angola was established in the city at Belas Shopping mall.\n\nLuanda is the starting point of the Luanda railway that goes due east to Malanje. The civil war left the railway non-functional, but the railway has been restored up to Dondo and Malanje.\n\nThe main airport of Luanda is Quatro de Fevereiro Airport, which is the largest in the country. Currently, a new international airport, Angola International Airport is under construction southeast of the city, a few kilometres from Viana, which was expected to be opened in 2011. However, as the Angolan government did not continue to make the payments due to the Chinese enterprise in charge of the construction, the firm suspended its work in 2010.\n\nThe port of Luanda serves as the largest port of Angola, and connects Angola to the rest of the world. Major expansion of this port is also taking place. In 2014, a new port is being developed at Dande, about 30 km to the north.\n\nLuanda's roads are in a poor state of repair, but are currently undergoing an extensive reconstruction process by the government in order to relieve traffic congestion in the city. Major road repairs can be found taking place in nearly every neighbourhood, including a major 6-lane highway connected Luanda to Viana.\n\nPublic transit is provided by the suburban services of the Luanda Railway, by the public company TCUL, and by a large fleet of privately owned collective taxis as white-blue painted minibuses called \"Candongueiro\".\n\nCandongueiros are usually Toyota Hiace vans, that are built to carry 12 people, although the candongueiros usually carry at least 15 people. They charge from 100 to 200 kwanzas per trip. They are known to disobey traffic rules, for example not stopping at signs and driving over pavements and aisles. Their stop points, known as \"paragens\" are often the places cause significant traffic because they often double park.\n\nThere is also a private bus company Transportes Urbanos Rodoviarios de Angola - TURA, working routes in Luanda.\n\nIn 2019, a light rail network with an estimated cost of US $3 billion was announced to begin construction in 2020.\n\nThe central government supposedly allocates funds to all regions of the country, but the capital region receives the bulk of these funds. Since the end of the Angolan Civil War (1975–2002), stability has been widespread in the country, and major reconstruction has been going on since 2002 in those parts of the country that were damaged during the civil war. Luanda has been of major concern because its population had multiplied and had far outgrown the capacity of the city, especially because much of its infrastructure (water, electricity, roads etc.) had become obsolete and degraded.\n\nLuanda has been undergoing major road reconstruction in the 21st century, and new highways are planned to improve connections to Cacuaco, Viana, Samba, and the new airport.\n\nMajor social housing is also being constructed to house those who reside in slums, which dominate the landscape of Luanda. A large Chinese firm has been given a contract to construct the majority of replacement housing in Luanda. The Angolan minister of health recently stated poverty in Angola will be overcome by an increase in jobs and the housing of every citizen.\n\nUniversities:\nBULLET::::- Agostinho Neto University\nBULLET::::- Catholic University of Angola\nBULLET::::- Private University of Angola\n\nInternational schools in Luanda:\nBULLET::::- Escola Portuguesa de Luanda\nBULLET::::- Colégio Português de Luanda\nBULLET::::- Colégio São Francisco de Assis\nBULLET::::- Lycée Français de Luanda\nBULLET::::- Luanda International School\nBULLET::::- English School Community of Luanda - AO\n\nAmong the places of worship, they are predominantly Christian churches and temples : Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Luanda (Catholic Church), Evangelical Congregational Church in Angola (World Communion of Reformed Churches), Evangelical Reformed Church in Angola (World Communion of Reformed Churches), Baptist Convention of Angola (Baptist World Alliance), Universal Church of the Kingdom of God, Assemblies of God. There are also Muslim mosques.\n\nIn 2013 Luanda together with Namibe, today's Moçâmedes, hosted the 2013 FIRS Men's Roller Hockey World Cup, the first time that a World Cup of roller hockey was held in Africa. The city is home to the Desportivo do Bengo football club.\n\nLuanda makes widespread use of an unusual variant of the median U-turn type intersection. This eliminates the need for traffic lights and encourages free flow traffic on many main roads around the city. The intersection operates by not permitting the left turn at intersections. Angola drives on the right. A driver entering from a minor road wanting to turn left is required to join the main road traffic and proceed a U-turn and then backtrack in the opposite direction.\n\nThe advantages: \nBULLET::::- This arrangement converts a regular arterial road into a low cost Freeway with simple low cost at-grade interchanges.\nBULLET::::- Collisions typically associated with at-grade intersections are eliminated. There is no crossing of on-coming traffic with this arrangement.\nBULLET::::- Traffic lights are not required. No stopping or waiting at the intersection.\nBULLET::::- A free flow of traffic is achieved.\nBULLET::::- Reduced fuel consumption from vehicles not being required to accelerate away from a red light as well as reduced wear and tear on vehicles.\n\nDisadvantages:\nBULLET::::- Minor road traffic cannot directly cross the intersection. It has to join the main route and make a U-turn and return.\nBULLET::::- Although traffic is free flowing left turn traffic will encounter the inconvenience of additional travel distance sometimes as far as 2.5 km.\nBULLET::::- The road surface has additional burden of longer travel distances, but has reduced wear at intersection and from braking.\nBULLET::::- The U-turn is negotiated from the fast inner lane.\nBULLET::::- Because of regular tight radius median u-turns the traffic speed is less than can be achieved on a regular freeway.\n\nThe Government of Angola takes a bold view of property rights and has been known to relocate property owners at short notice, where the land is required to make space for the bulged u-turns.\n\nIt is unclear whether this intersection design has been in use prior or since the civil war.\n\nThe Luanda traffic is notoriously congested with gridlock and so arguably this intersection worsens the situation by lengthening the routes.\n\nLuanda is twinned with:\n\nBULLET::::- Houston, United States\nBULLET::::- São Paulo, Brazil\nBULLET::::- Lisbon, Portugal\nBULLET::::- Oaxaca, Mexico\nBULLET::::- Praia, Cape Verde\nBULLET::::- Cape Town, South Africa\nBULLET::::- Beira, Mozambique\nBULLET::::- Windhoek, Namibia\nBULLET::::- Bissau, Guinea-Bissau\nBULLET::::- Beijing, China\nBULLET::::- Macau, Macau\nBULLET::::- Maputo, Mozambique\nBULLET::::- Tahoua, Niger\nBULLET::::- São Tomé, São Tomé and Príncipe\nBULLET::::- Johannesburg, South Africa\nBULLET::::- Cairo, Egypt\nBULLET::::- Porto, Portugal\nBULLET::::- Huambo, Angola\nBULLET::::- Toulon, France\nBULLET::::- Asunción, Paraguay\n\nBULLET::::- Portal da Cidade de Luanda\nBULLET::::- www.cidadeluanda.com - Luanda, city map, History, Photos\n"}
{"id": "18403", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18403", "title": "Logical positivism", "text": "Logical positivism\n\nLogical positivism, later called logical empiricism, and both of which together are also known as neopositivism, was a movement in Western philosophy whose central thesis was the verification principle (also known as the verifiability criterion of meaning). Also called verificationism, this would-be theory of knowledge asserted that only statements verifiable through direct observation or logical proof are meaningful. Starting in the late 1920s, groups of philosophers, scientists, and mathematicians formed the Berlin Circle and the Vienna Circle, which, in these two cities, would propound the ideas of logical positivism.\n\nFlourishing in several European centers through the 1930s, the movement sought to prevent confusion rooted in unclear language and unverifiable claims by converting philosophy into \"scientific philosophy\", which, according to the logical positivists, ought to share the bases and structures of empirical sciences' best examples, such as Albert Einstein's general theory of relativity. Despite its ambition to overhaul philosophy by studying and mimicking the extant conduct of empirical science, logical positivism became erroneously stereotyped as a movement to regulate the scientific process and to place strict standards on it.\n\nAfter World War II, the movement shifted to a milder variant, logical empiricism, led mainly by Carl Hempel, who, during the rise of Nazism, had emigrated to the United States. In the ensuing years, the movement's central premises, still unresolved, were heavily criticised by leading philosophers, particularly Willard van Orman Quine and Karl Popper, and even, within the movement itself, by Hempel. By 1960, the movement had run its course. Soon, publication of Thomas Kuhn's landmark book, \"The Structure of Scientific Revolutions\", dramatically shifted academic philosophy's focus. By then, neopositivism was \"dead, or as dead as a philosophical movement ever becomes\".\n\nLogical positivists culled from Ludwig Wittgenstein's early philosophy of language the verifiability principle or criterion of meaningfulness. As in Ernst Mach's phenomenalism, whereby the mind knows only actual or potential sensory experience, verificationists took all sciences' basic content to be only sensory experience. And some influence came from Percy Bridgman's musings that others proclaimed as operationalism, whereby a physical theory is understood by what laboratory procedures scientists perform to test its predictions. In verificationism, only the \"verifiable\" was scientific, and thus meaningful (or \"cognitively meaningful\"), whereas the unverifiable, being unscientific, were meaningless \"pseudostatements\" (just \"emotively meaningful\"). Unscientific discourse, as in ethics and metaphysics, would be unfit for discourse by philosophers, newly tasked to organize knowledge, not develop new knowledge.\n\nLogical positivism is sometimes stereotyped as forbidding talk of unobservables, such as microscopic entities or such notions as causality and general principles, but that is an exaggeration. Rather, most neopositivists viewed talk of unobservables as metaphorical or elliptical: direct observations phrased abstractly or indirectly. So \"theoretical terms\" would garner meaning from \"observational terms\" via \"correspondence rules\", and thereby \"theoretical laws\" would be reduced to \"empirical laws\". Via Bertrand Russell's logicism, reducing mathematics to logic, physics' mathematical formulas would be converted to symbolic logic. Via Russell's logical atomism, ordinary language would break into discrete units of meaning. Rational reconstruction, then, would convert ordinary statements into standardized equivalents, all networked and united by a logical syntax. A scientific theory would be stated with its method of verification, whereby a logical calculus or empirical operation could verify its falsity or truth.\n\nIn the late 1930s, logical positivists fled Germany and Austria for Britain and the United States. By then, many had replaced Mach's phenomenalism with Otto Neurath's physicalism, whereby science's content is not actual or potential sensations, but instead is entities publicly observable. Rudolf Carnap, who had sparked logical positivism in the Vienna Circle, had sought to replace \"verification\" with simply \"confirmation\". With World War II's close in 1945, logical positivism became milder, \"logical empiricism\", led largely by Carl Hempel, in America, who expounded the covering law model of scientific explanation. Logical positivism became a major underpinning of analytic philosophy, and dominated philosophy in the English-speaking world, including philosophy of science, while influencing sciences, but especially social sciences, into the 1960s. Yet the movement failed to resolve its central problems, and its doctrines were increasingly criticized, most trenchantly by Willard Van Orman Quine, Norwood Hanson, Karl Popper, Thomas Kuhn, and Carl Hempel.\n\n\"Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus\", by the young Ludwig Wittgenstein, introduced the view of philosophy as \"critique of language\", offering the possibility of a theoretically principled distinction of intelligible versus nonsensical discourse. \"Tractatus\" adhered to a correspondence theory of truth (versus a coherence theory of truth). Wittgenstein's influence also shows in some versions of the verifiability principle. In tractarian doctrine, truths of logic are tautologies, a view widely accepted by logical positivists who were also influenced by Wittgenstein's interpretation of probability although, according to Neurath, some logical positivists found \"Tractatus\" to contain too much metaphysics.\n\nGottlob Frege began the program of reducing mathematics to logic, continued it with Bertrand Russell, but lost interest in this logicism, and Russell continued it with Alfred North Whitehead in their \"Principia Mathematica\", inspiring some of the more mathematical logical posivists, such as Hans Hahn and Rudolf Carnap. Carnap's early anti-metaphysical works employed Russell's theory of types. Carnap envisioned a universal language that could reconstruct mathematics and thereby encode physics. Yet Kurt Gödel's incompleteness theorem showed this impossible except in trivial cases, and Alfred Tarski's undefinability theorem shattered all hopes of reducing mathematics to logic. Thus, a universal language failed to stem from Carnap's 1934 work \"Logische Syntax der Sprache\" (\"Logical Syntax of Language\"). Still, some logical positivists, including Carl Hempel, continued support of logicism.\n\nIn Germany, Hegelian metaphysics was a dominant movement, and Hegelian successors such as F H Bradley explained reality by postulating metaphysical entities lacking empirical basis, drawing reaction in the form of positivism. Starting in the late 19th century, there was a \"back to Kant\" movement. Ernst Mach's positivism and phenomenalism were a major influence.\n\nThe Vienna Circle, gathering around University of Vienna and Café Central, was led principally by Moritz Schlick. Schlick had held a neo-Kantian position, but later converted, via Carnap's 1928 book \"Der logische Aufbau der Welt\", that is, \"The Logical Structure of the World\". A 1929 pamphlet written by Otto Neurath, Hans Hahn, and Rudolf Carnap summarized the Vienna Circle's positions. Another member of Vienna Circle to later prove very influential was Carl Hempel. A friendly but tenacious critic of the Circle was Karl Popper, whom Neurath nicknamed the \"Official Opposition\".\n\nCarnap and other Vienna Circle members, including Hahn and Neurath, saw need for a weaker criterion of meaningfulness than verifiability. A radical \"left\" wing—led by Neurath and Carnap—began the program of \"liberalization of empiricism\", and they also emphasized fallibilism and pragmatics, which latter Carnap even suggested as empiricism's basis. A conservative \"right\" wing—led by Schlick and Waismann—rejected both the liberalization of empiricism and the epistemological nonfoundationalism of a move from phenomenalism to physicalism. As Neurath and somewhat Carnap posed science toward social reform, the split in Vienna Circle also reflected political views.\n\nThe Berlin Circle was led principally by Hans Reichenbach.\n\nBoth Moritz Schlick and Rudolf Carnap had been influenced by and sought to define logical positivism versus the neo-Kantianism of Ernst Cassirer—the then leading figure of Marburg school, so called—and against Edmund Husserl's phenomenology. Logical positivists especially opposed Martin Heidegger's obscure metaphysics, the epitome of what logical positivism rejected. In the early 1930s, Carnap debated Heidegger over \"metaphysical pseudosentences\". Despite its revolutionary aims, logical positivism was but one view among many vying within Europe, and logical positivists initially spoke their language.\n\nAs the movement's first emissary to the New World, Moritz Schlick visited Stanford University in 1929, yet otherwise remained in Vienna and was murdered at the University, reportedly by a deranged student, in 1936. That year, a British attendee at some Vienna Circle meetings since 1933, A. J. Ayer saw his \"Language, Truth and Logic\", written in English, import logical positivism to the English-speaking world. By then, the Nazi Party's 1933 rise to power in Germany had triggered flight of intellectuals. In exile in England, Otto Neurath died in 1945. Rudolf Carnap, Hans Reichenbach, and Carl Hempel—Carnap's protégé who had studied in Berlin with Reichenbach—settled permanently in America. Upon Germany's annexation of Austria in 1938, remaining logical positivists, many of whom were also Jewish, were targeted and continued flight. Logical positivism thus became dominant in the English-speaking world.\n\nConcerning reality, the necessary is a state true in all possible worlds—mere logical validity—whereas the contingent hinges on the way the particular world is. Concerning knowledge, the \"a priori\" is knowable before or without, whereas the \"a posteriori\" is knowable only after or through, relevant experience. Concerning statements, the \"analytic\" is true via terms' arrangement and meanings, thus a tautology—true by logical necessity but uninformative about the world—whereas the \"synthetic\" adds reference to a state of facts, a contingency.\n\nIn 1739, David Hume cast a fork aggressively dividing \"relations of ideas\" from \"matters of fact and real existence\", such that all truths are of one type or the other. By Hume's fork, truths by relations among ideas (abstract) all align on one side (analytic, necessary, \"a priori\"), whereas truths by states of actualities (concrete) always align on the other side (synthetic, contingent, \"a posteriori\"). Of any treatises containing neither, Hume orders, \"Commit it then to the flames, for it can contain nothing but sophistry and illusion\".\n\nThus awakened from \"dogmatic slumber\", Immanuel Kant quested to answer Hume's challenge—but by explaining how metaphysics is possible. Eventually, in his 1781 work, Kant crossed the tines of Hume's fork to identify another range of truths by necessity—synthetic \"a priori\", statements claiming states of facts but known true before experience—by arriving at transcendental idealism, attributing the mind a constructive role in phenomena by arranging sense data into the very experience \"space\", \"time\", and \"substance\". Thus, Kant saved Newton's law of universal gravitation from Hume's problem of induction by finding uniformity of nature to be \"a priori\" knowledge. Logical positivists rejected Kant's synthethic \"a priori\", and adopted Hume's fork, whereby a statement is either analytic and \"a priori\" (thus necessary and verifiable logically) or synthetic and \"a posteriori\" (thus contingent and verifiable empirically).\n\nEarly, most logical positivists proposed that all knowledge is based on logical inference from simple \"protocol sentences\" grounded in observable facts. In the 1936 and 1937 papers \"Testability and meaning\", individual terms replace sentences as the units of meaning. Further, theoretical terms no longer need to acquire meaning by explicit definition from observational terms: the connection may be indirect, through a system of implicit definitions. Carnap also provided an important, pioneering discussion of disposition predicates.\n\nThe logical positivists' initial stance was that a statement is \"cognitively meaningful\" only if some finite procedure conclusively determines its truth. By this verifiability principle, only statements verifiable either by their analyticity or by empiricism were \"cognitively meaningful\". Metaphysics, ontology, as well as much of ethics failed this criterion, and so were found \"cognitively meaningless\". Moritz Schlick, however, did not view ethical or aesthetic statements as cognitively meaningless. \"Cognitive meaningfulness\" was variously defined: having a truth value; corresponding to a possible state of affairs; intelligible or understandable as are scientific statements.\n\nEthics and aesthetics were subjective preferences, while theology and other metaphysics contained \"pseudostatements\", neither true nor false. This meaningfulness was cognitive, although other types of meaningfulness—for instance, emotive, expressive, or figurative—occurred in metaphysical discourse, dismissed from further review. Thus, logical positivism indirectly asserted Hume's law, the principle that \"is\" statements cannot justify \"ought\" statements, but are separated by an unbridgeable gap. A. J. Ayer's 1936 book asserted an extreme variant—the boo/hooray doctrine—whereby all evaluative judgments are but emotional reactions.\n\nIn an important pair of papers in 1936 and 1937, \"Testability and meaning\", Carnap replaced \"verification\" with \"confirmation\", on the view that although universal laws cannot be verified they can be confirmed. Later, Carnap employed abundant logical and mathematical methods in researching inductive logic while seeking to provide an account of probability as \"degree of confirmation\", but was never able to formulate a model. In Carnap's inductive logic, every universal law's degree of confirmation is always zero. In any event, the precise formulation of what came to be called the \"criterion of cognitive significance\" took three decades (Hempel 1950, Carnap 1956, Carnap 1961).\n\nCarl Hempel became a major critic within the logical positivism movement. Hempel elucidated the paradox of confirmation.\n\nThe second edition of A. J. Ayer's book arrived in 1946, and discerned \"strong\" versus \"weak\" forms of verification. Ayer concluded, \"A proposition is said to be verifiable, in the strong sense of the term, if, and only if, its truth could be conclusively established by experience\", but is verifiable in the weak sense \"if it is possible for experience to render it probable\". And yet, \"no proposition, other than a tautology, can possibly be anything more than a probable hypothesis\". Thus, all are open to weak verification.\n\nUpon the global defeat of Nazism, and the removal from philosophy of rivals for radical reform—Marburg neo-Kantianism, Husserlian phenomenology, Heidegger's \"existential hermeneutics\"—and while hosted in the climate of American pragmatism and commonsense empiricism, the neopositivists shed much of their earlier, revolutionary zeal. No longer crusading to revise traditional philosophy into a new \"scientific philosophy\", they became respectable members of a new philosophy subdiscipline, \"philosophy of science\". Receiving support from Ernest Nagel, logical empiricists were especially influential in the social sciences.\n\nComtean positivism had viewed science as \"description\", whereas the logical positivists posed science as \"explanation\", perhaps to better realize the envisioned unity of science by covering not only fundamental science—that is, fundamental physics—but the special sciences, too, for instance biology, anthropology, psychology, sociology, and economics. The most widely accepted concept of scientific explanation, held even by neopositivist critic Karl Popper, was the deductive-nomological model (DN model). Yet DN model received its greatest explication by Carl Hempel, first in his 1942 article \"The function of general laws in history\", and more explicitly with Paul Oppenheim in their 1948 article \"Studies in the logic of explanation\".\n\nIn the DN model, the stated phenomenon to be explained is the \"explanandum\"—which can be an event, law, or theory—whereas premises stated to explain it are the \"explanans\". Explanans must be true or highly confirmed, contain at least one law, and entail the explanandum. Thus, given initial conditions \"C, C . . . C\" plus general laws \"L, L . . . L\", event \"E\" is a deductive consequence and scientifically explained. In the DN model, a law is an unrestricted generalization by conditional proposition—\"If A, then B\"—and has empirical content testable. (Differing from a merely true regularity—for instance, \"George always carries only $1 bills in his wallet\"—a law suggests what \"must\" be true, and is consequent of a scientific theory's axiomatic structure.)\n\nBy the Humean empiricist view that humans observe sequences of events, (not cause and effect, as causality and causal mechanisms are unobservable), the DN model neglects causality beyond mere constant conjunction, first event \"A\" and then always event \"B\". Hempel's explication of the DN model held natural laws—empirically confirmed regularities—as satisfactory and, if formulated realistically, approximating causal explanation. In later articles, Hempel defended the DN model and proposed a probabilistic explanation, inductive-statistical model (IS model). the DN and IS models together form the \"covering law model\", as named by a critic, William Dray. Derivation of statistical laws from other statistical laws goes to deductive-statistical model (DS model). Georg Henrik von Wright, another critic, named it \"subsumption theory\", fitting the ambition of theory reduction.\n\nLogical positivists were generally committed to \"Unified Science\", and sought a common language or, in Neurath's phrase, a \"universal slang\" whereby all scientific propositions could be expressed. The adequacy of proposals or fragments of proposals for such a language was often asserted on the basis of various \"reductions\" or \"explications\" of the terms of one special science to the terms of another, putatively more fundamental. Sometimes these reductions consisted of set-theoretic manipulations of a few logically primitive concepts (as in Carnap's \"Logical Structure of the World\", 1928). Sometimes, these reductions consisted of allegedly analytic or \"a priori\" deductive relationships (as in Carnap's \"Testability and meaning\"). A number of publications over a period of thirty years would attempt to elucidate this concept.\n\nAs in Comtean positivism's envisioned unity of science, neopositivists aimed to network all special sciences through the covering law model of scientific explanation. And ultimately, by supplying boundary conditions and supplying bridge laws within the covering law model, all the special sciences' laws would reduce to fundamental physics, the fundamental science.\n\nAfter World War II, key tenets of logical positivism, including its atomistic philosophy of science, the verifiability principle, and the fact/value gap, drew escalated criticism. It was clear that empirical claims cannot be verified to be universally true. Thus, as initially stated, the verifiability criterion made universal statements meaningless, and even made statements beyond empiricism for technological but not conceptual reasons meaningless, which would pose significant problems for science. These problems were recognized within the movement, which hosted attempted solutions—Carnap's move to \"confirmation\", Ayer's acceptance of \"weak verification\"—but the program drew sustained criticism from a number of directions by the 1950s. Even philosophers disagreeing among themselves on which direction general epistemology ought to take, as well as on philosophy of science, agreed that the logical empiricist program was untenable, and it became viewed as self-contradictory. The verifiability criterion of meaning was itself unverified. Notable critics included Nelson Goodman, Willard Van Orman Quine, Norwood Hanson, Karl Popper, Thomas Kuhn, J L Austin, Peter Strawson, Hilary Putnam, and Richard Rorty.\n\nAlthough an empiricist, American logician Willard Van Orman Quine published the 1951 paper \"Two Dogmas of Empiricism\", which challenged conventional empiricist presumptions. Quine attacked the analytic/synthetic division, which the verificationist program had been hinged upon in order to entail, by consequence of Hume's fork, both necessity and aprioricity. Quine's ontological relativity explained that every term in any statement has its meaning contingent on a vast network of knowledge and belief, the speaker's conception of the entire world. Quine later proposed naturalized epistemology.\n\nIn 1958, Norwood Hanson's \"Patterns of Discovery\" undermined the division of observation versus theory, as one can predict, collect, prioritize, and assess data only via some horizon of expectation set by a theory. Thus, any dataset—the direct observations, the scientific facts—is laden with theory.\n\nAn early, tenacious critic was Karl Popper whose 1934 book \"Logik der Forschung\", arriving in English in 1959 as \"The Logic of Scientific Discovery\", directly answered verificationism. Popper heeded the problem of induction as rendering empirical verification logically impossible, and the deductive fallacy of affirming the consequent reveals any phenomenon's capacity to host more than one logically possible explanation. Accepting scientific method as hypotheticodeduction, whose inference form is denying the consequent, Popper finds scientific method unable to proceed without falsifiable predictions. Popper thus identifies falsifiability to demarcate not \"meaningful\" from \"meaningless\" but simply \"scientific\" from \"unscientific\"—a label not in itself unfavorable.\n\nPopper finds virtue in metaphysics, required to develop new scientific theories. And an unfalsifiable—thus unscientific, perhaps metaphysical—concept in one era can later, through evolving knowledge or technology, become falsifiable, thus scientific. Popper also found science's quest for truth to rest on values. Popper disparages the \"pseudoscientific\", which occurs when an unscientific theory is proclaimed true and coupled with seemingly scientific method by \"testing\" the unfalsifiable theory—whose predictions are confirmed by necessity—or when a scientific theory's falsifiable predictions are strongly falsified but the theory is persistently protected by \"immunizing stratagems\", such as the appendage of \"ad hoc\" clauses saving the theory or the recourse to increasingly speculative hypotheses shielding the theory.\n\nPopper's \"scientific\" epistemology is falsificationism, which finds that no number, degree, and variety of empirical successes can either verify or confirm scientific theory. Falsificationism finds science's aim as \"corroboration\" of scientific theory, which strives for scientific realism but accepts the maximal status of strongly corroborated verisimilitude (\"truthlikeness\"). Explicitly denying the positivist view that all knowledge is scientific, Popper developed the \"general\" epistemology critical rationalism, which finds human knowledge to evolve by \"conjectures and refutations\". Popper thus acknowledged the value of the positivist movement, driving evolution of human understanding, but claimed that he had \"killed positivism\".\n\nWith his landmark, \"The Structure of Scientific Revolutions\" (1962), Thomas Kuhn critically destabilized the verificationist program, which was presumed to call for foundationalism. (Actually, even in the 1930s, Otto Neurath had argued for nonfoundationalism via coherentism by likening science to a boat (Neurath's boat) that scientists must rebuild at sea.) Although Kuhn's thesis itself was attacked even by opponents of neopositivism, in the 1970 postscript to \"Structure\", Kuhn asserted, at least, that there was no algorithm to science—and, on that, even most of Kuhn's critics agreed.\n\nPowerful and persuasive, Kuhn's book, unlike the vocabulary and symbols of logic's formal language, was written in natural language open to the layperson. Ironically, Kuhn's book was first published in a volume of \"Encyclopedia of Unified Science\"—a project begun by logical positivists—and some sense unified science, indeed, but by bringing it into the realm of historical and social assessment, rather than fitting it to the model of physics. Kuhn's ideas were rapidly adopted by scholars in disciplines well outside natural sciences, and, as logical empiricists were extremely influential in the social sciences, ushered academia into postpositivism or postempiricism.\n\nThe \"received view\" operates on the \"correspondence rule\" that states, \"The observational terms are taken as referring to specified phenomena or phenomenal properties, and the only interpretation given to the theoretical terms is their explicit definition provided by the correspondence rules\". According to Hilary Putnam, a former student of Reichenbach and of Carnap, the dichotomy of observational terms versus theoretical terms introduced a problem within scientific discussion that was nonexistent until this dichotomy was stated by logical positivists. Putnam's four objections:\n\nBULLET::::1. Something is referred to as \"observational\" if it is observable directly with our senses. Then an observation term cannot be applied to something unobservable. If this is the case, there are no observation terms.\nBULLET::::2. With Carnap's classification, some unobservable terms are not even theoretical and belong to neither observation terms nor theoretical terms. Some theoretical terms refer primarily to observation terms.\nBULLET::::3. Reports of observation terms frequently contain theoretical terms.\nBULLET::::4. A scientific theory may not contain any theoretical terms (an example of this is Darwin's original theory of evolution).\n\nPutnam also alleged that positivism was actually a form of metaphysical idealism by its rejecting scientific theory's ability to garner knowledge about nature's unobservable aspects. With his \"no miracles\" argument, posed in 1974, Putnam asserted scientific realism, the stance that science achieves true—or approximately true—knowledge of the world as it exists independently of humans' sensory experience. In this, Putnam opposed not only the positivism but other instrumentalism—whereby scientific theory is but a human tool to predict human observations—filling the void left by positivism's decline.\n\nIn his book \"God, Freedom and Evil\", Alvin Plantinga puts forward an argument against logical positivism by stating that it is self-refuting. As the principle that everything that is meaningful is verifiable by empirical observation is, in itself, not verifiable by empirical observation, for such a theory to be even vaguely convincing some exceptions need to be drawn. This criticism was first put forward by Plantinga in God and Other Minds. \n\nBy the late 1960s, logical positivism had become exhausted. Interviewed in the late 1970s, A. J. Ayer supposed that \"the most important\" defect \"was that nearly all of it was false\". After some laughter, he says that \"it was true in spirit.\" Although logical positivism tends to be recalled as a pillar of scientism, Carl Hempel was key in establishing the philosophy subdiscipline philosophy of science where Thomas Kuhn and Karl Popper brought in the era of postpositivism. John Passmore found logical positivism to be \"dead, or as dead as a philosophical movement ever becomes\".\n\nLogical positivism's fall reopened debate over the metaphysical merit of scientific theory, whether it can offer knowledge of the world beyond human experience (scientific realism) versus whether it is but a human tool to predict human experience (instrumentalism). Meanwhile, it became popular among philosophers to rehash the faults and failures of logical positivism without investigation of it. Thereby, logical positivism has been generally misrepresented, sometimes severely. Arguing for their own views, often framed versus logical positivism, many philosophers have reduced logical positivism to simplisms and stereotypes, especially the notion of logical positivism as a type of foundationalism. In any event, the movement helped anchor analytic philosophy in the English-speaking world, and returned Britain to empiricism. Without the logical positivists, who have been tremendously influential outside philosophy, especially in psychology and social sciences, intellectual life of the 20th century would be unrecognizable.\n\nBULLET::::- Anti-realism\nBULLET::::- Empirio-criticism\nBULLET::::- Moral panic\nBULLET::::- Raven paradox\nBULLET::::- Sociological positivism\nBULLET::::- \"The Structure of Science\"\nBULLET::::- Unobservable\nBULLET::::- People\nBULLET::::- Gustav Bergmann\nBULLET::::- Herbert Feigl\nBULLET::::- Kurt Grelling\nBULLET::::- Friedrich Waismann\nBULLET::::- R. B. Braithwaite\n\nBULLET::::- Bechtel, William, \"Philosophy of Science: An Overview for Cognitive Science\" (Hillsdale NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc, 1988).\nBULLET::::- Friedman, Michael, \"Reconsidering Logical Positivism\" (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1999).\nBULLET::::- Novick, Peter, \"That Noble Dream: The 'Objectivity Question' and the American Historical Profession\" (Cambridge UK: Cambridge University Press, 1988).\nBULLET::::- Stahl, William A & Robert A Campbell, Yvonne Petry, Gary Diver, \"Webs of Reality: Social Perspectives on Science and Religion\" (Piscataway NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2002).\nBULLET::::- Suppe, Frederick, ed, \"The Structure of Scientific Theories\", 2nd edn (Urbana IL: University of Illinois Press, 1977).\n\nBULLET::::- Achinstein, Peter and Barker, Stephen F. \"The Legacy of Logical Positivism: Studies in the Philosophy of Science\". Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1969.\nBULLET::::- Ayer, Alfred Jules. \"Logical Positivism\". Glencoe, Ill: Free Press, 1959.\nBULLET::::- Barone, Francesco. \"Il neopositivismo logico\". Roma Bari: Laterza, 1986.\nBULLET::::- Bergmann, Gustav. \"The Metaphysics of Logical Positivism\". New York: Longmans Green, 1954.\nBULLET::::- Cirera, Ramon. \"Carnap and the Vienna Circle: Empiricism and Logical Syntax\". Atlanta, GA: Rodopi, 1994.\nBULLET::::- Edmonds, David & Eidinow, John; \"Wittgenstein's Poker\",\nBULLET::::- Friedman, Michael. \"Reconsidering Logical Positivism\". Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1999\nBULLET::::- Gadol, Eugene T. \"Rationality and Science: A Memorial Volume for Moritz Schlick in Celebration of the Centennial of his Birth\". Wien: Springer, 1982.\nBULLET::::- Geymonat, Ludovico. \"La nuova filosofia della natura in Germania\". Torino, 1934.\nBULLET::::- Giere, Ronald N. and Richardson, Alan W. \"Origins of Logical Empiricism\". Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1997.\nBULLET::::- Hanfling, Oswald. \"Logical Positivism\". Oxford: B. Blackwell, 1981.\nBULLET::::- Holt, Jim, \"Positive Thinking\" (review of Karl Sigmund, \"Exact Thinking in Demented Times: The Vienna Circle and the Epic Quest for the Foundations of Science\", Basic Books, 449 pp.), \"The New York Review of Books\", vol. LXIV, no. 20 (21 December 2017), pp. 74–76.\nBULLET::::- Jangam, R. T. \"Logical Positivism and Politics\". Delhi: Sterling Publishers, 1970.\nBULLET::::- Janik, Allan and Toulmin, Stephen. \"Wittgenstein's Vienna\". London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1973.\nBULLET::::- Kraft, Victor. The Vienna Circle: \"The Origin of Neo-positivism, a Chapter in the History of Recent Philosophy\". New York: Greenwood Press, 1953.\nBULLET::::- McGuinness, Brian. \"Wittgenstein and the Vienna Circle: Conversations Recorded by Friedrich Waismann\". Trans. by Joachim Schulte and Brian McGuinness. New York: Barnes & Noble Books, 1979.\nBULLET::::- Milkov, Nikolay (ed.). \"Die Berliner Gruppe. Texte zum Logischen Empirismus von Walter Dubislav, Kurt Grelling, Carl G. Hempel, Alexander Herzberg, Kurt Lewin, Paul Oppenheim und Hans Reichenbach.\" Hamburg: Meiner 2015. (German)\nBULLET::::- Mises von, Richard. \"Positivism: A Study in Human Understanding\". Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1951.\nBULLET::::- Parrini, Paolo. \"Empirismo logico e convenzionalismo: saggio di storia della filosofia della scienza\". Milano: F. Angeli, 1983.\nBULLET::::- Parrini, Paolo; Salmon, Wesley C.; Salmon, Merrilee H. (ed.) \"Logical Empiricism – Historical and Contemporary Perspectives\", Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2003.\nBULLET::::- Reisch, George. \"How the Cold War Transformed Philosophy of Science : To the Icy Slopes of Logic\". New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005.\nBULLET::::- Rescher, Nicholas. \"The Heritage of Logical Positivism\". Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 1985.\nBULLET::::- Richardson, Alan and Thomas Uebel (eds.) \"The Cambridge Companion to Logical Positivism.\" New York: Cambridge University Press, 2007.\nBULLET::::- Salmon, Wesley and Wolters, Gereon (ed.) \"Logic, Language, and the Structure of Scientific Theories: Proceedings of the Carnap-Reichenbach Centennial, University of Konstanz, 21–24 May 1991\", Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1994.\nBULLET::::- Sarkar, Sahotra (ed.) \"The Emergence of Logical Empiricism: From 1900 to the Vienna Circle\". New York: Garland Publishing, 1996.\nBULLET::::- Sarkar, Sahotra (ed.) \"Logical Empiricism at its Peak: Schlick, Carnap, and Neurath\". New York: Garland Pub., 1996.\nBULLET::::- Sarkar, Sahotra (ed.) \"Logical Empiricism and the Special Sciences: Reichenbach, Feigl, and Nagel\". New York: Garland Pub., 1996.\nBULLET::::- Sarkar, Sahotra (ed.) \"Decline and Obsolescence of Logical Empiricism: Carnap vs. Quine and the Critics\". New York: Garland Pub., 1996.\nBULLET::::- Sarkar, Sahotra (ed.) \"The Legacy of the Vienna Circle: Modern Reappraisals\". New York: Garland Pub., 1996.\nBULLET::::- Spohn, Wolfgang (ed.) \"Erkenntnis Orientated: A Centennial Volume for Rudolf Carnap and Hans Reichenbach\", Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1991.\nBULLET::::- Stadler, Friedrich. \"The Vienna Circle. Studies in the Origins, Development, and Influence of Logical Empiricism.\" New York: Springer, 2001. – 2nd Edition: Dordrecht: Springer, 2015.\nBULLET::::- Stadler, Friedrich (ed.). \"The Vienna Circle and Logical Empiricism. Re-evaluation and Future Perspectives.\" Dordrecht – Boston – London, Kluwer 2003.\n\nArticles by logical positivists\nBULLET::::- The Scientific Conception of the World: The Vienna Circle\nBULLET::::- Carnap, Rudolf. 'The Elimination of Metaphysics Through Logical Analysis of Language'\nBULLET::::- Carnap, Rudolf. 'Empiricism, Semantics, and Ontology.'\nBULLET::::- Excerpt from Carnap, Rudolf. \"Philosophy and Logical Syntax\".\nBULLET::::- Feigl, Herbert. 'Positivism in the Twentieth Century (Logical Empiricism)', \"Dictionary of the History of Ideas\", 1974, Gale Group (Electronic Edition)\nBULLET::::- Hempel, Carl. 'Problems and Changes in the Empiricist Criterion of Meaning.'\n\nArticles on logical positivism\nBULLET::::- Kemerling, Garth. 'Logical Positivism', \"Philosophy Pages\"\nBULLET::::- Murzi, Mauro. 'Logical Positivism', \"The New Encyclopedia of Unbelief\", Tom Flynn (ed.). Prometheus Books, 2007 (PDF version)\nBULLET::::- Murzi, Mauro. 'The Philosophy of Logical Positivism.'\nBULLET::::- Passmore, John. 'Logical Positivism', \"The Encyclopedia of Philosophy\", Paul Edwards (ed.). New York: Macmillan, 1967, first edition\n\nArticles on related philosophical topics\nBULLET::::- Hájek, Alan. 'Interpretations of Probability', \"The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2003 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.)\"\nBULLET::::- Rey, Georges. 'The Analytic/Synthetic Distinction', \"The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2003 Edition)\", Edward N. Zalta (ed.)\nBULLET::::- Ryckman, Thomas A., 'Early Philosophical Interpretations of General Relativity', \"The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2001 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.)\"\nBULLET::::- Woleński, Jan. 'Lvov-Warsaw School', \"The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2003 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.)\"\nBULLET::::- Woodward, James. 'Scientific Explanation', \"The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2003 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.)\"\n"}
{"id": "18404", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18404", "title": "Lorentz transformation", "text": "Lorentz transformation\n\nIn physics, the Lorentz transformations are a one-parameter family of linear transformations from a coordinate frame in spacetime to another frame that moves at a constant velocity (the parameter) relative to the former. The respective inverse transformation is then parametrized by the negative of this velocity. The transformations are named after the Dutch physicist Hendrik Lorentz.\n\nThe most common form of the transformation, parametrized by the real constant formula_1 representing a velocity confined to the -direction, is expressed as \nwhere and are the coordinates of an event in two frames, where the primed frame is seen from the unprimed frame as moving with speed along the -axis, is the speed of light, and formula_3 is the Lorentz factor. When speed \"v\" is significantly lower than \"c\", the factor is negligible, but as \"v\" approaches \"c\", there is a significant effect. The value of \"v\" cannot exceed \"c\", in current understanding. \n\nExpressing the speed as formula_4 an equivalent form of the transformation is\n\nFrames of reference can be divided into two groups: inertial (relative motion with constant velocity) and non-inertial (accelerating, moving in curved paths, rotational motion with constant angular velocity, etc.). The term \"Lorentz transformations\" only refers to transformations between \"inertial\" frames, usually in the context of special relativity.\n\nIn each reference frame, an observer can use a local coordinate system (usually Cartesian coordinates in this context) to measure lengths, and a clock to measure time intervals. An event is something that happens at a point in space at an instant of time, or more formally a point in spacetime. The transformations connect the space and time coordinates of an event as measured by an observer in each frame.\n\nThey supersede the Galilean transformation of Newtonian physics, which assumes an absolute space and time (see Galilean relativity). The Galilean transformation is a good approximation only at relative speeds well below the speed of light. Lorentz transformations have a number of unintuitive features that do not appear in Galilean transformations. For example, they reflect the fact that observers moving at different velocities may measure different distances, elapsed times, and even different orderings of events, but always such that the speed of light is the same in all inertial reference frames. The invariance of light speed is one of the postulates of special relativity.\n\nHistorically, the transformations were the result of attempts by Lorentz and others to explain how the speed of light was observed to be independent of the reference frame, and to understand the symmetries of the laws of electromagnetism. The Lorentz transformation is in accordance with Albert Einstein's special relativity, but was derived first.\n\nThe Lorentz transformation is a linear transformation. It may include a rotation of space; a rotation-free Lorentz transformation is called a Lorentz boost. In Minkowski space, the mathematical model of spacetime in special relativity, the Lorentz transformations preserve the spacetime interval between any two events. This property is the defining property of a Lorentz transformation. They describe only the transformations in which the spacetime event at the origin is left fixed. They can be considered as a hyperbolic rotation of Minkowski space. The more general set of transformations that also includes translations is known as the Poincaré group.\n\nMany physicists—including Woldemar Voigt, George FitzGerald, Joseph Larmor, and Hendrik Lorentz himself—had been discussing the physics implied by these equations since 1887. Early in 1889, Oliver Heaviside had shown from Maxwell's equations that the electric field surrounding a spherical distribution of charge should cease to have spherical symmetry once the charge is in motion relative to the aether. FitzGerald then conjectured that Heaviside's distortion result might be applied to a theory of intermolecular forces. Some months later, FitzGerald published the conjecture that bodies in motion are being contracted, in order to explain the baffling outcome of the 1887 aether-wind experiment of Michelson and Morley. In 1892, Lorentz independently presented the same idea in a more detailed manner, which was subsequently called FitzGerald–Lorentz contraction hypothesis. Their explanation was widely known before 1905.\n\nLorentz (1892–1904) and Larmor (1897–1900), who believed the luminiferous aether hypothesis, also looked for the transformation under which Maxwell's equations are invariant when transformed from the aether to a moving frame. They extended the FitzGerald–Lorentz contraction hypothesis and found out that the time coordinate has to be modified as well (\"local time\"). Henri Poincaré gave a physical interpretation to local time (to first order in \"v\"/\"c\", the relative velocity of the two reference frames normalized to the speed of light) as the consequence of clock synchronization, under the assumption that the speed of light is constant in moving frames. Larmor is credited to have been the first to understand the crucial time dilation property inherent in his equations.\n\nIn 1905, Poincaré was the first to recognize that the transformation has the properties of a mathematical group,\nand named it after Lorentz.\nLater in the same year Albert Einstein published what is now called special relativity, by deriving the Lorentz transformation under the assumptions of the principle of relativity and the constancy of the speed of light in any inertial reference frame, and by abandoning the mechanistic aether as unnecessary.\n\nAn \"event\" is something that happens at a certain point in spacetime, or more generally, the point in spacetime itself. In any inertial frame an event is specified by a time coordinate \"ct\" and a set of Cartesian coordinates to specify position in space in that frame. Subscripts label individual events.\n\nFrom Einstein's second postulate of relativity follows\n\nin all inertial frames for events connected by \"light signals\". The quantity on the left is called the \"spacetime interval\" between events and . The interval between \"any two\" events, not necessarily separated by light signals, is in fact invariant, i.e., independent of the state of relative motion of observers in different inertial frames, as is shown using homogeneity and isotropy of space. The transformation sought after thus must possess the property that\n\nwhere are the spacetime coordinates used to define events in one frame, and are the coordinates in another frame. First one observes that is satisfied if an arbitrary -tuple of numbers are added to events and . Such transformations are called \"spacetime translations\" and are not dealt with further here. Then one observes that a \"linear\" solution preserving the origin of the simpler problem\n\nsolves the general problem too. (A solution satisfying the left formula automatically satisfies the right formula, see polarization identity.) Finding the solution to the simpler problem is just a matter of look-up in the theory of classical groups that preserve bilinear forms of various signature. First equation in can be written more compactly as\n\nwhere refers to the bilinear form of signature on exposed by the right hand side formula in . The alternative notation defined on the right is referred to as the \"relativistic dot product\". Spacetime mathematically viewed as endowed with this bilinear form is known as Minkowski space . The Lorentz transformation is thus an element of the group Lorentz group , the Lorentz group or, for those that prefer the other metric signature, (also called the Lorentz group). One has\n\nwhich is precisely preservation of the bilinear form which implies (by linearity of and bilinearity of the form) that is satisfied. The elements of the Lorentz group are rotations and \"boosts\" and mixes thereof. If the spacetime translations are included, then one obtains the \"inhomogeneous Lorentz group\" or the Poincaré group.\n\nThe relations between the primed and unprimed spacetime coordinates are the Lorentz transformations, each coordinate in one frame is a linear function of all the coordinates in the other frame, and the inverse functions are the inverse transformation. Depending on how the frames move relative to each other, and how they are oriented in space relative to each other, other parameters that describe direction, speed, and orientation enter the transformation equations.\n\nTransformations describing relative motion with constant (uniform) velocity and without rotation of the space coordinate axes are called \"boosts\", and the relative velocity between the frames is the parameter of the transformation. The other basic type of Lorentz transformations is rotations in the spatial coordinates only, these are also inertial frames since there is no relative motion, the frames are simply tilted (and not continuously rotating), and in this case quantities defining the rotation are the parameters of the transformation (e.g., axis–angle representation, or Euler angles, etc.). A combination of a rotation and boost is a \"homogeneous transformation\", which transforms the origin back to the origin.\n\nThe full Lorentz group also contains special transformations that are neither rotations nor boosts, but rather reflections in a plane through the origin. Two of these can be singled out; spatial inversion in which the spatial coordinates of all events are reversed in sign and temporal inversion in which the time coordinate for each event gets its sign reversed.\n\nBoosts should not be conflated with mere displacements in spacetime; in this case, the coordinate systems are simply shifted and there is no relative motion. However, these also count as symmetries forced by special relativity since they leave the spacetime interval invariant. A combination of a rotation with a boost, followed by a shift in spacetime, is an \"inhomogeneous Lorentz transformation\", an element of the Poincaré group, which is also called the inhomogeneous Lorentz group.\n\nA \"stationary\" observer in frame defines events with coordinates . Another frame moves with velocity relative to , and an observer in this \"moving\" frame defines events using the coordinates .\n\nThe coordinate axes in each frame are parallel (the and axes are parallel, the and axes are parallel, and the and axes are parallel), remain mutually perpendicular, and relative motion is along the coincident axes. At , the origins of both coordinate systems are the same, . In other words, the times and positions are coincident at this event. If all these hold, then the coordinate systems are said to be in standard configuration, or synchronized.\n\nIf an observer in records an event , then an observer in records the \"same\" event with coordinates\n\nwhere is the relative velocity between frames in the -direction, is the speed of light, and\n\n(lowercase gamma) is the Lorentz factor.\n\nHere, is the \"parameter\" of the transformation, for a given boost it is a constant number, but can take a continuous range of values. In the setup used here, positive relative velocity is motion along the positive directions of the axes, zero relative velocity is no relative motion, while negative relative velocity is relative motion along the negative directions of the axes. The magnitude of relative velocity cannot equal or exceed , so only subluminal speeds are allowed. The corresponding range of is .\n\nThe transformations are not defined if is outside these limits. At the speed of light () is infinite, and faster than light () is a complex number, each of which make the transformations unphysical. The space and time coordinates are measurable quantities and numerically must be real numbers.\n\nAs an active transformation, an observer in F′ notices the coordinates of the event to be \"boosted\" in the negative directions of the axes, because of the in the transformations. This has the equivalent effect of the \"coordinate system\" F′ boosted in the positive directions of the axes, while the event does not change and is simply represented in another coordinate system, a passive transformation.\n\nThe inverse relations ( in terms of ) can be found by algebraically solving the original set of equations. A more efficient way is to use physical principles. Here is the \"stationary\" frame while is the \"moving\" frame. According to the principle of relativity, there is no privileged frame of reference, so the transformations from to must take exactly the same form as the transformations from to . The only difference is moves with velocity relative to (i.e., the relative velocity has the same magnitude but is oppositely directed). Thus if an observer in notes an event , then an observer in notes the \"same\" event with coordinates\n\nand the value of remains unchanged. This \"trick\" of simply reversing the direction of relative velocity while preserving its magnitude, and exchanging primed and unprimed variables, always applies to finding the inverse transformation of every boost in any direction.\n\nSometimes it is more convenient to use (lowercase beta) instead of , so that\n\nwhich shows much more clearly the symmetry in the transformation. From the allowed ranges of and the definition of , it follows . The use of and is standard throughout the literature.\n\nThe Lorentz transformations can also be derived in a way that resembles circular rotations in 3d space using the hyperbolic functions. For the boost in the direction, the results are\n\nwhere (lowercase zeta) is a parameter called \"rapidity\" (many other symbols are used, including ). Given the strong resemblance to rotations of spatial coordinates in 3d space in the Cartesian xy, yz, and zx planes, a Lorentz boost can be thought of as a hyperbolic rotation of spacetime coordinates in the xt, yt, and zt Cartesian-time planes of 4d Minkowski space. The parameter is the hyperbolic angle of rotation, analogous to the ordinary angle for circular rotations. This transformation can be illustrated with a Minkowski diagram.\n\nThe hyperbolic functions arise from the \"difference\" between the squares of the time and spatial coordinates in the spacetime interval, rather than a sum. The geometric significance of the hyperbolic functions can be visualized by taking or in the transformations. Squaring and subtracting the results, one can derive hyperbolic curves of constant coordinate values but varying , which parametrizes the curves according to the identity\n\nConversely the and axes can be constructed for varying coordinates but constant . The definition\n\nprovides the link between a constant value of rapidity, and the slope of the axis in spacetime. A consequence these two hyperbolic formulae is an identity that matches the Lorentz factor\n\nComparing the Lorentz transformations in terms of the relative velocity and rapidity, or using the above formulae, the connections between , , and are\n\nTaking the inverse hyperbolic tangent gives the rapidity\n\nSince , it follows . From the relation between and , positive rapidity is motion along the positive directions of the axes, zero rapidity is no relative motion, while negative rapidity is relative motion along the negative directions of the axes.\n\nThe inverse transformations are obtained by exchanging primed and unprimed quantities to switch the coordinate frames, and negating rapidity since this is equivalent to negating the relative velocity. Therefore,\n\nThe inverse transformations can be similarly visualized by considering the cases when and .\n\nSo far the Lorentz transformations have been applied to \"one event\". If there are two events, there is a spatial separation and time interval between them. It follows from the linearity of the Lorentz transformations that two values of space and time coordinates can be chosen, the Lorentz transformations can be applied to each, then subtracted to get the Lorentz transformations of the differences;\n\nwith inverse relations\n\nwhere (uppercase delta) indicates a difference of quantities; e.g., for two values of coordinates, and so on.\n\nThese transformations on \"differences\" rather than spatial points or instants of time are useful for a number of reasons:\n\nBULLET::::- in calculations and experiments, it is lengths between two points or time intervals that are measured or of interest (e.g., the length of a moving vehicle, or time duration it takes to travel from one place to another),\nBULLET::::- the transformations of velocity can be readily derived by making the difference infinitesimally small and dividing the equations, and the process repeated for the transformation of acceleration,\nBULLET::::- if the coordinate systems are never coincident (i.e., not in standard configuration), and if both observers can agree on an event in and in , then they can use that event as the origin, and the spacetime coordinate differences are the differences between their coordinates and this origin, e.g., , , etc.\n\nA critical requirement of the Lorentz transformations is the invariance of the speed of light, a fact used in their derivation, and contained in the transformations themselves. If in the equation for a pulse of light along the direction is , then in the Lorentz transformations give , and vice versa, for any .\n\nFor relative speeds much less than the speed of light, the Lorentz transformations reduce to the Galilean transformation\n\nin accordance with the correspondence principle. It is sometimes said that nonrelativistic physics is a physics of \"instantaneous action at a distance\".\n\nThree counterintuitive, but correct, predictions of the transformations are:\nBULLET::::- Relativity of simultaneity: Suppose two events occur simultaneously () along the x axis, but separated by a nonzero displacement . Then in , we find that formula_16, so the events are no longer simultaneous according to a moving observer.\nBULLET::::- Time dilation: Suppose there is a clock at rest in . If a time interval is measured at the same point in that frame, so that , then the transformations give this interval in by . Conversely, suppose there is a clock at rest in . If an interval is measured at the same point in that frame, so that , then the transformations give this interval in F by . Either way, each observer measures the time interval between ticks of a moving clock to be longer by a factor than the time interval between ticks of his own clock.\nBULLET::::- Length contraction: Suppose there is a rod at rest in aligned along the x axis, with length . In , the rod moves with velocity , so its length must be measured by taking two simultaneous () measurements at opposite ends. Under these conditions, the inverse Lorentz transform shows that . In the two measurements are no longer simultaneous, but this does not matter because the rod is at rest in . So each observer measures the distance between the end points of a moving rod to be shorter by a factor than the end points of an identical rod at rest in his own frame. Length contraction affects any geometric quantity related to lengths, so from the perspective of a moving observer, areas and volumes will also appear to shrink along the direction of motion.\n\nThe use of vectors allows positions and velocities to be expressed in arbitrary directions compactly. A single boost in any direction depends on the full relative velocity vector with a magnitude that cannot equal or exceed , so that .\n\nOnly time and the coordinates parallel to the direction of relative motion change, while those coordinates perpendicular do not. With this in mind, split the spatial position vector as measured in , and as measured in , each into components perpendicular (⊥) and parallel ( ‖ ) to ,\n\nthen the transformations are\n\nwhere · is the dot product. The Lorentz factor retains its definition for a boost in any direction, since it depends only on the magnitude of the relative velocity. The definition with magnitude is also used by some authors.\n\nIntroducing a unit vector in the direction of relative motion, the relative velocity is with magnitude and direction , and vector projection and rejection give respectively\n\nAccumulating the results gives the full transformations,\n\n\\end{align}</math>\ncellpadding\nborder = 1\nborder colour = black\n\nThe projection and rejection also applies to . For the inverse transformations, exchange and to switch observed coordinates, and negate the relative velocity (or simply the unit vector since the magnitude is always positive) to obtain\n\n\\end{align}</math>\ncellpadding\nborder = 1\nborder colour = black\n\nThe unit vector has the advantage of simplifying equations for a single boost, allows either or to be reinstated when convenient, and the rapidity parametrization is immediately obtained by replacing and . It is not convenient for multiple boosts.\n\nThe vectorial relation between relative velocity and rapidity is\n\nand the \"rapidity vector\" can be defined as\n\neach of which serves as a useful abbreviation in some contexts. The magnitude of is the absolute value of the rapidity scalar confined to , which agrees with the range .\n\nDefining the coordinate velocities and Lorentz factor by\n\ntaking the differentials in the coordinates and time of the vector transformations, then dividing equations, leads to\n\nThe velocities and are the velocity of some massive object. They can also be for a third inertial frame (say \"F\"′′), in which case they must be \"constant\". Denote either entity by X. Then X moves with velocity relative to F, or equivalently with velocity relative to F′, in turn F′ moves with velocity relative to F. The inverse transformations can be obtained in a similar way, or as with position coordinates exchange and , and change to .\n\nThe transformation of velocity is useful in stellar aberration, the Fizeau experiment, and the relativistic Doppler effect.\n\nThe Lorentz transformations of acceleration can be similarly obtained by taking differentials in the velocity vectors, and dividing these by the time differential.\n\nIn general, given four quantities and and their Lorentz-boosted counterparts and , a relation of the form\n\nimplies the quantities transform under Lorentz transformations similar to the transformation of spacetime coordinates;\n\nThe decomposition of (and ) into components perpendicular and parallel to is exactly the same as for the position vector, as is the process of obtaining the inverse transformations (exchange and to switch observed quantities, and reverse the direction of relative motion by the substitution ).\n\nThe quantities collectively make up a \"four-vector\", where is the \"timelike component\", and the \"spacelike component\". Examples of and are the following:\n\n! Four vector\n! \n\nFor a given object (e.g., particle, fluid, field, material), if or correspond to properties specific to the object like its charge density, mass density, spin, etc., its properties can be fixed in the rest frame of that object. Then the Lorentz transformations give the corresponding properties in a frame moving relative to the object with constant velocity. This breaks some notions taken for granted in non-relativistic physics. For example, the energy of an object is a scalar in non-relativistic mechanics, but not in relativistic mechanics because energy changes under Lorentz transformations; its value is different for various inertial frames. In the rest frame of an object, it has a rest energy and zero momentum. In a boosted frame its energy is different and it appears to have a momentum. Similarly, in non-relativistic quantum mechanics the spin of a particle is a constant vector, but in relativistic quantum mechanics spin depends on relative motion. In the rest frame of the particle, the spin pseudovector can be fixed to be its ordinary non-relativistic spin with a zero timelike quantity , however a boosted observer will perceive a nonzero timelike component and an altered spin.\n\nNot all quantities are invariant in the form as shown above, for example orbital angular momentum does not have a timelike quantity, and neither does the electric field nor the magnetic field . The definition of angular momentum is , and in a boosted frame the altered angular momentum is . Applying this definition using the transformations of coordinates and momentum leads to the transformation of angular momentum. It turns out transforms with another vector quantity related to boosts, see relativistic angular momentum for details. For the case of the and fields, the transformations cannot be obtained as directly using vector algebra. The Lorentz force is the definition of these fields, and in it is while in it is . A method of deriving the EM field transformations in an efficient way which also illustrates the unit of the electromagnetic field uses tensor algebra, given below.\n\nThroughout, italic non-bold capital letters are 4×4 matrices, while non-italic bold letters are 3×3 matrices.\n\nWriting the coordinates in column vectors and the Minkowski metric as a square matrix\n\nthe spacetime interval takes the form (T denotes transpose)\n\nand is invariant under a Lorentz transformation\n\nwhere Λ is a square matrix which can depend on parameters.\n\nThe set of all Lorentz transformations Λ in this article is denoted formula_29. This set together with matrix multiplication forms a group, in this context known as the \"Lorentz group\". Also, the above expression is a quadratic form of signature (3,1) on spacetime, and the group of transformations which leaves this quadratic form invariant is the indefinite orthogonal group O(3,1), a Lie group. In other words, the Lorentz group is O(3,1). As presented in this article, any Lie groups mentioned are matrix Lie groups. In this context the operation of composition amounts to matrix multiplication.\n\nFrom the invariance of the spacetime interval it follows\n\nand this matrix equation contains the general conditions on the Lorentz transformation to ensure invariance of the spacetime interval. Taking the determinant of the equation using the product rule gives immediately\n\nWriting the Minkowski metric as a block matrix, and the Lorentz transformation in the most general form,\n\ncarrying out the block matrix multiplications obtains general conditions on to ensure relativistic invariance. Not much information can be directly extracted from all the conditions, however one of the results\n\nis useful; always so it follows that\n\nThe negative inequality may be unexpected, because multiplies the time coordinate and this has an effect on time symmetry. If the positive equality holds, then is the Lorentz factor.\n\nThe determinant and inequality provide four ways to classify Lorentz Transformations (\"herein LTs for brevity\"). Any particular LT has only one determinant sign \"and\" only one inequality. There are four sets which include every possible pair given by the intersections (\"n\"-shaped symbol meaning \"and\") of these classifying sets.\n\n! Intersection, ∩\n! Antichronous (or non-orthochronous) LTs\n\n! Orthochronous LTs\n\n! Proper LTs\n\nProper orthochronous LTs\n! Improper LTs\n\nImproper antichronous LTs\nImproper orthochronous LTs\n\nwhere \"+\" and \"−\" indicate the determinant sign, while \"↑\" for ≥ and \"↓\" for ≤ denote the inequalities.\n\nThe full Lorentz group splits into the union (\"u\"-shaped symbol meaning \"or\") of four disjoint sets\n\nA subgroup of a group must be closed under the same operation of the group (here matrix multiplication). In other words, for two Lorentz transformations and from a particular set, the composite Lorentz transformations and must be in the same set as and . This will not always be the case; it can be shown that the composition of \"any\" two Lorentz transformations always has the positive determinant and positive inequality, a proper orthochronous transformation. The sets formula_44, formula_45, formula_46, and formula_47 all form subgroups. The other sets involving the improper and/or antichronous properties (i.e. formula_48, formula_49, formula_50) do not form subgroups, because the composite transformation always has a positive determinant or inequality, whereas the original separate transformations will have negative determinants and/or inequalities.\n\nThe Lorentz boost is\n\nwhere the boost matrix is\n\nThe boosts along the Cartesian directions can be readily obtained, for example the unit vector in the x direction has components and .\n\nThe matrices make one or more successive transformations easier to handle, rather than rotely iterating the transformations to obtain the result of more than one transformation. If a frame is boosted with velocity relative to frame , and another frame is boosted with velocity relative to , the separate boosts are\nand the composition of the two boosts connects the coordinates in and ,\nSuccessive transformations act on the left. If and are collinear (parallel or antiparallel along the same line of relative motion), the boost matrices commute: and this composite transformation happens to be another boost.\n\nIf and are not collinear but in different directions, the situation is considerably more complicated. Lorentz boosts along different directions do not commute: and are not equal. Also, each of these compositions is \"not\" a single boost, but still a Lorentz transformation as each boost still preserves invariance of the spacetime interval. It turns out the composition of any two Lorentz boosts is equivalent to a boost followed or preceded by a rotation on the spatial coordinates, in the form of or . The and are composite velocities, while and are rotation parameters (e.g. axis-angle variables, Euler angles, etc.). The rotation in block matrix form is simply\n\nwhere is a 3d rotation matrix, which rotates any 3d vector in one sense (active transformation), or equivalently the coordinate frame in the opposite sense (passive transformation). It is \"not\" simple to connect and (or and ) to the original boost parameters and . In a composition of boosts, the matrix is named the Wigner rotation, and gives rise to the Thomas precession. These articles give the explicit formulae for the composite transformation matrices, including expressions for .\n\nIn this article the axis-angle representation is used for . The rotation is about an axis in the direction of a unit vector , through angle (positive anticlockwise, negative clockwise, according to the right-hand rule). The \"axis-angle vector\"\nwill serve as a useful abbreviation.\n\nSpatial rotations alone are also Lorentz transformations they leave the spacetime interval invariant. Like boosts, successive rotations about different axes do not commute. Unlike boosts, the composition of any two rotations is equivalent to a single rotation. Some other similarities and differences between the boost and rotation matrices include:\n\nBULLET::::- inverses: (relative motion in the opposite direction), and (rotation in the opposite sense about the same axis)\nBULLET::::- identity transformation for no relative motion/rotation:\nBULLET::::- unit determinant: . This property makes them proper transformations.\nBULLET::::- matrix symmetry: is symmetric (equals transpose), while is nonsymmetric but orthogonal (transpose equals inverse, ).\n\nThe most general proper Lorentz transformation includes a boost and rotation together, and is a nonsymmetric matrix. As special cases, and . An explicit form of the general Lorentz transformation is cumbersome to write down and will not be given here. Nevertheless, closed form expressions for the transformation matrices will be given below using group theoretical arguments. It will be easier to use the rapidity parametrization for boosts, in which case one writes and .\n\nThe set of transformations\n\nwith matrix multiplication as the operation of composition forms a group, called the \"restricted Lorentz group\", and is the special indefinite orthogonal group SO(3,1). (The plus sign indicates that it preserves the orientation of the temporal dimension).\n\nFor simplicity, look at the infinitesimal Lorentz boost in the x direction (examining a boost in any other direction, or rotation about any axis, follows an identical procedure). The infinitesimal boost is a small boost away from the identity, obtained by the Taylor expansion of the boost matrix to first order about ,\n\nwhere the higher order terms not shown are negligible because is small, and is simply the boost matrix in the \"x\" direction. The derivative of the matrix is the matrix of derivatives (of the entries, with respect to the same variable), and it is understood the derivatives are found first then evaluated at ,\n\nFor now, is defined by this result (its significance will be explained shortly). In the limit of an infinite number of infinitely small steps, the finite boost transformation in the form of a matrix exponential is obtained\n\nwhere the limit definition of the exponential has been used (see also characterizations of the exponential function). More generally\n\nThe axis-angle vector and rapidity vector are altogether six continuous variables which make up the group parameters (in this particular representation), and the generators of the group are and , each vectors of matrices with the explicit forms\n\nThese are all defined in an analogous way to above, although the minus signs in the boost generators are conventional. Physically, the generators of the Lorentz group correspond to important symmetries in spacetime: are the \"rotation generators\" which correspond to angular momentum, and are the \"boost generators\" which correspond to the motion of the system in spacetime. The derivative of any smooth curve with in the group depending on some group parameter with respect to that group parameter, evaluated at , serves as a definition of a corresponding group generator , and this reflects an infinitesimal transformation away from the identity. The smooth curve can always be taken as an exponential as the exponential will always map smoothly back into the group via for all ; this curve will yield again when differentiated at .\n\nExpanding the exponentials in their Taylor series obtains\n\nwhich compactly reproduce the boost and rotation matrices as given in the previous section.\n\nIt has been stated that the general proper Lorentz transformation is a product of a boost and rotation. At the \"infinitesimal\" level the product\n\nis commutative because only linear terms are required (products like and count as higher order terms and are negligible). Taking the limit as before leads to the finite transformation in the form of an exponential\n\nThe converse is also true, but the decomposition of a finite general Lorentz transformation into such factors is nontrivial. In particular,\n\nbecause the generators do not commute. For a description of how to find the factors of a general Lorentz transformation in terms of a boost and a rotation \"in principle\" (this usually does not yield an intelligible expression in terms of generators and ), see Wigner rotation. If, on the other hand, \"the decomposition is given\" in terms of the generators, and one wants to find the product in terms of the generators, then the Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula applies.\n\nLorentz generators can be added together, or multiplied by real numbers, to obtain more Lorentz generators. In other words, the set of all Lorentz generators\n\ntogether with the operations of ordinary matrix addition and multiplication of a matrix by a number, forms a vector space over the real numbers. The generators form a basis set of \"V\", and the components of the axis-angle and rapidity vectors, , are the coordinates of a Lorentz generator with respect to this basis.\n\nThree of the commutation relations of the Lorentz generators are\n\nwhere the bracket is known as the \"commutator\", and the other relations can be found by taking cyclic permutations of x, y, z components (i.e. change x to y, y to z, and z to x, repeat).\n\nThese commutation relations, and the vector space of generators, fulfill the definition of the Lie algebra formula_71. In summary, a Lie algebra is defined as a vector space \"V\" over a field of numbers, and with a binary operation [ , ] (called a Lie bracket in this context) on the elements of the vector space, satisfying the axioms of bilinearity, alternatization, and the Jacobi identity. Here the operation [ , ] is the commutator which satisfies all of these axioms, the vector space is the set of Lorentz generators \"V\" as given previously, and the field is the set of real numbers.\n\nLinking terminology used in mathematics and physics: A group generator is any element of the Lie algebra. A group parameter is a component of a coordinate vector representing an arbitrary element of the Lie algebra with respect to some basis. A basis, then, is a set of generators being a basis of the Lie algebra in the usual vector space sense.\n\nThe exponential map from the Lie algebra to the Lie group,\n\nprovides a one-to-one correspondence between small enough neighborhoods of the origin of the Lie algebra and neighborhoods of the identity element of the Lie group. It the case of the Lorentz group, the exponential map is just the matrix exponential. Globally, the exponential map is not one-to-one, but in the case of the Lorentz group, it is surjective (onto). Hence any group element in the connected component of the identity can be expressed as an exponential of an element of the Lie algebra.\n\nLorentz transformations also include parity inversion\n\nwhich negates all the spatial coordinates only, and time reversal\n\nwhich negates the time coordinate only, because these transformations leave the spacetime interval invariant. Here is the 3d identity matrix. These are both symmetric, they are their own inverses (see involution (mathematics)), and each have determinant −1. This latter property makes them improper transformations.\n\nIf is a proper orthochronous Lorentz transformation, then is improper antichronous, is improper orthochronous, and is proper antichronous.\n\nTwo other spacetime symmetries have not been accounted for. For the spacetime interval to be invariant, it can be shown that it is necessary and sufficient for the coordinate transformation to be of the form\n\nwhere \"C\" is a constant column containing translations in time and space. If \"C\" ≠ 0, this is an inhomogeneous Lorentz transformation or Poincaré transformation. If \"C\" = 0, this is a homogeneous Lorentz transformation. Poincaré transformations are not dealt further in this article.\n\nWriting the general matrix transformation of coordinates as the matrix equation\n\nallows the transformation of other physical quantities that cannot be expressed as four-vectors; e.g., tensors or spinors of any order in 4d spacetime, to be defined. In the corresponding tensor index notation, the above matrix expression is\n\nwhere lower and upper indices label covariant and contravariant components respectively, and the summation convention is applied. It is a standard convention to use Greek indices that take the value 0 for time components, and 1, 2, 3 for space components, while Latin indices simply take the values 1, 2, 3, for spatial components. Note that the first index (reading left to right) corresponds in the matrix notation to a \"row index\". The second index corresponds to the column index.\n\nThe transformation matrix is universal for all four-vectors, not just 4-dimensional spacetime coordinates. If is any four-vector, then in tensor index notation\n\nAlternatively, one writes\n\nin which the primed indices denote the indices of A in the primed frame. This notation cuts risk of exhausting the Greek alphabet roughly in half.\n\nFor a general -component object one may write\n\nwhere is the appropriate representation of the Lorentz group, an matrix for every . In this case, the indices should \"not\" be thought of as spacetime indices (sometimes called Lorentz indices), and they run from to . E.g., if is a bispinor, then the indices are called \"Dirac indices\".\n\nThere are also vector quantities with covariant indices. They are generally obtained from their corresponding objects with contravariant indices by the operation of \"lowering an index\"; e.g.,\n\nwhere is the metric tensor. (The linked article also provides more information about what the operation of raising and lowering indices really is mathematically.) The inverse of this transformation is given by\n\nwhere, when viewed as matrices, is the inverse of . As it happens, . This is referred to as \"raising an index\". To transform a covariant vector , first raise its index, then transform it according to the same rule as for contravariant -vectors, then finally lower the index;\n\nBut\n\nI. e., it is the -component of the \"inverse\" Lorentz transformation. One defines (as a matter of notation),\n\nand may in this notation write\n\nNow for a subtlety. The implied summation on the right hand side of\n\nis running over \"a row index\" of the matrix representing . Thus, in terms of matrices, this transformation should be thought of as the \"inverse transpose\" of acting on the column vector . That is, in pure matrix notation,\n\nThis means exactly that covariant vectors (thought of as column matrices) transform according to the dual representation of the standard representation of the Lorentz group. This notion generalizes to general representations, simply replace with .\n\nIf and are linear operators on vector spaces and , then a linear operator may be defined on the tensor product of and , denoted according to\n\nFrom this it is immediately clear that if and are a four-vectors in , then transforms as\n\nThe second step uses the bilinearity of the tensor product and the last step defines a 2-tensor on component form, or rather, it just renames the tensor .\n\nThese observations generalize in an obvious way to more factors, and using the fact that a general tensor on a vector space can be written as a sum of a coefficient (component!) times tensor products of basis vectors and basis covectors, one arrives at the transformation law for any tensor quantity . It is given by\n\n_\\mu {\\Lambda^{\\beta'}}_\\nu \\cdots {\\Lambda^{\\zeta'}}_\\rho\n</math>               \n\nwhere is defined above. This form can generally be reduced to the form for general -component objects given above with a single matrix () operating on column vectors. This latter form is sometimes preferred; e.g., for the electromagnetic field tensor.\n\nLorentz transformations can also be used to illustrate that the magnetic field and electric field are simply different aspects of the same force — the electromagnetic force, as a consequence of relative motion between electric charges and observers. The fact that the electromagnetic field shows relativistic effects becomes clear by carrying out a simple thought experiment.\nBULLET::::- An observer measures a charge at rest in frame F. The observer will detect a static electric field. As the charge is stationary in this frame, there is no electric current, so the observer does not observe any magnetic field.\nBULLET::::- The other observer in frame F′ moves at velocity relative to F and the charge. \"This\" observer sees a different electric field because the charge moves at velocity in their rest frame. The motion of the charge corresponds to an electric current, and thus the observer in frame F′ also sees a magnetic field.\n\nThe electric and magnetic fields transform differently from space and time, but exactly the same way as relativistic angular momentum and the boost vector.\n\nThe electromagnetic field strength tensor is given by\n\nin SI units. In relativity, the Gaussian system of units is often preferred over SI units, even in texts whose main choice of units is SI units, because in it the electric field and the magnetic induction have the same units making the appearance of the electromagnetic field tensor more natural. Consider a Lorentz boost in the -direction. It is given by\n\nwhere the field tensor is displayed side by side for easiest possible reference in the manipulations below.\n\nThe general transformation law becomes\n\nFor the magnetic field one obtains\n\nFor the electric field results\n\nHere, is used. These results can be summarized by\n\nand are independent of the metric signature. For SI units, substitute . refer to this last form as the view as opposed to the \"geometric view\" represented by the tensor expression\nand make a strong point of the ease with which results that are difficult to achieve using the view can be obtained and understood. Only objects that have well defined Lorentz transformation properties (in fact under \"any\" smooth coordinate transformation) are geometric objects. In the geometric view, the electromagnetic field is a six-dimensional geometric object in \"spacetime\" as opposed to two interdependent, but separate, 3-vector fields in \"space\" and \"time\". The fields (alone) and (alone) do not have well defined Lorentz transformation properties. The mathematical underpinnings are equations and that immediately yield . One should note that the primed and unprimed tensors refer to the \"same event in spacetime\". Thus the complete equation with spacetime dependence is\n\nLength contraction has an effect on charge density and current density , and time dilation has an effect on the rate of flow of charge (current), so charge and current distributions must transform in a related way under a boost. It turns out they transform exactly like the space-time and energy-momentum four-vectors,\n\nor, in the simpler geometric view,\n\nOne says that charge density transforms as the time component of a four-vector. It is a rotational scalar. The current density is a 3-vector.\n\nThe Maxwell equations are invariant under Lorentz transformations.\n\nEquation hold unmodified for any representation of the Lorentz group, including the bispinor representation. In one simply replaces all occurrences of by the bispinor representation ,\n\nThe above equation could, for instance, be the transformation of a state in Fock space describing two free electrons.\n\nA general \"noninteracting\" multi-particle state (Fock space state) in quantum field theory transforms according to the rule\nwhere is the Wigner rotation and is the representation of .\n\n\n\nBULLET::::- . See also: English translation.\nBULLET::::- eqn (55).\n\n\nBULLET::::- Derivation of the Lorentz transformations. This web page contains a more detailed derivation of the Lorentz transformation with special emphasis on group properties.\nBULLET::::- The Paradox of Special Relativity. This webpage poses a problem, the solution of which is the Lorentz transformation, which is presented graphically in its next page.\nBULLET::::- Relativity – a chapter from an online textbook\nBULLET::::- Warp Special Relativity Simulator. A computer program demonstrating the Lorentz transformations on everyday objects.\nBULLET::::- visualizing the Lorentz transformation.\nBULLET::::- Lorentz Frames Animated \"from John de Pillis.\" Online Flash animations of Galilean and Lorentz frames, various paradoxes, EM wave phenomena, \"etc\".\n"}
{"id": "18406", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18406", "title": "Luminiferous aether", "text": "Luminiferous aether\n\nLuminiferous aether or ether (\"luminiferous\", meaning \"light-bearing\") was the postulated medium for the propagation of light. It was invoked to explain the ability of the apparently wave-based light to propagate through empty space, something that waves should not be able to do. The assumption of a spatial plenum of luminiferous aether, rather than a spatial vacuum, provided the theoretical medium that was required by wave theories of light.\n\nThe aether hypothesis was the topic of considerable debate throughout its history, as it required the existence of an invisible and infinite material with no interaction with physical objects. As the nature of light was explored, especially in the 19th century, the physical qualities required of an aether became increasingly contradictory. By the late 1800s, the existence of the aether was being questioned, although there was no physical theory to replace it.\n\nThe negative outcome of the Michelson–Morley experiment (1887) suggested that the aether did not exist, a finding that was confirmed in subsequent experiments through the 1920s. This led to considerable theoretical work to explain the propagation of light without an aether. A major breakthrough was the theory of relativity, which could explain why the experiment failed to see aether, but was more broadly interpreted to suggest that it was not needed. The Michelson-Morley experiment, along with the blackbody radiator and photoelectric effect, was a key experiment in the development of modern physics, which includes both relativity and quantum theory, the latter of which explains the wave-like nature of light.\n\nIn the 17th century, Robert Boyle was a proponent of an aether hypothesis. According to Boyle, the aether consists of subtle particles, one sort of which explains the absence of vacuum and the mechanical interactions between bodies, and the other sort of which explains phenomena such as magnetism (and possibly gravity) that are, otherwise, inexplicable on the basis of purely mechanical interactions of macroscopic bodies, \"though in the ether of the ancients there was nothing taken notice of but a diffused and very subtle substance; yet we are at present content to allow that there is always in the air a swarm of steams moving in a determinate course between the north pole and the south\".\n\nChristiaan Huygens's \"Treatise on Light\" (1690) hypothesized that light is a wave propagating through an aether. He and Isaac Newton could only envision light waves as being longitudinal, propagating like sound and other mechanical waves in fluids. However, longitudinal waves necessarily have only one form for a given propagation direction, rather than two polarizations like transverse wave. Thus, longitudinal waves can not explain birefringence, in which two polarizations of light are refracted differently by a crystal. In addition, Newton rejected light as waves in a medium because such a medium would have to extend everywhere in space, and would thereby \"disturb and retard the Motions of those great Bodies\" (the planets and comets) and thus \"as it is of no use, and hinders the Operation of Nature, and makes her languish, so there is no evidence for its Existence, and therefore it ought to be rejected\".\n\nIsaac Newton contended that light is made up of numerous small particles. This can explain such features as light's ability to travel in straight lines and reflect off surfaces. Newton imagined that light particles as non-spherical \"corpuscles\", with different \"sides\" that give rise to birefringence. But the particle theory of light can not satisfactorily explain refraction and diffraction. To explain refraction, Newton's Third Book of \"Opticks\" (1st ed. 1704, 4th ed. 1730) postulated an \"aethereal medium\" transmitting vibrations faster than light, by which light, when overtaken, is put into \"Fits of easy Reflexion and easy Transmission\", which caused refraction and diffraction. Newton believed that these vibrations were related to heat radiation:\n\nIs not the Heat of the warm Room convey'd through the vacuum by the Vibrations of a much subtiler Medium than Air, which after the Air was drawn out remained in the Vacuum? And is not this Medium the same with that Medium by which Light is refracted and reflected, and by whose Vibrations Light communicates Heat to Bodies, and is put into Fits of easy Reflexion and easy Transmission?\n\nIn contrast to the modern understanding that heat radiation and light are both electromagnetic radiation, Newton viewed heat and light as two different phenomena. He believed heat vibrations to be excited \"when a Ray of Light falls upon the Surface of any pellucid Body\". He wrote, \"I do not know what this Aether is\", but that if it consists of particles then they must be exceedingly smaller than those of Air, or even than those of Light: The exceeding smallness of its Particles may contribute to the greatness of the force by which those Particles may recede from one another, and thereby make that Medium exceedingly more rare and elastic than Air, and by consequence exceedingly less able to resist the motions of Projectiles, and exceedingly more able to press upon gross Bodies, by endeavoring to expand itself.\n\nIn 1720, James Bradley carried out a series of experiments attempting to measure stellar parallax by taking measurements of stars at different times of the year. As the Earth moves around the sun, the apparent angle to a given distant spot changes. By measuring those angles the distance to the star can be calculated based on the known orbital circumference of the Earth around the sun. He failed to detect any parallax, thereby placing a lower limit on the distance to stars.\n\nDuring these experiments, Bradley also discovered a related effect; the apparent positions of the stars did change over the year, but not as expected. Instead of the apparent angle being maximized when the Earth was at either end of its orbit with respect to the star, the angle was maximized when the Earth was at its fastest sideways velocity with respect to the star. This effect is now known as stellar aberration.\n\nBradley explained this effect in the context of Newton's corpuscular theory of light, by showing that the aberration angle was given by simple vector addition of the Earth's orbital velocity and the velocity of the corpuscles of light, just as vertically falling raindrops strike a moving object at an angle. Knowing the Earth's velocity and the aberration angle, this enabled him to estimate the speed of light.\n\nExplaining stellar aberration in the context of an aether-based theory of light was regarded as more problematic. As the aberration relied on relative velocities, and the measured velocity was dependent on the motion of the Earth, the aether had to be remaining stationary with respect to the star as the Earth moved through it. This meant that the Earth could travel through the aether, a physical medium, with no apparent effect – precisely the problem that led Newton to reject a wave model in the first place.\n\nA century later, Thomas Young and Augustin-Jean Fresnel revived the wave theory of light when they pointed out that light could be a transverse wave rather than a longitudinal wave; the polarization of a transverse wave (like Newton's \"sides\" of light) could explain birefringence, and in the wake of a series of experiments on diffraction the particle model of Newton was finally abandoned. Physicists assumed, moreover, that like mechanical waves, light waves required a medium for propagation, and thus required Huygens's idea of an aether \"gas\" permeating all space.\n\nHowever, a transverse wave apparently required the propagating medium to behave as a solid, as opposed to a gas or fluid. The idea of a solid that did not interact with other matter seemed a bit odd, and Augustin-Louis Cauchy suggested that perhaps there was some sort of \"dragging\", or \"entrainment\", but this made the aberration measurements difficult to understand. He also suggested that the \"absence\" of longitudinal waves suggested that the aether had negative compressibility. George Green pointed out that such a fluid would be unstable. George Gabriel Stokes became a champion of the entrainment interpretation, developing a model in which the aether might be (by analogy with pine pitch) rigid at very high frequencies and fluid at lower speeds. Thus the Earth could move through it fairly freely, but it would be rigid enough to support light.\n\nIn 1856, Wilhelm Eduard Weber and Rudolf Kohlrausch measured the numerical value of the ratio of the electrostatic unit of charge to the electromagnetic unit of charge. They found that the ratio equals the product of the speed of light and the square root of two. The following year, Gustav Kirchhoff wrote a paper in which he showed that the speed of a signal along an electric wire was equal to the speed of light. These are the first recorded historical links between the speed of light and electromagnetic phenomena.\n\nJames Clerk Maxwell began working on Michael Faraday's lines of force. In his 1861 paper \"\" he modelled these magnetic lines of force using a sea of molecular vortices that he considered to be partly made of aether and partly made of ordinary matter. He derived expressions for the dielectric constant and the magnetic permeability in terms of the transverse elasticity and the density of this elastic medium. He then equated the ratio of the dielectric constant to the magnetic permeability with a suitably adapted version of Weber and Kohlrausch's result of 1856, and he substituted this result into Newton's equation for the speed of sound. On obtaining a value that was close to the speed of light as measured by Hippolyte Fizeau, Maxwell concluded that light consists in undulations of the same medium that is the cause of electric and magnetic phenomena.\n\nMaxwell had, however, expressed some uncertainties surrounding the precise nature of his molecular vortices and so he began to embark on a purely dynamical approach to the problem. He wrote another paper in 1864, entitled \"A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field\", in which the details of the luminiferous medium were less explicit. Although Maxwell did not explicitly mention the sea of molecular vortices, his derivation of Ampère's circuital law was carried over from the 1861 paper and he used a dynamical approach involving rotational motion within the electromagnetic field which he likened to the action of flywheels. Using this approach to justify the electromotive force equation (the precursor of the Lorentz force equation), he derived a wave equation from a set of eight equations which appeared in the paper and which included the electromotive force equation and Ampère's circuital law. Maxwell once again used the experimental results of Weber and Kohlrausch to show that this wave equation represented an electromagnetic wave that propagates at the speed of light, hence supporting the view that light is a form of electromagnetic radiation.\n\nThe apparent need for a propagation medium for such Hertzian waves can be seen by the fact that they consist of orthogonal electric (E) and magnetic (B or H) waves. The E waves consist of undulating dipolar electric fields, and all such dipoles appeared to require separated and opposite electric charges. Electric charge is an inextricable property of matter, so it appeared that some form of matter was required to provide the alternating current that would seem to have to exist at any point along the propagation path of the wave. Propagation of waves in a true vacuum would imply the existence of electric fields without associated electric charge, or of electric charge without associated matter. Albeit compatible with Maxwell's equations, electromagnetic induction of electric fields could not be demonstrated in vacuum, because all methods of detecting electric fields required electrically charged matter.\n\nIn addition, Maxwell's equations required that all electromagnetic waves in vacuum propagate at a fixed speed, \"c\". As this can only occur in one reference frame in Newtonian physics (see Galilean relativity), the aether was hypothesized as the absolute and unique frame of reference in which Maxwell's equations hold. That is, the aether must be \"still\" universally, otherwise \"c\" would vary along with any variations that might occur in its supportive medium. Maxwell himself proposed several mechanical models of aether based on wheels and gears, and George Francis FitzGerald even constructed a working model of one of them. These models had to agree with the fact that the electromagnetic waves are transverse but never longitudinal.\n\nBy this point the mechanical qualities of the aether had become more and more magical: it had to be a fluid in order to fill space, but one that was millions of times more rigid than steel in order to support the high frequencies of light waves. It also had to be massless and without viscosity, otherwise it would visibly affect the orbits of planets. Additionally it appeared it had to be completely transparent, non-dispersive, incompressible, and continuous at a very small scale. Maxwell wrote in \"Encyclopædia Britannica\":\n\nAethers were invented for the planets to swim in, to constitute electric atmospheres and magnetic effluvia, to convey sensations from one part of our bodies to another, and so on, until all space had been filled three or four times over with aethers. ... The only aether which has survived is that which was invented by Huygens to explain the propagation of light.\n\nContemporary scientists were aware of the problems, but aether theory was so entrenched in physical law by this point that it was simply assumed to exist. In 1908 Oliver Lodge gave a speech on behalf of Lord Rayleigh to the Royal Institution on this topic, in which he outlined its physical properties, and then attempted to offer reasons why they were not impossible. Nevertheless, he was also aware of the criticisms, and quoted Lord Salisbury as saying that \"aether is little more than a nominative case of the verb \"to undulate\"\". Others criticized it as an \"English invention\", although Rayleigh jokingly stated it was actually an invention of the Royal Institution.\n\nBy the early 20th century, aether theory was in trouble. A series of increasingly complex experiments had been carried out in the late 19th century to try to detect the motion of the Earth through the aether, and had failed to do so. A range of proposed aether-dragging theories could explain the null result but these were more complex, and tended to use arbitrary-looking coefficients and physical assumptions. Lorentz and FitzGerald offered within the framework of Lorentz ether theory a more elegant solution to how the motion of an absolute aether could be undetectable (length contraction), but if their equations were correct, the new special theory of relativity (1905) could generate the same mathematics without referring to an aether at all. Aether fell to Occam's Razor.\n\nThe two most important models, which were aimed to describe the relative motion of the Earth and aether, were Augustin-Jean Fresnel's (1818) model of the (nearly) stationary aether including a partial aether drag determined by Fresnel's dragging coefficient,\nand George Gabriel Stokes' (1844)\nmodel of complete aether drag. The latter theory was not considered as correct, since it was not compatible with the aberration of light, and the auxiliary hypotheses developed to explain this problem were not convincing. Also, subsequent experiments as the Sagnac effect (1913) also showed that this model is untenable. However, the most important experiment supporting Fresnel's theory was Fizeau's 1851 experimental confirmation of Fresnel's 1818 prediction that a medium with refractive index \"n\" moving with a velocity \"v\" would increase the speed of light travelling through the medium in the same direction as \"v\" from \"c\"/\"n\" to:\n\nThat is, movement adds only a fraction of the medium's velocity to the light (predicted by Fresnel in order to make Snell's law work in all frames of reference, consistent with stellar aberration). This was initially interpreted to mean that the medium drags the aether along, with a \"portion\" of the medium's velocity, but that understanding became very problematic after Wilhelm Veltmann demonstrated that the index \"n\" in Fresnel's formula depended upon the wavelength of light, so that the aether could not be moving at a wavelength-independent speed. This implied that there must be a separate aether for each of the infinitely many frequencies.\n\nThe key difficulty with Fresnel's aether hypothesis arose from the juxtaposition of the two well-established theories of Newtonian dynamics and Maxwell's electromagnetism. Under a Galilean transformation the equations of Newtonian dynamics are invariant, whereas those of electromagnetism are not. Basically this means that while physics should remain the same in non-accelerated experiments, light would not follow the same rules because it is travelling in the universal \"aether frame\". Some effect caused by this difference should be detectable.\n\nA simple example concerns the model on which aether was originally built: sound. The speed of propagation for mechanical waves, the speed of sound, is defined by the mechanical properties of the medium. Sound travels 4.3 times faster in water than in air. This explains why a person hearing an explosion underwater and quickly surfacing can hear it again as the slower travelling sound arrives through the air. Similarly, a traveller on an airliner can still carry on a conversation with another traveller because the sound of words is travelling along with the air inside the aircraft. This effect is basic to all Newtonian dynamics, which says that everything from sound to the trajectory of a thrown baseball should all remain the same in the aircraft flying (at least at a constant speed) as if still sitting on the ground. This is the basis of the Galilean transformation, and the concept of frame of reference.\n\nBut the same was not supposed to be true for light, since Maxwell's mathematics demanded a single universal speed for the propagation of light, based, not on local conditions, but on two measured properties, the permittivity and permeability of free space, that were assumed to be the same throughout the universe. If these numbers did change, there should be noticeable effects in the sky; stars in different directions would have different colours, for instance.\n\nThus at any point there should be one special coordinate system, \"at rest relative to the aether\". Maxwell noted in the late 1870s that detecting motion relative to this aether should be easy enough—light travelling along with the motion of the Earth would have a different speed than light travelling backward, as they would both be moving against the unmoving aether. Even if the aether had an overall universal flow, changes in position during the day/night cycle, or over the span of seasons, should allow the drift to be detected.\n\nAlthough the aether is almost stationary according to Fresnel, his theory predicts a positive outcome of aether drift experiments only to \"second\" order in formula_2, because Fresnel's dragging coefficient would cause a negative outcome of all optical experiments capable of measuring effects to \"first\" order in formula_2. This was confirmed by the following first-order experiments, which all gave negative results. The following list is based on the description of Wilhelm Wien (1898), with changes and additional experiments according to the descriptions of Edmund Taylor Whittaker (1910) and Jakob Laub (1910):\n\nBULLET::::- The experiment of François Arago (1810), to confirm whether refraction, and thus the aberration of light, is influenced by Earth's motion. Similar experiments were conducted by George Biddell Airy (1871) by means of a telescope filled with water, and Éleuthère Mascart (1872).\nBULLET::::- The experiment of Fizeau (1860), to find whether the rotation of the polarization plane through glass columns is changed by Earth's motion. He obtained a positive result, but Lorentz could show that the results have been contradictory. DeWitt Bristol Brace (1905) and Strasser (1907) repeated the experiment with improved accuracy, and obtained negative results.\nBULLET::::- The experiment of Martin Hoek (1868). This experiment is a more precise variation of the Fizeau experiment (1851). Two light rays were sent in opposite directions – one of them traverses a path filled with resting water, the other one follows a path through air. In agreement with Fresnel's dragging coefficient, he obtained a negative result.\nBULLET::::- The experiment of Wilhelm Klinkerfues (1870) investigated whether an influence of Earth's motion on the absorption line of sodium exists. He obtained a positive result, but this was shown to be an experimental error, because a repetition of the experiment by Haga (1901) gave a negative result.\nBULLET::::- The experiment of Ketteler (1872), in which two rays of an interferometer were sent in opposite directions through two mutually inclined tubes filled with water. No change of the interference fringes occurred. Later, Mascart (1872) showed that the interference fringes of polarized light in calcite remained uninfluenced as well.\nBULLET::::- The experiment of Éleuthère Mascart (1872) to find a change of rotation of the polarization plane in quartz. No change of rotation was found when the light rays had the direction of Earth's motion and then the opposite direction. Lord Rayleigh conducted similar experiments with improved accuracy, and obtained a negative result as well.\n\nBesides those optical experiments, also electrodynamic first-order experiments were conducted, which should have led to positive results according to Fresnel. However, Hendrik Antoon Lorentz (1895) modified Fresnel's theory and showed that those experiments can be explained by a stationary aether as well:\n\nBULLET::::- The experiment of Wilhelm Röntgen (1888), to find whether a charged condenser produces magnetic forces due to Earth's motion.\nBULLET::::- The experiment of Theodor des Coudres (1889), to find whether the inductive effect of two wire rolls upon a third one is influenced by the direction of Earth's motion. Lorentz showed that this effect is cancelled to first order by the electrostatic charge (produced by Earth's motion) upon the conductors.\nBULLET::::- The experiment of Königsberger (1905). The plates of a condenser are located in the field of a strong electromagnet. Due to Earth's motion, the plates should have become charged. No such effect was observed.\nBULLET::::- The experiment of Frederick Thomas Trouton (1902). A condenser was brought parallel to Earth's motion, and it was assumed that momentum is produced when the condenser is charged. The negative result can be explained by Lorentz's theory, according to which the electromagnetic momentum compensates the momentum due to Earth's motion. Lorentz could also show, that the sensitivity of the apparatus was much too low to observe such an effect.\n\nWhile the \"first\"-order experiments could be explained by a modified stationary aether, more precise \"second\"-order experiments were expected to give positive results, however, no such results could be found.\n\nThe famous Michelson–Morley experiment compared the source light with itself after being sent in different directions, looking for changes in phase in a manner that could be measured with extremely high accuracy. In this experiment, their goal was to determine the velocity of the Earth through the aether. The publication of their result in 1887, the null result, was the first clear demonstration that something was seriously wrong with the aether hypothesis (Michelson's first experiment in 1881 was not entirely conclusive). In this case the MM experiment yielded a shift of the fringing pattern of about 0.01 of a fringe, corresponding to a small velocity. However, it was incompatible with the expected aether wind effect due to the Earth's (seasonally varying) velocity which would have required a shift of 0.4 of a fringe, and the error was small enough that the value may have indeed been zero. Therefore, the null hypothesis, the hypothesis that there was no aether wind, could not be rejected. More modern experiments have since reduced the possible value to a number very close to zero, about 10.\n\nA series of experiments using similar but increasingly sophisticated apparatuses all returned the null result as well. Conceptually different experiments that also attempted to detect the motion of the aether were the Trouton–Noble experiment (1903), whose objective was to detect torsion effects caused by electrostatic fields, and the experiments of Rayleigh and Brace (1902, 1904), to detect double refraction in various media. However, all of them obtained a null result, like Michelson–Morley (MM) previously did.\n\nThese \"aether-wind\" experiments led to a flurry of efforts to \"save\" aether by assigning to it ever more complex properties, while only few scientists, like Emil Cohn or Alfred Bucherer, considered the possibility of the abandonment of the aether hypothesis. Of particular interest was the possibility of \"aether entrainment\" or \"aether drag\", which would lower the magnitude of the measurement, perhaps enough to explain the results of the Michelson-Morley experiment. However, as noted earlier, aether dragging already had problems of its own, notably aberration. In addition, the interference experiments of Lodge (1893, 1897) and Ludwig Zehnder (1895), aimed to show whether the aether is dragged by various, rotating masses, showed no aether drag. A more precise measurement was made in the Hammar experiment (1935), which ran a complete MM experiment with one of the \"legs\" placed between two massive lead blocks. If the aether was dragged by mass then this experiment would have been able to detect the drag caused by the lead, but again the null result was achieved. The theory was again modified, this time to suggest that the entrainment only worked for very large masses or those masses with large magnetic fields. This too was shown to be incorrect by the Michelson–Gale–Pearson experiment, which detected the Sagnac effect due to Earth's rotation (see Aether drag hypothesis).\n\nAnother, completely different attempt to save \"absolute\" aether was made in the Lorentz–FitzGerald contraction hypothesis, which posited that \"everything\" was affected by travel through the aether. In this theory the reason the Michelson–Morley experiment \"failed\" was that the apparatus contracted in length in the direction of travel. That is, the light was being affected in the \"natural\" manner by its travel though the aether as predicted, but so was the apparatus itself, cancelling out any difference when measured. FitzGerald had inferred this hypothesis from a paper by Oliver Heaviside. Without referral to an aether, this physical interpretation of relativistic effects was shared by Kennedy and Thorndike in 1932 as they concluded that the interferometer's arm contracts and also the frequency of its light source \"very nearly\" varies in the way required by relativity.\n\nSimilarly the Sagnac effect, observed by G. Sagnac in 1913, was immediately seen to be fully consistent with special relativity. In fact, the Michelson-Gale-Pearson experiment in 1925 was proposed specifically as a test to confirm the relativity theory, although it was also recognized that such tests, which merely measure absolute rotation, are also consistent with non-relativistic theories.\n\nDuring the 1920s, the experiments pioneered by Michelson were repeated by Dayton Miller, who publicly proclaimed positive results on several occasions, although they were not large enough to be consistent with any known aether theory. However, other researchers were unable to duplicate Miller's claimed results. Over the years the experimental accuracy of such measurements has been raised by many orders of magnitude, and no trace of any violations of Lorentz invariance has been seen. (A later re-analysis of Miller's results concluded that he had underestimated the variations due to temperature.)\n\nSince the Miller experiment and its unclear results there have been many more experimental attempts to detect the aether. Many experimenters have claimed positive results. These results have not gained much attention from mainstream science, since they contradict a large quantity of high-precision measurements, all the results of which were consistent with special relativity.\n\nBetween 1892 and 1904, Hendrik Lorentz developed an electron-aether theory, in which he introduced a strict separation between matter (electrons) and aether. In his model the aether is completely motionless, and won't be set in motion in the neighborhood of ponderable matter. Contrary to earlier electron models, the electromagnetic field of the aether appears as a mediator between the electrons, and changes in this field cannot propagate faster than the speed of light. A fundamental concept of Lorentz's theory in 1895 was the \"theorem of corresponding states\" for terms of order v/c. This theorem states that an observer moving relative to the aether makes the same observations as a resting observer, after a suitable change of variables. Lorentz noticed that it was necessary to change the space-time variables when changing frames and introduced concepts like physical length contraction (1892) to explain the Michelson–Morley experiment, and the mathematical concept of local time (1895) to explain the aberration of light and the Fizeau experiment. This resulted in the formulation of the so-called Lorentz transformation by Joseph Larmor (1897, 1900) and Lorentz (1899, 1904), whereby (it was noted by Larmor) the complete formulation of local time is accompanied by some sort of time dilation of electrons moving in the aether. As Lorentz later noted (1921, 1928), he considered the time indicated by clocks resting in the aether as \"true\" time, while local time was seen by him as a heuristic working hypothesis and a mathematical artifice. Therefore, Lorentz's theorem is seen by modern authors as being a mathematical transformation from a \"real\" system resting in the aether into a \"fictitious\" system in motion.\n\nThe work of Lorentz was mathematically perfected by Henri Poincaré, who formulated on many occasions the Principle of Relativity and tried to harmonize it with electrodynamics. He declared simultaneity only a convenient convention which depends on the speed of light, whereby the constancy of the speed of light would be a useful postulate for making the laws of nature as simple as possible. In 1900 and 1904 he physically interpreted Lorentz's local time as the result of clock synchronization by light signals. In June and July 1905 he declared the relativity principle a general law of nature, including gravitation. He corrected some mistakes of Lorentz and proved the Lorentz covariance of the electromagnetic equations. However, he used the notion of an aether as a perfectly undetectable medium and distinguished between apparent and real time, so most historians of science argue that he failed to invent special relativity.\n\nAether theory was dealt another blow when the Galilean transformation and Newtonian dynamics were both modified by Albert Einstein's special theory of relativity, giving the mathematics of Lorentzian electrodynamics a new, \"non-aether\" context. Unlike most major shifts in scientific thought, special relativity was adopted by the scientific community remarkably quickly, consistent with Einstein's later comment that the laws of physics described by the Special Theory were \"ripe for discovery\" in 1905. Max Planck's early advocacy of the special theory, along with the elegant formulation given to it by Hermann Minkowski, contributed much to the rapid acceptance of special relativity among working scientists.\n\nEinstein based his theory on Lorentz's earlier work. Instead of suggesting that the mechanical properties of objects changed with their constant-velocity motion through an undetectable aether, Einstein proposed to deduce the characteristics that any successful theory must possess in order to be consistent with the most basic and firmly established principles, independent of the existence of a hypothetical aether. He found that the Lorentz transformation must transcend its connection with Maxwell's equations, and must represent the fundamental relations between the space and time coordinates of inertial frames of reference. In this way he demonstrated that the laws of physics remained invariant as they had with the Galilean transformation, but that light was now invariant as well.\n\nWith the development of the special theory of relativity, the need to account for a single universal frame of reference had disappeared – and acceptance of the 19th century theory of a luminiferous aether disappeared with it. For Einstein, the Lorentz transformation implied a conceptual change: that the concept of position in space or time was not absolute, but could differ depending on the observer's location and velocity.\n\nMoreover, in another paper published the same month in 1905, Einstein made several observations on a then-thorny problem, the photoelectric effect. In this work he demonstrated that light can be considered as particles that have a \"wave-like nature\". Particles obviously do not need a medium to travel, and thus, neither did light. This was the first step that would lead to the full development of quantum mechanics, in which the wave-like nature \"and\" the particle-like nature of light are both considered as valid descriptions of light. A summary of Einstein's thinking about the aether hypothesis, relativity and light quanta may be found in his 1909 (originally German) lecture \"The Development of Our Views on the Composition and Essence of Radiation\".\n\nLorentz on his side continued to use the aether hypothesis. In his lectures of around 1911 he pointed out that what \"the theory of relativity has to say ... can be carried out independently of what one thinks of the aether and the time\". He commented that \"whether there is an aether or not, electromagnetic fields certainly exist, and so also does the energy of the electrical oscillations\" so that, \"if we do not like the name of 'aether', we must use another word as a peg to hang all these things upon\". He concluded that \"one cannot deny the bearer of these concepts a certain substantiality\".\n\nIn later years there have been a few individuals who advocated a neo-Lorentzian approach to physics, which is Lorentzian in the sense of positing an absolute true state of rest that is undetectable and which plays no role in the predictions of the theory. (No violations of Lorentz covariance have ever been detected, despite strenuous efforts.) Hence these theories resemble the 19th century aether theories in name only. For example, the founder of quantum field theory, Paul Dirac, stated in 1951 in an article in Nature, titled \"Is there an Aether?\" that \"we are rather forced to have an aether\". However, Dirac never formulated a complete theory, and so his speculations found no acceptance by the scientific community.\n\nWhen Einstein was still a student in the Zurich Polytechnic in 1900, he was very interested in the idea of aether. His initial proposal of research thesis was to do an experiment to measure how fast the Earth was moving through the aether. \"The velocity of a wave is proportional to the square root of the elastic forces which cause [its] propagation, and inversely proportional to the mass of the aether moved by these forces.\"\n\nIn 1916, after Einstein completed his foundational work on general relativity, Lorentz wrote a letter to him in which he speculated that within general relativity the aether was re-introduced. In his response Einstein wrote that one can actually speak about a \"new aether\", but one may not speak of motion in relation to that aether. This was further elaborated by Einstein in some semi-popular articles (1918, 1920, 1924, 1930).\n\nIn 1918 Einstein publicly alluded to that new definition for the first time. Then, in the early 1920s, in a lecture which he was invited to give at Lorentz's university in Leiden, Einstein sought to reconcile the theory of relativity with Lorentzian aether. In this lecture Einstein stressed that special relativity took away the last mechanical property of the aether: immobility. However, he continued that special relativity does not necessarily rule out the aether, because the latter can be used to give physical reality to acceleration and rotation. This concept was fully elaborated within general relativity, in which physical properties (which are partially determined by matter) are attributed to space, but no substance or state of motion can be attributed to that \"aether\" (by which he meant curved space-time).\n\nIn another paper of 1924, named \"Concerning the Aether\", Einstein argued that Newton's absolute space, in which acceleration is absolute, is the \"Aether of Mechanics\". And within the electromagnetic theory of Maxwell and Lorentz one can speak of the \"Aether of Electrodynamics\", in which the aether possesses an absolute state of motion. As regards special relativity, also in this theory acceleration is absolute as in Newton's mechanics. However, the difference from the electromagnetic aether of Maxwell and Lorentz lies in the fact, that \"because it was no longer possible to speak, in any absolute sense, of simultaneous states at different locations in the aether, the aether became, as it were, four dimensional, since there was no objective way of ordering its states by time alone\". Now the \"aether of special relativity\" is still \"absolute\", because matter is affected by the properties of the aether, but the aether is not affected by the presence of matter. This asymmetry was solved within general relativity. Einstein explained that the \"aether of general relativity\" is not absolute, because matter is influenced by the aether, just as matter influences the structure of the aether.\n\nThe only similarity of this relativistic aether concept with the classical aether models lies in the presence of physical properties in space, which can be identified through geodesics. As historians such as John Stachel argue, Einstein's views on the \"new aether\" are not in conflict with his abandonment of the aether in 1905. As Einstein himself pointed out, no \"substance\" and no state of motion can be attributed to that new aether. Einstein's use of the word \"aether\" found little support in the scientific community, and played no role in the continuing development of modern physics.\n\nBULLET::::- Aether theories\nBULLET::::- Aether (classical element)\nBULLET::::- Aether drag hypothesis\n\nBULLET::::- Dirac sea\nBULLET::::- Galactic year\nBULLET::::- History of special relativity\nBULLET::::- Le Sage's theory of gravitation\nBULLET::::- One-way speed of light\nBULLET::::- Preferred frame\nBULLET::::- Superseded scientific theories\nBULLET::::- Virtual particle\n\nFootnotes\nCitations\n \nBULLET::::- Harry Bateman (1915) The Structure of the Aether, Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 21(6):299–309.\nBULLET::::- The Aether of Space - Lord Rayleigh's address\nBULLET::::- ScienceWeek THEORETICAL PHYSICS: ON THE AETHER AND BROKEN SYMMETRY\n"}
{"id": "18408", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18408", "title": "LAME", "text": "LAME\n\nLAME is a software encoder that converts audio to the MP3 file format. LAME is a free software project that was first released in 1998, and has incorporated many improvements since then, including an improved psychoacoustic model. The LAME encoder vastly outperforms early encoders like L3enc.\n\nLAME is required by some programs. In many programs released as free software (e.g., Audacity), LAME must be linked for MP3 support. This avoided including LAME itself, which used patented techniques, and so required patent licenses in many countries.\n\nThe name LAME is a recursive acronym for \"LAME Ain't an MP3 Encoder\".\n\nAround mid-1998, Mike Cheng created LAME 1.0 as a set of modifications against the \"8Hz-MP3\" encoder source code. After some quality concerns raised by others, he decided to start again from scratch based on the \"dist10\" MPEG reference software sources. His goal was only to speed up the dist10 sources, and leave its quality untouched. That branch (a patch against the reference sources) became Lame 2.0. The project quickly became a team project. Mike Cheng eventually left leadership and started working on tooLAME (an MP2 encoder).\n\nMark Taylor then started pursuing increased quality in addition to better speed, and released version 3.0 featuring gpsycho, a new psychoacoustic model he developed.\n\nA few key improvements, in chronological order:\nBULLET::::- May 1999: a new psychoacoustic model (gpsycho) is released along with LAME 3.0.\nBULLET::::- June 1999: The first variable bitrate implementation is released. Soon after this, LAME also became able to target lower sampling frequencies from MPEG-2.\nBULLET::::- November 1999: LAME switches from a GPL license to an LGPL license, which allows using it with closed-source applications.\nBULLET::::- May 2000: the last pieces of the original ISO demonstration code are removed. LAME is not a patch anymore, but a full encoder.\nBULLET::::- December 2003: substantial improvement to default settings, along with improved speed. LAME no longer requires user to use complicated parameters to produce good results.\nBULLET::::- May 2007: default variable bitrate encoding speed is vastly improved.\n\nLike all MP3 encoders, LAME implemented techniques covered by patents owned by the Fraunhofer Society and others. The developers of LAME did not license the technology described by these patents. Distributing compiled binaries of LAME, its libraries, or programs that derive from LAME in countries where those patents have been granted may have constituted infringement, but since April 23, 2017, all of these patents have expired.\n\nThe LAME developers stated that, since their code was only released in source code form, it should only be considered as an educational description of an MP3 encoder, and thus did not infringe any patent in itself. They also advised users to obtain relevant patent licenses before including a compiled version of the encoder in a product. Some software was released using this strategy: companies used the LAME library, but obtained patent licenses.\n\nIn the course of the 2005 Sony BMG copy protection rootkit scandal, there were reports that the Extended Copy Protection rootkit included on some Sony Compact Discs had portions of the LAME library without complying with the terms of the LGPL.\n\nBULLET::::- List of codecs\nBULLET::::- Lossy compression\nBULLET::::- MP3, ID3\n\nBULLET::::- LAME binaries - RareWares\nBULLET::::- LAME binaries for Audacity - recommended for the Audacity free and GPL audio editor\nBULLET::::- LAME Wiki - HydrogenAudio\nBULLET::::- LAME Mp3 Info Tag revision 1 Specifications\n"}
{"id": "18414", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18414", "title": "Leszek Miller", "text": "Leszek Miller\n\nLeszek Cezary Miller ( ; born 3 July 1946) is a Polish left-wing politician who served as Prime Minister of Poland from 2001 to 2004. He is now a Member of the European Parliament. Miller was the leader of the Democratic Left Alliance from 1999 to 2004 and again from 2011 to 2016.\n\nLeszek Miller is the great-grandson of Eliasz, son of Mośek and Sura Miller, born in 1840 in Kutno. Eliasz Miller converted from Judaism to Christianity in 1869 in Nieborów. Leszek Miller was born in Żyrardów, Miller comes from a poor, working-class family: His father was a tailor and his mother a needlewoman. His parents broke up when Miller was six months old. His father, Florian Miller left the family and Leszek has never maintained any contact with him. His mother brought him up in a religious spirit – following her wish, he was even, for some time, an altar boy in their church.\n\nDue to hard life conditions, after graduation from vocational school, 17-year-old Miller got a job in the Textile Linen Plant in Żyrardów, while continuing his education in the evenings at the Vocational Secondary School of Electric Power Engineering. He soon completed his military service on the ORP Bielik submarine.\n\nIn 1969, Miller married Aleksandra, three years his junior, in church. They had a son, Leszek Junior ( August 2018), and a granddaughter, Monika.\n\nMiller started his political career as an activist of the Socialist Youth Union, where he held the position of Chairman of the Plant Board, soon becoming a member of the Town Committee. After the military service, in 1969, he joined the Polish United Workers' Party (PZPR), People's Poland's communist party.\n\nMany people were pressured to join PZPR in order to advance in their careers or to pursue higher education. Miller used his affiliation with the Communist party to effectively advance in his studies and professional goals.\n\nIn 1973 and 1974, Miller was the Secretary of the PZPR Plant Committee. With the party's recommendation, he started political sciences studies at the party's Higher School of Political Sciences (\"Wyższa Szkoła Nauk Społecznych\"), graduating in 1977. After graduation, Miller worked at the PZPR Central Committee, supervising the Group, and later on the Department of Youth, Physical Education and Tourism.\n\nIn July 1986, Miller was elected as First Secretary of the PZPR Provincial Committee in Skierniewice. In December 1988, he returned to Warsaw, due to his promotion to the position of the Secretary of the PZPR Central Committee. As a representative of the government side, he took part in the session of the historic \"Round Table\", where, together with Andrzej Celiński, he co-chaired the sub-team for youth issues (the only one that closed the session without signing the agreement). In 1989, he became a member of the PZPR Political Bureau.\n\nAfter the PZPR was dissolved, Miller became a co-founder of the Social Democracy of the Polish Republic (till March 1993, he was Secretary General, then Deputy Chairman and, from December 1997, the Chairman of that party). In December 1999, at the Founding Congress of the Democratic Left Alliance (SLD), he was elected its Chairman, holding the function continuously until February 2004. In 1997-2001 he was the Chairman of the SLD’s caucus.\n\nIn 1989, he ran unsuccessfully for the Senate as a representative of Skierniewice Province. In subsequent elections (1991), Miller was a leader on the election list of the Social Democracy of the Polish Republic in Łódź and, following a considerable success in elections, he won a seat in the Sejm, becoming Chairman of the Parliamentary Group of the Social Democracy of the Polish Republic. In three subsequent elections to the Sejm, he ran each time from Łódź, each time gaining more and more votes (from 50 thousand in 1991 up to 146 thousand in 2001); he held a seat in Parliament until 2005.\n\nThrough all that time he remained one of the leading politicians on the left wing. In early 1990s, together with Mieczysław Rakowski, he was suspected in the case of the so-called \"Moscow loan\". After revealing that affair in 1991, Włodzimierz Cimoszewicz called Miller to abstain from taking an MP's oath due to accusations laid against him. When Miller was cleared of the charges, Prime Minister Cimoszewicz appointed him later as the Minister in Charge of the Office of the Council of Ministers and in 1997 the Minister of Internal Affairs and Administration in his government. In turn, Cimoszewicz later became the Minister of Foreign Affairs in Miller’s cabinet.\n\nFrom 1993 to 1996, Miller was the Minister of Labour and Social Policy in the governments of Waldemar Pawlak and Józef Oleksy respectively. In 1996, he was nominated as Senior Minister in charge of the Office of the Council of Ministers. He then got the nickname “The Chancellor”.\n\nMiller played an important role in concluding the case of Colonel Ryszard Kukliński, for which he was severely criticised within his political circle. A similar disapproval was expressed after Miller’s support for the Concordat and the candidature of Leszek Balcerowicz to the position of President of the National Bank of Poland.\n\nDuring the period of the Solidarity Electoral Action’s government, Miller was in charge of the parliamentary opposition, leading the political fight with the governing party. He was also consolidating the majority of significant left-wing groups around his person. In 1999, he succeeded in establishing one uniform political party – the Democratic Left Alliance – which turned out to be very successful in following elections.\n\nFollowing the victory of the Left (41% vs. 12% of the subsequent party) in the Parliamentary Election in 2001, on 19 October 2001, President Aleksander Kwaśniewski appointed Miller Prime Minister and obliged to nominate the government. The new government won the parliamentary vote of confidence on 26 October 2001 (306:140 votes with one abstention). The 16-person cabinet of Prime Minister Miller has been the smallest government of the Polish Republic so far.\n\nMiller’s government faced a difficult economic situation in Poland, including an unemployment rate above 18%, a high level of public debt, and economic stagnation. At the end of Miller’s term, economic growth exceeded 6%; still, it was too slow to reduce the unemployment rate. During his term, the unpopular program of cuts in public expenses was implemented, together with a hardly successful reform of health care financing. The reforms of the tax system and of the Social Insurance Institution were continued, and the attempt to settle the mass-media market failed. Taxes were significantly lowered – to 19% for companies and for persons running business activity – and the act of freedom in business activity was voted through. A radical, structural reform of secret services was implemented (the State Security Office was dissolved and replaced by the Internal Security Agency and the Intelligence Agency).\n\nSimultaneously, institutional and legal adjustments were continued, resulting from the accession to the European Union. The Accession conditions were negotiated, being the main strategic goal of Miller’s cabinet. On 13 December 2002, at the summit in Copenhagen (Denmark), Prime Minister Leszek Miller completed the negotiations with the European Union. On 16 April 2003 in Athens, Miller, together with Cimoszewicz, signed the Accession Treaty, bringing Poland into the European Union. Miller’s government, in collaboration with various political and social forces, organized the accession referendum with a successful outcome. On 7 and 8 June 2003, 77.45% of the referendum participants voted in favor of Poland’s accession to the European Union. The referendum turn-out reached 58.85%.\n\nMiller’s government, together with President Kwaśniewski, made a decision (March 2003) to join the international coalition and deploy Polish troops to Iraq, targeting at overthrowing Saddam Hussein’s government. Miller was also a co-signatory of \"the letter of 8\", signed by eight European prime ministers, supporting the US position on Iraq. Already in 2002 Miller gave permission to the U.S. government to run a secret CIA prison at Stare Kiejkuty military training center, three hours North of Warsaw. Years later he is facing accusations of acting anti-constitutionally by having tolerated the imprisonment and torture of prisoners.\nOn 4 December 2003, Leszek Miller suffered injuries in a helicopter crash near Warsaw.\n\nAt the end of its term of office, Miller’s government had the lowest public support of any government since 1989. It was mainly caused by the continuing high unemployment rate, corruption scandals, with Rywingate on top, and by the attempt of fulfilling the plan of reducing social spending (the Hausner’s plan). In result of criticism in his own party, the Democratic Left Alliance, in February 2004, Miller resigned from chairing the party. Miller was criticized for an excessively liberal approach and for stressing the role of free market mechanisms in economy. He was reproached for his acceptance of a flat tax, which ran counter to the left-wing doctrine. He was also identified with the “chieftain-like style” of leadership. On 26 March 2004, following the decision of the Speaker of the Parliament, Marek Borowski, to found a new dissenting party, the Social Democracy of Poland, Miller decided to resign from the position of Prime Minister on 2 May 2004, a day after Poland’s accession to the EU. On 1 May 2004, together with President Kwaśniewski, he was in Dublin, taking part in the Grand Ceremony of accession of 10 states, including Poland, to the European Union.\n\nIn 2005, despite the support of the Łódź Branch of the Democratic Left Alliance, Miller was not registered on the election list to the Parliament. At the same time, he was offered to run for Senate but refused. Retirement of the old activists was presented in media as “inflow of new blood into the Democratic Left Alliance”. After the election, Miller became active in journalism, writing mainly for the “Wprost” weekly on liberal economic concepts and current political issues. In the first half of 2005, he stayed at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington, D.C., implementing a research project: “Status of the new Poland in the Eastern Europe’s space”.\n\nIn September 2007, the former Polish Prime Minister Leszek Miller become affiliated with Samoobrona, when he decided to run for the Sejm from their lists.\n\nBULLET::::- J. Machejek, A. Machejek, Leszek Miller: dogońmy Europę!(wywiad-rzeka z liderem SLD)(Catch up with Europe! An extended interview with the Leader of the Democratic Left Alliance), Hamal Books, 2001.\nBULLET::::- L. Stomma, Leszek Miller WDK 2001\n\nBULLET::::- Official site\n"}
{"id": "18420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18420", "title": "Basis (linear algebra)", "text": "Basis (linear algebra)\n\nIn mathematics, a set of elements (vectors) in a vector space is called a basis, if every element of may be written in a unique way as a (finite) linear combination of elements of . The coefficients of this linear combination are referred to as components or coordinates on of the vector. The elements of a basis are called .\n\nEquivalently is a basis if its elements are linearly independent and every element of is a linear combination of elements of . In more general terms, a basis is a linearly independent spanning set.\n\nA vector space can have several bases; however all the bases have the same number of elements, called the dimension of the vector space.\n\nA basis of a vector space over a field (such as the real numbers or the complex numbers ) is a linearly independent subset of that spans .\nThis means that a subset of is a basis if it satisfies the two following conditions:\nBULLET::::- the \"linear independence\" property:\nBULLET::::- the \"spanning\" property:\n\nThe scalars are called the coordinates of the vector with respect to the basis , and by the first property they are uniquely determined.\n\nA vector space that has a finite basis is called finite-dimensional. In this case, the subset that is considered (twice) in the above definition may be chosen as itself.\n\nIt is often convenient or even necessary to have an ordering on the basis vectors, e.g. for discussing orientation, or when one considers the scalar coefficients of a vector with respect to a basis, without referring explicitly to the basis elements. In this case, the ordering is necessary for associating each coefficient to the corresponding basis element. This ordering can be done by numbering the basis elements. For example, when dealing with (\"m\", \"n\")-matrices, the element (in the th row and th column) can be referred to the th element of a basis consisting of the (\"m\", \"n\")-unit-matrices (varying column-indices before row-indices). For emphasizing that an order has been chosen, one speaks of an ordered basis, which is therefore not simply an unstructured set, but e.g. a sequence, or an indexed family, or similar; see \"Ordered bases and coordinates\" below.\n\nBULLET::::- The set of the ordered pairs of real numbers is a vector space for the component-wise addition\nBULLET::::- More generally, if is a field, the set formula_5 of -tuples of elements of is a vector space for similarly defined addition and scalar multiplication. Let\nBULLET::::- If is a field, the polynomial ring of the polynomials in one indeterminate has a basis , called the monomial basis, consisting of all monomials:\n\nMany properties of finite bases result from the Steinitz exchange lemma, which states that, given a finite spanning set and a linearly independent subset of elements of , one may replace well chosen elements of by the elements of for getting a spanning set containing , having its other elements in , and having the same number of elements as .\n\nMost properties resulting from the Steinitz exchange lemma remain true when there is no finite spanning set, but their proof in the infinite case requires generally the axiom of choice or a weaker form of it, such as the ultrafilter lemma.\n\nIf is a vector space over a field , then:\nBULLET::::- If is a linearly independent subset of a spanning set , then there is a basis such that\nBULLET::::- has a basis (this is the preceding property with being the empty set, and ).\nBULLET::::- All bases of have the same cardinality, which is called the dimension of . This is the dimension theorem.\nBULLET::::- A generating set is a basis of if and only if it is minimal, that is, no proper subset of is also a generating set of .\nBULLET::::- A linearly independent set is a basis if and only if it is maximal, that is, it is not a proper subset of any linearly independent set.\n\nIf is a vector space of dimension , then:\nBULLET::::- A subset of with elements is a basis if and only if it is linearly independent.\nBULLET::::- A subset of with elements is a basis if and only if it is spanning set of .\n\nLet be a vector space of finite dimension over a field , and \nbe a basis of . By definition of a basis, every in may be written, in a unique way, as\nwhere the coefficients formula_14 are scalars (that is, elements of ), which are called the \"coordinates\" of over . However, if one talks of the \"set\" of the coefficients, one loses the correspondence between coefficients and basis elements, and several vectors may have the same \"set\" of coefficients. For example, formula_15 and formula_16 have the same set of coefficients , and are different. It is therefore often convenient to work with an ordered basis; this is typically done by indexing the basis elements by the first natural numbers. Then, the coordinates of a vector form a sequence similarly indexed, and a vector is completely characterized by the sequence of coordinates. An ordered basis is also called a frame, a word commonly used, in various contexts, for referring to a sequence of data allowing defining coordinates.\n\nLet, as usual, formula_5 be the set of the -tuples of elements of . This set is an -vector space, with addition and scalar multiplication defined component-wise. The map \nis a linear isomorphism from the vector space formula_5 onto . In other words, formula_5 is the coordinate space of , and the -tuple formula_21 is the coordinate vector of .\n\nThe inverse image by formula_22 of formula_23 is the -tuple formula_24 all of whose components are 0, except the th that is 1. The formula_24 form an ordered basis of formula_8 which is called its standard basis or canonical basis. The ordered basis is the image by formula_22 of the canonical basis of formula_9 \n\nIt follows from what precedes that every ordered basis is the image by a linear isomorphism of the canonical basis of formula_8 and that every linear isomorphism from formula_5 onto may be defined as the isomorphism that maps the canonical basis of formula_5 onto a given ordered basis of . In other words it is equivalent to define an ordered basis of , or a linear isomorphism from formula_5 onto .\n\nLet be a vector space of dimension over a field . Given two (ordered) bases formula_33 and formula_34 of , it is often useful to express the coordinates of a vector with respect to formula_35 in terms of the coordinates with respect to formula_36 This can be done by the \"change-of-basis formula\", that is described below. The subscripts \"old\" and \"new\" have been chosen because it is customary to refer to formula_35 and formula_38 as the \"old basis\" and the \"new basis\", respectively. It is useful to describe the old coordinates in terms of the new ones, because, in general, one has expressions involving the old coordinates, and if one wants to obtain equivalent expressions in terms of the new coordinates; this is obtained by replacing the old coordinates by their expressions in terms of the new coordinates.\n\nTypically, the new basis vectors are given by their coordinates over the old basis, that is, \nIf formula_40 and formula_41 are the coordinates of a vector over the old and the new basis respectively, the change-of-basis formula is \nfor .\n\nThis formula may be concisely written in matrix notation. Let be the matrix of the formula_43 and\nbe the column vectors of the coordinates of in the old and the new basis respectively, then the formula for changing coordinates is\n\nThe formula can be proven by considering the decomposition of the vector on the two bases: one has \nand\n\nThe change-of-basis formula results then from the uniqueness of the decomposition of a vector over a basis, here formula_49 that is\nfor .\n\nIf one replaces the field occurring in the definition of a vector space by a ring, one gets the definition of a module. For modules, linear independence and spanning sets are defined exactly as for vector spaces, although \"generating set\" is more commonly used than that of \"spanning set\".\n\nLike for vector spaces, a \"basis\" of a module is a linearly independent subset that is also a generating set. A major difference with the theory of vector spaces is that not every module has a basis. A module that has a basis is called a \"free module\". Free modules play a fundamental role in module theory, as they may be used for describing the structure of non-free modules through free resolutions.\n\nA module over the integers is exactly the same thing as an abelian group. Thus a free module over the integers is also a free abelian group. Free abelian groups have specific properties that are not shared by modules over other rings. Specifically, every subgroup of a free abelian group is a free abelian group, and, if is a subgroup of a finitely generated free abelian group (that is an abelian group that has a finite basis), there is a basis formula_7 of and an integer such that formula_52 is a basis of , for some nonzero integers formula_53 For details, see .\n\nIn the context of infinite-dimensional vector spaces over the real or complex numbers, the term (named after Georg Hamel) or algebraic basis can be used to refer to a basis as defined in this article. This is to make a distinction with other notions of \"basis\" that exist when infinite-dimensional vector spaces are endowed with extra structure. The most important alternatives are orthogonal bases on Hilbert spaces, Schauder bases, and Markushevich bases on normed linear spaces. In the case of the real numbers R viewed as a vector space over the field Q of rational numbers, Hamel bases are uncountable, and have specifically the cardinality of the continuum, which is the cardinal number formula_54 where formula_55 is the smallest infinite cardinal, the cardinal of the integers.\n\nThe common feature of the other notions is that they permit the taking of infinite linear combinations of the basis vectors in order to generate the space. This, of course, requires that infinite sums are meaningfully defined on these spaces, as is the case for topological vector spaces – a large class of vector spaces including e.g. Hilbert spaces, Banach spaces, or Fréchet spaces.\n\nThe preference of other types of bases for infinite-dimensional spaces is justified by the fact that the Hamel basis becomes \"too big\" in Banach spaces: If \"X\" is an infinite-dimensional normed vector space which is complete (i.e. \"X\" is a Banach space), then any Hamel basis of \"X\" is necessarily uncountable. This is a consequence of the Baire category theorem. The completeness as well as infinite dimension are crucial assumptions in the previous claim. Indeed, finite-dimensional spaces have by definition finite bases and there are infinite-dimensional (\"non-complete\") normed spaces which have countable Hamel bases. Consider formula_56, the space of the sequences formula_57 of real numbers which have only finitely many non-zero elements, with the norm formula_58 Its standard basis, consisting of the sequences having only one non-zero element, which is equal to 1, is a countable Hamel basis.\n\nIn the study of Fourier series, one learns that the functions {1} ∪ { sin(\"nx\"), cos(\"nx\") : \"n\" = 1, 2, 3, ... } are an \"orthogonal basis\" of the (real or complex) vector space of all (real or complex valued) functions on the interval [0, 2π] that are square-integrable on this interval, i.e., functions \"f\" satisfying\n\nThe functions {1} ∪ { sin(\"nx\"), cos(\"nx\") : \"n\" = 1, 2, 3, ... } are linearly independent, and every function \"f\" that is square-integrable on [0, 2π] is an \"infinite linear combination\" of them, in the sense that\n\nfor suitable (real or complex) coefficients \"a\", \"b\". But many square-integrable functions cannot be represented as \"finite\" linear combinations of these basis functions, which therefore \"do not\" comprise a Hamel basis. Every Hamel basis of this space is much bigger than this merely countably infinite set of functions. Hamel bases of spaces of this kind are typically not useful, whereas orthonormal bases of these spaces are essential in Fourier analysis.\n\nThe geometric notions of an affine space, projective space, convex set, and cone have related notions of \"basis\". An affine basis for an \"n\"-dimensional affine space is formula_61 points in general linear position. A ' is formula_62 points in general position, in a projective space of dimension \"n\". A ' of a polytope is the set of the vertices of its convex hull. A consists of one point by edge of a polygonal cone. See also a Hilbert basis (linear programming).\n\nFor a probability distribution in R with a probability density function, such as the equidistribution in a \"n\"-dimensional ball with respect to Lebesgue measure, it can be shown that \"n\" randomly and independently chosen vectors will form a basis with probability one, which is due to the fact that \"n\" linearly dependent vectors x, ..., x in R should satisfy the equation (zero determinant of the matrix with columns x), and the set of zeros of a non-trivial polynomial has zero measure. This observation has led to techniques for approximating random bases.\n\nIt is difficult to check numerically the linear dependence or exact orthogonality. Therefore, the notion of ε-orthogonality is used. For spaces with inner product, \"x\" is ε-orthogonal to \"y\" if formula_63 (that is, cosine of the angle between \"x\" and \"y\" is less than ε).\n\nIn high dimensions, two independent random vectors are with high probability almost orthogonal, and the number of independent random vectors, which all are with given high probability pairwise almost orthogonal, grows exponentially with dimension. More precisely, consider equidistribution in \"n\"-dimensional ball. Choose \"N\" independent random vectors from a ball (they are independent and identically distributed). Let \"θ\" be a small positive number. Then for\n\n\"N\" random vectors are all pairwise ε-orthogonal with probability . This \"N\" growth exponentially with dimension \"n\" and formula_64 for sufficiently big \"n\". This property of random bases is a manifestation of the so-called \"measure concentration phenomenon\".\n\nThe figure (right) illustrates distribution of lengths N of pairwise almost orthogonal chains of vectors that are independently randomly sampled from the \"n\"-dimensional cube as a function of dimension, \"n\". A point is first randomly selected in the cube. The second point is randomly chosen in the same cube. If the angle between the vectors was within then the vector was retained. At the next step a new vector is generated in the same hypercube, and its angles with the previously generated vectors are evaluated. If these angles are within then the vector is retained. The process is repeated until the chain of almost orthogonality breaks, and the number of such pairwise almost orthogonal vectors (length of the chain) is recorded. For each \"n\", 20 pairwise almost orthogonal chains where constructed numerically for each dimension. Distribution of the length of these chains is presented.\n\nLet V be any vector space over some field F.\nLet X be the set of all linearly independent subsets of V.\n\nThe set X is nonempty since the empty set is an independent subset of V,\nand it is partially ordered by inclusion, which is denoted, as usual, by .\n\nLet Y be a subset of X that is totally ordered by ,\nand let L be the union of all the elements of Y (which are themselves certain subsets of V).\n\nSince (Y, ⊆) is totally ordered, every finite subset of L is a subset of an element of Y,\nwhich is a linearly independent subset of V,\nand hence every finite subset of L is linearly independent.\nThus L is linearly independent, so L is an element of X.\nTherefore, L is an upper bound for Y in (X, ⊆):\nit is an element of X, that contains every element Y.\n\nAs X is nonempty, and every totally ordered subset of (X, ⊆) has an upper bound in X, Zorn's lemma asserts that X has a maximal element. In other words, there exists some element L of X satisfying the condition that whenever L ⊆ L for some element L of X, then L = L.\n\nIt remains to prove that L is a basis of V. Since L belongs to X, we already know that L is a linearly independent subset of V.\n\nIf L would not span V, there would exist some vector w of V that cannot be expressed as a linear combination of elements of L (with coefficients in the field F). In particular, w cannot be an element of L.\nLet L = L ∪ {w}. This set is an element of X, that is, it is a linearly independent subset of V (because w is not in the span of L, and L is independent). As L ⊆ L, and L ≠ L (because L contains the vector w that is not contained in L), this contradicts the maximality of L. Thus this shows that L spans V.\n\nHence L is linearly independent and spans V. It is thus a basis of V, and this proves that every vector space has a basis.\n\nThis proof relies on Zorn's lemma, which is equivalent to the axiom of choice. Conversely, it has been proved that if every vector space has a basis, then the axiom of choice is true. Thus the two assertions are equivalent.\n\nBULLET::::- Change of basis\nBULLET::::- Frame of a vector space\nBULLET::::- Spherical basis\n\n\nBULLET::::- , reprint:\n\nBULLET::::- Instructional videos from Khan Academy\nBULLET::::- Introduction to bases of subspaces\nBULLET::::- Proof that any subspace basis has same number of elements\n"}
{"id": "18422", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18422", "title": "Linear algebra", "text": "Linear algebra\n\nLinear algebra is the branch of mathematics concerning linear equations such as \nlinear functions such as\nand their representations through matrices and vector spaces.\n\nLinear algebra is central to almost all areas of mathematics. For instance, linear algebra is fundamental in modern presentations of geometry, including for defining basic objects such as lines, planes and rotations. Also, functional analysis may be basically viewed as the application of linear algebra to spaces of functions. Linear algebra is also used in most sciences and engineering areas, because it allows modeling many natural phenomena, and efficiently computing with such models. For nonlinear systems, which cannot be modeled with linear algebra, linear algebra is often used as a first-order approximation.\n\nThe procedure for solving simultaneous linear equations now called Gaussian elimination appears in the ancient Chinese mathematical text Chapter Eight: \"Rectangular Arrays\" of \"The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art\". Its use is illustrated in eighteen problems, with two to five equations.\n\nSystems of linear equations arose in Europe with the introduction in 1637 by René Descartes of coordinates in geometry. In fact, in this new geometry, now called Cartesian geometry, lines and planes are represented by linear equations, and computing their intersections amounts to solving systems of linear equations.\n\nThe first systematic methods for solving linear systems used determinants, first considered by Leibniz in 1693. In 1750, Gabriel Cramer used them for giving explicit solutions of linear systems, now called Cramer's rule. Later, Gauss further described the method of elimination, which was initially listed as an advancement in geodesy.\n\nIn 1844 Hermann Grassmann published his \"Theory of Extension\" which included foundational new topics of what is today called linear algebra. In 1848, James Joseph Sylvester introduced the term \"matrix\", which is Latin for \"womb\".\n\nLinear algebra grew with ideas noted in the complex plane. For instance, two numbers \"w\" and \"z\" in ℂ have a difference \"w\" – \"z\", and the line segments formula_3 are of the same length and direction. The segments are equipollent. The four-dimensional system ℍ of quaternions was started in 1843. The term \"vector\" was introduced as \"v\" = \"x\" i + \"y\" j + \"z\" k representing a point in space. The quaternion difference \"p\" – \"q\" also produces a segment equipollent to formula_4 \nOther hypercomplex number systems also used the idea of a linear space with a basis.\n\nArthur Cayley introduced matrix multiplication and the inverse matrix in 1856, making possible the general linear group. The mechanism of group representation became available for describing complex and hypercomplex numbers. Crucially, Cayley used a single letter to denote a matrix, thus treating a matrix as an aggregate object. He also realized the connection between matrices and determinants, and wrote \"There would be many things to say about this theory of matrices which should, it seems to me, precede the theory of determinants\".\n\nBenjamin Peirce published his \"Linear Associative Algebra\" (1872), and his son Charles Sanders Peirce extended the work later.\n\nThe telegraph required an explanatory system, and the 1873 publication of A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism instituted a field theory of forces and required differential geometry for expression. Linear algebra is flat differential geometry and serves in tangent spaces to manifolds. Electromagnetic symmetries of spacetime are expressed by the Lorentz transformations, and much of the history of linear algebra is the history of Lorentz transformations.\n\nThe first modern and more precise definition of a vector space was introduced by Peano in 1888; by 1900, a theory of linear transformations of finite-dimensional vector spaces had emerged. Linear algebra took its modern form in the first half of the twentieth century, when many ideas and methods of previous centuries were generalized as abstract algebra. The development of computers led to increased research in efficient algorithms for Gaussian elimination and matrix decompositions, and linear algebra became an essential tool for modelling and simulations.\n\nSee also and .\n\nUntil the 19th century, linear algebra was introduced through systems of linear equations and matrices. In modern mathematics, the presentation through \"vector spaces\" is generally preferred, since it is more synthetic, more general (not limited to the finite-dimensional case), and conceptually simpler, although more abstract.\n\nA vector space over a field (often the field of the real numbers) is a set equipped with two binary operations satisfying the following axioms. \nElements of are called \"vectors\", and elements of \"F\" are called \"scalars\". The first operation, \"vector addition\", takes any two vectors and and outputs a third vector . The second operation, \"scalar multiplication\", takes any scalar and any vector and outputs a new . The axioms that addition and scalar multiplication must satisfy are the following. (In the list below, and are arbitrary elements of , and and are arbitrary scalars in the field .)\n\nThe first four axioms mean that is an abelian group under addition.\n\nElements of a vector space may have various nature; for example, they can be sequences, functions, polynomials or matrices. Linear algebra is concerned with properties common to all vector spaces.\n\nLinear maps are mappings between vector spaces that preserve the vector-space structure. Given two vector spaces and over a field , a linear map (also called, in some contexts, linear transformation, linear mapping or linear operator) is a map\n\nthat is compatible with addition and scalar multiplication, that is\n\nfor any vectors in and scalar in .\n\nThis implies that for any vectors in and scalars in , one has\n\nWhen a bijective linear map exists between two vector spaces (that is, every vector from the second space is associated with exactly one in the first), the two spaces are isomorphic. Because an isomorphism preserves linear structure, two isomorphic vector spaces are \"essentially the same\" from the linear algebra point of view, in the sense that they cannot be distinguished by using vector space properties. An essential question in linear algebra is testing whether a linear map is an isomorphism or not, and, if it is not an isomorphism, finding its range (or image) and the set of elements that are mapped to the zero vector, called the kernel of the map. All these questions can be solved by using Gaussian elimination or some variant of this algorithm.\n\nThe study of subsets of vector spaces that are themselves vector spaces for the induced operations is fundamental, similarly as for many mathematical structures. These subsets are called linear subspaces. More precisely, a linear subspace of a vector space over a field is a subset of such that and are in , for every , in , and every in . (These conditions suffice for implying that is a vector space.)\n\nFor example, given a linear map formula_5, the image \"T(V)\" of \"V\", and the inverse image formula_9 of 0 (called kernel or null space), are linear subspaces of \"W\" and \"V\", respectively.\n\nAnother important way of forming a subspace is to consider linear combinations of a set of vectors: the set of all sums \nwhere are in , and are in form a linear subspace called the span of . The span of is also the intersection of all linear subspaces containing . In other words, it is the (smallest for the inclusion relation) linear subspace containing .\n\nA set of vectors is linearly independent if none is in the span of the others. Equivalently, a set of vector is linearly independent if the only way to express the zero vector as a linear combination of elements of is to take zero for every coefficient formula_11\n\nA set of vectors that spans a vector space is called a spanning set or generating set. If a spanning set is \"linearly dependent\" (that is not linearly independent), then some element of is in the span of the other elements of , and the span would remain the same if one remove from . One may continue to remove elements of until getting a \"linearly independent spanning set\". Such a linearly independent set that spans a vector space is called a basis of . The importance of bases lies in the fact that there are together minimal generating sets and maximal independent sets. More precisely, if is a linearly independent set, and is a spanning set such that formula_12 then there is a basis such that formula_13\n\nAny two bases of a vector space have the same cardinality, which is called the dimension of ; this is the dimension theorem for vector spaces. Moreover, two vector spaces over the same field are isomorphic if and only if they have the same dimension.\n\nIf any basis of (and therefore every basis) has a finite number of elements, is a \"finite-dimensional vector space\". If is a subspace of , then . In the case where is finite-dimensional, the equality of the dimensions implies .\n\nIf \"U\" and \"U\" are subspaces of \"V\", then\n\nwhere formula_15denotes the span of formula_16\n\nMatrices allow explicit manipulation of finite-dimensional vector spaces and linear maps. Their theory is thus an essential part of linear algebra.\n\nLet be a finite-dimensional vector space over a field , and be a basis of (thus is the dimension of ). By definition of a basis, the map\nis a bijection from formula_18 the set of the sequences of elements of , onto . This is an isomorphism of vector spaces, if formula_19 is equipped of its standard structure of vector space, where vector addition and scalar multiplication are done component by component.\n\nThis isomorphism allows representing a vector by its inverse image under this isomorphism, that is by the coordinates vector formula_20 or by the column matrix\n\nIf is another finite dimensional vector space (possibly the same), with a basis formula_22 a linear map from to is well defined by its values on the basis elements, that is formula_23 Thus, is well represented by the list of the corresponding column matrices. That is, if \nfor , then is represented by the matrix\nwith rows and columns.\n\nMatrix multiplication is defined in such a way that the product of two matrices is the matrix of the composition of the corresponding linear maps, and the product of a matrix and a column matrix is the column matrix representing the result of applying the represented linear map to the represented vector. It follows that the theory of finite-dimensional vector spaces and the theory of matrices are two different languages for expressing exactly the same concepts.\n\nTwo matrices that encode the same linear transformation in different bases are called similar. Equivalently, two matrices are similar if one can transform one in the other by elementary row and column operations. For a matrix representing a linear map from to , the row operations correspond to change of bases in and the column operations correspond to change of bases in . Every matrix is similar to an identity matrix possibly bordered by zero rows and zero columns. In terms of vector space, this means that, for any linear map from to , there are bases such that a part of the basis of is mapped bijectively on a part of the basis of , and that the remaining basis elements of , if any, are mapped to zero (this is a way of expressing the fundamental theorem of linear algebra). Gaussian elimination is the basic algorithm for finding these elementary operations, and proving this theorem.\n\nA finite set of linear equations in a finite set of variables, for example, formula_26 or formula_27 is called a system of linear equations or a linear system.\n\nSystems of linear equations form a fundamental part of linear algebra. Historically, linear algebra and matrix theory has been developed for solving such systems. In the modern presentation of linear algebra through vector spaces and matrices, many problems may be interpreted in terms of linear systems.\n\nFor example, let\nbe a linear system.\n\nTo such a system, one may associate its matrix \nand its right member vector\n\nLet be the linear transformation associated to the matrix . A solution of the system () is a vector \nsuch that \nthat is an element of the preimage of by .\n\nLet () be the associated homogeneous system, where the right-hand sides of the equations are put to zero:\n\nThe solutions of () are exactly the elements of the kernel of or, equivalently, .\n\nThe Gaussian-elimination consists of performing elementary row operations on the augmented matrix\nfor putting it in reduced row echelon form. These row operations do not change the set of solutions of the system of equations. In the example, the reduced echelon form is \nshowing that the system () has the unique solution\n\nIt follows from this matrix interpretation of linear systems that the same methods can be applied for solving linear systems and for many operations on matrices and linear transformations, which include the computation of the ranks, kernels, matrix inverses.\n\nA linear endomorphism is a linear map that maps a vector space to itself. \nIf has a basis of elements, such an endomorphism is represented by a square matrix of size .\n\nWith respect to general linear maps, linear endomorphisms and square matrices have some specific properties that make their study an important part of linear algebra, which is used in many parts of mathematics, including geometric transformations, coordinate changes, quadratic forms, and many other part of mathematics.\n\nThe \"determinant\" of a square matrix is defined to be\nwhere formula_36 is the group of all permutations of elements,\nformula_37 is a permutation, and formula_38 the parity of the permutation.\nA matrix is invertible if and only if the determinant is invertible (i.e., nonzero if the scalars belong to a field).\n\nCramer's rule is a closed-form expression, in terms of determinants, of the solution of a system of linear equations in unknowns. Cramer's rule is useful for reasoning about the solution, but, except for or , it is rarely used for computing a solution, since Gaussian elimination is a faster algorithm.\n\nThe \"determinant of an endomorphism\" is the determinant of the matrix representing the endomorphism in terms of some ordered basis. This definition makes sense, since this determinant is independent of the choice of the basis.\n\nIf is a linear endomorphism of a vector space over a field , an \"eigenvector\" of is a nonzero vector of such that for some scalar in . This scalar is an \"eigenvalue\" of .\n\nIf the dimension of is finite, and a basis has been chosen, and may be represented, respectively, by a square matrix and a column matrix ; the equation defining eigenvectors and eigenvalues becomes\nUsing the identity matrix , whose entries are all zero, except those of the main diagonal, which are equal to one, this may be rewritten\nAs is supposed to be nonzero, this means that is a singular matrix, and thus that its determinant formula_41 equals zero. The eigenvalues are thus the roots of the polynomial\nIf is of dimension , this is a monic polynomial of degree , called the characteristic polynomial of the matrix (or of the endomorphism), and there are, at most, eigenvalues.\n\nIf a basis exists that consists only of eigenvectors, the matrix of on this basis has a very simple structure: it is a diagonal matrix such that the entries on the main diagonal are eigenvalues, and the other entries are zero. In this case, the endomorphism and the matrix are said to be diagonalizable. More generally, an endomorphism and a matrix are also said diagonalizable, if they become diagonalizable after extending the field of scalars. In this extended sense, if the characteristic polynomial is square-free, then the matrix is diagonalizable.\n\nA symmetric matrix is always diagonalizable. There are non-diagonalizable matrices, the simplest being\n(it cannot be diagonalizable since its square is the zero matrix, and the square of a nonzero diagonal matrix is never zero).\n\nWhen an endomorphism is not diagonalizable, there are bases on which it has a simple form, although not as simple as the diagonal form. The Frobenius normal form does not need of extending the field of scalars and makes the characteristic polynomial immediately readable on the matrix. The Jordan normal form requires to extend the field of scalar for containing all eigenvalues, and differs from the diagonal form only by some entries that are just above the main diagonal and are equal to 1.\n\nA linear form is a linear map from a vector space over a field to the field of scalars , viewed as a vector space over itself. Equipped by pointwise addition and multiplication by a scalar, the linear forms form a vector space, called the dual space of , and usually denoted formula_44\n\nIf formula_45 is a basis of (this implies that is finite-dimensional), then one can define, for , a linear map formula_46 such that formula_47 and formula_48 if . These linear maps form a basis of formula_49 called the dual basis of formula_50 (If is not finite-dimensional, the formula_51 may be defined similarly; they are linearly independent, but do not form a basis.)\n\nFor in , the map\nis a linear form on formula_44 This defines the canonical linear map from into formula_54 the dual of formula_49 called the bidual of . This canonical map is an isomorphism if is finite-dimensional, and this allows identifying with its bidual. (In the infinite dimensional case, the canonical map is injective, but not surjective.)\n\nThere is thus a complete symmetry between a finite-dimensional vector space and its dual. This motivates the frequent use, in this context, of the bra–ket notation\nfor denoting .\n\nLet \nbe a linear map. For every linear form on , the composite function is a linear form on . This defines a linear map\nbetween the dual spaces, which is called the dual or the transpose of .\n\nIf and are finite dimensional, and is the matrix of in terms of some ordered bases, then the matrix of formula_59 over the dual bases is the transpose formula_60 of , obtained by exchanging rows and columns.\n\nIf elements of vector spaces and their duals are represented by column vectors, this duality may be expressed in bra–ket notation by \nFor highlighting this symmetry, the two members of this equality are sometimes written \n\nBesides these basic concepts, linear algebra also studies vector spaces with additional structure, such as an inner product. The inner product is an example of a bilinear form, and it gives the vector space a geometric structure by allowing for the definition of length and angles. Formally, an \"inner product\" is a map\n\nthat satisfies the following three axioms for all vectors \"u\", \"v\", \"w\" in \"V\" and all scalars \"a\" in \"F\":\nBULLET::::- Conjugate symmetry:\n\nIn R, it is symmetric.\nBULLET::::- Linearity in the first argument:\n\nBULLET::::- Positive-definiteness:\n\nWe can define the length of a vector \"v\" in \"V\" by\nand we can prove the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality:\n\nIn particular, the quantity\nand so we can call this quantity the cosine of the angle between the two vectors.\n\nTwo vectors are orthogonal if formula_71. An orthonormal basis is a basis where all basis vectors have length 1 and are orthogonal to each other. Given any finite-dimensional vector space, an orthonormal basis could be found by the Gram–Schmidt procedure. Orthonormal bases are particularly easy to deal with, since if \"v\" = \"a\" \"v\" + ... + \"a v\", then formula_72.\n\nThe inner product facilitates the construction of many useful concepts. For instance, given a transform \"T\", we can define its Hermitian conjugate \"T*\" as the linear transform satisfying\nIf \"T\" satisfies \"TT*\" = \"T*T\", we call \"T\" normal. It turns out that normal matrices are precisely the matrices that have an orthonormal system of eigenvectors that span \"V\".\n\nThere is a strong relationship between linear algebra and geometry, which started with the introduction by René Descartes, in 1637, of Cartesian coordinates. In this new (at that time) geometry, now called Cartesian geometry, points are represented by Cartesian coordinates, which are sequences of three real numbers (in the case of the usual three-dimensional space). The basic objects of geometry, which are lines and planes are represented by linear equations. Thus, computing intersections of lines and planes amounts to solving systems of linear equations. This was one of the main motivations for developing linear algebra.\n\nMost geometric transformation, such as translations, rotations, reflections, rigid motions, isometries, and projections transform lines into lines. It follows that they can be defined, specified and studied in terms of linear maps. This is also the case of homographies and Möbius transformations, when considered as transformations of a projective space.\n\nUntil the end of 19th century, geometric spaces were defined by axioms relating points, lines and planes (synthetic geometry). Around this date, it appeared that one may also define geometric spaces by constructions involving vector spaces (see, for example, Projective space and Affine space) It has been shown that the two approaches are essentially equivalent. In classical geometry, the involved vector spaces are vector spaces over the reals, but the constructions may be extended to vector spaces over any field, allowing considering geometry over arbitrary fields, including finite fields.\n\nPresently, most textbooks, introduce geometric spaces from linear algebra, and geometry is often presented, at elementary level, as a subfield of linear algebra.\n\nLinear algebra is used in almost all areas of mathematics, thus making it relevant in almost all scientific domains that use mathematics. These applications may be divided into several wide categories.\n\nThe modeling of our ambient space is based on geometry. Sciences concerned with this space use geometry widely. This is the case with mechanics and robotics, for describing rigid body dynamics; geodesy for describing Earth shape; perspectivity, computer vision, and computer graphics, for describing the relationship between a scene and its plane representation; and many other scientific domains.\n\nIn all these applications, synthetic geometry is often used for general descriptions and a qualitative approach, but for the study of explicit situations, one must compute with coordinates. This requires the heavy use of linear algebra.\n\nFunctional analysis studies function spaces. These are vector spaces with additional structure, such as Hilbert spaces. Linear algebra is thus a fundamental part of functional analysis and its applications, which include, in particular, quantum mechanics (wave functions).\n\nMost physical phenomena are modeled by partial differential equations. To solve them, one usually decomposes the space in which the solutions are searched into small, mutually interacting cells. For linear systems this interaction involves linear functions. For nonlinear systems, this interaction is often approximated by linear functions. In both cases, very large matrices are generally involved. Weather forecasting is a typical example, where the whole Earth atmosphere is divided in cells of, say, 100 km of width and 100 m of height.\n\nNearly all scientific computations involve linear algebra. Consequently, linear algebra algorithms have been highly optimized. BLAS and LAPACK are the best known implementations. For improving efficiency, some of them configure the algorithms automatically, at run time, for adapting them to the specificities of the computer (cache size, number of available cores, ...).\n\nSome processors, typically graphics processing units (GPU), are designed with a matrix structure, for optimizing the operations of linear algebra.\n\nThis section presents several related topics that do not appear generally in elementary textbooks on linear algebra, but are commonly considered, in advanced mathematics, as parts of linear algebra.\n\nThe existence of multiplicative inverses in fields is not involved in the axioms defining a vector space. One may thus replace the field of scalars by a ring , and this gives a structure called module over , or -module.\n\nThe concepts of linear independence, span, basis, and linear maps (also called module homomorphisms) are defined for modules exactly as for vector spaces, with the essential difference that, if is not a field, there are modules that do not have any basis. The modules that have a basis are the free modules, and those that are spanned by a finite set are the finitely generated modules. Module homomorphisms between finitely generated free modules may be represented by matrices. The theory of matrices over a ring is similar to that of matrices over a field, except that determinants exist only if the ring is commutative, and that a square matrix over a commutative ring is invertible only if its determinant has a multiplicative inverse in the ring.\n\nVector spaces are completely characterized by their dimension (up to an isomorphism). In general, there is not such a complete classification for modules, even if one restricts oneself to finitely generated modules. However, every module is a cokernel of a homomorphism of free modules.\n\nModules over the integers can be identified with abelian groups, since the multiplication by an integer may identified to a repeated addition. Most of the theory of abelian groups may be extended to modules over a principal ideal domain. In particular, over a principal ideal domain, every submodule of a free module is free, and the fundamental theorem of finitely generated abelian groups may be extended straightforwardly to finitely generated modules over a principal ring.\n\nThere are many rings for which there are algorithms for solving linear equations and systems of linear equations. However, these algorithms have generally a computational complexity that is much higher than the similar algorithms over a field. For more details, see Linear equation over a ring.\n\nIn multilinear algebra, one considers multivariable linear transformations, that is, mappings that are linear in each of a number of different variables. This line of inquiry naturally leads to the idea of the dual space, the vector space \"V\" consisting of linear maps where \"F\" is the field of scalars. Multilinear maps can be described via tensor products of elements of \"V\".\n\nIf, in addition to vector addition and scalar multiplication, there is a bilinear vector product , the vector space is called an algebra; for instance, associative algebras are algebras with an associate vector product (like the algebra of square matrices, or the algebra of polynomials).\n\nVector spaces that are not finite dimensional often require additional structure to be tractable. A normed vector space is a vector space along with a function called a norm, which measures the \"size\" of elements. The norm induces a metric, which measures the distance between elements, and induces a topology, which allows for a definition of continuous maps. The metric also allows for a definition of limits and completeness - a metric space that is complete is known as a Banach space. A complete metric space along with the additional structure of an inner product (a conjugate symmetric sesquilinear form) is known as a Hilbert space, which is in some sense a particularly well-behaved Banach space. Functional analysis applies the methods of linear algebra alongside those of mathematical analysis to study various function spaces; the central objects of study in functional analysis are L spaces, which are Banach spaces, and especially the \"L\" space of square integrable functions, which is the only Hilbert space among them. Functional analysis is of particular importance to quantum mechanics, the theory of partial differential equations, digital signal processing, and electrical engineering. It also provides the foundation and theoretical framework that underlies the Fourier transform and related methods.\n\nBULLET::::- Linear equation over a ring\nBULLET::::- Fundamental matrix in computer vision\nBULLET::::- Linear regression, a statistical estimation method\nBULLET::::- List of linear algebra topics\nBULLET::::- Numerical linear algebra\nBULLET::::- Linear programming\nBULLET::::- Transformation matrix\n\n\nBULLET::::- Fearnley-Sander, Desmond, \"Hermann Grassmann and the Creation of Linear Algebra\", American Mathematical Monthly 86 (1979), pp. 809–817.\n\nBULLET::::- Murty, Katta G. (2014) \"Computational and Algorithmic Linear Algebra and n-Dimensional Geometry\", World Scientific Publishing, . \"Chapter 1: Systems of Simultaneous Linear Equations\"\nBULLET::::- The Manga Guide to Linear Algebra (2012), by Shin Takahashi, Iroha Inoue and Trend-Pro Co., Ltd.,\n\n\n\nBULLET::::- MIT Linear Algebra Video Lectures, a series of 34 recorded lectures by professor Gilbert Strang (Spring 2010)\nBULLET::::- International Linear Algebra Society\nBULLET::::- Linear Algebra on MathWorld.\nBULLET::::- Matrix and Linear Algebra Terms on Earliest Known Uses of Some of the Words of Mathematics\nBULLET::::- Earliest Uses of Symbols for Matrices and Vectors on Earliest Uses of Various Mathematical Symbols\nBULLET::::- Essence of linear algebra, a video presentation of the basics of linear algebra, with emphasis on the relationship between the geometric, the matrix and the abstract points of view\n\nBULLET::::- Beezer, Rob, \"A First Course in Linear Algebra\"\nBULLET::::- Connell, Edwin H., \"Elements of Abstract and Linear Algebra\"\nBULLET::::- Hefferon, Jim, \"Linear Algebra\"\nBULLET::::- Matthews, Keith, \"Elementary Linear Algebra\"\nBULLET::::- Sharipov, Ruslan, \"Course of linear algebra and multidimensional geometry\"\nBULLET::::- Treil, Sergei, \"Linear Algebra Done Wrong\"\n"}
{"id": "18423", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18423", "title": "Labia majora", "text": "Labia majora\n\nThe labia majora (singular: \"labium majus\") are two prominent longitudinal cutaneous folds that extend downward and backward from the mons pubis to the perineum. Together with the labia minora they form the labia of the vulva.\n\nThe labia majora are homologous to the male scrotum. \n\n\"Labia majora\" is the Latin plural for big (\"major\") lips; the singular is \"labium majus.\" The Latin term \"labium/labia\" is used in anatomy for a number of usually paired parallel structures, but in English it is mostly applied to two pairs of parts of female external genitals (vulva)—labia majora and labia minora. Labia majora are commonly known as the outer lips, while labia minora (Latin for \"small lips\"), which run alongside between them, are referred to as the inner lips. Traditionally, to avoid confusion with other lip-like structures of the body, the labia of female genitals were termed by anatomists in Latin as \"labia majora (\"or \"minora) pudendi.\"\n\nEmbryologically, they develop from labioscrotal folds. It means that they develop in the female foetus from the same previously sexually undifferentiated anatomical structure as the scrotum, the sac of skin below the penis in males.\n\nThe same process of sex differentiation concerns other male and female reproductive organs (see List of related male and female reproductive organs), with some organs of both sexes developing similar, yet not identical, structure and functions (like the gonads - male testicles and female ovaries, like male and female urethras, erectile corpus cavernosum penis and prepuce in the penis (foreskin) and the corpus cavernosum clitoridis in the clitoris and (clitoral hood) and their frenula). But other male and female sex organs become absolutely different and unique, like the internal female genitalia.\n\nThe scrotum and labia majora develop to have both similarities and crucial differences. Like the scrotum, labia majora after puberty may become of a darker color than the skin outside them, and, similarly, also grow pubic hair on their external surface (the female genitals on accompanying photos are shaved to show their structure clearer). But, during sexual differentiation of the foetus, labioscrotal folds in the males normally fuse longitudinally in the middle, forming a sack for male gonads (testicles) to descend into it from the pelvis, while in the females these folds normally do not fuse, forming the two labia majora and the pudendal cleft between them. Female gonads (ovaries) do not descend from the pelvis, thus the structure of labia majora may seem simpler (just fatty tissue covered with skin) and of lesser significance for functioning of the female body as a whole than the scrotum with testicles for males. The ridge or groove remaining of the fusion can be traced on the scrotum.\n\nIn some cases of intersex with disorders of sex development male/female genitalia may look ambiguous for either gender with phallus too small for a typical penis yet too big for a clitoris, with external urethral opening in an atypical location, and with labia/scrotum fully or partially fused but without descended gonads in them. Undescended testicles, though, may also occur in otherwise generally healthy male infants.\n\nThe labia majora constitute the lateral boundaries of the pudendal cleft, which contains the labia minora, interlabial sulci, clitoral hood, clitoral glans, frenulum clitoridis, the Hart's Line, and the vulval vestibule, which contains the external openings of the urethra and the vagina. Each labium majus has two surfaces, an outer, pigmented and covered with strong, pubic hair; and an inner, smooth and beset with large sebaceous follicles. The labia majora are covered with squamous epithelium. Between the two there is a considerable quantity of areolar tissue, fat, and a tissue resembling the dartos tunic of the scrotum, besides vessels, nerves, and glands. The labia majora are thicker in front, and form the anterior labial commissure where they meet below the mons pubis. Posteriorly, they are not really joined, but appear to become lost in the neighboring integument, ending close to, and nearly parallel to, each other. Together with the connecting skin between them, they form another commissure the posterior labial commissure which is also the posterior boundary of the pudendum. The interval between the posterior commissure and the anus, from 2.5 to 3 cm in length, constitutes the perineum. The anterior region of the perineum is known as the urogenital triangle which separates it from the anal region. Between the labia majora and the inner thighs are the labiocrural folds. Between the labia majora and labia minora are the interlabial sulci. Labia majora atrophy after menopause.\n\nThe fat pad of the labia majora can be used as a graft, often as a so-called \"Martius labial fat pad graft\", and can be used, for example, in urethrolysis.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Femalia\"\nBULLET::::- Labia\nBULLET::::- Labia minora\nBULLET::::- Labia pride\n\nBULLET::::- Labia Majora Medical Definition\n"}
{"id": "18424", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18424", "title": "Labia minora", "text": "Labia minora\n\nThe labia minora (Latin for \"smaller lips,\" singular: \"labium minus\" \"smaller lip\"), also known as the inner labia, inner lips, vaginal lips or nymphae, are two flaps of skin on either side of the human vaginal opening in the vulva, situated between the labia majora (Latin for \"larger lips;\" also called outer labia, or outer lips). The labia minora vary widely in size, color and shape from individual to individual.\n\nThe labia minora are homologous to the male urethral surface of the penis.\n\nThe labia minora extend from the clitoris obliquely downward, laterally, and backward on either side of the vulval vestibule, ending between the bottom of the vulval vestibule and the labia majora. The posterior ends (bottom) of the labia minora are usually joined across the middle line by a fold of skin, named the frenulum of labia minora or fourchette.\n\nOn the front, each lip forks dividing into two portions surrounding the clitoris. The upper part of each lip passes above the clitoris to meet the upper part of the other lip—which will often be a little larger or smaller—forming a fold which overhangs the glans clitoridis (clitoral tip or head); this fold is named the clitoral hood. The lower part passes beneath the glans clitoridis and becomes united to its under surface, forming, with the inner lip of the opposite side, the \"frenulum clitoridis\".\n\nThe clitoral hood, analogously to the foreskin of the penis in men and also termed, like the latter, by the Latin word \"prepuce\", serves to cover most of the time the shaft and sometimes the glans (which is very sensitive to the touch) to protect the clitoris from mechanical irritation and from dryness. Yet the hood is movable and can slide during clitoral erection or be pulled upwards a little for greater exposure of the clitoris to sexual stimulation.\n\nThe frenulum (Latin for \"little bridle\") is an elastic band of tissue attached by its one end to the clitoral shaft and glans and by its other end to the prepuce. It allows two-way shifting of the clitoral hood: firstly, it can extend to let the hood be moved upwards to expose the glans for stimulation or hygienic cleansing, and secondly, it contracts to pull the hood back to protect it.\n\nOn the opposed surfaces of the labia minora are numerous sebaceous glands not associated with hair follicles. They are lined by stratified squamous epithelium on those surfaces.\n\nLike the whole area of the vulval vestibule, the mucus secreted by those glands protects the labia from dryness and mechanical irritation.\n\nBeing thinner than the outer labia, the inner labia can be also more narrow than the former, or wider than labia majora, thus protruding in the pudendal cleft and making the term \"minora\" (Latin for smaller) essentially inapplicable in these cases.\n\nThe reception of wider and/or longer labia varies considerably between different people, with some men and women stressing the beauty of bigger labia while other women who have such ones complain of some discomfort either from mechanical irritation by their tighter clothes or from their own or their peers' negative attitude to the image of less compact female genitalia than is stereotypical for them.\n\nThey can also be smooth or frilled, the latter being more typical of longer or wider inner labia.\n\nFrom 2003 to 2004, researchers from the Department of Gynaecology, Elizabeth Garret Anderson Hospital in London, measured the labia and other genital structures of 50 women from the age of 18 to 50, with a mean age of 35.6. The results were:\n\n! Measuring\n! Range\n! Mean [SD]\n\nDue to the frequent portrayal of the pudendal cleft without protrusion in art and pornography, there has been a rise in the popularity of labiaplasty, surgery to alter the labia - usually, to make them smaller. On the other hand, there is an opposite movement of labia stretching. Its proponents stress the beauty of long labia and their positive role in sexual stimulation of both partners.\n\nLabiaplasty is also sometimes sought by women who have asymmetrical labia minora to adjust the shape of the structures towards identical size.\n\nLabia stretching has traditionally been practiced in some African nations.\n\nThe inner lips serve to protect from mechanical irritation, dryness and infections the highly sensitive area of the vulval vestibule with vaginal and urethral openings in it between them. During vaginal sexual intercourse they may contribute to stimulation of the whole vestibule area, the clitoris and the vagina of the woman and the penis of her partner. Stimulation of the clitoris may occur through tension of the clitoral hood and its frenulum by inner labia pulling at them. During sexual arousal they are lubricated by the mucus secreted in the vagina and around it to make penetration painless and protect them from irritation.\n\nAs the female external urethral opening (meatus) is also situated between labia minora, they may play a role in guiding the stream of the urine during female urination.\n\nBeing very sensitive by their structure to any irritation, and situated in the excretion area where traces of urine, vaginal discharge, smegma and even feces may be present, the inner lips may be susceptible to inflammatory infections of the vulva such as vulvitis.\n\nThe likelihood of inflammation may be reduced through appropriate regular hygienic cleansing of the whole vulval vestibule, using water and medically tested cleansing agents designed for vulvas. To avoid contamination of the vulva with fecal bacteria, it is recommended that the vulva is washed only from front to back, from mons pubis to the perineum and anus. Apart from water and special liquid cleansing agents (lotions), there are commercially available wet wipes for female intimate hygiene. Some women wipe the vulval vestibule dry with toilet tissue after urination to avoid irritation and infections from residual drops of the urine in the area.\n\nHowever, incorrect choice of cleansing agents, or their incorrect application, may itself cause labial irritation and require medical attention. Over-vigorous rubbing of the labia of little girls while washing, combined with the lack of estrogen in their bodies, may lead to the mostly pediatric condition known as labial fusion. If fused labia prevent urination, urine may accumulate and cause pain and inflammation.\n\nIn adult females, irritation of the area may be caused by wearing too-tight underwear (especially where wider inner labia protrude in the pudendal cleft); while G-strings, which rub against the labia during body movements, may cause irritation or lead to infection from bacteria transferred from either the external environment or the anus.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Femalia\"\nBULLET::::- Labia pride\nBULLET::::- Labia stretching\nBULLET::::- Labiaplasty\n"}
{"id": "18425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18425", "title": "Leopold von Sacher-Masoch", "text": "Leopold von Sacher-Masoch\n\nLeopold Ritter von Sacher-Masoch (27 January 1836 – 9 March 1895) was an Austrian nobleman, writer and journalist, who gained renown for his romantic stories of Galician life. The term \"masochism\" is derived from his name, invented by his contemporary, the Austrian psychiatrist Richard von Krafft-Ebing. Masoch did not approve of this use of his name.\n\nDuring his lifetime, Sacher-Masoch was well known as a man of letters, in particular a utopian thinker who espoused socialist and humanist ideals in his fiction and non-fiction. Most of his works remain untranslated into English. Until recently, his novel \"Venus in Furs\" was his only book commonly available in English, but an English translation by William Holmes of \"Die Gottesmutter\" was released in 2015 as \"The Mother of God\".\n\nVon Sacher-Masoch was born in the city of Lemberg (now Lviv, Ukraine), the capital of the Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria, at the time a province of the Austrian Empire, into the Roman Catholic family of an Austrian civil servant, Leopold Johann Nepomuk Ritter von Sacher, and Charlotte von Masoch, a Ukrainian noblewoman. The father later combined his surname with his wife's 'von Masoch', at the request of her family (she was the last of the line). Von Sacher served as a Commissioner of the Imperial Police Forces in Lemberg, and he was recognised with a new title of nobility as Sacher-Masoch awarded by the Austrian Emperor.\n\nLeopold studied law, history and mathematics at Graz University, and after graduating moved back to Lemberg where he became a professor. His early, non-fictional publications dealt mostly with Austrian history. At the same time, Masoch turned to the folklore and culture of his homeland, Galicia. Soon he abandoned lecturing and became a free man of letters. Within a decade his short stories and novels prevailed over his historical non-fiction works, though historical themes continued to imbue his fiction.\n\nPanslavist ideas were prevalent in Masoch's literary work, and he found a particular interest in depicting picturesque types among the various ethnicities that inhabited Galicia. From the 1860s to the 1880s he published a number of volumes of \"Jewish Short Stories\", \"Polish Short Stories\", \"Galician Short Stories\", \"German Court Stories\" and \"Russian Court Stories\". His works were published in translation in Ukrainian, Polish, Russian and French.\n\nIn 1869, Sacher-Masoch conceived a grandiose series of short stories under the collective title \"Legacy of Cain\" that would represent the author's aesthetic \"Weltanschauung\". The cycle opened with the manifesto \"The Wanderer\" that brought out misogynist themes that became peculiar to Masoch's writings. Of the six planned volumes, only the first two were ever completed. By the middle of the 1880s, Masoch abandoned the \"Legacy of Cain\". Nevertheless, the published volumes of the series included Masoch's best-known stories, and of them, \"Venus in Furs\" (1869) is the most famous today. The short novel expressed Sacher-Masoch's fantasies and fetishes (especially for dominant women wearing fur). He did his best to live out his fantasies with his mistresses and wives.\n\nSacher-Masoch edited the Leipzig-based monthly literary magazine \"Auf der Höhe. Internationale Review\" (\"At the Pinnacle. International Review\"), which was published from October, 1881 to September, 1885. This was a progressive magazine aimed at tolerance and integration for Jews in Saxony, as well as for the emancipation of women with articles on women's education and suffrage.\n\nIn his later years, he worked against local antisemitism through an association for adult education called the \"Oberhessischer Verein für Volksbildung\" (OVV), founded in 1893 with his second wife, Hulda Meister, who had also been his assistant for some years.\n\nOn 9 December 1869, Sacher-Masoch and his mistress Baroness Fanny Pistor signed a contract making him her slave for a period of six months, with the stipulation that the Baroness wear furs as often as possible, especially when she was in a cruel mood. Sacher-Masoch took the alias of \"Gregor\", a stereotypical male servant's name, and assumed a disguise as the servant of the Baroness. The two travelled by train to Italy. As in \"Venus in Furs\", he traveled in the third-class compartment, while she had a seat in first-class, arriving in Venice (Florence, in the novel), where they were not known, and would not arouse suspicion.\n\nSacher-Masoch pressured his first wife – Aurora von Rümelin, whom he married in 1873 – to live out the experience of the book, against her preferences. Sacher-Masoch found his family life to be unexciting, and eventually got a divorce and married his assistant.\n\nIn 1875, Masoch wrote \"The Ideals of Our Time\", an attempt to give a portrait of German society during its Gründerzeit period.\n\nIn his late fifties, his mental health began to deteriorate, and he spent the last years of his life under psychiatric care. According to official reports, he died in Lindheim, Altenstadt, Hesse, in 1895. It is also claimed that he died in an asylum in Mannheim in 1905.\n\nSacher-Masoch is the great-great-uncle to the British singer and actress Marianne Faithfull on the side of her mother, the Viennese Baroness Eva Erisso.\n\nThe term \"masochism\" was coined in 1886 by the Austrian psychiatrist Richard Freiherr von Krafft-Ebing (1840–1902) in his book \"Psychopathia Sexualis\":\n\nSacher-Masoch was not pleased with Krafft-Ebing's assertions. Nevertheless, details of Masoch's private life were obscure until Aurora von Rümelin's memoirs, \"Meine Lebensbeichte\" (My Life Confession;1906), were published in Berlin under the pseudonym Wanda v. Dunajew. The following year, a French translation, \"Confession de Ma Vie\" (1907) by \"Wanda von Sacher-Masoch\", was printed in Paris by Mercure de France. An English translation of the French edition was published as \"The Confessions of Wanda von Sacher-Masoch\" (1991) by RE/Search Publications.\n\nBULLET::::- 1858 \"A Galician Story 1846\"\nBULLET::::- 1865 \"Kaunitz\"\nBULLET::::- 1866 \"Don Juan of Kolomiya\"\nBULLET::::- 1867 \"The Last King of Hungary\"\nBULLET::::- 1870 \"The Divorcee\"\nBULLET::::- 1870 \"Legacy of Cain. Vol. 1: Love\" (includes his most famous novella \"Venus in Furs\")\nBULLET::::- 1872 \"Faux Ermine\"\nBULLET::::- 1873 \"Female Sultan\"\nBULLET::::- 1873 \"The Messalinas of Vienna\"\nBULLET::::- 1873–74 \"Russian Court Stories\": 4 Vols.\nBULLET::::- 1873–77 \"Viennese Court Stories\": 2 Vols.\nBULLET::::- 1874/76 ' (\"Love Stories from Several Centuries\"), 3 volumes, includes ' (\"Bloody Wedding in Kyiv\"), \"Ariella\"\nBULLET::::- 1875 \"The Ideals of Our Time\"\nBULLET::::- 1875 \"Galician Stories\"\nBULLET::::- 1877 \"The Man Without Prejudice\"\nBULLET::::- 1877 \"Legacy of Cain. Vol. 2: Property\"\nBULLET::::- 1878 \"The New Hiob\"\nBULLET::::- 1878 \"Jewish Stories\"\nBULLET::::- 1878 \"The Republic of Women's Enemies\"\nBULLET::::- 1879 \"Silhouettes\"\nBULLET::::- 1881 \"New Jewish Stories\"\nBULLET::::- 1883 \"\" (\"The Mother of God\")\nBULLET::::- 1886 \"Eternal Youth\"\nBULLET::::- 1886 \"Stories from Polish Ghetto\"\nBULLET::::- 1886 \"Little Mysteries of World History\"\nBULLET::::- 1886 \"Bloody Wedding in Kyiv''\nBULLET::::- 1887 \"Polish Stories\"\nBULLET::::- 1890 \"The Serpent in Paradise\"\nBULLET::::- 1891 \"The Lonesome\"\nBULLET::::- 1894 \"Love Stories\"\nBULLET::::- 1898 \"Entre nous\"\nBULLET::::- 1900 \"Catherina II\"\nBULLET::::- 1901 \"Afrikas Semiramis\"\nBULLET::::- 1907 \"Fierce Women\"\n\nBULLET::::- BDSM\nBULLET::::- Marquis de Sade\nBULLET::::- Sadism and masochism in fiction\nBULLET::::- \"Story of O\"\n\nBULLET::::- Bach, Ulrich E, \"Sacher-Masoch's Utopian Peripheries.\" In: \"The German Quarterly\" 80.2 (2007): 201–219.\nBULLET::::- Biale, David, \"Masochism and Philosemitism: The Strange Case of Leopold Von Sacher-Masoch\", \"Journal of Contemporary History\" 17 (1982), 305–323.\nBULLET::::- Deleuze, Gilles, \"Coldness and Cruelty,\" in \"Masochism,\" New York: Zone Books (1991).\nBULLET::::- John K. Noyes, \"The Mastery of Submission. Inventions of Masochism\". Ithaca: Cornell University Press 1997.\nBULLET::::- Carlo Di Mascio, \"Masoch sovversivo. Cinque studi su Venus im Pelz\", Firenze, Phasar Edizioni, 2018.\nBULLET::::- Alison Moore, Recovering Difference in the Deleuzian Dichotomy of Masochism-without-Sadism. Angelaki 14 (3), November 2009, 27-43.\nBULLET::::- Alison M. Moore, Sexual Myths of Modernity: Sadism, Masochism and Historical Teleology. Lanham: Lexington Books, 2016.\n\nBULLET::::- The complete text of \"Venus in Furs\" from Project Gutenberg\nBULLET::::- The Bookbinder of Hort, part of an anthology, \"Stories by Foreign Authors\"\nBULLET::::- The Letawitza\nBULLET::::- \"The Independent Saturday\", 23 July 1994\nBULLET::::- Stanislav Tsalyk: Don Juan of Lviv\n"}
{"id": "18426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18426", "title": "Lithography", "text": "Lithography\n\nLithography () is a method of printing originally based on the immiscibility of oil and water. The printing is from a stone (lithographic limestone) or a metal plate with a smooth surface. It was invented in 1796 by German author and actor Alois Senefelder as a cheap method of publishing theatrical works. Lithography can be used to print text or artwork onto paper or other suitable material.\n\nLithography originally used an image drawn with oil, fat, or wax onto the surface of a smooth, level lithographic limestone plate. The stone was treated with a mixture of acid and gum arabic, \"etching\" the portions of the stone that were not protected by the grease-based image. When the stone was subsequently moistened, these etched areas retained water; an oil-based ink could then be applied and would be repelled by the water, sticking only to the original drawing. The ink would finally be transferred to a blank paper sheet, producing a printed page. This traditional technique is still used in some fine art printmaking applications.\n\nIn modern lithography, the image is made of a polymer coating applied to a flexible plastic or metal plate. The image can be printed directly from the plate (the orientation of the image is reversed), or it can be offset, by transferring the image onto a flexible sheet (rubber) for printing and publication.\n\nAs a printing technology, lithography is different from intaglio printing (gravure), wherein a plate is either engraved, etched, or stippled to score cavities to contain the printing ink; and woodblock printing or letterpress printing, wherein ink is applied to the raised surfaces of letters or images. Today, most types of high-volume books and magazines, especially when illustrated in colour, are printed with offset lithography, which has become the most common form of printing technology since the 1960s.\n\nThe related term \"photolithography\" refers to the use of photographic images in lithographic printing, whether these images are printed directly from a stone or from a metal plate, as in offset printing. \"Photolithography\" is used synonymously with \"offset printing\". The technique as well as the term were introduced in Europe in the 1850s. Beginning in the 1960s, photolithography has played an important role in the fabrication and mass production of integrated circuits in the microelectronics industry.\n\nLithography uses simple chemical processes to create an image. For instance, the positive part of an image is a water-repelling (\"hydrophobic\") substance, while the negative image would be water-retaining (\"hydrophilic\"). Thus, when the plate is introduced to a compatible printing ink and water mixture, the ink will adhere to the positive image and the water will clean the negative image. This allows a flat print plate to be used, enabling much longer and more detailed print runs than the older physical methods of printing (e.g., intaglio printing, letterpress printing).\n\nLithography was invented by Alois Senefelder in the Kingdom of Bavaria in 1796. In the early days of lithography, a smooth piece of limestone was used (hence the name \"lithography\": \"lithos\" () is the ancient Greek word for stone). After the oil-based image was put on the surface, a solution of gum arabic in water was applied, the gum sticking only to the non-oily surface. During printing, water adhered to the gum arabic surfaces and was repelled by the oily parts, while the oily ink used for printing did the opposite.\n\nLithography works because of the mutual repulsion of oil and water. The image is drawn on the surface of the print plate with a fat or oil-based medium (hydrophobic) such as a wax crayon, which may be pigmented to make the drawing visible. A wide range of oil-based media is available, but the durability of the image on the stone depends on the lipid content of the material being used, and its ability to withstand water and acid. After the drawing of the image, an aqueous solution of gum arabic, weakly acidified with nitric acid is applied to the stone. The function of this solution is to create a hydrophilic layer of calcium nitrate salt, , and gum arabic on all non-image surfaces. The gum solution penetrates into the pores of the stone, completely surrounding the original image with a hydrophilic layer that will not accept the printing ink. Using lithographic turpentine, the printer then removes any excess of the greasy drawing material, but a hydrophobic molecular film of it remains tightly bonded to the surface of the stone, rejecting the gum arabic and water, but ready to accept the oily ink.\n\nSenefelder had experimented during the early 19th century with multicolor lithography; in his 1819 book, he predicted that the process would eventually be perfected and used to reproduce paintings. Multi-color printing was introduced by a new process developed by Godefroy Engelmann (France) in 1837 known as chromolithography. A separate stone was used for each color, and a print went through the press separately for each stone. The main challenge was to keep the images aligned (\"in register\"). This method lent itself to images consisting of large areas of flat color, and resulted in the characteristic poster designs of this period.\n\n\"Lithography, or printing from soft stone, largely took the place of engraving in the production of English commercial maps after about 1852. It was a quick, cheap process and had been used to print British army maps during the Peninsula War. Most of the commercial maps of the second half of the 19th century were lithographed and unattractive, though accurate enough.\"\n\nHigh-volume lithography is used presently to produce posters, maps, books, newspapers, and packaging—just about any smooth, mass-produced item with print and graphics on it. Most books, indeed all types of high-volume text, are now printed using offset lithography.\n\nFor offset lithography, which depends on photographic processes, flexible aluminum, polyester, mylar or paper printing plates are used instead of stone tablets. Modern printing plates have a brushed or roughened texture and are covered with a photosensitive emulsion. A photographic negative of the desired image is placed in contact with the emulsion and the plate is exposed to ultraviolet light. After development, the emulsion shows a reverse of the negative image, which is thus a duplicate of the original (positive) image. The image on the plate emulsion can also be created by direct laser imaging in a CTP (Computer-To-Plate) device known as a platesetter. The positive image is the emulsion that remains after imaging. Non-image portions of the emulsion have traditionally been removed by a chemical process, though in recent times plates have come available that do not require such processing.\n\nThe plate is affixed to a cylinder on a printing press. Dampening rollers apply water, which covers the blank portions of the plate but is repelled by the emulsion of the image area. Hydrophobic ink, which is repelled by the water and only adheres to the emulsion of the image area, is then applied by the inking rollers.\n\nIf this image were transferred directly to paper, it would create a mirror-type image and the paper would become too wet. Instead, the plate rolls against a cylinder covered with a rubber \"blanket\", which squeezes away the water, picks up the ink and transfers it to the paper with uniform pressure. The paper passes between the blanket cylinder and a counter-pressure or impression cylinder and the image is transferred to the paper. Because the image is first transferred, or \"offset\" to the rubber blanket cylinder, this reproduction method is known as \"offset lithography\" or \"offset printing\".\n\nMany innovations and technical refinements have been made in printing processes and presses over the years, including the development of presses with multiple units (each containing one printing plate) that can print multi-color images in one pass on both sides of the sheet, and presses that accommodate continuous rolls (\"webs\") of paper, known as web presses. Another innovation was the continuous dampening system first introduced by Dahlgren, instead of the old method (conventional dampening) which is still used on older presses, using rollers covered with molleton (cloth) that absorbs the water. This increased control of the water flow to the plate and allowed for better ink and water balance. Current dampening systems include a \"delta effect or vario\", which slows the roller in contact with the plate, thus creating a sweeping movement over the ink image to clean impurities known as \"hickies\".\n\nThis press is also called an ink pyramid because the ink is transferred through several layers of rollers with different purposes. Fast lithographic 'web' printing presses are commonly used in newspaper production.\n\nThe advent of desktop publishing made it possible for type and images to be modified easily on personal computers for eventual printing by desktop or commercial presses. The development of digital imagesetters enabled print shops to produce negatives for platemaking directly from digital input, skipping the intermediate step of photographing an actual page layout. The development of the digital platesetter during the late 20th century eliminated film negatives altogether by exposing printing plates directly from digital input, a process known as computer to plate printing.\n\nMicrolithography and nanolithography refer specifically to lithographic patterning methods capable of structuring material on a fine scale. Typically, features smaller than 10 micrometers are considered microlithographic, and features smaller than 100 nanometers are considered nanolithographic. Photolithography is one of these methods, often applied to semiconductor device fabrication. Photolithography is also commonly used for fabricating microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) devices. Photolithography generally uses a pre-fabricated photomask or reticle as a master from which the final pattern is derived.\n\nAlthough photolithographic technology is the most commercially advanced form of nanolithography, other techniques are also used. Some, for example electron beam lithography, are capable of much greater patterning resolution (sometimes as small as a few nanometers). Electron beam lithography is also important commercially, primarily for its use in the manufacture of photomasks. Electron beam lithography as it is usually practiced is a form of maskless lithography, in that a mask is not required to generate the final pattern. Instead, the final pattern is created directly from a digital representation on a computer, by controlling an electron beam as it scans across a resist-coated substrate. Electron beam lithography has the disadvantage of being much slower than photolithography.\n\nIn addition to these commercially well-established techniques, a large number of promising microlithographic and nanolithographic technologies exist or are being developed, including nanoimprint lithography, interference lithography, X-ray lithography, extreme ultraviolet lithography, magnetolithography and scanning probe lithography. Some of these new techniques have been used successfully for small-scale commercial and important research applications.\nSurface-charge lithography, in fact Plasma desorption mass spectrometry can be directly patterned on polar dielectric crystals via pyroelectric effect, \nDiffraction lithography.\n\nDuring the first years of the 19th century, lithography had only a limited effect on printmaking, mainly because technical difficulties remained to be overcome. Germany was the main center of production in this period. Godefroy Engelmann, who moved his press from Mulhouse to Paris in 1816, largely succeeded in resolving the technical problems, and during the 1820s lithography was adopted by artists such as Delacroix and Géricault. After early experiments such as \"Specimens of Polyautography\" (1803), which had experimental works by a number of British artists including Benjamin West, Henry Fuseli, James Barry, Thomas Barker of Bath, Thomas Stothard, Henry Richard Greville, Richard Cooper, Henry Singleton, and William Henry Pyne, London also became a center, and some of Géricault's prints were in fact produced there. Goya in Bordeaux produced his last series of prints by lithography—\"The Bulls of Bordeaux\" of 1828. By the mid-century the initial enthusiasm had somewhat diminished in both countries, although the use of lithography was increasingly favored for commercial applications, which included the prints of Daumier, published in newspapers. Rodolphe Bresdin and Jean-François Millet also continued to practice the medium in France, and Adolf Menzel in Germany. In 1862 the publisher Cadart tried to initiate a portfolio of lithographs by various artists, which was not successful but included several prints by Manet. The revival began during the 1870s, especially in France with artists such as Odilon Redon, Henri Fantin-Latour and Degas producing much of their work in this manner. The need for strictly limited editions to maintain the price had now been realized, and the medium became more accepted.\nIn the 1890s, color lithography gained success in part by the emergence of Jules Chéret, known as the \"father of the modern poster\", whose work went on to inspire a new generation of poster designers and painters, most notably Toulouse-Lautrec, and former student of Chéret, Georges de Feure. By 1900 the medium in both color and monotone was an accepted part of printmaking.\n\nDuring the 20th century, a group of artists, including Braque, Calder, Chagall, Dufy, Léger, Matisse, Miró, and Picasso, rediscovered the largely undeveloped artform of lithography thanks to the Mourlot Studios, also known as \"Atelier Mourlot\", a Parisian printshop founded in 1852 by the Mourlot family. The Atelier Mourlot originally specialized in the printing of wallpaper; but it was transformed when the founder's grandson, Fernand Mourlot, invited a number of 20th-century artists to explore the complexities of fine art printing. Mourlot encouraged the painters to work directly on lithographic stones in order to create original artworks that could then be executed under the direction of master printers in small editions. The combination of modern artist and master printer resulted in lithographs that were used as posters to promote the artists' work.\n\nGrant Wood, George Bellows, Alphonse Mucha, Max Kahn, Pablo Picasso, Eleanor Coen, Jasper Johns, David Hockney, Susan Dorothea White, and Robert Rauschenberg are a few of the artists who have produced most of their prints in the medium. M. C. Escher is considered a master of lithography, and many of his prints were created using this process. More than other printmaking techniques, printmakers in lithography still largely depend on access to good printers, and the development of the medium has been greatly influenced by when and where these have been established.\nAs a special form of lithography, the serilith process is sometimes used. Seriliths are mixed media original prints created in a process in which an artist uses the lithograph and serigraph processes. The separations for both processes are hand-drawn by the artist. The serilith technique is used primarily to create fine art limited print editions.\n\nBULLET::::- Twyman, Michael. \"Early Lithographed Books\". Pinner, Middlesex: Private Libraries Association, 1990\nBULLET::::- Museum of Modern Art information on printing techniques and examples of prints\nBULLET::::- The Invention of Lithography, Aloys Senefelder, (Eng. trans. 1911) (a searchable facsimile at the University of Georgia Libraries; DjVu and layered PDF format)\nBULLET::::- Theo De Smedt's website, author of \"\"What's lithography\"\"\nBULLET::::- Extensive information on Honoré Daumier and his life and work, including his entire output of lithographs\nBULLET::::- Digital work catalog to 4000 lithographs and 1000 wood engravings\nBULLET::::- Detailed examination of the processes involved in the creation of a typical scholarly lithographic illustration in the 19th century\nBULLET::::- Nederlands Steendrukmuseum\nBULLET::::- Delacroix's \"Faust\" lithographs at the Davison Art Center, Wesleyan University\nBULLET::::- A brief historic overview of Lithography. University of Delaware Library. Includes citations for 19th century books using early lithographic illustrations.\nBULLET::::- Philadelphia on Stone: The First Fifty Years of Commercial Lithography in Philadelphia. Library Company of Philadelphia. Provides an historic overview of the commercial trade in Philadelphia and links to a biographical dictionary of over 500 Philadelphia lithographers and catalog of more than 1300 lithographs documenting Philadelphia.\nBULLET::::- Prints & People: A Social History of Printed Pictures, an exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art (fully available online as PDF), which contains material on lithography\n"}
{"id": "18430", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18430", "title": "Library management", "text": "Library management\n\nLibrary management is a sub-discipline of institutional management that focuses on specific issues faced by libraries and library management professionals. Library management encompasses normal managerial tasks, as well as intellectual freedom and fundraising responsibilities. Issues faced in library management frequently overlap with those faced in managing non-profit organizations.\n\nThe basic functions of library management include, but are not limited to: planning and negotiating the acquisition of materials, Interlibrary Loan (ILL) requests, stacks maintenance, overseeing fee collection, event planning, fundraising, and human resources.\nMost of the libraries that store physical media like books, periodicals, film, and other objects adhere to some derivative of the Dewey Decimal System as their method for tagging, storing, and retrieving materials based on unique identifiers. The use of such systems have caused librarians to develop and leverage common constructs that act as tools for both library professionals and library users alike. These constructs include master catalogs, domain catalogs, indexes, unique identifiers, unique identifier tokens, and artifacts .\n\nBULLET::::- A master catalog acts as a catalog of all domain or topic-specific catalogs and often directs the user to a more specific area of a library, where the user can find a more specific domain catalog. For example, upon entering a very large library, one may find a master catalog that will direct a patron to a specific wing of the library that focuses on a specific subject, such as law, history, fiction, etc.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Domain catalogs\"' are usually made up of a system of very large libraries, where a master catalog cannot hold all of the system's information. As a result, the master catalog leads the user to domain catalogs that contain homogeneous references to specific artifacts that fall within the category or domain assigned to that catalog. For example, a very large library may have many domain catalogs—one for law, one for history, one for fiction, etc. In the case of smaller libraries where the use of domain catalogs are unnecessary, the master catalog can contain all of the information.\n\nBULLET::::- Indexes represent a grouping of artifacts by some relevant grouping constraint. The most common index groupings are \"by title,\" \"by subject,\", publisher\" and \"by author.\"\n\nBULLET::::- Unique identifiers, also known as IDs, represent a means of assigning and tagging an artifact with a readable string of characters that is unique to that single artifact. Such identifiers usually include the address or location of the artifact within the library, and a unique character set that helps to distinguish artifacts that have common traits like common titles. Such unique identifiers are also broken into tokens and are usually placed somewhere on the surface of the artifact being stored, such as on the binding of a book, to facilitate in easily locating that item.\n\nBULLET::::- Unique identification strings are broken into predefined and fixed position segments or sub-strings. Each segment is called a token and represents a mapping to something meaningful, hence the name unique identifier tokens. For example, one token may lead a user to a specific wing of a library, another might lead the user to a specific aisle within that wing, another to a specific bookcase within that aisle, etc., all ultimately leading to the artifact itself. Such tokens are often separated by a character that is often referred to as a tokenizer (e.g. \".\" or \":\").\n\nBULLET::::- Artifacts represent those original things or authorized copies of things that are being categorized, stored within, and retrieved from libraries. Examples of artifacts include books, periodicals, research documentation, film, and computer disks.\n\nAn important aspect of library management is planning and maintaining library facilities. Successful planning is defined as \"active planning that ensures an organization will have the right people in the right place at the right time for right job\" Planning the construction of new libraries or remodeling those that exist is integral since user needs are often changing. To supplement their operating budget, managers often secure funding through donor gifts and fundraising. Many facilities have begun including cafes, Friends of the Library spaces, and even exhibits to help generate additional revenue. These areas should be taken into account when planning for building expansions.\n\nThe site for new construction must be found, then the building must be designed, constructed, and eventually evaluated. Once established, it is important that the building is regularly maintained. This may be completed by delegating tasks to maintenance personnel or by hiring an outside company through bids.\n\nDisaster planning must be taken into account in the library context as well: not only the impact of a disaster on the library, but the library's potential role as a support service just after a disaster.\n\nThe Library Leadership and Management Association (LLAMA) is a division of the American Library Association that provides leaders with webinars, conferences, and a variety of industry publications, in addition to funding through awards and grants. LLAMA membership includes a free subscription to the online quarterly magazine \"Library Leadership & Management\", as well as discounts on other publications and related conferences.\n\nThe \"Journal of Library Administration\" began in 1980 and is currently published by Routledge eight times per year. It is a peer-reviewed academic journal that discusses issues pertaining to library management.\n\nBULLET::::- Ainslie, Karen. 2016. Internal Control for Public Libraries. Indiana State Library.\nBULLET::::- Gregory, Ruth W. and Lester L. Stoffel. \"Public Libraries in Cooperative Systems: Administrative Patters for Service\". Chicago: American Library Association, 1971.\nBULLET::::- Lock, Reginald Northwood. \"Library Administration\". London: C. Lockwood & Son, 1961. vi, 132, [1] p.\nBULLET::::- Lyle, Guy R. \"The Administration of the College Library\", with the collaboration of Paul H. Bixler, Marjorie Hood, and Arnold H. Trotier. Third ed. New York: H. W. Wilson Co., 1961. xiii, 419 p.\nBULLET::::- Vishwakarma M L.and Parashar V _Ed. Halkar Giriraj, Natrajan M, Singh,Hirdyesh Kumar et al_ \"Changing Role of Library Professionals & Libraries in the Digital Age\". New Delhi_India: American Library Association,International Research Publication House,New Delhi, 2014.\nBULLET::::- Wofford, Azile. \"The School Library at Work: Acquisition, Organization, Use, and Maintenance of Materials in the School Library\". New York: H. W. Wilson Co., 1959.\n\nBULLET::::- American Library Association, What Library Managers Need to Know\nBULLET::::- Library Instruction for Teachers, Blog by Michael Lorenzen\nBULLET::::- Library Leadership & Management Association\nBULLET::::- Library Management\nBULLET::::- RFID based Library Management Software, LIBSYS Press Release\nBULLET::::- UNESCO Adult Learning Documentation and Information Network, Managing A Library PDF\n"}
{"id": "18432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18432", "title": "English longbow", "text": "English longbow\n\nThe English longbow was a powerful medieval type of longbow (a tall bow for archery) about long used by the English and Welsh for hunting and as a weapon in warfare. English use of longbows was effective against the French during the Hundred Years' War, particularly at the start of the war in the battles of Sluys (1340), Crécy (1346), and Poitiers (1356), and perhaps most famously at the Battle of Agincourt (1415). They were less successful after this, with longbowmen having their lines broken at the Battle of Verneuil (1424), and being completely routed at the Battle of Patay (1429) when they were charged before they had set up their defensive position.\n\nNo English longbows survive from the period when the longbow was dominant (c. 1250–1450 AD), probably because bows became weaker, broke, and were replaced rather than being handed down through generations. More than 130 bows survive from the Renaissance period, however. More than 3,500 arrows and 137 whole longbows were recovered from the \"Mary Rose\", a ship of Henry VIII's navy that sank at Portsmouth in 1545.\n\nA longbow must be long enough to allow its user to draw the string to a point on the face or body, and the length therefore varies with the user. In continental Europe it was generally seen as any bow longer than . The Society of Antiquaries of London says it is of in length. Richard Bartelot, of the Royal Artillery Institution, said that the bow was of yew, long, with a arrow. Gaston III, Count of Foix, wrote in 1388 that a longbow should be \"of yew or boxwood, seventy inches [] between the points of attachment for the cord\". Historian Jim Bradbury said they were an average of about 5 feet and 8 inches. All but the last estimate were made before the excavation of the \"Mary Rose\", where bows were found ranging in length from with an average length of .\n\nEstimates for the draw of these bows varies considerably. Before the recovery of the \"Mary Rose\", Count M. Mildmay Stayner, Recorder of the British Long Bow Society, estimated the bows of the Medieval period drew , maximum, and Mr. W.F. Paterson, Chairman of the Society of Archer-Antiquaries, believed the weapon had a supreme draw weight of only . Other sources suggest significantly higher draw weights. The original draw forces of examples from the \"Mary Rose\" are estimated by Robert Hardy at at a draw length; the full range of draw weights was between . The draw length was used because that is the length allowed by the arrows commonly found on the \"Mary Rose\".\n\nA modern longbow's draw is typically or less, and by modern convention measured at . Historically, hunting bows usually had draw weights of , which is enough for all but the very largest game and which most reasonably fit adults can manage with practice. Today, there are few modern longbowmen capable of using bows accurately.\n\nA record of how boys and men trained to use the bows with high draw weights survives from the reign of Henry VII.\nWhat Latimer meant when he describes laying his body into the bow was described thus:\n\nThe preferred material to make the longbow was yew, although ash, elm and other woods were also used. Gerald of Wales speaking of the bows used by the Welsh men of Gwent, says: \"They are made neither of horn, ash nor yew, but of elm; ugly unfinished-looking weapons, but astonishingly stiff, large and strong, and equally capable of use for long or short shooting\". The traditional construction of a longbow consists of drying the yew wood for 1 to 2 years, then slowly working the wood into shape, with the entire process taking up to four years. (This can be done far more quickly by working the wood down when wet, as a thinner piece of wood will dry much faster.) The bow stave is shaped into a D-section. The outer \"back\" of sapwood, approximately flat, follows the natural growth rings; modern bowyers often thin the sapwood, while in the \"Mary Rose\" bows the back of the bow was the natural surface of the wood, only the bark is removed. The inner side (\"belly\") of the bow stave consists of rounded heartwood. The heartwood resists compression and the outer sapwood performs better in tension. This combination in a single piece of wood (a self bow) forms a natural \"laminate\", somewhat similar in effect to the construction of a composite bow. Longbows will last a long time if protected with a water-resistant coating, traditionally of \"wax, resin and fine tallow\".\n\nThe trade of yew wood to England for longbows was such that it depleted the stocks of yew over a huge area. The first documented import of yew bowstaves to England was in 1294. In 1350 there was a serious shortage, and Henry IV of England ordered his royal bowyer to enter private land and cut yew and other woods. In 1470 compulsory practice was renewed, and hazel, ash, and laburnum were specifically allowed for practice bows. Supplies still proved insufficient, until by the Statute of Westminster 1472, every ship coming to an English port had to bring four bowstaves for every tun. Richard III of England increased this to ten for every tun. This stimulated a vast network of extraction and supply, which formed part of royal monopolies in southern Germany and Austria. In 1483, the price of bowstaves rose from two to eight pounds per hundred, and in 1510 the Venetians obtained sixteen pounds per hundred.\n\nIn 1507 the Holy Roman Emperor asked the Duke of Bavaria to stop cutting yew, but the trade was profitable, and in 1532 the royal monopoly was granted for the usual quantity \"if there are that many\". In 1562, the Bavarian government sent a long plea to the Holy Roman Emperor asking him to stop the cutting of yew and outlining the damage done to the forests by its selective extraction, which broke the canopy and allowed wind to destroy neighbouring trees. In 1568, despite a request from Saxony, no royal monopoly was granted because there was no yew to cut, and the next year Bavaria and Austria similarly failed to produce enough yew to justify a royal monopoly.\n\nForestry records in this area in the 17th century do not mention yew, and it seems that no mature trees were to be had. The English tried to obtain supplies from the Baltic, but at this period bows were being replaced by guns in any case.\n\nBowstrings are made of hemp, flax or silk, and attached to the wood via horn \"nocks\" that fit onto the end of the bow. Modern synthetic materials (often Dacron) are now commonly also used for strings.\n\nA wide variety of arrows were shot from the English longbow. Variations in length, fletchings and heads are all recorded. Perhaps the greatest diversity lies in hunting arrows, with varieties like broad-arrow, wolf-arrow, dog-arrow, Welsh arrow and Scottish arrow being recorded. War arrows were ordered in the thousands for medieval armies and navies, supplied in sheaves normally of 24 arrows. For example, between 1341 and 1359 the English crown is known to have obtained 51,350 sheaves (1,232,400 arrows).\n\nOnly one significant group of arrows, found at the wreck of the \"Mary Rose\", has survived. Over 3500 arrows were found, mainly made of poplar but also of ash, beech and hazel. Analysis of the intact specimens shows their length to vary from , with an average length of . Because of the preservation conditions of the \"Mary Rose\", no arrowheads survived. However, many heads have survived in other places, which has allowed typologies of arrowheads to be produced, the most modern being the Jessop typology. The most common arrowheads in military use were the short bodkin point (Jessop M10) and a small barbed arrow (Jessop M4).\n\nLongbows were very difficult to master because the force required to deliver an arrow through the improving armour of medieval Europe was very high by modern standards. Although the draw weight of a typical English longbow is disputed, it was at least and possibly more than . Considerable practice was required to produce the swift and effective combat shooting required. Skeletons of longbow archers are recognisably affected, with enlarged left arms and often osteophytes on left wrists, left shoulders and right fingers.\n\nIt was the difficulty in using the longbow that led various monarchs of England to issue instructions encouraging their ownership and practice, including the Assize of Arms of 1252 and Edward III of England's declaration of 1363:\n\nIf the people practised archery, it would be that much easier for the king to recruit the proficient longbowmen he needed for his wars. Along with the improving ability of gunfire to penetrate plate armour, it was the long training needed by longbowmen that eventually led to their being replaced by musketeers.\n\nThe range of the medieval weapon is not accurately known, with much depending on both the power of the bow and the type of arrow. It has been suggested that a flight arrow of a professional archer of Edward III's time would reach but the longest mark shot at on the London practice ground of Finsbury Fields in the 16th century was . In 1542, Henry VIII set a minimum practice range for adults using flight arrows of ; ranges below this had to be shot with heavy arrows. Modern experiments broadly concur with these historical ranges. A 667 N (150 lbf) \"Mary Rose\" replica longbow was able to shoot a arrow and a a distance of . In 2012, Joe Gibbs shot a livery arrow with a 170 lbf yew bow. The effective combat range of longbowmen was generally lower than what could be achieved on the practice range as sustained shooting was tiring and the rigors of campaigning would sap soldiers' strength. Writing 30 years after the Mary Rose sank, Barnabe Rich estimated that if 1,000 English archers were mustered then after one week only 100 of them would be able to shoot farther than 200 paces, while 200 would not be able to shoot farther than 180 paces.\n\nIn an early modern test by Saxton Pope, a direct hit from a steel bodkin point penetrated Damascus mail armour.\n\nA 2006 test was made by Matheus Bane using a draw (at 28\") bow, shooting at 10 yards; according to Bane's calculations, this would be approximately equivalent to a bow at 250 yards. Measured against a replica of the thinnest contemporary gambeson (padded jacket) armour, a 905 grain needle bodkin and a 935 grain curved broadhead penetrated over . (gambeson armour could be up to twice as thick as the coat tested; in Bane's opinion such a thick coat would have stopped bodkin arrows but not the cutting force of broadhead arrows.) Against \"high quality riveted maille\", the needle bodkin and curved broadhead penetrated 2.8\". Against a coat of plates, the needle bodkin achieved 0.3\" penetration. The curved broadhead did not penetrate but caused 0.3\" of deformation of the metal. Results against plate armour of \"minimum thickness\" (1.2mm) were similar to the coat of plates, in that the needle bodkin penetrated to a shallow depth, the other arrows not at all. In Bane's view, the plate armour would have kept out all the arrows if thicker or worn with more padding.\n\nOther modern tests described by Bane include those by Williams (which concluded that longbows could \"not\" penetrate mail, but in Bane's view did not use a realistic arrow tip), Robert Hardy's tests (which achieved broadly similar results to Bane), and a \"Primitive Archer\" test which demonstrated that a longbow could penetrate a plate armour breastplate. However, the \"Primitive Archer\" test used a longbow at very short range, generating 160 joules (vs. 73 for Bane and 80 for Williams), so probably not representative of battles of the time.\n\nTests conducted by Mark Stretton examined the effects of heavier war shafts (as opposed to lighter hunting or distance-shooting 'flight arrows'). The quarrel-like 102-gram arrow from a yew 'self bow' (with a draw weight of 144lbs at 32 inches) while travelling at 47.23 metres per second yielded 113.76 joules, more kinetic energy than the lighter broad-heads while achieving 90% of the range. The short, heavy quarrel-form bodkin could penetrate a replica brigandine at up to 40° from perpendicular.\n\nIn 2011, Mike Loades conducted an experiment in which short bodkin arrows were shot at a range of by bows of - powerful bows at less than normal battlefield range. The target was covered in a riveted mail over a fabric armour of deerskin over 24 linen layers. While most arrows went through the mail layer, none fully penetrated the textile armour.\n\nOther research has also concluded that later medieval armour, such as that of the Italian city-state mercenary companies, was effective at stopping contemporary arrows.\n\nComputer analysis by Warsaw University of Technology in 2017 has estimated that heavy bodkin-point arrows could penetrate typical plate armour of the time at up to . However, the depth of penetration would be slight at that range, a mere 14mm on average; penetration increased as the range closed or against armour lesser than the best quality available at the time, but with 24mm being the highest penetration depth estimated at 25 m range, it was unlikely to be deadly.\n\nGerald of Wales commented on the power of the Welsh longbow in the 12th century:\nAgainst massed men in armour, massed longbows were murderously effective on many battlefields.\n\nStrickland and Hardy suggest that \"even at a range of 240 yards heavy war arrows shot from bows of poundages in the mid- to upper range possessed by the Mary Rose bows would have been capable of killing or severely wounding men equipped with armour of wrought iron. Higher-quality armour of steel would have given considerably greater protection, which accords well with the experience of Oxford's men against the elite French vanguard at Poitiers in 1356, and des Ursin's statement that the French knights of the first ranks at Agincourt, which included some of the most important (and thus best-equipped) nobles, remained comparatively unhurt by the English arrows\".\n\nArchery was described by contemporaries as ineffective against steel plate armour in the Battle of Neville's Cross (1346), the siege of Bergerac (1345), and the Battle of Poitiers (1356); such armour became available to European knights and men at arms of fairly modest means by the middle of the 14th century, though never to all soldiers in any army. Longbowmen were, however, effective at Poitiers, and this success stimulated changes in armour manufacture partly intended to make armoured men less vulnerable to archery. Nevertheless, at the battle of Agincourt in 1415 and for some decades thereafter, English longbowmen continued to be an effective battlefield force.\n\nFollowing the Battle of Crécy, the longbow did not always prove as effective. For example, at the Battle of Poitiers (1356), the French men-at-arms formed a shield wall with which Geoffrey le Baker recounts \"protecting their bodies with joined shields, [and] turned their faces away from the missiles. So the archers emptied their quivers in vain\".\n\nModern tests and contemporary accounts agree therefore that well-made plate armour could protect against longbows. However, this did not necessarily make the longbow ineffective; thousands of longbowmen were deployed in the English victory at Agincourt against plate armoured French knights in 1415. Clifford Rogers has argued that while longbows might not have been able to penetrate steel breastplates at Agincourt they could still penetrate the thinner armour on the limbs. Most of the French knights advanced on foot but, exhausted by walking across wet muddy terrain in heavy armour enduring a \"terrifying hail of arrow shot\", they were overwhelmed in the melee.\n\nLess heavily armoured soldiers were more vulnerable than knights. For example, enemy crossbowmen were forced to retreat at Crécy when deployed without their protecting pavises. Horses were generally less well protected than the knights themselves; shooting the French knights' horses from the side (where they were less well armoured) is described by contemporary accounts of the Battle of Poitiers (1356), and at Agincourt John Keegan has argued that the main effect of the longbow would have been in injuring the horses of the mounted French knights.\n\nA typical military longbow archer would be provided with between 60 and 72 arrows at the time of battle. Most archers would not shoot arrows at the maximum rate, as it would exhaust even the most experienced man. \"With the heaviest bows [a modern war bow archer] does not like to try for more than six a minute.\" Not only do the arms and shoulder muscles tire from the exertion, but the fingers holding the bowstring become strained; therefore, actual rates of shooting in combat would vary considerably. Ranged volleys at the beginning of the battle would differ markedly from the closer, aimed shots as the battle progressed and the enemy neared. On the battlefield English archers stored their arrows stabbed upright into the ground at their feet, reducing the time it took to nock, draw and loose.\n\nArrows were not unlimited, so archers and their commanders took every effort to ration their use to the situation at hand. Nonetheless, resupply during battle was available. Young boys were often employed to run additional arrows to longbow archers while in their positions on the battlefield. \"The longbow was the machine gun of the Middle Ages: accurate, deadly, possessed of a long range and rapid rate of fire, the flight of its missiles was likened to a storm\".\n\nIn tests against a moving target simulating a galloping knight it took some approximately seven seconds to draw, aim and loose an armour-piercing heavy arrow using a replica war bow. It was found that in the seven seconds between the first and second shots the target advanced 70 yards and that the second shot occurred at such close range that, if it was a realistic contest, running away was the only option.\n\nA Tudor English author expects eight shots from a longbow in the same time as five from a musket. He points out that the musket also shoots at a flatter trajectory, so is more likely to hit its target and its shot is likely to be more damaging in the event of a hit. The advantage of early firearms lay in the lower training requirements, the opportunity to take cover while shooting, flatter trajectory, and greater penetration.\n\nThe only way to remove an arrow cleanly was to tie a piece of cloth soaked in water to the end of it and push it through the victim's wound and out the other side — this was extremely painful. Specialised tools have existed since ancient times: Diocles (successor of Hippocrates) devised the graphiscos, a form of cannula with hooks, and the duck-billed forceps (allegedly invented by Heras of Cappadocia) was employed during the medieval period to extract arrows from places where bone prevented the arrow being pushed through.\n\nHenry, Prince of Wales, later Henry V, was wounded in the face by an arrow at the Battle of Shrewsbury (1403). The royal physician John Bradmore had such a tool made, which consisted of a pair of smooth tongs. Once carefully inserted into the socket of the arrowhead, the tongs screwed apart till they gripped its walls and allowed the head to be extracted from the wound. Prior to the extraction, the hole made by the arrow shaft had been widened by inserting larger and larger dowels of elder pith wrapped in linen down the entry wound. The dowels were soaked in honey, now known to have antiseptic properties. The wound was then dressed with a poultice of barley and honey mixed in turpentine (pre-dating Ambroise Paré but whose therapeutic use of turpentine was inspired by Roman medical texts that may have been familiar to Bradmore). After 20 days the wound was free of infection.\n\nThe word may have been coined to distinguish the longbow from the crossbow. The first recorded use of the term \"longbow\", as distinct from simply 'bow', is possibly in a 1386 administrative document which refers in Latin to \"arcus vocati longbowes\", \"bows called 'longbows'\", though unfortunately the reading of the last word in the original document is not certain. A 1444 will proved in York bequeaths \"a sadil, alle my longe bowis, a bedde\".\n\nThe origins of the English longbow are disputed. While it is hard to assess the significance of military archery in pre-Norman Conquest Anglo-Saxon warfare, it is clear that archery played a prominent role under the Normans, as the story of the Battle of Hastings shows. Their Anglo-Norman descendants also made use of military archery, as exemplified by their victory at the Battle of the Standard in 1138. During the Anglo-Norman invasions of Wales, Welsh bowmen took a heavy toll of the invaders and Welsh archers would feature in English armies from this point on. However, historians dispute whether this archery used a different kind of bow to the later English Longbow. Traditionally it has been argued that prior to the beginning of the 14th century, the weapon was a self bow between four and five feet in length, known since the 19th century as the shortbow. This weapon, drawn to the chest rather than the ear, was much weaker. However, in 1985, Jim Bradbury reclassified this weapon as the \"ordinary wooden bow\", reserving the term shortbow for short composite bows and arguing that longbows were a developed form of this ordinary bow. Strickland and Hardy in 2005 took this argument further, suggesting that the shortbow was a myth and all early English bows were a form of longbow. In 2011, Clifford Rogers forcefully restated the traditional case based upon a variety of evidence, including a large scale iconographic survey. In 2012, Richard Wadge added to the debate with an extensive survey of record, iconographic and archaeological evidence, concluding that longbows co-existed with shorter self-wood bows in England in the period between the Norman conquest and the reign of Edward III, but that powerful longbows shooting heavy arrows were a rarity until the later 13th century. Whether or not there was a technological revolution at the end of the 13th century therefore remains in dispute. What is agreed, however, is that the English longbow as an effective weapon system evolved in the late 13th and early 14th centuries.\n\nThe longbow decided many medieval battles fought by the English and Welsh, the most significant of which were the Battle of Crécy (1346) and the Battle of Agincourt (1415), during the Hundred Years' War and followed earlier successes, notably at the Battle of Falkirk (1298) and the Battle of Halidon Hill (1333) during the Wars of Scottish Independence. They were less successful after this, with longbowmen having their lines broken at the Battle of Verneuil (1424), and being routed at the Battle of Patay (1429) when they were charged before they had set up their defences, and with the war-ending Battle of Castillon (1453) being decided by the French artillery.\n\nThe longbow was also used against the English by their Welsh neighbours. The Welsh used the longbow mostly in a different manner than the English. In many early period English campaigns, the Welsh used the longbow in ambushes, often at point blank range that allowed their missiles to penetrate armour and generally do a lot of damage.\n\nAlthough longbows were much faster and more accurate than the black-powder weapons which replaced them, longbowmen always took a long time to train because of the years of practice necessary before a war longbow could be used effectively (examples of longbows from the \"Mary Rose\" typically had draws greater than ). In an era in which warfare was usually seasonal, and non-noble soldiers spent part of the year working at farms, the year-round training required for the effective use of the longbow was a challenge. A standing army was an expensive proposition to a medieval ruler. Mainland European armies seldom trained a significant longbow corps. Due to their specialized training, English longbowmen were sought as mercenaries in other European countries, most notably in the Italian city-states and in Spain.\nThe White Company, comprising men-at-arms and longbowmen and commanded by Sir John Hawkwood, is the best known English Free Company of the 14th century. The powerful Hungarian king, Louis the Great, is an example of someone who used longbowmen in his Italian campaigns.\n\nLongbows remained in use until around the 16th century, when advances in firearms made gunpowder weapons a significant factor in warfare and such units as arquebusiers and grenadiers began appearing. Despite this, the English Crown made numerous efforts to continue to promote archery practice by banning other sports and fining people for not possessing bows. Indeed, just before the English Civil War, a pamphlet by William Neade entitled \"The Double-Armed Man\" advocated that soldiers be trained in both the longbow and pike; although this advice was followed only by a few town militias.\n\nThe Battle of Flodden (1513) was \"a landmark in the history of archery, as the last battle on English soil to be fought with the longbow as the principal weapon...\" The last recorded use of bows in an English battle may have been a skirmish at Bridgnorth, in October 1642, during the Civil War, when an impromptu town militia, armed with bows, proved effective against un-armoured musketeers. Longbowmen remained a feature of the Royalist Army, but were not used by the Roundheads.\n\nLongbows have been in continuous production and use for sport and for hunting to the present day, but since 1642 they have been a minority interest, and very few have had the high draw weights of the medieval weapons. Other differences include the use of a stiffened non-bending centre section, rather than a continuous bend.\n\nSerious military interest in the longbow faded after the seventeenth century but occasionally schemes to resurrect its military use were proposed. Benjamin Franklin was a proponent in the 1770s; the Honourable Artillery Company had an archer company between 1784 and 1794, and a man named Richard Mason wrote a book proposing the arming of militia with pike and longbow in 1798. Donald Featherstone also records a Lt. Col. Richard Lee of 44th Foot advocated the military use of the longbow in 1792. There is a record of the use of the longbow in action as late as WWII, when Jack Churchill is credited with a longbow kill in France in 1940. The weapon was certainly considered for use by Commandos during the war but it is not known whether it was used in action.\n\nThe idea that there was a standard formation for English longbow armies was argued by Alfred Byrne in his influential work on the battles of the Hundred Years' War, \"The Crecy War\". This view was challenged by Jim Bradbury in his book \"The Medieval Archer\" and more modern works are more ready to accept a variety of formations.\n\nIn summary, however, the usual English deployment in the 14th and 15th centuries was as follows:\nBULLET::::- Infantry (usually dismounted knights and armoured soldiers employed by the nobles and often armed with pole weapons such as pollaxes and bills) in the centre.\nBULLET::::- Longbowmen were usually deployed primarily on the flanks, sometimes to the front.\nBULLET::::- Cavalry was rarely used but, where deployed, either on the flanks (to make or protect against flank attacks), or in the centre in reserve, to be deployed as needed (for example, to counter any breakthroughs).\n\nIn the 16th century, these formations evolved in line with new technologies and techniques from the continent. Formations with a central core of pikes and bills were flanked by companies of \"shot\" made up of a mixture of archers and arquebusiers, sometimes with a skirmish screen of archers and arquebusiers in front.\n\nMore than 3,500 arrows and 137 whole longbows were recovered from the \"Mary Rose\", a ship of Henry VIII's navy that capsized and sank at Portsmouth in 1545. It is an important source for the history of the longbow, as the bows, archery implements and the skeletons of archers have been preserved. The bows range in length from with an average length of . The majority of the arrows were made of poplar, others were made of beech, ash and hazel. Draw lengths of the arrows varied between with the majority having a draw length of . The head would add 5–15 cm depending on type, though some 2–4.5 cm must be allowed for the insertion of the shaft into the socket.\n\nThe longbows on the \"Mary Rose\" were in excellent finished condition. There were enough bows to test some to destruction which resulted in draw forces of 450 N (100 lbf) on average. However, analysis of the wood indicated that they had degraded significantly in the seawater and mud, which had weakened their draw forces. Replicas were made and when tested had draw forces of from 445 N to 823 N (100 to 185 lbf).\n\nIn 1980, before the finds from the \"Mary Rose\", Robert E. Kaiser published a paper stating that there were five known surviving longbows:\n\nBULLET::::- The first bow comes from the Battle of Hedgeley Moor in 1464, during the Wars of the Roses. A family who lived at the castle since the battle had preserved it to modern times. It is and a 270 N (60 lbf) draw force.\nBULLET::::- The second dates to the Battle of Flodden in 1513 (\"a landmark in the history of archery, as the last battle on English soil to be fought with the longbow as the principal weapon...\"). It hung in the rafters at the headquarters of the Royal Scottish Archers in Edinburgh. It has a draw force of 360 to 410 N (80 to 90 lbf).\nBULLET::::- The third and fourth were recovered in 1836 by John Deane from the \"Mary Rose\". Both weapons are in the Tower of London Armoury and Horace Ford writing in 1887 estimated them to have a draw force of 280 to 320 N (65 to 70 lbf). A modern replica made in the early 1970s of these bows has a draw force of 460 N (102 lbf).\nBULLET::::- The fifth surviving longbow comes from the armoury of the church in the village of Mendlesham in Suffolk, and is believed to date either from the period of Henry VIII or Queen Elizabeth I. The Mendlesham Bow is broken but has an estimated length of and draw force of 350 N (80 lbf).\n\nThe importance of the longbow in English culture can be seen in the legends of Robin Hood, which increasingly depicted him as a master archer, and also in the \"Song of the Bow\", a poem from \"The White Company\" by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle.\n\nDuring the reign of Henry III the Assize of Arms of 1252 required that all \"citizens, burgesses, free tenants, villeins and others from 15 to 60 years of age\" should be armed. The poorest of them were expected to have a halberd and a knife, and a bow if they owned land worth more than £2. This made it easier for the King to raise an army, but also meant that the bow was a weapon commonly used by rebels during the Peasants' Revolt. From the time that the yeoman class of England became proficient with the longbow, the nobility in England had to be careful not to push them into open rebellion.\n\nIt has been conjectured that yew trees were commonly planted in English churchyards to have readily available longbow wood.\n\nBULLET::::- Archery\nBULLET::::- Infantry in the Middle Ages\n\n\nBULLET::::- Journals\n\nBULLET::::- Other\n\nBULLET::::- Books\nBULLET::::- A review by Bernard Cornwell in The Times\n\nBULLET::::- Journals\nBULLET::::- Thomas Esper \"The Replacement of the Longbow by Firearms in the English Army\", Technology and Culture, Vol. VI, No. 3, 1965.\nBULLET::::- B.W. Kooi C.A. Bergman. \"PDF:An Approach to the Study of Ancient Archery using Mathematical Modelling\", Antiquity 71:(271) 124–134 (1979)\n\nBULLET::::- Other\nBULLET::::- Rulon l. Hancock. \"PDF: United States National Archery Association Flight committee modern longbow flight rules\", U.S. National Archery Association. September 2002.\nBULLET::::- Paul Lalonde. \"A Bundle of Tudor War Arrows\", An article about the arrows found on the Mary Rose.\nBULLET::::- Liesl Wilhelmstochter. \"Ealdormere Archery Handbook: Section 11: Towards a more medieval archer\"\nBULLET::::- Staff. \"Mary Rose historical ship\", The Mary Rose Trust – {note: BACK of bow faces enemy.}\nBULLET::::- The Great Northwood Bowmen Medieval Longbow Archery and re-enactment Society, re-enacting the 15th century, based in London.\n"}
{"id": "18433", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18433", "title": "Lee Marvin", "text": "Lee Marvin\n\nLee Marvin (February 19, 1924 – August 29, 1987) was an American film and television actor.\n\nKnown for his distinctive voice and premature white hair, Marvin initially appeared in supporting roles, mostly villains, soldiers, and other hardboiled characters. A prominent television role was that of Detective Lieutenant Frank Ballinger in the NBC crime series \"M Squad\" (1957–1960). Marvin is best remembered for his lead roles as “tough guy” characters such as Charlie Strom in \"The Killers\" (1964), Rico Fardan in \"The Professionals\" (1966), Major John Reisman in \"The Dirty Dozen\", Walker in \"Point Blank\" (both 1967), and the Sergeant in \"The Big Red One\" (1980).\n\nOne of Marvin's most notable film projects was \"Cat Ballou\" (1965), a comedy Western in which he played dual roles. For portraying both gunfighter Kid Shelleen and criminal Tim Strawn, he won the Academy Award for Best Actor, along with a BAFTA Award, a Golden Globe Award, an NBR Award, and the Silver Bear for Best Actor.\n\nMarvin was born in New York City. He was the son of Lamont Waltman Marvin, an advertising executive and later the head of the New York and New England Apple Institute, and Courtenay Washington (née Davidge), a fashion and beauty writer/editor.\n\nAs with his elder brother, Robert, he was named in honor of Confederate General Robert E. Lee, who was his first cousin, four times removed. His father was a direct descendant of Matthew Marvin Sr., who emigrated from Great Bentley, Essex, England, in 1635, and helped found Hartford, Connecticut.\n\nMarvin studied violin when he was young. As a teenager, Marvin \"spent weekends and spare time hunting deer, puma, wild turkey, and bobwhite in the wilds of the then-uncharted Everglades\".\n\nHe attended Manumit School, a Christian socialist boarding school in Pawling, New York, during the late 1930s, and later attended St. Leo College Preparatory School, a Catholic school in St. Leo, Florida, after being expelled from several other schools for bad behavior.\n\nMarvin left school at 18 to enlist in the United States Marine Corps Reserve on August 12, 1942. He served with the 4th Marine Division in the Pacific Theater during World War II. While serving as a member of \"I\" Company, 3rd Battalion, 24th Marines, 4th Marine Division, he was wounded in action on June 18, 1944, during the assault on Mount Tapochau in the Battle of Saipan, during which most of his company were casualties. He was hit by machine gun fire, which severed his sciatic nerve, and then was hit again in the foot by a sniper. After over a year of medical treatment in naval hospitals, Marvin was given a medical discharge with the rank of private first class (he had been a corporal years earlier but had been demoted after causing trouble) in 1945 Philadelphia.\n\nMarvin's military awards include: the Purple Heart Medal, the Presidential Unit Citation, the American Campaign Medal, the Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal, and the World War II Victory Medal, Combat Action Ribbon.\n\nAfter the war, while working as a plumber's assistant at a local community theatre in upstate New York, Marvin was asked to replace an actor who had fallen ill during rehearsals. He caught the acting bug and got a job with the company at $7 a week. He moved to Greenwich Village and used the GI Bill to study at the American Theatre Wing.\n\nHe appeared on stage in a production of \"Uniform of Flesh\", an adaptation of \"Billy Budd\" (1949). It was done at the Experimental Theatre, where a few months later Marvin also appeared in \"The Nineteenth Hole of Europe\" (1949).\n\nMarvin began appearing on television shows like \"Escape\", \"The Big Story\", and \"Treasury Men in Action\".\n\nHe made it to Broadway with a small role in a production of \"Uniform of Flesh\", now called \"Billy Budd\" in February 1951.\n\nMarvin's film debut was in \"You're in the Navy Now\" (1951), directed by Henry Hathaway, a film which also marked the debuts of Charles Bronson and Jack Warden. This required some filming in Hollywood. Marvin decided to stay there.\n\nHe had a similar small part in \"Teresa\" (1951) directed by Fred Zinnemann. As a decorated combat veteran, Marvin was a natural in war dramas, where he frequently assisted the director and other actors in realistically portraying infantry movement, arranging costumes, and the use of firearms.\n\nHe guest starred on episodes of \"Fireside Theatre\", \"Suspense\" and \"Rebound\". Hathaway used him again on \"Diplomatic Courier\" (1952) and he could be seen in \"Down Among the Sheltering Palms\" (1952), directed by Edmund Goulding, \"We're Not Married!\" (1952), also for Goulding, \"The Duel at Silver Creek\" (1952) directed by Don Siegel, and \"Hangman's Knot\" (1952), directed by Roy Huggins.\n\nHe guest starred on \"Biff Baker, U.S.A.\" and \"Dragnet\", and had a decent role in a feature with \"Eight Iron Men\" (1952), a war film produced by Stanley Kramer (Marvin's role had been played on Broadway by Burt Lancaster).\n\nHe was a sergeant in \"Seminole\" (1953), a Western directed by Budd Boetticher, and was a corporal in \"The Glory Brigade\" (1953), a Korean War film.\n\nMarvin guest starred in \"The Doctor\", \"The Revlon Mirror Theater \", \"Suspense\" again and \"The Motorola Television Hour\".\n\nHe was now in much demand for Westerns: \"The Stranger Wore a Gun\" (1953) with Randolph Scott, and \"Gun Fury\" (1953) with Rock Hudson.\n\nMarvin received much acclaim for his portrayal as villains in two films: \"The Big Heat\" (1953) where he played Gloria Grahame's vicious boyfriend, directed by Fritz Lang; and \"The Wild One\" (1953) opposite Marlon Brando (Marvin's gang in the film was called \"The Beetles\"), produced by Kramer.\n\nHe continued in TV shows such as \"The Plymouth Playhouse\" and \"The Pepsi-Cola Playhouse\". He had support roles in \"Gorilla at Large\" (1954) and had a notable small role as smart-aleck sailor Meatball in \"The Caine Mutiny\" (1954), produced by Kramer.\n\nMarvin was in \"The Raid\" (1954), \"Center Stage\", \"Medic\" and \"TV Reader's Digest\".\n\nHe had an excellent part as Hector, the small-town hood in \"Bad Day at Black Rock\" (1955) with Spencer Tracy. Also in 1955, he played a conflicted, brutal bank-robber in \"Violent Saturday\". A latter-day critic wrote of the character, \"Marvin brings a multi-faceted complexity to the role and gives a great example of the early promise that launched his long and successful career.\"\n\nMarvin played Robert Mitchum's friend in \"Not as a Stranger\" (1955), a medical drama produced by Kramer. He had good support roles in \"A Life in the Balance\" (1955) (he was third billed), and \"Pete Kelly's Blues\" (1955) and appeared on TV in \"Jane Wyman Presents The Fireside Theatre\" and \"Studio One in Hollywood.\"\n\nMarvin was in \"I Died a Thousand Times\" (1955) with Jack Palance, \"Shack Out on 101\" (1955), \"Kraft Theatre\", and \"Front Row Center.\"\nMarvin was the villain in \"7 Men from Now\" (1956) with Randolph Scott directed by Boetticher. He was second billed to Palance in \"Attack\" (1956) directed by Robert Aldrich.\n\nMarvin had good roles in \"Pillars of the Sky\" (1956) with Jeff Chandler, \"The Rack\" (1956) with Paul Newman, \"Raintree County\" (1956) and \"The Missouri Traveler\" (1958). He also guest starred on \"Climax!\" (several times), \"Studio 57\", \"The United States Steel Hour\" and \"Schlitz Playhouse\".\n\nMarvin finally got to be a leading man in 100 episodes as Chicago cop Frank Ballinger in the successful 1957–1960 television series \"M Squad\". One critic described the show as \"a hyped-up, violent \"Dragnet\" ... with a hard-as-nails Marvin\" playing a tough police lieutenant. Marvin received the role after guest-starring in a memorable \"Dragnet\" episode as a serial killer.\n\nWhen the series ended Marvin appeared on \"Westinghouse Desilu Playhouse\", \"Sunday Showcase\", \"The Barbara Stanwyck Show\", \"The Americans\", \"Wagon Train\", \"Checkmate\", \"General Electric Theater, Alcoa Premiere\", \"The Investigators\", \"Route 66\" (he was injured during a fight scene), Ben Casey, \"Bonanza\", \"The Untouchables\" (several times), \"The Virginian\", \"The Twilight Zone\" (\"The Grave\", \"Steel\") and \"The Dick Powell Theatre\".\n\nMarvin returned to features with a prominent role in \"The Comancheros\" (1961) starring John Wayne. He played in two more films with Wayne, both directed by John Ford: \"The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance\" (1962), and \"Donovan's Reef\" (1963). As the vicious Liberty Valance, Marvin played his first title role and held his own with two of the screen's biggest stars (Wayne and James Stewart).\n\nIn 1962 Marvin appeared as Martin Kalig on the TV western \"The Virginian\" in the episode titled \"It Tolls for Thee.\" He continued to guest star on shows like \"Combat!\", \"Dr. Kildare\" and \"The Great Adventure\". He did \"The Case Against Paul Ryker\" for \"Kraft Suspense Theatre.\"\n\nFor director Don Siegel, Marvin appeared in \"The Killers\" (1964) playing an efficient professional assassin alongside Clu Gulager. \"The Killers\" was also the first film in which Marvin received top billing.\n\nHe guest starred on \"Bob Hope Presents the Chrysler Theatre\".\n\nMarvin finally became a star for his comic role in the offbeat Western \"Cat Ballou\" starring Jane Fonda. This was a surprise hit and Marvin won the 1965 Academy Award for Best Actor. He also won the 1965 Silver Bear for Best Actor at the 15th Berlin International Film Festival.\n\nPlaying alongside Vivien Leigh and Simone Signoret, Marvin won the 1966 National Board of Review Award for male actors for his role in \"Ship of Fools\" (1965) directed by Kramer.\n\nMarvin next performed in the hit Western \"The Professionals\" (1966), in which he played the leader of a small band of skilled mercenaries (Burt Lancaster, Robert Ryan, and Woody Strode) rescuing a kidnap victim (Claudia Cardinale) shortly after the Mexican Revolution.\n\nHe followed that film with the hugely successful World War II epic \"The Dirty Dozen\" (1967) in which top-billed Marvin again portrayed an intrepid commander of a colorful group (future stars John Cassavetes, Charles Bronson, Telly Savalas, Jim Brown, and Donald Sutherland) performing an almost impossible mission. Robert Aldrich directed.\n\nIn the wake of these two films and after having received an Oscar, Marvin was a huge star, given enormous control over his next film \"Point Blank\". In \"Point Blank\", an influential film for director John Boorman, he portrayed a hard-nosed criminal bent on revenge. Marvin, who had selected Boorman himself for the director's slot, had a central role in the film's development, plot line, and staging.\n\nIn 1968, Marvin also appeared in another Boorman film, the critically acclaimed but commercially unsuccessful World War II character study \"Hell in the Pacific\", also starring famed Japanese actor Toshiro Mifune. John Boorman recounted his work with Lee Marvin on these two films and Marvin's influence on his career in the 1998 documentary \"\". \"Paul Ryker\", which Marvin shot for TV in 1963 was released theatrically as \"Sergeant Ryker\".\n\nMarvin was originally cast as Pike Bishop (later played by William Holden) in \"The Wild Bunch\" (1969), but fell out with director Sam Peckinpah and pulled out to star in the Western musical \"Paint Your Wagon\" (1969), in which he was top-billed over a singing Clint Eastwood. Despite his limited singing ability, he had a hit song with \"Wand'rin' Star\". By this time, he was getting paid a million dollars per film, $200,000 less than top star Paul Newman was making at the time, yet he was ambivalent about the film business, even with its financial rewards:\n\nYou spend the first forty years of your life trying to get in this business, and the next forty years trying to get out. And then when you're making the bread, who needs it?\n\nMarvin had a much greater variety of roles in the 1970s, with fewer 'bad-guy' roles than in earlier years. His 1970s films included \"Monte Walsh\" (1970), a Western with Palance and Jeanne Moreau; the violent \"Prime Cut\" (1972) with Gene Hackman; \"Pocket Money\" (1972) with Paul Newman, for Stuart Rosenberg; \"Emperor of the North\" (1973) opposite Ernest Borgnine for Aldrich; as Hickey in \"The Iceman Cometh\" (1973) with Fredric March and Robert Ryan, for John Frankenheimer; \"The Spikes Gang\" (1974) with Noah Beery Jr. for Richard Fleischer; \"The Klansman\" (1974) with Richard Burton; \"Shout at the Devil\" (1976), a World War One adventure with Roger Moore, directed by Peter Hunt; \"The Great Scout and Cathouse Thursday\" (1976), a comic Western with Oliver Reed; and \"Avalanche Express\" (1978), a Cold War thriller with Robert Shaw who died during production. None of these films were big box office hits.\n\nMarvin was offered the role of Quint in \"Jaws\" (1975) but declined, stating \"What would I tell my fishing friends who'd see me come off a hero against a dummy shark?\".\n\nMarvin's last big role was in Samuel Fuller's \"The Big Red One\" (1980), a war film based on Fuller's own war experiences.\n\nHis remaining films were \"Death Hunt\" (1981), a Canadian action film with Charles Bronson, directed by Hunt; \"Gorky Park\" (1983) with William Hurt; and \"Dog Day\" (1984), shot in France.\n\nFor TV he did \"\" (1985; a sequel with Marvin, Ernest Borgnine, and Richard Jaeckel picking up where they had left off despite being 18 years older).\n\nHis final appearance was in \"The Delta Force\" (1986) with Chuck Norris, playing a role turned down by Charles Bronson.\n\nMarvin was a Democrat who opposed the Vietnam War. He publicly endorsed John F. Kennedy in the 1960 presidential election.\n\nMarvin married Betty Ebeling in February 1951 and together they had four children, son Christopher Lamont (1952–2013), and three daughters: Courtenay Lee (b. 1954), Cynthia Louise (b. 1956), and Claudia Leslie (1958–2012). Married 16 years, they divorced in 1967.\n\nMarvin reunited with his high school sweetheart, Pamela Feeley, following his divorce. They married in October 1970. She had four children with three previous marriages, they had no children together and remained married until his death in 1987.\n\nIn 1971, Marvin was sued by Michelle Triola, his live-in girlfriend from 1965 to 1970, who legally changed her surname to \"Marvin\". Although the couple never married, she sought financial compensation similar to that available to spouses under California's alimony and community property laws. Triola claimed Marvin made her pregnant three times and paid for two abortions, while one pregnancy ended in miscarriage. She claimed the second abortion left her unable to bear children. The result was the landmark \"palimony\" case, \"Marvin v. Marvin\", 18 Cal. 3d 660 (1976).\n\nIn 1979, Marvin was ordered to pay $104,000 to Triola for \"rehabilitation purposes\", but the court denied her community property claim for one-half of the $3.6 million which Marvin had earned during their six years of cohabitation – distinguishing nonmarital relationship contracts from marriage, with community property rights only attaching to the latter by operation of law. Rights equivalent to community property only apply in nonmarital relationship contracts when the parties expressly, whether orally or in writing, contract for such rights to operate between them. In August 1981, the California Court of Appeal found that no such contract existed between them and nullified the award she had received. Michelle Triola died of lung cancer on October 30, 2009, having been with actor Dick Van Dyke since 1976.\n\nLater there was controversy after Marvin characterized the trial as a \"circus\", saying \"everyone was lying, even I lied\". There were official comments about possibly charging Marvin with perjury, but no charges were filed.\n\nThis case was used as fodder for a mock debate skit on \"Saturday Night Live\" called \"Point Counterpoint\", and on \"The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson\" as a skit with Carson as Adam, and Betty White as Eve.\n\nIn December 1986, Marvin was hospitalized for more than two weeks because of a condition related to coccidioidomycosis. He went into respiratory distress and was administered steroids to help his breathing. He had major intestinal ruptures as a result, and underwent a colectomy. Marvin died of a heart attack on August 29, 1987, aged 63. His body was buried with full military honors at Arlington National Cemetery.\n\n! Year\n! Title\n! Role\n! class=\"unsortable\"  Notes\n\n\"Hangman's Knot\"\n\n\"Gun Fury\"\n\n\"The Klansman\"\n\n! Year\n! Title\n! Role\n! class=\"unsortable\"  Notes\n\nBULLET::::- The Sons of Lee Marvin, a tongue-in-cheek secret society dedicated to Marvin\nBULLET::::- \"Welcome to Night Vale\", which features Lee Marvin as an integral piece of its mythology and supporting cast.\n\nBULLET::::- Bailey, Mark. \"Of All the Gin Joints: Stumbling through Hollywood History\". Chapel Hill, North Carolina: Algonquin Books, 2014. .\nBULLET::::- Bean, Kendra. \"Vivien Leigh: An Intimate Portrait\". Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Running Press, 2013. .\nBULLET::::- David, Catherine. \"Simone Signoret\". New York: Overlook Press, 1995. .\nBULLET::::- Epstein, Dwayne. \"Lee Marvin: Point Blank.\" Tucson, Arizona: Schaffner Press, Inc., 2013. .\nBULLET::::- Lentz, Robert J. \"Lee Marvin: His Films and Career.\" Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland & Company, 2000. .\nBULLET::::- Marvin, Pamela. \"Lee: A Romance\". London: Faber & Faber Limited, 1997. .\nBULLET::::- Walker, Alexander. \"Vivien: The Life of Vivien Leigh\". New York: Grove Press, 1987. .\nBULLET::::- Wise, James E. and Anne Collier Rehill. \"Stars in the Corps: Movie Actors in the United States Marines\". Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press, 1999. .\nBULLET::::- Zec, Donald. \"Marvin: The Story of Lee Marvin\". New York: St. Martin's Press, 1980. .\nBULLET::::- Profile of Marvin in \"Film Comment\"\n"}
{"id": "18434", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18434", "title": "Lead Belly", "text": "Lead Belly\n\nHuddie William Ledbetter (; January 20, 1888 – December 6, 1949), better known by the stage name Lead Belly, was an American folk and blues singer, musician and songwriter notable for his strong vocals, virtuosity on the twelve-string guitar, and the folk standards he introduced, including his renditions of \"Goodnight, Irene\", \"Midnight Special\", \"Cotton Fields\", and \"Boll Weevil\".\n\nLead Belly usually played a twelve-string guitar, but he also played the piano, mandolin, harmonica, violin, and windjammer. In some of his recordings, he sang while clapping his hands or stomping his foot.\n\nLead Belly's songs covered a wide range of genres and topics including gospel music; blues about women, liquor, prison life, and racism; and folk songs about cowboys, prison, work, sailors, cattle herding, and dancing. He also wrote songs about people in the news, such as Franklin D. Roosevelt, Adolf Hitler, Jean Harlow, Jack Johnson, the Scottsboro Boys and Howard Hughes. Lead Belly was posthumously inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1988 and the Louisiana Music Hall of Fame in 2008.\n\nThough many releases credit him as \"Leadbelly\", he himself wrote it as \"Lead Belly\", which is also the spelling on his tombstone and the spelling used by the Lead Belly Foundation.\n\nLead Belly pronounced his first name /ˈhjuːdi/ (, as if spelled \"Hudie\"). He can be heard pronouncing his name this way on one of his recordings of \"Boll Weevil\".\n\nThe younger of two children, Lead Belly was born Huddie William Ledbetter to Sallie Brown and Wesley Ledbetter on a plantation near Mooringsport, Louisiana, on January 20, 1888. His parents had cohabited for several years, but they legally married on February 26, 1888. When Huddie was five years old, the family settled in Bowie County, Texas.\n\nThe 1900 United States Census lists \"Hudy Ledbetter\" as 12 years old, born January 1888, and the 1910 and 1930 censuses also give his age as corresponding to a birth in 1888. The 1940 census lists his age as 51, with information supplied by wife Martha. However, in April 1942, when Ledbetter filled out his World War II draft registration card, he gave his birth date as January 23, 1889, and his birthplace as Freeport, Louisiana (\"Shreveport\"). His grave marker bears the date given on his draft registration.\n\nThe 1910 census of Harrison County, Texas, shows \"Hudy Ledbetter\" living next door to his parents with his first wife, Aletha \"Lethe\" Henderson. Aletha is registered as age 19 and married one year. Others say she was 15 when they married in 1908. It was in Texas that Ledbetter received his first instrument, an accordion, from his uncle Terrell. By his early twenties, having fathered at least two children, Ledbetter left home to make his living as a guitarist and occasional laborer.\n\nBetween 1915 and 1939, Ledbetter served several prison and jail terms for a variety of criminal charges. In 1934, when Lead Belly was released from one of his last incarcerations, the United States was deep in the Great Depression, and jobs were very scarce. In September of that year, in need of regular work in order to avoid cancellation of his release from prison, Lead Belly asked John Lomax to take him on as a driver. For three months, he assisted the 67-year-old in his folk song collecting around the South. Alan Lomax, his son, was ill and did not accompany him on this trip.\n\nBy 1903, Huddie was already a \"musicianer\", a singer and guitarist of some note. He performed for nearby Shreveport audiences in St. Paul's Bottoms, a notorious red-light district there. He began to develop his own style of music after exposure to various musical influences on Shreveport's Fannin Street, a row of saloons, brothels, and dance halls in the Bottoms, now referred to as Ledbetter Heights. While in prison, Lead Belly may have first heard the traditional prison song \"Midnight Special\". He was \"discovered\" there three years later during a visit by folklorists John Lomax and his son Alan Lomax.\n\nDeeply impressed by Ledbetter's vibrant tenor and extensive repertoire, the Lomaxes recorded him in 1933 on portable aluminum disc recording equipment for the Library of Congress. They returned with new and better equipment in July 1934, recording hundreds of his songs. On August 1, Ledbetter was released after having again served nearly all of his minimum sentence, following a petition the Lomaxes had taken to Louisiana Governor Oscar K. Allen at his urgent request. It was on the other side of a recording of his signature song, \"Goodnight Irene\".\n\nA prison official later wrote to John Lomax denying that Ledbetter's singing had anything to do with his release from Angola (state prison records confirm he was eligible for early release due to good behavior). However, both Ledbetter and the Lomaxes believed that the record they had taken to the governor had hastened his release from prison.\n\nIn December 1934, Lead Belly participated in a \"smoker\" (group sing) at a Modern Language Association meeting at Bryn Mawr College in Pennsylvania, where the senior Lomax had a prior lecturing engagement. He was written up in the press as a convict who had sung his way out of prison. On New Year's Day, 1935, the pair arrived in New York City, where Lomax was scheduled to meet with his publisher, Macmillan, about a new collection of folk songs. The newspapers were eager to write about the \"singing convict,\" and \"Time\" magazine made one of its first \"March of Time\" newsreels about him. Lead Belly attained fame – although not fortune.\n\nThe following week, he began recording for the American Record Corporation, but these recordings achieved little commercial success. He recorded over 40 sides for ARC (intended to be released on their Banner, Melotone, Oriole, Perfect, and Romeo labels and their short-lived Paramount series), but only five sides were actually issued. Part of the reason for the poor sales may have been that ARC released only his blues songs rather than the folk songs for which he would later become better known. Lead Belly continued to struggle financially. Like many performers, what income he made during his career would come from touring, not from record sales. In February 1935, he married his girlfriend, Martha Promise, who came North from Louisiana to join him.\n\nThe month of February was spent recording his repertoire and those of other African Americans and interviews about his life with Alan Lomax for their forthcoming book, \"Negro Folk Songs As Sung by Lead Belly\" (1936). Concert appearances were slow to materialize. In March 1935, Lead Belly accompanied John Lomax on a previously scheduled two-week lecture tour of colleges and universities in the Northeast, culminating at Harvard.\n\nAt the end of the month, John Lomax decided he could no longer work with Lead Belly and gave him and Martha money to go back to Louisiana by bus. He gave Martha the money her husband had earned during three months of performing, but in installments, on the pretext Lead Belly would spend it all on drinking if given a lump sum. From Louisiana, Lead Belly successfully sued Lomax for both the full amount and release from his management contract. The quarrel was bitter, with hard feelings on both sides. Curiously, in the midst of the legal wrangling, Lead Belly wrote to Lomax proposing they team up again, but it was not to be. Further, the book about Lead Belly published by the Lomaxes in the fall of the following year proved a commercial failure.\n\nIn January 1936, Lead Belly returned to New York on his own, without John Lomax, in an attempted comeback. He performed twice a day at Harlem's Apollo Theater during the Easter season in a live dramatic recreation of the \"March of Time\" newsreel (itself a recreation) about his prison encounter with John Lomax, where he had worn stripes, though by this time he was no longer associated with Lomax.\n\n\"Life\" magazine ran a three-page article titled \"Lead Belly: Bad Nigger Makes Good Minstrel\" in its issue of April 19, 1937. It included a full-page, color (rare in those days) picture of him sitting on grain sacks playing his guitar and singing. Also included was a striking picture of Martha Promise (identified in the article as his manager); photos showing Lead Belly's hands playing the guitar (with the caption \"these hands once killed a man\"); Texas Governor Pat M. Neff; and the \"ramshackle\" Texas State Penitentiary. The article attributes both of his pardons to his singing of his petitions to the governors, who were so moved that they pardoned him. The text of the article ends with \"he... may well be on the brink of a new and prosperous period.\"\n\nLead Belly failed to stir the enthusiasm of Harlem audiences. Instead, he attained success playing at concerts and benefits for an audience of leftist folk music aficionados. He developed his own style of singing and explaining his repertoire in the context of Southern black culture having learned from his participation in Lomax's college lectures. He was especially successful with his repertoire of children's game songs (as a younger man in Louisiana he had sung regularly at children's birthday parties in the black community). He was written about as a heroic figure by the black novelist Richard Wright, then a member of the Communist Party, in the columns of the \"Daily Worker,\" of which Wright was the Harlem editor. The two men became personal friends, though some say Lead Belly himself was apolitical and, if anything, was a supporter of Wendell Willkie, the centrist Republican candidate for President, for whom he wrote a campaign song. However, he also wrote the song \"Bourgeois Blues\", which has radical or left-wing lyrics.\n\nIn 1939, Lead Belly returned to prison. Alan Lomax, then 24, took him under his wing and helped raise money for his legal expenses, dropping out of graduate school to do so. After his release (in 1940–41), Lead Belly appeared as a regular on Alan Lomax and Nicholas Ray's groundbreaking CBS radio show \"Back Where I Come From\", broadcast nationwide. He also appeared in nightclubs with Josh White, becoming a fixture in New York City's surging folk music scene and befriending the likes of Sonny Terry, Brownie McGhee, Woody Guthrie, and a young Pete Seeger, all fellow performers on \"Back Where I Come From\". During the first half of the decade, he recorded for RCA, the Library of Congress, and Moe Asch (future founder of Folkways Records) and in 1944 went to California, where he recorded strong sessions for Capitol Records. He lodged with a studio guitar player on Merrywood Drive in Laurel Canyon. Lead Belly was the first American country blues musician to achieve success in Europe.\n\nIn 1949, Lead Belly had a regular radio show, \"Folk Songs of America\", broadcast on station WNYC in New York, on Henrietta Yurchenco's show on Sunday nights. Later in the year he began his first European tour with a trip to France, but fell ill before its completion and was diagnosed with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), or Lou Gehrig's disease (a motor neuron disease). His final concert was at the University of Texas at Austin in a tribute to his former mentor, John Lomax, who had died the previous year. Martha also performed at that concert, singing spirituals with her husband.\n\nLead Belly died later that year in New York City and was buried in the Shiloh Baptist Church cemetery, in Mooringsport, Louisiana, west of Blanchard, in Caddo Parish. He is honoured with a statue across from the Caddo Parish Courthouse, in Shreveport.\n\nLead Belly was imprisoned multiple times beginning in 1915 when he was convicted of carrying a pistol and sentenced to time on the Harrison County chain gang. He later escaped and found work in nearby Bowie County under the assumed name of Walter Boyd. Later, in January 1918, he was imprisoned at the Imperial Farm (now Central Unit) in Sugar Land, Texas, after killing one of his relatives, Will Stafford, in a fight over a woman. During his second prison term, another inmate stabbed him in the neck (leaving him with a fearsome scar he subsequently covered with a bandana); Ledbetter nearly killed his attacker with his own knife.\n\nIn 1925 he was pardoned and released after writing a song to Governor Pat Morris Neff seeking his freedom, having served the minimum seven years of a 7-to-35-year sentence. Combined with his good behavior, which included entertaining the guards and fellow prisoners, his appeal to Neff's strong religious beliefs proved sufficient. It was a testament to his persuasive powers, as Neff had run for governor on a pledge not to issue pardons (the only recourse for prisoners, since in most Southern prisons there was no provision for parole). According to Charles K. Wolfe and Kip Lornell in their book \"The Life and Legend of Leadbelly\" (1999), Neff had regularly brought guests to the prison on Sunday picnics to hear Ledbetter perform.\n\nIn 1930, Ledbetter was sentenced to Louisiana State Penitentiary after a summary trial for attempted homicide for stabbing a man in a fight. In 1939, Lead Belly served his final jail term for assault after stabbing a man in a fight in Manhattan.\n\nThere are several conflicting stories about how Ledbetter acquired the nickname \"Lead Belly\", but he probably acquired it while in prison. Some claim his fellow inmates called him \"Lead Belly\" as a play on his family name and his physical toughness. Others say he earned the name after being wounded in the stomach with buckshot. Another theory is that the name refers to his ability to drink moonshine, the homemade liquor that Southern farmers, black and white, made to supplement their incomes.\n\nBlues singer Big Bill Broonzy thought it came from a supposed tendency to lie about as if \"with a stomach weighted down by lead\" in the shade when the chain gang was supposed to be working. Yet another theory is that it may be a corruption of his last name pronounced with a Southern accent. Whatever its origin, he adopted the nickname as a pseudonym while performing.\n\nLead Belly styled himself \"King of the Twelve-String Guitar,\" and despite his use of other instruments like the accordion, the most enduring image of Lead Belly as a performer is wielding his unusually large Stella twelve-string. This guitar had a slightly longer scale length than a standard guitar, increasing the tension on the instrument, which, given the added tension of the six extra strings, meant that a trapeze-style tailpiece helped resist bridge lifting. It had slotted tuners and ladder bracing.\n\nLead Belly played with finger picks much of the time, using a thumb pick to provide walking bass lines described as \"tricky\" and \"inventive\" and occasionally to strum. This technique, combined with low tunings and heavy strings, gives many of his recordings a piano-like sound. In fact, scholars have suggested much of his guitar playing was inspired equally by barrelhouse piano and the Mexican Bajo sexto, an instrument he encountered in Texas and Louisiana.\n\nLead Belly's tunings are debated by both modern and contemporary musicians and blues enthusiasts alike exacerbated by the lack of film footage of his performing rendering chord decoding difficult but it seems to be a down-tuned variant of standard tuning; it is likely that he tuned his guitar strings relative to one another, so that the actual notes shifted as the strings wore. Such down-tuning was a common technique before the development of truss rods, and was intended to prevent the instrument's neck from warping. Lead Belly's playing style was popularized by Pete Seeger, who adopted the twelve-string guitar in the 1950s and released an instructional LP and book using Lead Belly as an exemplar of technique.\n\nIn some of the recordings in which Lead Belly accompanied himself, he would make an unusual type of grunt between his verses, sometimes described as \"haah! \" Songs such as \"Looky Looky Yonder,\" \"Take This Hammer,\" \"Linin' Track\" and \"Julie Ann Johnson\" feature this unusual vocalization. In \"Take This Hammer,\" Lead Belly explained, \"Every time the men say, 'Haah,' the hammer falls. The hammer rings, and we swing, and we sing.\" The \"haah\" sound can be heard in work chants sung by Southern railroad section workers, \"gandy dancers,\" in which it was used to coordinate work crews as they laid and maintained tracks.\n\nIn 1976, a biopic entitled \"Leadbelly\" was released, directed by Gordon Parks and featuring Roger E. Mosley as Lead Belly.\n\nKurt Cobain promoted the legacy of Lead Belly, and some modern rock audiences often owe their familiarity with Lead Belly to Nirvana's performance of \"Where Did You Sleep Last Night\" on a televised concert later released as \"MTV Unplugged in New York\". Cobain refers to his attempt to convince David Geffen to purchase Lead Belly's guitar for him in an interval before the song is played. In his notebooks, Cobain listed Lead Belly's \"Last Session Vol. 1\" as one of the 50 albums most influential in the formation of Nirvana's sound. It was included in \"NME's\" \"The 100 Greatest Albums You've Never Heard list\".\n\nBob Dylan credits Lead Belly for getting him into Folk music. In his Nobel Prize Lecture, Dylan said \"somebody – somebody I’d never seen before – handed me a Lead Belly record with the song \"Cotton Fields\" on it. And that record changed my life right then and there. Transported me into a world I’d never known. It was like an explosion went off. Like I’d been walking in darkness and all of the sudden the darkness was illuminated. It was like somebody laid hands on me. I must have played that record a hundred times.\" Dylan also pays homage to him in \"Song to Woody\" on his self-titled debut album.\n\nLonnie Donegan's recording of \"Rock Island Line\", released as a single in late 1955, signalled the start of the UK skiffle craze. George Harrison of The Beatles was quoted as saying, “if there was no Lead Belly, there would have been no Lonnie Donegan; no Lonnie Donegan, no Beatles. Therefore no Lead Belly, no Beatles.” In a BBC tribute in 1999, which marked the 50th anniversary of Lead Belly’s death, Van Morrison — while sitting alongside Ronnie Wood of The Rolling Stones — claimed that the British popular music scene of the 1960s wouldn’t have happened if it weren’t for Lead Belly’s influence. “I’d put my money on that,” he said. Wood concurred.\n\nGeorge Ezra developed his singing style from trying to sing like Lead Belly. \"On the back of the record, it said his voice was so big, you had to turn your record player down,\" Ezra says. \"I liked the idea of singing with a big voice, so I tried it, and I could.\"\n\nIn 2015, in celebration Lead Belly's 125th birthday, several events were held. The Kennedy Center, in collaboration with the Grammy Museum held \"Lead Belly at 125: A Tribute to an American Songster,\" a musical event featuring Robert Plant, Alison Krauss, and Buddy Miller with Viktor Krauss as headliners and Dom Flemons as host, with special appearances by Lucinda Williams, Alvin Youngblood Hart, Billy Hector, Valerie June, Shannon McNally, Josh White Jr., and Dan Zanes, among others Also in Washington, D.C., \"Bourgeois Town: Lead Belly in Washington DC\" by the Library of Congress was held where Todd Harvey interviewed Lead Belly family members about their relative, his contributions to American culture and world music and an overview of the significant Lead Belly materials in the Center's archive In London, England, the Royal Albert Hall held, \"Lead Belly Fest\", a musical event featuring Van Morrison, Eric Burdon, Jools Holland, Billy Bragg, Paul Jones, and more.\n\nInfluenced by the sinking of the \"Titanic\" in April 1912, Ledbetter wrote the song \"The Titanic\", his first composition on the twelve-string guitar, which later became his signature instrument. Initially played when performing with Blind Lemon Jefferson (1893–1929) in and around Dallas, Texas, the song is about champion African-American boxer Jack Johnson's being denied passage on the \"Titanic\". Johnson had in fact been denied passage on a ship for being black, but it was not the \"Titanic\". Still, the song includes the lyric \"Jack Johnson tried to get on board. The Captain, he says, 'I ain't haulin' no coal!' Fare thee, \"Titanic\"! Fare thee well!\" Ledbetter later noted he had to leave out this passage when playing in front of white audiences.\n\nBULLET::::- \"\" (2017, Lo-Max, Sony Legacy, Third Man)\n\nBULLET::::- The Midnight Special and Other Southern Prison Songs\n\nThe Library of Congress recordings, made by John and Alan Lomax from 1934 to 1943, were released in a six-volume series by Rounder Records:\n\nBULLET::::- \"Midnight Special\" (1991)\nBULLET::::- \"Gwine Dig a Hole to Put the Devil In\" (1991)\nBULLET::::- \"Let It Shine on Me\" (1991)\nBULLET::::- \"The Titanic\" (1994)\nBULLET::::- \"Nobody Knows the Trouble I've Seen\" (1994)\nBULLET::::- \"Go Down Old Hannah\" (1995)\n\nThe Folkways recordings, done for Moses Asch from 1941 to 1947, were released in a three-volume series by Smithsonian Folkways:\n\nBULLET::::- \"Where Did You Sleep Last Night\", Lead Belly Legacy, Vol. 1 (1996)\nBULLET::::- \"Bourgeois Blues\", Lead Belly Legacy, Vol. 2 (1997)\nBULLET::::- \"Shout On\", Lead Belly Legacy, Vol. 3 (1998)\n\nSmithsonian Folkways has released several other collections of his recordings:\n\nBULLET::::- \"Leadbelly Sings Folk Songs\" (1989)\nBULLET::::- \"Lead Belly's Last Sessions\" (4-CD box set, 1994), recorded late 1948 in New York City; his only commercial recordings on magnetic tape\nBULLET::::- \"Lead Belly Sings for Children\" (1999)\nBULLET::::- \"Folkways: The Original Vision\", Woody Guthrie and Lead Belly (2004), expanded version of the 1989 compilation\nBULLET::::- \"\" (2015)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Leadbelly Recorded in Concert, University of Texas, Austin, June 15, 1949\" (1973, Playboy Records PB 119)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Huddie Ledbetter's Best\" (1989, BGO Records), containing recordings made for Capitol Records in 1944 in California\nBULLET::::- \"King of the 12-String Guitar\" (1991, Sony/Legacy Records), a collection of blues songs and prison ballads recorded in 1935 in New York City for the American Record Company, including previously unreleased alternate takes\nBULLET::::- \"Private Party November 21, 1948\" (2000, Document Records), containing Lead Belly's intimate performance at a private party in late 1948 in Minneapolis\nBULLET::::- \"Take This Hammer\", When the Sun Goes Down series, vol. 5 (2003, RCA Victor/Bluebird Jazz), CD collection of all 26 songs Lead Belly recorded for Victor Records in 1940, half of which feature the Golden Gate Jubilee Quartet (a 1968 LP released by RCA Victor included about half of these recordings)\nBULLET::::- \"A Leadbelly Memorial, Vol II\" (1963, Stinson Records, SLP 19), red vinyl pressing\nBULLET::::- \"The Definitive Lead Belly\" (2008, Not Now Music), a 50-song retrospective on two CDs\nBULLET::::- \"Leadbelly - American Folk & Blues Anthology\" (2013, Not Now Music), 75 songs on three CDs\n\nBULLET::::- White, Gary; Stuart, David; Aviva, Elyn (2001). \"Music in Our World\". p. 196. .\nBULLET::::- Lornell, Kip; Wolfe, Charles (1999). \"The Life and Legend of Leadbelly\". Da Capo Press.\n\nBULLET::::- The Lead Belly Foundation\nBULLET::::- The Official Lead Belly Website\nBULLET::::- \"Where Did You Sleep Last Night\" MP3 file on The Internet Archive\nBULLET::::- \"Ledbetter, Huddie (Leadbelly)\" in the Handbook of Texas Online\nBULLET::::- [ AllMusic]\nBULLET::::- Discography for Lead Belly on Folkways\nBULLET::::- Recording of Lead Belly and Woody Guthrie live on WNYC Radio, Dec. 1940, with commentary by WNYC radio producer Henrietta Yurchenco\nBULLET::::- Leadbelly and Lomax Together at the American Music Festival on WNYC\nBULLET::::- Lead Belly And The Lomaxes: Myths and Realities A FAQ and Timeline Lead Belly's relationship with John and Alan Lomax\nBULLET::::- Louisiana Music Hall of Fame Induction Page\nBULLET::::- Lead Belly: EntriesKnowLA, Encyclopedia of Louisiana\nBULLET::::- Huddie William \"Lead Belly\" Ledbetter at Find A Grave\n"}
{"id": "18435", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18435", "title": "Lower Saxony", "text": "Lower Saxony\n\nLower Saxony ( ; ) is a German state (\"Land\") situated in northwestern Germany. It is the second-largest state by land area, with , and fourth-largest in population (7.9 million) among the 16 \"Länder\" federated as the Federal Republic of Germany. In rural areas, Northern Low Saxon (a dialect of Low German) and Saterland Frisian (a variety of the Frisian language) are still spoken, but the number of speakers is declining.\n\nLower Saxony borders on (from north and clockwise) the North Sea, the states of Schleswig-Holstein, Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Brandenburg, Saxony-Anhalt, Thuringia, Hesse and North Rhine-Westphalia, and the Netherlands (Drenthe, Groningen and Overijssel). Furthermore, the state of Bremen forms two enclaves within Lower Saxony, one being the city of Bremen, the other, its seaport city of Bremerhaven. In fact, Lower Saxony borders more neighbours than any other single \"Bundesland.\" The state's principal cities include the state capital Hanover, Braunschweig (Brunswick), Lüneburg, Osnabrück, Oldenburg, Hildesheim, Wolfenbüttel, Wolfsburg, and Göttingen.\n\nThe northwestern area of Lower Saxony, which lies on the coast of the North Sea, is called East Frisia and the seven East Frisian Islands offshore are popular with tourists. In the extreme west of Lower Saxony is the Emsland, a traditionally poor and sparsely populated area, once dominated by inaccessible swamps. The northern half of Lower Saxony, also known as the North German Plains, is almost invariably flat except for the gentle hills around the Bremen geestland. Towards the south and southwest lie the northern parts of the German Central Uplands: the Weser Uplands and the Harz mountains. Between these two lie the Lower Saxon Hills, a range of low ridges. Thus, Lower Saxony is the only \"Bundesland\" that encompasses both maritime and mountainous areas.\n\nLower Saxony's major cities and economic centres are mainly situated in its central and southern parts, namely Hanover, Braunschweig, Osnabrück, Wolfsburg, Salzgitter, Hildesheim, and Göttingen. Oldenburg, near the northwestern coastline, is another economic centre. The region in the northeast is called the Lüneburg Heath (\"Lüneburger Heide\"), the largest heathland area of Germany and in medieval times wealthy due to salt mining and salt trade, as well as to a lesser degree the exploitation of its peat bogs until about the 1960s. To the north, the Elbe River separates Lower Saxony from Hamburg, Schleswig-Holstein, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, and Brandenburg. The banks just south of the Elbe are known as \"Altes Land\" (Old Country). Due to its gentle local climate and fertile soil, it is the state's largest area of fruit farming, its chief produce being apples.\n\nMost of the state's territory was part of the historic Kingdom of Hanover; the state of Lower Saxony has adopted the coat of arms and other symbols of the former kingdom. It was created by the merger of the State of Hanover with three smaller states on 1 November 1946.\n\nLower Saxony has a natural boundary in the north in the North Sea and the lower and middle reaches of the River Elbe, although parts of the city of Hamburg lie south of the Elbe. The state and city of Bremen is an enclave entirely surrounded by Lower Saxony. The Bremen/Oldenburg Metropolitan Region is a cooperative body for the enclave area. To the southeast, the state border runs through the Harz, low mountains that are part of the German Central Uplands. The northeast and west of the state, which form roughly three-quarters of its land area, belong to the North German Plain, while the south is in the Lower Saxon Hills, including the Weser Uplands, Leine Uplands, Schaumburg Land, Brunswick Land, Untereichsfeld, Elm, and Lappwald. In northeast, Lower Saxony is Lüneburg Heath. The heath is dominated by the poor, sandy soils of the geest, whilst in the central east and southeast in the loess \"börde\" zone, productive soils with high natural fertility occur. Under these conditions—with loam and sand-containing soils—the land is well-developed agriculturally. In the west lie the County of Bentheim, Osnabrück Land, Emsland, Oldenburg Land, Ammerland, Oldenburg Münsterland, and on the coast East Frisia.\nThe state is dominated by several large rivers running northwards through the state: the Ems, Weser, Aller, and Elbe.\n\nThe highest mountain in Lower Saxony is the Wurmberg (971 m) in the Harz. For other significant elevations see: List of mountains and hills in Lower Saxony. Most of the mountains and hills are found in the southeastern part of the state. The lowest point in the state, at about 2.5 m below sea level, is a depression near Freepsum in East Frisia.\n\nThe state's economy, population, and infrastructure are centred on the cities and towns of Hanover, Stadthagen, Celle, Braunschweig, Wolfsburg, Hildesheim, and Salzgitter. Together with Göttingen in southern Lower Saxony, they form the core of the Hannover–Braunschweig–Göttingen–Wolfsburg Metropolitan Region.\n\nLower Saxony has clear regional divisions that manifest themselves geographically, as well as historically and culturally. In the regions that used to be independent, especially the heartlands of the former states of Brunswick, Hanover, Oldenburg and Schaumburg-Lippe, a marked local regional awareness exists. By contrast, the areas surrounding the Hanseatic cities of Bremen and Hamburg are much more oriented towards those centres.\n\nSometimes, overlaps and transition areas happen between the various regions of Lower Saxony. Several of the regions listed here are part of other, larger regions, that are also included in the list.\nBULLET::::- Altes Land\nBULLET::::- Ammerland\nBULLET::::- Artland\nBULLET::::- County of Bentheim\nBULLET::::- Bramgau\nBULLET::::- Brunswick Land\nBULLET::::- Calenberg Land\nBULLET::::- Eastphalia\nBULLET::::- East Frisia\nBULLET::::- Eichsfeld\nBULLET::::- Elbe-Weser Triangle\nBULLET::::- Emsland\nBULLET::::- Grönegau\nBULLET::::- Land Hadeln\nBULLET::::- Land Wursten\nBULLET::::- Hannover\nBULLET::::- Harz Mountains\nBULLET::::- Hildesheim Börde\nBULLET::::- Hümmling\nBULLET::::- Kehdingen\nBULLET::::- Leine Uplands\nBULLET::::- Lüneburg Heath\nBULLET::::- Middle Weser Region\nBULLET::::- Oldenburg Land\nBULLET::::- Oldenburg Münsterland\nBULLET::::- Osnabrück Land\nBULLET::::- Schaumburg Land\nBULLET::::- Solling\nBULLET::::- South Lower Saxony\nBULLET::::- Stade Geest\nBULLET::::- Wendland\nBULLET::::- Weser Uplands\nBULLET::::- Wesermarsch\nBULLET::::- Wümme Depression\nJust under 20% of the land area of Lower Saxony is designated as nature parks, i.e.: Dümmer, Elbhöhen-Wendland, Elm-Lappwald, Harz, Lüneburger Heide, Münden, Terra.vita, Solling-Vogler, Lake Steinhude, Südheide, Weser Uplands, Wildeshausen Geest, Bourtanger Moor-Bargerveen.\nLower Saxony falls climatically into the north temperate zone of central Europe that is affected by prevailing Westerlies and is located in a transition zone between the maritime climate of Western Europe and the continental climate of Eastern Europe. This transition is clearly noticeable within the state: whilst the northwest experiences an Atlantic (North Sea coastal) to Sub-Atlantic climate, with comparatively low variations in temperature during the course of the year and a surplus water budget, the climate towards the southeast is increasingly affected by the Continent. This is clearly shown by greater temperature variations between the summer and winter halves of the year and in lower and more variable amounts of precipitation across the year. This sub-continental effect is most sharply seen in the Wendland, in the Weser Uplands (Hamelin to Göttingen) and in the area of Helmstedt. The highest levels of precipitation are experienced in the Harz because the Lower Saxon part forms the windward side of this mountain range against which orographic rain falls. The average annual temperature is 8 °C (7.5 °C in the Altes Land and 8.5 °C in the district of Cloppenburg).\n\nLower Saxony is divided into 37 districts (\"Landkreise\" or simply \"Kreise\"):\n\nFurthermore, there are eight urban districts and two cities with special status:\nBULLET::::1. Braunschweig\nBULLET::::2. Delmenhorst\nBULLET::::3. Emden\nBULLET::::4. \"Göttingen\" ¹\nBULLET::::5. \"Hanover\" ²\nBULLET::::6. Oldenburg\nBULLET::::7. Osnabrück\nBULLET::::8. Salzgitter\nBULLET::::9. Wilhelmshaven\nBULLET::::10. Wolfsburg\n¹ \"following the \"Göttingen Law\" of 1 January 1964, the town of Göttingen is incorporated into the rural district (\"Landkreis\") of Göttingen, but is treated as an urban district unless other rules apply. On 1 November 2016 the districts of Osterode and Göttingen were merged under the name Göttingen, not influencing the city's special status.\"\n² \"following the \"Law on the region of Hanover\", Hanover merged with the district of Hanover to form the Hanover Region, which has been treated mostly as a rural district, but Hanover is treated as an urban district since 1 November 2001 unless other rules apply.\"\n\nThe name of Saxony derives from that of the Germanic tribe of the Saxons. Before the late medieval period, there was a single Duchy of Saxony. The term \"Lower Saxony\" was used after the dissolution of the stem duchy in the late 13th century to disambiguate the parts of the former duchy ruled by the House of Welf from the Electorate of Saxony on one hand, and from the Duchy of Westphalia on the other.\n\nThe name and coat of arms of the present state go back to the Germanic tribe of Saxons. During the Migration Period some of the Saxon peoples left their homeland in Holstein about the 3rd century and pushed southwards over the Elbe, where they expanded into the sparsely populated regions in the rest of the lowlands, in the present-day Northwest Germany and the northeastern part of what is now the Netherlands. From about the 7th century the Saxons had occupied a settlement area that roughly corresponds to the present state of Lower Saxony, of Westphalia and a number of areas to the east, for example, in what is now west and north Saxony-Anhalt. The land of the Saxons was divided into about 60 \"Gaue\". The Frisians had not moved into this region; for centuries they preserved their independence in the most northwesterly region of the present-day Lower Saxon territory. The original language of the folk in the area of Old Saxony was West Low German, one of the varieties of language in the Low German dialect group.\n\nThe establishment of permanent boundaries between what later became Lower Saxony and Westphalia began in the 12th century. In 1260, in a treaty between the Archbishopric of Cologne and the Duchy of Brunswick-Lüneburg the lands claimed by the two territories were separated from each other. The border ran along the Weser to a point north of Nienburg. The northern part of the Weser-Ems region was placed under the rule of Brunswick-Lüneburg.\n\nThe word \"Niedersachsen\" was first used before 1300 in a Dutch rhyming chronicle (\"Reimchronik\"). From the 14th century it referred to the Duchy of Saxe-Lauenburg (as opposed to Saxe-Wittenberg). On the creation of the imperial circles in 1500, a Lower Saxon Circle was distinguished from a Lower Rhenish–Westphalian Circle. The latter included the following territories that, in whole or in part, belong today to the state of Lower Saxony: the Bishopric of Osnabrück, the Bishopric of Münster, the County of Bentheim, the County of Hoya, the Principality of East Frisia, the Principality of Verden, the County of Diepholz, the County of Oldenburg, the County of Schaumburg and the County of Spiegelberg. At the same time a distinction was made with the eastern part of the old Saxon lands from the central German principalities later called Upper Saxony for dynastic reasons. (see also → Electorate of Saxony, History of Saxony).\n\nThe close historical links between the domains of the Lower Saxon Circle now in modern Lower Saxony survived for centuries especially from a dynastic point of view. The majority of historic territories whose land now lies within Lower Saxony were sub-principalities of the medieval, Welf estates of the Duchy of Brunswick-Lüneburg. All the Welf princes called themselves dukes \"of Brunswick and Lüneburg\" despite often ruling parts of a duchy that was forever being divided and reunited as various Welf lines multiplied or died out.\n\nOver the course of time two great principalities survived east of the Weser: the Kingdom of Hanover and the Duchy of Brunswick (after 1866 Hanover became a Prussian province; after 1919 Brunswick became a free state). Historically a close tie exists between the royal house of Hanover (Electorate of Hanover) to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland as a result of their personal union in the 18th century.\n\nWest of the River Hunte a \"de-Westphalianising process\" began in 1815: After the Congress of Vienna the territories of the later administrative regions (\"Regierungsbezirke\") of Osnabrück and Aurich transferred to the Kingdom of Hanover. Until 1946, the Grand Duchy of Oldenburg and the Principality of Schaumburg-Lippe retained their stately authority. Nevertheless, the entire Weser-Ems region (including the city of Bremen) were grouped in 1920 into a Lower Saxon Constituency Association (\"Wahlkreisverband IX (Niedersachsen)\"). This indicates that at that time the western administrations of the Prussian Province of Hanover and the state of Oldenburg were perceived as being \"Lower Saxon\".\n\nThe forerunners of today's state of Lower Saxony were lands that were geographically and, to some extent, institutionally interrelated from very early on. The County of Schaumburg (not to be confused with the Principality of Schaumburg-Lippe) around the towns of Rinteln and Hessisch Oldendorf did indeed belong to the Prussian province of Hesse-Nassau until 1932, a province that also included large parts of the present state of Hesse, including the cities of Kassel, Wiesbaden and Frankfurt am Main; but in 1932, however, the County of Schaumburg became part of the Prussian Province of Hanover. Also before 1945, namely 1937, the city of Cuxhaven has been fully integrated into the Prussian Province of Hanover by the Greater Hamburg Act, so that in 1946, when the state of Lower Saxony was founded, only four states needed to be merged. With the exception of Bremen and the areas that were ceded to the Soviet Occupation Zone in 1945, all those areas allocated to the new state of Lower Saxony in 1946, had already been merged into the \"Constituency Association of Lower Saxony\" in 1920.\n\nIn a lecture on 14 September 2007, Dietmar von Reeken described the emergence of a \"Lower Saxony consciousness\" in the 19th century, the geographical basis of which was used to invent a territorial construct: the resulting local heritage societies (\"Heimatvereine\") and their associated magazines routinely used the terms \"Lower Saxony\" or \"Lower Saxon\" in their names. At the end of the 1920s in the context of discussions about a reform of the Reich, and promoted by the expanding local heritage movement (\"Heimatbewegung\"), a 25-year conflict started between \"Lower Saxony\" and \"Westphalia\". The supporters of this dispute were administrative officials and politicians, but regionally focussed scientists of various disciplines were supposed to have fuelled the arguments. In the 1930s, a real Lower Saxony did not yet exist, but there was a plethora of institutions that would have called themselves \"Lower Saxon\". The motives and arguments in the disputes between \"Lower Saxony\" and \"Westphalia\" were very similar on both sides: economic interests, political aims, cultural interests and historical aspects.\n\nAfter the Second World War most of Northwest Germany lay within the British Zone of Occupation. On 23 August 1946, the British Military Government issued Ordinance No. 46 \"\"Concerning the dissolution of the provinces of the former state of Prussia in the British Zone and their reconstitution as independent states\"\", which initially established the State of Hanover on the territory of the former Prussian Province of Hanover. Its minister president, Hinrich Wilhelm Kopf, had already suggested in June 1945 the formation of a state of Lower Saxony, that was to include the largest possible region in the middle of the British Zone. In addition to the regions that actually became Lower Saxony subsequently, Kopf asked, in a memorandum dated April 1946, for the inclusion of the former Prussian district of Minden-Ravensberg (i.e. the Westphalian city of Bielefeld as well as the Westphalian districts of Minden, Lübbecke, Bielefeld, Herford and Halle), the district of Tecklenburg and the state of Lippe. Kopf's plan was ultimately based on a draft for the reform of the German Empire from the late 1920s by Georg Schnath and Kurt Brüning. The strong Welf connotations of this draft, according to Thomas Vogtherr, did not simplify the development of a Lower Saxon identity after 1946.\n\nAn alternative model, proposed by politicians in Oldenburg and Brunswick, envisaged the foundation of the independent state of \"Weser-Ems\", that would be formed from the state of Oldenburg, the Hanseatic City of Bremen and the administrative regions of Aurich and Osnabrück. Several representatives of the state of Oldenburg even demanded the inclusion of the Hanoverian districts of Diepholz, Syke, Osterholz-Scharmbeck and Wesermünde in the proposed state of \"Weser-Ems\". Likewise an enlarged State of Brunswick was proposed in the southeast to include the \"Regierungsbezirk\" of Hildesheim and the district of Gifhorn. Had this plan come to fruition, the territory of the present Lower Saxony would have consisted of three states of roughly equal size.\n\nThe district council of Vechta protested on 12 June 1946 against being incorporated into the metropolitan area of Hanover (\"Großraum Hannover\"). If the State of Oldenburg was to be dissolved, Vechta District would much rather be included in the Westphalian region. Particularly in the districts where there was a political Catholicism the notion was widespread, that Oldenburg Münsterland and the \"Regierungsbezirk\" of Osnabrück should be part of a newly formed State of Westphalia.\n\nSince the foundation of the states of North Rhine-Westphalia and Hanover on 23 August 1946 the northern and eastern border of North Rhine-Westphalia has largely been identical with that of the Prussian Province of Westphalia. Only the Free State of Lippe was not incorporated into North Rhine-Westphalia until January 1947. With that the majority of the regions left of the Upper Weser became North Rhine-Westphalian.\n\nIn the end, at the meeting of the Zone Advisory Board on 20 September 1946, Kopf's proposal with regard to the division of the British occupation zone into three large states proved to be capable of gaining a majority. Because this division of their occupation zone into relatively large states also met the interests of the British, on 8 November 1946 Regulation No. 55 of the British military government was issued, by which the State of Lower Saxony with its capital Hanover were founded, backdated to 1 November 1946. The state was formed by a merger of the Free States of Brunswick, of Oldenburg and of Schaumburg-Lippe with the previously formed State of Hanover. But there were exceptions:\nBULLET::::- In the Free State of Brunswick, the eastern part of the district of Blankenburg and the exclave of Calvörde, which belonged to the district of Helmstedt fell into the Soviet Zone of Occupation and were later integrated into the state of Saxony-Anhalt.\nBULLET::::- In the State of Hanover, Amt Neuhaus and the villages of Neu Bleckede and Neu Wendischthun were allotted to the Soviet Zone and thus the subsequent East Germany. They were not returned to Lower Saxony until 1993.\nBULLET::::- The city of Wesermünde that then lay in the Regierungsbezirk Stade was renamed in 1947 to Bremerhaven and incorporated into the new city state of Bremen, which became one of the federated German states.\n\nThe demands of Dutch politicians that the Netherlands should be given the German regions east of the Dutch-German border as war reparations, were roundly rejected at the London Conference of 26 March 1949. In fact only about 1.3 km² of West Lower Saxony was transferred to the Netherlands, in 1949.\n\n\"→ see main article Dutch annexation of German territory after World War II\"\n\nThe first Lower Saxon parliament or \"Landtag\" met on 9 December 1946. It was not elected; rather it was established by the British Occupation Administration (a so-called \"appointed parliament\"). That same day the parliament elected the Social Democrat, Hinrich Wilhelm Kopf, the former Hanoverian president (\"Regierungspräsident\") as their first minister president. Kopf led a five-party coalition, whose basic task was to rebuild a state afflicted by the war's rigours. Kopf's cabinet had to organise an improvement of food supplies and the reconstruction of the cities and towns destroyed by Allied air raids during the war years. Hinrich Wilhelm Kopf remained – interrupted by the time in office of Heinrich Hellwege (1955–1959) – as the head of government in Lower Saxony until 1961.\n\nThe greatest problem facing the first state government in the immediate post-war years was the challenge of integrating hundreds of thousands of refugees from Germany's former territories in the east (such as Silesia and East Prussia), which had been annexed by Poland and the Soviet Union. Lower Saxony was at the western end of the direct escape route from East Prussia and had the longest border with the Soviet Zone. On 3 October 1950 Lower Saxony took over the sponsorship of the very large number of refugees from Silesia. In 1950 there was still a shortage of 730,000 homes according to official figures.\n\nDuring the period when Germany was divided, the Lower Saxon border crossing at Helmstedt found itself on the main transport artery to West Berlin and, from 1945 to 1990 was the busiest European border crossing point.\n\nOf economic significance for the state was the \"Volkswagen\" concern, that restarted the production of civilian vehicles in 1945, initially under British management, and in 1949 transferred into the ownership of the newly founded country of West Germany and state of Lower Saxony. Overall, Lower Saxony, with its large tracts of rural countryside and few urban centres, was one of the industrially weaker regions of the federal republic for a long time. In 1960, 20% of the working population worked on the land. In the rest of the federal territory the figure was just 14%. Even in economically prosperous times the jobless totals in Lower Saxony are constantly higher than the federal average.\n\nIn 1961 Georg Diederichs took office as the minister president of Lower Saxony as the successor to Hinrich Wilhelm Kopf. He was replaced in 1970 by Alfred Kubel. The arguments about the Gorleben Nuclear Waste Repository, that began during the time in office of minister president Ernst Albrecht (1976–1990), have played an important role in state and federal politics since the end of the 1970s.\n\nIn 1990 Gerhard Schröder entered the office of minister president. On 1 June 1993 the new Lower Saxon constitution entered force, replacing the \"Provisional Lower Saxon Constitution\" of 1951. It enables referenda and plebiscites and establishes environmental protection as a fundamental state principle.\n\nThe former Hanoverian Amt Neuhaus with its parishes of Dellien, Haar, Kaarßen, Neuhaus (Elbe), Stapel, Sückau, Sumte and Tripkau as well as the villages of Neu Bleckede, Neu Wendischthun and Stiepelse in the parish of Teldau and the historic Hanoverian region in the forest district of Bohldamm in the parish of Garlitz transferred with effect from 30 June 1993 from Mecklenburg-Vorpommern to Lower Saxony (Lüneburg district). From these parishes the new municipality of Amt Neuhaus was created on 1 October 1993.\n\nIn 1998 Gerhard Glogowski succeeded Gerhard Schröder who became Federal Chancellor. Because he had been linked with various scandals in his home city of Brunswick, he resigned in 1999 and was replaced by Sigmar Gabriel.\n\nFrom 2003 to his election as Federal President in 2010 Christian Wulff was minister president in Lower Saxony. The Osnabrücker headed a CDU-led coalition with the FDP as does his successor, David McAllister. After the elections on 20 January 2013 McAllister was deselected.\n\nBetween 1946 and 2004, the state's districts and independent towns were grouped into eight regions, with different status for the two regions (\"Verwaltungsbezirke\") comprising the formerly free states of Brunswick and Oldenburg. In 1978 the regions were merged into four governorates (\"Regierungsbezirke\"): Since 2004 the Bezirksregierungen (regional governments) have been broken up again.\n\n1946–1978:\nBULLET::::- Governorate of Aurich\nBULLET::::- Administrative Region of Brunswick (\"Braunschweig\")\nBULLET::::- Governorate of Hanover (\"Hannover\")\nBULLET::::- Governorate of Hildesheim\nBULLET::::- Governorate of Lunenburg (\"Lüneburg\")\nBULLET::::- Administrative Region of Oldenburg\nBULLET::::- Administrative Region of Osnabrück\nBULLET::::- Governorate of Stade\n1978–2004:\nBULLET::::- Governorate of Brunswick (\"Braunschweig\")\nBULLET::::- Governorate of Hanover (\"Hannover\")\nBULLET::::- Governorate of Lunenburg (\"Lüneburg\")\nBULLET::::- Governorate of Weser-Ems\n\nOn 1 January 2005 the four administrative regions or governorates (\"Regierungsbezirke\"), into which Lower Saxony had been hitherto divided, were dissolved. These were the governorates of Braunschweig, Hanover, Lüneburg and Weser-Ems.\n\nAt the end of 2014, there were almost 571.000 non-German citizens in Lower Saxony. The following table illustrates the largest minority groups in Lower Saxony:\n\n! style=\"background:#efefef;\"Rank\n! style=\"background:#efefef;\"Nationality\n! style=\"background:#efefef;\"Population estimate (2017)\n1 90,914\n2 83,950\n3 41,324\n4 30,377\n5 29,065\n6 26,951\n7 20,694\n8 20,388\n9 17,522\n10 17,474\n11 17,304\n12 15,971\n13 11,532\n14 10,295\n15 10,250\n\nBULLET::::- Births from January–October 2016 = 62,761\nBULLET::::- Births from January–October 2017 = 61,314\nBULLET::::- Deaths from January–October 2016 = 75,733\nBULLET::::- Deaths from January–October 2017 = 75,804\nBULLET::::- Natural growth from January–October 2016 = -12,972\nBULLET::::- Natural growth from January–October 2017 = -14,490\n\nThe 2011 census stated that a majority of the population were Christians (71.93%); 51.48% of the total population were member of the Evangelical Church in Germany, 18.34% were Catholics, 2.11% were member of other Christian denominations, 2.27% were member of other religions. 25.8% have no denomination. Even there is a high level of official belonging to a Christian denomination, the people - especially in the cities - are highly secular in faith and behavior.\n\nAs of 2017, the Evangelical Church in Germany was the faith of 43.9% of the population. It is organised in the five Landeskirchen named Evangelical Lutheran State Church in Brunswick (comprising the former Free State of Brunswick), Evangelical Lutheran Church of Hanover (comprising the former Province of Hanover), Evangelical Lutheran Church in Oldenburg (comprising the former Free State of Oldenburg), Evangelical Lutheran Church of Schaumburg-Lippe (comprising the former Free State of Schaumburg-Lippe), and Evangelical Reformed Church (covering all the state).\n\nTogether, these member churches of the Evangelical Church in Germany gather a substantial part of the Protestant population in Germany.\n\nThe Catholic Church was the faith of 16.9% of the population in 2017. It is organised in the three dioceses of Osnabrück (western part of the state), Münster (comprising the former Free State of Oldenburg) and Hildesheim (northern and eastern part of the state). The Catholic faith is mainly concentrated to the regions of Oldenburger Münsterland, region of Osnabrück, region of Hildesheim and in the Western Eichsfeld.\n39.1% of the Low Saxons were irreligious or adhere to other religions. Judaism, Islam and Buddhism are minority faiths.\n\nAgriculture, strongly weighted towards the livestock sector, has always been a very important economic factor in the state. The north and northwest of Lower Saxony are mainly made up of coarse sandy soil that makes crop farming difficult and therefore grassland and cattle farming are more prevalent in those areas. Lower Saxony is home, in 2017, to one in five of Germany's cattle, one in three of the country's pigs, and 50% of its hens. Wheat, potatoes, rye, and oats are among the state's present-day arable crops. Towards the south and southeast, extensive loess layers in the soil left behind by the last ice age allow high-yield crop farming. One of the principal crops there is sugar beet. Consequently, the Land has a big food industry, mainly organized in small and medium-sized enterprises (SME). Big players are Deutsches Milchkontor and PHW Group (biggest German poultry farmer and producer).\n\nMining has also been an important source of income in Lower Saxony for centuries. Silver ore became a foundation of notable economic prosperity in the Harz Mountains as early as the 12th century, while iron mining in the Salzgitter area and salt mining in various areas of the state became another important economic backbone. Although overall yields are comparatively low, Lower Saxony is also an important supplier of crude oil in the European Union. Mineral products still mined today include iron and lignite.\n\nRadioactive waste is frequently transported in the area to the city of Salzgitter, for the deep geological repository Schacht Konrad and between Schacht Asse II in the Wolfenbüttel district and Lindwedel and Höfer.\n\nManufacturing is another large part of the regional economy. Despite decades of gradual downsizing and restructuring, the car maker Volkswagen with its five production plants within the state's borders still remains the single biggest private-sector employer, its world headquarters in Wolfsburg. Due to the Volkswagen Law, which has recently been ruled illegal by the European Union's high court, the state of Lower Saxony is still the second largest shareholder, owning 20.3% of the company. Thanks to the importance of car manufacturing in Lower Saxony, a thriving supply industry is centred around its regional focal points. Other mainstays of the Lower Saxon industrial sector include aviation (the region of Stade is called CFK-Valley), shipbuilding (e.g. Meyer Werft), biotechnology, and steel. Medicine plays a major role: Hanover and Göttingen have two large University Medical Schools and hospitals and Otto Bock in Duderstadt is the word leader in prosthetics.\n\nThe service sector has gained importance following the demise of manufacturing in the 1970s and 1980s. Important branches today are the tourism industry with TUI AG in Hanover, one of Europe's largest travel companies, as well as trade and telecommunication. Hanover is one of Germany's main location of insurance companies e. g. Talanx, Hannover Re .\n\nIn October 2018 the unemployment rate stood at 5.0% and was marginally higher than the national average.\n!Year\n!2000\n!2001\n!2002\n!2003\n!2004\n!2005\n!2006\n!2007\n!2008\n!2009\n!2010\n!2011\n!2012\n!2013\n!2014\n!2015\n!2016\n!2017\n!2018\nUnemployment rate in %\n9.3\n9.1\n9.2\n9.6\n9.6\n11.6\n10.5\n8.8\n7.6\n7.7\n7.5\n6.9\n6.6\n6.6\n6.5\n6.1\n6.0\n5.8\n5.3\n\nLower Saxony has four World Heritage Sites.\n\nSince 1948, politics in the state has been dominated by the rightist Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and the leftist Social Democratic Party. Lower Saxony was one of the origins of the German environmentalist movement in reaction to the state government's support for underground nuclear waste disposal. This led to the formation of the German Green Party in 1980.\n\nThe former Minister-President, Christian Wulff, led a coalition of his CDU with the Free Democratic Party between 2003 and 2010. In the 2008 election, the ruling CDU held on to its position as the leading party in the state, despite losing votes and seats. The CDU's coalition with the Free Democratic Party retained its majority although it was cut from 29 to 10. The election also saw the entry into the state parliament for the first time of the leftist The Left party. On 1 July 2010 David McAllister was elected Minister-President.\n\nAfter the state election on 20 January 2013, Stephan Weil of the Social Democrats was elected as the new Minister-President. He governed in coalition with the Greens.\n\nAfter the state election in September 2017, Stephan Weil of the Social Democrats was again elected as the new Minister-President. He governs in coalition with the CDU.\n\nThe state of Lower Saxony was formed after World War II by merging the former states of Hanover, Oldenburg, Brunswick and Schaumburg-Lippe. Hanover, a former kingdom, is by far the largest of these contributors by area and population and has been a province of Prussia since 1866. The city of Hanover is the largest and capital city of Lower Saxony.\n\nThe constitution states that Lower Saxony be a free, republican, democratic, social and environmentally sustainable state inside the Federal Republic of Germany; universal human rights, peace and justice are preassigned guidelines of society, and the human rights and civil liberties proclaimed by the constitution of the Federal Republic are genuine constituents of the constitution of Lower Saxony. Each citizen is entitled to education and there is universal compulsory school attendance.\n\nAll government authority is to be sanctioned by the will of the people, which expresses itself via elections and plebiscites. The legislative assembly is a unicameral parliament elected for terms of five years. The composition of the parliament obeys to the principle of proportional representation of the participating political parties, but it is also ensured that each constituency delegates one directly elected representative. If a party wins more constituency delegates than their statewide share among the parties would determine, it can keep all these constituency delegates.\n\nThe governor of the state (prime minister) and his ministers are elected by the parliament. As there is a system of five political parties in Germany and so also in Lower Saxony, it is usually the case that two or more parties negotiate for a common political agenda and a commonly determined composition of government where the party with the biggest share of the electorate fills the seat of the governor.\n\nThe states of the Federal Republic of Germany, and so Lower Saxony, have legislative responsibility and power mainly reduced to the policy fields of the school system, higher education, culture and media and police, whereas the more important policy fields like economic and social policies, foreign policy etc. are a prerogative of the federal government. Hence the probably most important function of the federal states is their representation in the Federal Council (Bundesrat), where their approval on many crucial federal policy fields, including the tax system, is required for laws to become enacted.\n\nThe Minister-President heads the state government, acting as a head of state (even if the federated states have the status of a state, they don't established the office of a head of state but merged the functions with the head of the executive branch) as well as the government leader. They are elected by the Landtag of Lower Saxony.\n\nThe coat of arms shows a white horse (Saxon Steed) on red ground, which is an old symbol of the Saxon people. Legend has it that the horse was a symbol of the Saxon leader Widukind. But this one should have been black. The colour has been changed by Christian baptism of Widukind into white. White and red are the other colours (despite to Gold and black) of the Holy Roman Empire symbolizing Christ as the Saviour, who is still shown with a white flag with a red cross.\n\nBULLET::::- List of places in Lower Saxony\nBULLET::::- Straße der Megalithkultur - tourist route from Osnabrück to Oldenburg via some 33 Megalithic sites.\nBULLET::::- Niedersächsische Spargelstraße - tourist route around the Asparagus growing areas.\nBULLET::::- Straße der Weserrenaissance - tourist route that passes through Lower Saxony\nBULLET::::- Outline of Germany\n\nBULLET::::- Official governmental portal\nBULLET::::- Official website for tourism, holiday and leisure in Lower Saxony\nBULLET::::- map with tourist highlights, notepad and personal guide\n"}
{"id": "18439", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18439", "title": "LTJ Bukem", "text": "LTJ Bukem\n\nDaniel Williamson (born 20 September 1967), better known as LTJ Bukem, is a British drum and bass musician, producer and DJ. He and his record label Good Looking are most associated with the jazzy, atmospheric side of drum and bass music.\n\nHe was trained as a classical pianist and discovered jazz fusion in his teenage years, having a jazz funk band at one stage. However, by the late 1980s he decided to become a DJ and gained fame in the rave scene of the early 1990s. As a producer, he released a series of drum and bass tracks such as \"Logical Progression\" (1991), \"Demon's Theme\" (1992), \"Atlantis\" and \"Music\" (1993). His most notable release was the track \"Horizons\" (1995) which attained considerable popularity.\n\nHe then dipped in visibility as a producer, with his work running the London club night Speed and his record label Good Looking Records, coming to the fore. A series of compilations entitled \"Logical Progression\" highlighted a jazz and ambient influenced side of drum and bass; the style became widely known as intelligent drum and bass. Bukem also explored the downtempo end of electronic lounge music, with sister label Cookin' and the \"Earth\" series of compilations. Some of the artists who rose to fame under Good Looking in this period include Blame, Seba, Big Bud, Blu Mar Ten, DJ Dream (Aslan Davis), Future Engineers, Tayla, Aquarius (an alias of Photek), Peshay, Source Direct and Artemis.\n\nOn 16 July 1995, he did an Essential Mix alongside MC Conrad. In 1997, he remixed the James Bond theme for David Arnold's concept album of James Bond music \"\". In 2000, he finally released a debut solo album, the double-CD \"Journey Inwards\". The album heavily emphasised his jazz fusion influences. 2001 saw a remix of Herbie Hancock.\n\nHe ran the Speed clubnight in London with fellow drum and bass DJ Fabio.\n\nHe DJs extensively around the world, often under the 'Progression Sessions' or 'Bukem in Session' banners. However, his former companion and vocalist, MC Conrad left the label and ultimately their musical partnership in 2012.\n\nDaniel Williamson was adopted from birth. In 2007, he revealed that he had found his biological birth mother, a Ugandan woman living in Paris. She told him that his father was Egyptian.\n\nViewed as an innovator in the drum and bass style, Bukem is known for developing an accessible alternative to that hardcore genre's speedy, assaultive energies. His style pays homage to the Detroit-based sound of early techno, but Bukem also incorporates still earlier influences, particularly the mellow, melodic sonorities of 1970s era jazz fusion as exemplified by Lonnie Liston Smith and Roy Ayers. Early in his career, Bukem was identified for his response to the \"almost paranoid hyperkinesis\" of breakbeat-based house music, and specifically for his reservations regarding the overbearing force of the hardcore mentality.\n\nBukem's music from the early 1990s onward represents his efforts to map out an alternative future for drum and bass by incorporating softer-edged influences culled from London's 1980s rare groove and acid jazz scenes. Music on \"Logical Progression\" reveals these influences, as does his approach on 1993's \"Music / Enchanted\", which features string arrangements and sounds from nature. His use of keyboards, live vocals and slow-motion breaks on these and future releases earned Bukem's music the tag intelligent drum and bass. While this designation caused controversy within the drum and bass community, it also influenced the popularization of hardcore music in the UK during the mid-1990s.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Delitefol\" (1991)\nBULLET::::- LT Bukem - \"Logical Progression\" (1991)\nBULLET::::- LTJ Bukem and DJ Trace - \"Teach Me to Fly\" (1992)\nBULLET::::- \"Demon's Theme / A Couple of Beats\" (1992)\nBULLET::::- The Bookworm - \"Who Knows Vol, 1\" (1993)\nBULLET::::- LTJ Bukem and Tayla - \"Bang The Drums / Remnants\" (1993)\nBULLET::::- LTJ Buken and Apollo Two - \"Return to Atlantis\" (1993)\nBULLET::::- \"Music / Enchanted\" (1993)\nBULLET::::- LTJ Bukem and Peshay - \"19.5 / 19.5 Reprisal\" (1994)\nBULLET::::- LTJ Bukem and Mystic Moods - \"The Journey\" (1996)\nBULLET::::- \"Mystical Realms EP\" (1998)\nBULLET::::- \"Suspended Space EP\" (2000)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Journey Inwards\" (2000)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Mixmag Live! Volume 21\" (MixMag, 1996)\nBULLET::::- \"Logical Progression Vols 1-4\" (1996-2001)\nBULLET::::- \"Progression Sessions Vols 1-10\" (1998–2003)\nBULLET::::- \"Earth Vols 1-7\" (1996-2004)\nBULLET::::- \"Producer 01\" (2001)\nBULLET::::- \"Producer 05: Rarities\" (2002)\nBULLET::::- \"Some Blue Notes of Drum 'N Bass\" (2004)\nBULLET::::- \"FabricLive.46\" (2009)\nBULLET::::- \"Bukem in Session\" (2013)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Sweetness (Mellow Drum n Bass Mix)\" – Michelle Gayle (1994)\nBULLET::::- \"Feenin' (LTJ Bukem Remix)\" – Jodeci (1995)\nBULLET::::- \"Transamazonia (LTJ Bukem Remix)\" – The Shamen (1995)\nBULLET::::- \"If I Could Fly (LTJ Bukem Remix)\" – Grace (1996)\nBULLET::::- \"The James Bond Theme (LTJ Bukem Remix)\" – David Arnold (1997)\nBULLET::::- \"The Essence (LTJ Bukem Remix)\" – Herbie Hancock (with Chaka Khan) (2001)\n\nBULLET::::- [ LTJ Bukem] at AllMusic\n"}
{"id": "18443", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18443", "title": "Lindsay Anderson", "text": "Lindsay Anderson\n\nLindsay Gordon Anderson (17 April 1923 – 30 August 1994) was a British feature-film, theatre and documentary director, film critic, and leading-light of the Free Cinema movement and of the British New Wave. He is most widely remembered for his 1968 film \"if...\", which won the \"Palme d'Or\" at Cannes Film Festival in 1969 and marked Malcolm McDowell's cinematic debut.\nHe is also notable, though not a professional actor, for playing a minor role in the Academy Award-winning 1981 film \"Chariots of Fire\". McDowell produced a 2007 documentary about his experiences with Anderson, \"Never Apologize\".\n\nLindsay Gordon Anderson was born in Bangalore, South India, where his father had been stationed with the Royal Engineers, on the 17th of April 1923. His father Captain (later Major General) Alexander Vass Anderson was a British Army Officer that had been born in North India and his mother Estelle Bell Gasson was born in Queenstown, South Africa, the daughter of a wool merchant. Lindsay's parents separated in 1926 and Estelle returned to England with her sons; however, they tried to reconcile in 1932 in Bangalore, and when Estelle returned to England she was pregnant with her third son, Alexander Vass Anderson. The Andersons divorced and Estelle remarried Major Cuthbert Sleigh in 1936. Lindsay's father re-married in India; although Gavin Lambert writes, in 'Mainly About Lindsay Anderson: A Memoir' (Faber and Faber, 2000, p. 18), that Alexander Vass Anderson 'cut (his first family) out of his life', making no reference to them in his 'Who's Who' entry, Lindsay often saw his father and looked after his house and dogs when he was away.\n\nBoth Lindsay and his older brother Murray Anderson (1919-2016) were educated at Saint Ronan's School in Worthing, West Sussex, and at Cheltenham College. It was at Cheltenham that Lindsay had met his lifelong friend and biographer, the screenwriter and novelist Gavin Lambert. Lindsay won a scholarship for classical studies at Wadham College at the University of Oxford, in 1942.\n\nAnderson served in the Army from 1943 until 1946, first with the 60th King's Royal Rifle Groups, and then in the final year of World War II as a cryptographer for the Intelligence Corps, at the Wireless Experimental Centre in Delhi. Anderson assisted in nailing the Red flag to the roof of the Junior Officers' mess in Annan Parbat, in August 1945, after the victory of the Labour Party in the general election was confirmed. The colonel did not approve, he recalled a decade later, but no disciplinary action was taken against them.\n\nLindsay returned to Oxford in 1946 but changed from classical studies to English; he graduated with an MA in 1948.\n\nBefore going into film-making, Anderson was a prominent film critic writing for the influential \"Sequence\" magazine (1947–52), which he co-founded with Gavin Lambert, Peter Ericsson and Karel Reisz; later writing for the British Film Institute's journal \"Sight and Sound\" and the left-wing political weekly the \"New Statesman\". In a 1956 polemical article, \"Stand Up, Stand Up\" for \"Sight and Sound\", he attacked contemporary critical practices, in particular the pursuit of objectivity. Taking as an example some comments made by Alistair Cooke in 1935, where Cooke claimed to be without politics as a critic, Anderson responded:\nFollowing a series of screenings which he and the National Film Theatre programmer Karel Reisz organized for the venue of independently-produced short films by himself and others, he developed a philosophy of cinema which found expression in what became known, by the late-1950s, as the Free Cinema movement. This was the belief that the British cinema must break away from its class-bound attitudes and that non-metropolitan Britain ought to be shown on the nation's screens. He had already begun to make films himself, starting in 1948 with \"Meet the Pioneers\", a documentary about a conveyor-belt factory.\n\nAlong with Karel Reisz, Tony Richardson, and others, he secured funding from a variety of sources (including Ford of Britain) and they each made a series of short documentaries on a variety of subjects. One of Anderson's early short films, \"Thursday's Children\" (1954), concerning the education of deaf children, made in collaboration with Guy Brenton, a friend from his Oxford days, won an Oscar for Best Documentary Short in 1954.\n\nThese films, influenced by one of Anderson' heroes, the French filmmaker Jean Vigo, and made in the tradition of the British documentaries of Humphrey Jennings, foreshadowed much of the social realism of British cinema that emerged in the next decade, with Reisz's \"Saturday Night and Sunday Morning\" (1960), Richardson's \"The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner\" (1962) and Anderson's own \"This Sporting Life\" (1963), produced by Reisz. Anderson's film met with mixed reviews at the time, and was not a commercial success.\n\nAnderson is perhaps best remembered as a filmmaker for his \"Mick Travis trilogy\", all of which star Malcolm McDowell as the title character: \"if...\" (1968), a satire on public schools; \"O Lucky Man!\" (1973) a \"Pilgrim's Progress\" inspired road movie; and \"Britannia Hospital\" (1982), a fantasia taking stylistic influence from the populist wing of British cinema represented by Hammer horror films and Carry On comedies.\n\nIn 1981, Anderson played the role of the Master of Caius College at Cambridge University in the film \"Chariots of Fire\".\n\nAnderson developed an acquaintance from 1950 with John Ford, which led to what has come to be regarded as one of the standard books on that director, Anderson's \"About John Ford\" (1983). Based on half a dozen meetings over more than two decades, and a lifetime's study of the man's work, the book has been described as \"One of the best books published by a film-maker on a film-maker\".\n\nIn 1985, producer Martin Lewis invited Anderson to chronicle Wham!'s visit to China, among the first-ever visits by Western pop artists, which resulted in Anderson's film \"Foreign Skies: Wham! In China\". He admitted in his diary on 31 March 1985, to having \"no interest in Wham!\", or China, and he was simply \"'doing this for the money'\". In 1986, he was a member of the jury at the 36th Berlin International Film Festival.\n\nAnderson was also a significant British theatre director. He was long associated with London's Royal Court Theatre, where he was Co-Artistic Director 1969–70, and Associate Artistic Director 1971–75, directing premiere productions of plays by David Storey, among others.\n\nIn 1992, as a close friend of actresses Jill Bennett and Rachel Roberts, Anderson included a touching episode in his autobiographical BBC film \"Is That All There Is?\", with a boat trip down the River Thames (several of their professional colleagues and friends aboard) to scatter their ashes on the waters while musician Alan Price sang the song \"Is That All There Is?\".\n\nEvery year, the International Documentary Festival in Amsterdam (IDFA) gives an acclaimed filmmaker the chance to screen his or her personal Top 10 favorite films. In 2007, Iranian filmmaker Maziar Bahari selected \"O Dreamland\" and \"Every Day Except Christmas\" (1957), a record of a day in the old Covent Garden market, for his top 10 classics from the history of documentary.[3]\n\nGavin Lambert's memoir, \"Mainly About Lindsay Anderson\", in which he wrote that Anderson repressed his homosexuality, was seen as a betrayal by his other friends. In November 2006 Malcolm McDowell told \"The Independent\":\nAnderson died from a heart attack on 30 August 1994 at the age of 71.\n\nAll Royal Court, London, unless otherwise indicated:\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Waiting of Lester Abbs\" (Kathleen Sully, 1957)\nBULLET::::- \"The Long and the Short and the Tall\" (Willis Hall,1959)\nBULLET::::- \"Progress to the Park\" (Alun Owen, 1959)\nBULLET::::- \"The Trial of Cob and Leach/Jazzetry\" (Christopher Logue, 1959)\nBULLET::::- \"Serjeant Musgrave's Dance\" (John Arden, 1959)\nBULLET::::- \"The Lily White Boys\" (Harry Cookson and Christopher Logue, 1960)\nBULLET::::- \"\" (Christopher Logue, 1960)\nBULLET::::- \"Diary of a Madman\" (Gogol adaptation, 1963)\nBULLET::::- \"Box and Cox\" (John Maddison Morton, 1961)\nBULLET::::- \"The Fire Raisers\" (Max Frisch, 1961)\nBULLET::::- \"Julius Caesar\" (William Shakespeare, 1964)\nBULLET::::- \"Andorra\" (Max Frisch, National Theatre at the Old Vic, 1964)\nBULLET::::- \"The Cherry Orchard\" (Anton Chekhov, Chichester Festival Theatre, 1966)\nBULLET::::- \"Inadmissible Evidence\" (John Osborne, Teatr Współczesny, Warsaw, 1966)\nBULLET::::- \"The Contractor\" (David Storey, 1969)\nBULLET::::- \"Home\" (David Storey, also Morosco Theatre NY, 1970)\nBULLET::::- \"The Changing Room\" (David Storey, 1971)\nBULLET::::- \"The Farm\" (David Storey, 1973)\nBULLET::::- \"Life Class\" (David Storey, 1974)\nBULLET::::- \"In Celebration\" (David Storey 1974)\nBULLET::::- \"What the Butler Saw\" (Joe Orton, 1975)\nBULLET::::- \"The Seagull\" (Anton Chekhov, Lyric Theatre, 1975); in repertory with\nBULLET::::- \"The Bed Before Yesterday\" (Ben Travers, Lyric Theatre, 1975)\nBULLET::::- \"The Kingfisher\" (William Douglas Home, Lyric Theatre 1977, Biltmore NY, 1978)\nBULLET::::- \"Alice's Boys\" (Felicity Brown and Jonathan Hayes, Savoy Theatre, 1978)\nBULLET::::- \"Early Days\" (David Storey, National Cottesloe Theatre, 1980)\nBULLET::::- \"The Holly and the Ivy\" (Wynyard Browne, Roundabout New York, 1982)\nBULLET::::- \"The Cherry Orchard\" (Anton Chekhov, Theatre Royal Haymarket, 1983)\nBULLET::::- \"The Playboy of the Western World\" (John Millington Synge, 1984)\nBULLET::::- \"In Celebration\" revival (David Storey, Manhattan Theatre Club, NY, 1984)\nBULLET::::- \"Holiday\" (Philip Barry, Old Vic, 1987)\nBULLET::::- \"The March on Russia\" (David Storey, National Lyttelton Theatre, 1989)\nBULLET::::- \"The Fishing Trip\" (Frank Grimes, Warehouse Theatre, 1991)\nBULLET::::- \"Stages\" (David Storey, National Cottesloe Theatre, 1992)\n\nBULLET::::- \"This Sporting Life\" (1963, director)\nBULLET::::- \"The White Bus\" (1967, director)\nBULLET::::- \"Mučedníci lásky\" (1967) - Himself\nBULLET::::- \"if...\" (1968, director)\nBULLET::::- \"Inadmissible Evidence\" (1968) - Barrister\nBULLET::::- \"O Lucky Man!\" (1973, director)\nBULLET::::- \"In Celebration\" (1975, director)\nBULLET::::- \"Look Back in Anger\" (1980, director)\nBULLET::::- \"Chariots of Fire\" (1981) - Master of Caius\nBULLET::::- \"Britannia Hospital\" (1982, director)\nBULLET::::- \"The Whales of August\" (1987, director)\nBULLET::::- \"Blame It on the Bellboy\" (1992) - Mr. Marshall (voice)\nBULLET::::- \"Is That All There Is?\" (1993) - Himself\n\nBULLET::::- \"Meet the Pioneers\" (1948)\nBULLET::::- \"Idlers that Work\" (1949)\nBULLET::::- \"Three Installations\" (1951)\nBULLET::::- \"Wakefield Express\" (1952)\nBULLET::::- \"Thursday's Children\" (1953)\nBULLET::::- \"O Dreamland\" (1953)\nBULLET::::- \"Trunk Conveyor\" (1954)\nBULLET::::- \"Foot and Mouth\" (1955)\nBULLET::::- \"A Hundred Thousand Children\" (1955)\nBULLET::::- \"The Children Upstairs\" (1955)\nBULLET::::- \"Green and Pleasant Land\" (1955)\nBULLET::::- \"Henry\" (1955)\nBULLET::::- \"£20 a Ton\" (1955)\nBULLET::::- \"Energy First\" (1955)\nBULLET::::- \"Every Day Except Christmas\" (1957)\nBULLET::::- \"March to Aldermaston\" (1959)\nBULLET::::- \"The Singing Lesson\" (1967)\nBULLET::::- \"Home\" (1971)\nBULLET::::- \"The Old Crowd\", screenplay by Alan Bennett (LWT, 1979)\nBULLET::::- \"\" (also known as \"If You Were There\") (1985)\nBULLET::::- \"Glory! Glory!\" (1989)\nBULLET::::- \"Is That All There Is?\" (Autobiographical film for BBC, 1993)\n\nBULLET::::- Kitchen sink realism\nBULLET::::- Jill Bennett\n\nBULLET::::- \"About John Ford\" (1983)\nBULLET::::- \"The Diaries of Lindsay Anderson\" ed. Paul Sutton (2004)\nBULLET::::- \"Never Apologise: The Collected Writings of Lindsay Anderson\" (2004)\nBULLET::::- \"Six English Filmmakers\" (2014) - Anderson and his colleagues in conversation with Sutton.\n\nBULLET::::- Lindsay Anderson - A Celebration\nBULLET::::- The Lindsay Anderson Memorial Foundation\nBULLET::::- Watch O Dreamland on FourDocs\nBULLET::::- The BFI's \"screenonline\" on Free Cinema\nBULLET::::- The BFI's \"screenonline\" for Lindsay Anderson\nBULLET::::- The Lindsay Anderson Archive at Stirling University, Scotland\nBULLET::::- Lindsay Anderson Bibliography (via UC Berkeley)\n"}
{"id": "18444", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18444", "title": "Loch", "text": "Loch\n\nLoch () is the Irish, Scottish Gaelic and Scots word for a lake or for a sea inlet. It is cognate with the Manx lough, Cornish logh, and one of the Welsh words for lake, llwch.\n\nIn English English and Hiberno-English, the anglicised spelling lough is commonly found in place names; in Lowland Scots and Scottish English, the spelling \"loch\" is always used.\n\nSome lochs could also be called firths, fjords, estuaries, straits or bays. Sea-inlet lochs are often called sea lochs or sea loughs. Many loughs are connected to stories of lake-bursts, signifying their mythical origin.\n\nThis name for a body of water is Insular Celtic in origin and is applied to most lakes in\nScotland and to many sea inlets in the west and north of Scotland. The word is Indo-European in origin; cf. Latin \"lacus\".\n\nLowland Scots orthography, like Scottish Gaelic, Welsh and Irish, represents with \"ch\", so the word was borrowed with identical spelling.\n\nEnglish borrowed the word separately from a number of loughs in the previous Cumbric language areas of Northumbria and Cumbria. Earlier forms of English included the sound as \"gh\" (compare Scots \"bricht\" with English \"bright\"). However, by the time Scotland and England joined under a single parliament, English had lost the sound. This form was therefore used when the English settled Ireland. The Scots convention of using \"ch\" remained, hence the modern Scottish English \"loch\".\n\nLikewise, in the Insular Celtic languages, the representation of (), is \"lu\" in Old Welsh and \"llw\" in Middle Welsh such as in today's Welsh placenames Llanllwchaiarn, Llwchwr, Llyn Cwm Llwch, Amlwch, Maesllwch, the Goidelic \"lo\" being taken into Scottish Gaelic by the gradual replacement of much Brittonic orthography with Goidelic orthography in Scotland.\n\nMany of the loughs in Northern England have also previously been called \"meres\" (a Northern English dialect word for \"lake\" and an archaic Standard English word meaning \"a lake that is broad in relation to its depth\") such as the \"Black Lough\" in Northumberland. However, reference to the latter as \"loughs\" (lower case initial), rather than as \"lakes\", \"inlets\" and so on, is unusual.\n\nSome lochs in Southern Scotland have a Brythonic rather than Goidelic etymology, such as Loch Ryan where the Gaelic \"loch\" has replaced a Cumbric equivalent of Welsh \"llwch\". The same is perhaps the case for water bodies in Northern England named with 'Low' or 'Lough' or otherwise it represents a borrowing of the Brythonic word into the Northumbrian dialect of Old English.\n\nAlthough there is no strict size definition, a small loch is often known as a lochan (so spelled also in Scottish Gaelic; in Irish it is spelled lochán).\n\nPerhaps the most famous Scottish loch is Loch Ness, although there are other large examples such as Loch Awe, Loch Lomond and Loch Tay.\n\nExamples of sea lochs in Scotland include Loch Long, Loch Fyne, Loch Linnhe, and Loch Eriboll.\n\nSome new reservoirs for hydroelectric schemes have been given names faithful to the names for natural bodies of water—for example, the Loch Sloy scheme, and Lochs Laggan and Treig (which form part of the Lochaber hydroelectric scheme near Fort William). Other expanses are simply called reservoirs, e.g. Blackwater Reservoir above Kinlochleven.\n\nScotland has very few bodies of water called lakes. The Lake of Menteith, an Anglicisation of the Scots \"Laich o Menteith\" meaning a \"low-lying bit of land in Menteith\", is applied to the loch there because of the similarity of the sounds of the words \"laich\" and \"lake\". Until the 19th century the body of water was known as the \"Loch of Menteith\". The Lake of the Hirsel, Pressmennan Lake and Lake Louise are man-made bodies of water in Scotland known as lakes.\n\nThe word \"loch\" is sometimes used as a shibboleth to identify natives of England, because the fricative sound is used in Scotland whereas most English people pronounce the word like \"lock\".\n\nAs \"loch\" is a common Gaelic word, it is found as the root of several Manx place names.\n\nThe United States naval port of Pearl Harbor, on the south coast of the main Hawaiian island of Oahu, is one of a complex of sea inlets. Several are named as lochs, including South East Loch, Merry Loch, East Loch, Middle Loch and West Loch.\n\nLoch Raven Reservoir is a reservoir in Baltimore County, Maryland.\n\nBrenton Loch in the Falkland Islands is a sea loch, near Lafonia, East Falkland.\n\nIn the Scottish settlement of Glengarry County in present-day Eastern Ontario, there is a lake called Loch Garry. Loch Garry was named by those who settled in the area, Clan MacDonell of Glengarry, after the well-known loch their clan is from, Loch Garry in Scotland. Similarly, lakes named Loch Broom, Big Loch, Greendale Loch, and Loch Lomond can be found in Nova Scotia, along with Loch Leven in Newfoundland, and Loch Leven in Saskatchewan.\n\nLoch Fyne is a fjord in Greenland named by Douglas Clavering in 1823.\n\nBULLET::::- List of lochs of Scotland\nBULLET::::- List of loughs of Ireland\nBULLET::::- List of English loughs\nBULLET::::- Ria\nBULLET::::- Lake-burst\n"}
{"id": "18446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18446", "title": "Leo Marks", "text": "Leo Marks\n\nLeopold Samuel \"Leo\" Marks, MBE (24 September 1920 – 15 January 2001) was an English writer, screenwriter, and cryptographer. During the Second World War he headed the codes office supporting resistance agents in occupied Europe for the secret Special Operations Executive organisation. After the war, Marks became a playwright and screenwriter, writing scripts that frequently utilised his war-time cryptographic experiences. He wrote the script for \"Peeping Tom\", the controversial film directed by Michael Powell which had a disastrous effect on Powell's career, but was later described by Martin Scorsese as a masterpiece. In 1998, towards the end of his life, Marks published a personal history of his experiences during the war, \"Between Silk and Cyanide\", which was critical of the leadership of SOE.\n\nMarks was the son of Benjamin Marks, the joint owner of Marks & Co, an antiquarian bookseller in Charing Cross Road, London. He was introduced at an early age to cryptography when his father showed him Edgar Allan Poe's story, \"The Gold-Bug\".\n\nFrom this early interest, he demonstrated his skill at codebreaking by deciphering the secret price codes which his father wrote inside the covers of books. The bookshop subsequently became famous as a result of the book \"84, Charing Cross Road\", which was based on correspondence between American writer Helene Hanff and the shop's chief buyer, Frank Doel.\n\nMarks was conscripted in January 1942, and trained as a cryptographer; apparently he demonstrated the ability to complete one week's work in decipherment exercise in a few hours. Unlike the rest of his intake, who were sent to the main British codebreaking centre at Bletchley Park, Marks was regarded as a misfit and he was assigned the newly formed Special Operations Executive (SOE) in Baker Street, which was set up to train agents to operate behind enemy lines in occupied Europe and to assist local resistance groups. SOE has been described as \"a mixture of brilliant brains and bungling amateurs\". Marks wrote that he had an inauspicious arrival at SOE when it took him all day to decipher a code he had been expected to finish in 20 minutes, because, not atypically, SOE had forgotten to supply the cipher key.\n\nMarks briefed many Allied agents sent into occupied Europe, including Noor Inayat Khan, the Grouse/Swallow team of four Norwegian Telemark saboteurs and his own close friend 'Tommy' Yeo-Thomas, nicknamed \"the White Rabbit\". In an interview which accompanied the DVD of the film \"Peeping Tom\", Marks quoted General Eisenhower as saying that his group's work shortened the war by three months, saving countless lives.\n\nMarks was portrayed by Anton Lesser in David Morley's BBC Radio drama \"A Cold Supper Behind Harrods\". The fiction play was inspired by conversations between Marks and David Morley and real events in SOE. It featured David Jason, and Stephanie Cole as Vera Atkins.\n\nOne of Marks's first challenges was to phase out double transposition ciphers using keys based on preselected poems. These poem ciphers had the limited advantage of being easy to memorise, but significant disadvantages, including limited cryptographic security, substantial minimum message sizes (short ones were easy to crack), and the fact that the method's complexity caused encoding errors.\n\nCryptographic security was enhanced by Marks's innovations, especially \"worked-out keys\". He was credited with inventing the letter one-time pad, but while he did independently discover the method, he later found it already in use at Bletchley.\n\nWhile attempting to relegate poem codes to emergency use, he enhanced their security by promoting the use of original poems in preference to widely known ones, forcing a cryptanalyst to work it out the hard way for each message instead of guessing an agent's entire set of keys after breaking the key to a single message (or possibly just part of the key.) Marks wrote many poems later used by agents, the most famous being one he gave to the agent Violette Szabo, \"The Life That I Have\", which gained popularity when it was used in the 1958 film about her, \"Carve Her Name With Pride\". According to his book, Marks wrote the poem in Christmas 1943 about a girlfriend, Ruth, who had recently died in an air crash in Canada; supposedly the god-daughter of the head of SOE, Sir Charles Jocelyn Hambro.\nThe life that I have \nIs all that I have \nAnd the life that I have \nIs yours. \n\nThe love that I have \nOf the life that I have \nIs yours and yours and yours. \n\nA sleep I shall have\nA rest I shall have \nYet death will be but a pause. \n\nFor the peace of my years \nIn the long green grass \nWill be yours and yours and yours.\nGestapo signal tracers endangered clandestine radio operators, and their life expectancy averaged about six weeks. Therefore, short and less frequent transmissions from the codemaster were of value. The pressure could cause agents to make mistakes encoding messages, and the practice was for the home station to tell them to recode it (usually a safe activity) and retransmit it (dangerous, and increasingly so the longer it took). In response to this problem, Marks established, staffed and trained a group based at Grendon Underwood, Buckinghamshire to cryptanalyse garbled messages (\"indecipherables\") so they could be dealt with in England without forcing the agent to risk retransmitting from the field. Other innovations of his simplified encoding in the field, which reduced errors and made shorter messages possible, both of which reduced transmission time.\n\nThe Germans generally did not execute captured radio operators out of hand. The goal was to turn and use them, or to extract enough information to imitate them. For the safety of entire underground \"circuits\", it was important to determine if an operator was genuine and still free, but means of independently checking were primitive. Marks claims that he became convinced (but was unable to prove) that their agents in the Netherlands had been compromised by the German counter-intelligence Abwehr. The Germans referred to their operation as \"a game\"—Das Englandspiel. Marks's warnings fell on deaf ears and perhaps as many as 50 further agents were sent to meet their deaths in Holland. The other side of this story was published in 1953 by Marks's German opposite number in the Netherlands, Hermann Giskes, in his book \"London Calling North Pole\".\n\nIn his book (pp. 222–3), Marks describes the memorandum he wrote detailing his conviction that messages from the Netherlands were being sent either by Germans or by agents who had been turned. He argued that, despite harrowing circumstances, \"not a single Dutch agent has been so overwrought that he's made a mistake in his coding...\" Marks had to face Brigadier (later Sir) Colin Gubbins:\n\nGubbins grills Marks. In particular he wants to know who has seen this report, who typed it (Marks did):\n\nAfter the war, Marks went on to write plays and films, including \"The Girl Who Couldn't Quite!\" (1947), \"Cloudburst\" (1951), \"The Best Damn Lie\" (1957), \"Guns at Batasi\" (co-writer) (1964), \"Sebastian\" (1968) and \"Twisted Nerve\" (1968).\n\nMarks wrote the script for Michael Powell's film \"Peeping Tom\" (1960), the story of a serial killer who films his victims while stabbing them. The film provoked critical revulsion, at the time, and was described as \"evil and pornographic\". The film was critically rehabilitated when younger directors, including Martin Scorsese, expressed admiration for Marks's script. Scorsese subsequently asked Marks to supply the voice of Satan in his 1988 film \"The Last Temptation of Christ\".\n\nIn 1998, Marks published his account of his work in SOE – \"\". The book was written in the early 1980s, but didn't receive UK Government approval for publication until 1998. Three of the poems published in the book were scrambled into the song \"Dead Agents\" by John Cale performed at the Institute of Contemporary Arts, London, in April 1999.\n\nMarks describes himself as an agnostic in \"Between Silk and Cyanide\", but frequently refers to his Jewish heritage.\n\nHe married the portrait painter Elena Gaussen in 1966. The marriage lasted until shortly before his death at home from cancer in January 2001.\n\nBULLET::::- Leo Marks (1998), \"\". HarperCollins.\nBULLET::::- Philippe Ganier-Raymond (1968), \"The Tangled Web,\" (Arthur Barker; [reprint]: Warner Paperback , originally published in French as \"Le Réseau Étranglé\"). One of the central stories in Marks's book, the betrayal of the SOE Dutch network, is told from the Dutch and German points of view.\n\nBULLET::::- Leo Marks at the Powell & Pressburger pages\nBULLET::::- Imperial War Museum Interview\n"}
{"id": "18448", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18448", "title": "Livonia", "text": "Livonia\n\nLivonia (, , , German and Scandinavian languages: \"\", archaic German \"Liefland\", Latvian and , , archaic English \"Livland\", \"Liwlandia\"; ) is a historical region on the eastern shores of the Baltic Sea. It is named after the Livonians, who lived on the shores of present-day Latvia.\n\nBy the end of the 13th century, the name was extended to most of present-day Estonia and Latvia that had been conquered during the Livonian Crusade (1193–1290) by the Livonian Brothers of the Sword. Medieval Livonia, or Terra Mariana, reached its greatest extent after Saint George's Night Uprising that in 1346 forced Denmark to sell the Duchy of Estonia (northern Estonia conquered by Denmark in the 13th century) to the State of the Teutonic Order. Livonia, as understood after the retreat of Denmark in 1346, bordered on the Gulf of Finland in the north, Lake Peipus and Russia to the east, and Lithuania to the south.\n\nAs a consequence of the Livonian War in the 16th century, the territory of Livonia was reduced to the southern half of Estonia and the northern half of Latvia.\n\nThe indigenous inhabitants of Livonia were various Finnic tribes in the north and Baltic tribes in the south. The descendants of the crusaders formed the nucleus of the new ruling class of Livonia after the Livonian Crusade, and eventually became known as Baltic Germans.\n\nBeginning in the 12th century, Livonia was an area of economic and political expansion by Danes and Germans, particularly by the Hanseatic League and the Cistercian Order. \nAround 1160, Hanseatic traders from Lübeck established a trading post on the site of the future city of Riga, which Albrecht von Buxthoeven founded in 1201. He ordered the construction of a cathedral and became the first Prince-Bishop of Livonia.\n\nBishop Albert of Riga (Albert of Buxhoeveden) founded the military order of the Livonian Brothers of the Sword (, ) in 1202; Pope Innocent III sanctioned the establishment in 1204. The membership of the order comprised German \"warrior monks\". Alternative names of the order include the Christ Knights, Sword Brethren, and The Militia of Christ of Livonia. Following their defeat by Lithuania in the Battle of Saule in 1236, the surviving Brothers merged into the Teutonic Order as an autonomous branch and became known as the Livonian Order.\n\nAlbert, bishop of Riga (or Prince-Bishop of Livonia), founded the Brotherhood to aid the Bishopric of Riga in the conversion of the pagan Curonians, Livonians, Semigallians, and Latgalians living on the shores of the Gulf of Riga. From its foundation, the undisciplined Order tended to ignore its supposed vassalage to the bishops. In 1218, Albert asked King Valdemar II of Denmark for assistance, but Valdemar instead arranged a deal with the Brotherhood and conquered the north of Estonia for Denmark. The Brotherhood had its headquarters at Fellin (Viljandi) in present-day Estonia, where the walls of the Master's castle stand. Other strongholds included Wenden (Cēsis), Segewold (Sigulda) and Ascheraden (Aizkraukle). The commanders of Fellin, Goldingen (Kuldīga), Marienburg (Alūksne), Reval (Tallinn), and the bailiff of Weißenstein (Paide) belonged to the five-member entourage of the Order's Master.\n\nPope Gregory IX asked the Brothers to defend Finland from the Novgorodian attacks in his letter of November 24, 1232;\nhowever, no known information regarding the knights' possible activities in Finland has survived. (Sweden eventually took over Finland after the Second Swedish Crusade in 1249.) In the Battle of Saule in 1236 the Lithuanians and Semigallians decimated the Order. This disaster led the surviving Brothers to become incorporated into the Order of Teutonic Knights in the following year, and from that point on they became known as the Livonian Order. They continued, however, to function in all respects (rule, clothing and policy) as an autonomous branch of the Teutonic Order, headed by their own Master (himself \"de jure\" subject to the Teutonic Order's Grand Master).\n\nThe Chronicle of Henry of Livonia from the 1220s gives a firsthand account of the Christianization of Livonia, granted as a fief by the Hohenstaufen Holy Roman Emperor, de facto but not known as the King of Germany, Philip of Swabia, to Bishop Albert of Buxthoeven, nephew of the Hartwig II, Archbishop of Bremen, who sailed with a convoy of ships filled with armed crusaders to carve out a Catholic territory in the east during the Livonian Crusade.\n\nLivonia consisted of the following subdivisions: \nBULLET::::- a state ruled by the Livonian Order founded by Albert in 1202, which was assimilated into the Teutonic Knights in 1237;\nBULLET::::- the Bishopric of Riga (an archbishopric since 1255);\nBULLET::::- the Bishoprics of Courland, Ösel-Wiek, and Dorpat, where Albert's brother Hermann established himself as the prince-bishop (Terra Mariana). The conquest of Livonia by the Germans is described in the Livonian Rhymed Chronicle.\n\nThe Livonian Order was a largely autonomous branch of the Teutonic Knights (or Teutonic Order) and a member of the Livonian Confederation from 1418–1561. After being defeated by Lithuania in the 1236 Battle of Saule, the remnants of the Livonian Brothers of the Sword were incorporated into the Teutonic Knights as the Livonian Order in 1237. Between 1237 and 1290, the Livonian Order conquered all of Courland, Livonia, and Semigallia, but their attack on northern Russia was repelled in the Battle of Rakvere (1268). In 1346, after St. George's Night Uprising the Order bought the rest of Estonia from King Valdemar IV of Denmark. Life within the Order's territory is described in the Chronicle of Henry of Livonia and the Livonian Rhymed Chronicle. The Teutonic Order fell into decline following its defeat in the Battle of Grunwald in 1410 and the secularization of its Prussian territories by Albert of Brandenburg in 1525, but the Livonian Order managed to maintain an independent existence. During many years of Livonian War (1558–1582), however, they suffered a decisive defeat by troops of Muscovite Russia in the Battle of Ergeme in 1560 and continued living under great threat. Letters to the Emperor arrived from many European countries, warning, \"that Moscow has its eyes on much more than only a few harbors or the province of Liefland\" ... the East Sea (Ostsee-Baltic Sea and the West Sea (Atlantic) are equally in danger. Duke Barnim the Elder, 50 years duke of Pomerania, warned, \"that never before did he experience the fear than now, where even in his land, where people send by Moscow are everywhere\". At stake was the Narva-Trade-Route and practically all trade in the North, and with that all of Europe. Due to religious upheavals of the Reformation the empire could not send troops, which it could not afford and which were too far away anyway. Prussia was not able to help for much of the same reason, and Duke Albrecht was under continuous ban by the emperor. The Hanseatic League was greatly weakened by this and the city state of Luebeck fought its last great war. The emperor Maximilian II diffused the greatest threat by remaining on friendly terms with the czar, but not sending him troops as requested, in his struggles with the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth.\n\nCzar Ivan of Moscow installed Duke Magnus as King of Livonia. This was opposed by the other forces. The Livonian Order saw no other way than to seek protection from Sigismund II Augustus, the King of Poland and the Grand Duke of Lithuania, who had intervened in a war between Bishop William of Riga and the Brothers in 1557. After coming to an agreement with Sigismund II Augustus and his representatives (especially Mikołaj \"the Black\" Radziwiłł), the last Livonian Master, Gotthard Kettler, secularized the Order and converted to Lutheranism. In the southern part of the Brothers' lands he created the Duchy of Courland and Semigallia for his family. Most of the remaining lands were seized by the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. The north of Estonia was taken back by Denmark and Sweden.\n\nFrom the 14th to the 16th centuries, Middle Low German as spoken in the towns of the Hanseatic League was the established language, but was subsequently succeeded by High German as official language in the course of the 16th and 17th centuries.\nThe five Ecclesiastical states of the Holy Roman Empire in Medieval Livonia were organized into the Livonian Confederation in 1418. A diet or \"Landtag\" was formed in 1419. The city of Walk was chosen as the site of the diet.\n\nFerdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor once again asked for help of Gustav I of Sweden, and The Kingdom of Poland (1385–1569) also began direct negotiations with Gustav, but nothing resulted because on September 29, 1560, Gustav I Vasa died. The chances for success of Magnus and his supporters looked particularly good in 1560 (and 1570). In the former case, he had been recognised as their sovereign by The Bishopric of Ösel-Wiek and The Bishopric of Courland, and as their prospective ruler by the authorities of The Bishopric of Dorpat; The Bishopric of Reval with the Harrien-Wierland gentry were on his side; Livonian Order conditionally recognised his right of ownership of Estonia (Principality of Estonia). Then along with Archbishop Wilhelm von Brandenburg of The Archbishopric of Riga and his Coadjutor Christoph von Mecklenburg, Kettler gave to Magnus the portions of The Kingdom of Livonia, which he had taken possession of, but they refused to give him any more land.\n\nOnce Eric XIV of Sweden became king he took quick actions to get involved in the war. He negotiated a continued peace with Muscovy and spoke to the burghers of Reval city. He offered them goods to submit to him as well as threatening them. By June 6, 1561 they submitted to him contrary to the persuasions of Kettler to the burghers. The King's brother Johan married the Polish princess Catherine Jagiellon. Wanting to obtain his own land in Livonia, he loaned Poland money and then claimed the castles they had pawned as his own instead of using them to pressure Poland. After Johan returned to Finland, Erik XIV forbade him to deal with any foreign countries without his consent.\n\nShortly after that Erik XIV started acting quickly lost any allies he was about to obtain, either from Magnus or the Archbishop of Riga. Magnus was upset he had been tricked out of his inheritance of Holstein. After Sweden occupied Reval, Frederick II of Denmark made a treaty with Erik XIV of Sweden in August 1561. The brothers were in great disagreement and Frederick II negotiated a treaty with Ivan IV on August 7, 1562 in order to help his brother obtain more land and stall further Swedish advance. Erik XIV did not like this and The Northern Seven Years' War between The Free City of Lübeck, Denmark, Poland, and Sweden broke out. While only losing land and trade, Frederick II and Magnus were not faring well. But in 1568 Erik XIV became insane and his brother Johan III took his place.\n\nJohan III ascended to the throne of Sweden and due to his friendship with Poland he began a policy against Muscovy. He would try to obtain more land in Livonia and exercise strength over Denmark. After all parties had been financially drained, Frederick II let his ally, King Sigismund II Augustus of Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, know that he was ready for peace. On December 15, 1570, the Treaty of Stettin was concluded.\n\nIt is, however, more difficult to estimate the scope and magnitude of the support Magnus received in Livonian cities. Compared to the Harrien-Wierland gentry, the Reval city council, and hence probably the majority of citizens, demonstrated a much more reserved attitude towards Denmark and King Magnus of Livonia. Nevertheless, there is no reason to speak about any strong pro-Swedish sentiments among the residents of Reval. The citizens who had fled to The Bishopric of Dorpat or had been deported to Muscovy hailed Magnus as their saviour until 1571. The analysis indicates that during the Livonian War a pro-independence wing emerged among the Livonian gentry and townspeople, forming the so-called \"Peace Party\". Dismissing hostilities, these forces perceived an agreement with Muscovy as a chance to escape the atrocities of war and avoid the division of Livonia. That is why Magnus, who represented Denmark and later struck a deal with Ivan the Terrible, proved a suitable figurehead for this faction.\n\nThe Peace Party, however, had its own armed forces – scattered bands of household troops (\"Hofleute\") under diverse command, which only united in action in 1565 (Battle of Pärnu, 1565 and Siege of Reval, 1565), in 1570–1571 (Siege of Reval, 1570-1571; 30 weeks), and in 1574–1576 (first on Sweden's side, then came the sale of Ösel–Wiek to the Danish Crown, and the loss of the territory to Tsardom of Russia). In 1575 after Muscovy attacked Danish claims in Livonia, Frederick II dropped out of the competition as well as the Holy Roman Emperor. After this Johan III held off on his pursuit for more land due to Muscovy obtaining lands that Sweden controlled. He used the next two years of truce to get in a better position. In 1578, he resumed the fight for not only Livonia, but also everywhere due to an understanding he made with Rzeczpospolita. In 1578 Magnus retired to Rzeczpospolita and his brother all but gave up the land in Livonia.\n\nIn 1561, during the Livonian War, Livonia fell to the Grand Duchy of Lithuania with vassal dependency from Lithuania. Eight years later, in 1569, when the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and Kingdom of Poland formed Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, Livonia became a joint domain administered directly by the king and grand duke. \nHaving rejected peace proposals from its enemies, Ivan the Terrible found himself in a difficult position by 1579, when Crimean Khanate devastated Muscovian territories and burnt down Moscow (see Russo-Crimean Wars), the drought and epidemics have fatally affected the economy, Oprichnina had thoroughly disrupted the government, while The Grand Principality of Lithuania had united with The Kingdom of Poland (1385–1569) and acquired an energetic leader, Stefan Batory, supported by Ottoman Empire (1576). Stefan Batory replied with a series of three offensives against Muscovy, trying to cut The Kingdom of Livonia from Muscovian territories. During his first offensive in 1579, with 22,000 men, he retook Polotsk; during the second, in 1580, with 29,000-strong army, he took Velikie Luki, and in 1581 with a 100,000-strong army he started the Siege of Pskov. Frederick II of Denmark and Norway had trouble continuing the fight against Muscovy unlike Sweden and Poland. He came to an agreement with John III in 1580 giving him the titles in Livonia. That war would last from 1577 to 1582. Muscovy recognized Polish–Lithuanian control of Ducatus Ultradunensis only in 1582. After Magnus von Lyffland died in 1583, Poland invaded his territories in The Duchy of Courland and Frederick II decided to sell his rights of inheritance. Except for the island of Œsel, Denmark was out of the Baltic by 1585. As of 1598 Inflanty Voivodeship was divided onto:\nBULLET::::- Wenden Voivodeship (\"województwo wendeńskie\", Kieś)\nBULLET::::- Dorpat Voivodeship (\"województwo dorpackie\", Dorpat)\nBULLET::::- Parnawa Voivodeship (\"województwo parnawskie\", Parnawa)\n\nBased on a guarantee by Sigismund II Augustus from the 1560s, the German language retained its official status.\n\nThe armies of Ivan the Terrible were initially successful, taking Polotsk (1563) and Parnawa (1575) and overrunning much of Grand Duchy of Lithuania up to Vilnius. Eventually, the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and Kingdom of Poland formed the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1569 under the Union of Lublin. Eric XIV of Sweden did not like this and the Northern Seven Years' War between the Free City of Lübeck, Denmark, Poland, and Sweden broke out. While only losing land and trade, Frederick II of Denmark and Magnus von Lyffland of the Œsel-Wiek did not fare well. But in 1569, Erik XIV became insane and his brother John III of Sweden took his place. After all parties had been financially drained, Frederick II let his ally, King Zygmunt II August, know that he was ready for peace. On December 15, 1570, the Treaty of Stettin was concluded.\n\nIn the next phase of the conflict, in 1577 Ivan IV took advantage of the Commonwealth's internal strife (called the war against Gdańsk in Polish historiography), and during the reign of Stefan Batory in Poland, invaded Livonia, quickly taking almost the entire territory, with the exception of Riga and Reval. In 1578, Magnus of Livonia recognized the sovereignty of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth (not ratified by the Sejm of Poland-Lithuania, or recognized by Denmark). The Kingdom of Livonia was beaten back by Muscovy on all fronts. In 1578, Magnus of Livonia retired to The Bishopric of Courland and his brother all but gave up the land in Livonia.\n\nSweden was given roughly the same area as the former Duchy of Livonia after the 1626–1629 Polish–Swedish War. The area, usually known as Swedish Livonia, became a very important Swedish dominion, with Riga being the second largest Swedish city and Livonia paying for one third of the Swedish war costs. Sweden lost Swedish Livonia, Swedish Estonia and Ingria to the Russian Empire almost 100 years later, by the Capitulation of Estonia and Livonia in 1710 and the Treaty of Nystad in 1721.\n\nThe Livonian Voivodeship (; ) was a unit of administrative division and local government in the Duchy of Livonia, part of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, since it was formed in the 1620s out of the Wenden Voivodeship till the First Partition of Poland in 1772.\n\nThe Russian Empire conquered Swedish Livonia during the course of the Great Northern War and acquired the province in the Capitulation of Estonia and Livonia in 1710, confirmed by the Treaty of Nystad in 1721. Peter the Great confirmed German as the exclusive official language. Russia then added Polish Livonia in 1772 during the Partitions of Poland.\n\nIn 1796 the Riga Governorate was renamed as the Governorate of Livonia ( / , , ). Livonia remained within the Russian Empire until the end of World War I, when it was split between the newly independent states of Latvia and Estonia. In 1918–1920, both Soviet troops and German Freikorps fought against Latvian and Estonian troops for control over Livonia, but their attempts were defeated.\n\nFrom 1845 to 1876, the Baltic governorates of Estonia, Livonia, and Courland—an area roughly corresponding to the historical medieval Livonia—were administratively subordinated to a common Governor-General. Amongst the holders of this post were Count Alexander Arkadyevich Suvorov and Count Pyotr Andreyevich Shuvalov.\n\nIn independent Latvia between the World Wars, southern Livonia became an administrative region under the traditional Latvian name Vidzeme, encompassing the then much larger counties of Riga, Cēsis, Valmiera, and Valka.\n\nOstland was one of the Reichskommissariats established, by a Decree of the Führer dated 17 July 1941, as administrative units of the \"Großdeutsches Reich\" (Greater Germany). The structure of the Reichskommissariats was defined by the same decree. Local administration in the Reichskommissariats was to be organized under a \"National Director\" (\"Reichskomissar\") in Estonia, a \"General Director\" in Latvia and a \"General Adviser\" in Lithuania. The local administration of the Reichskommissariat Ostland was under \"Reichskomissar\" Hinrich Lohse. Below him there was an administrative hierarchy: a \"Generalkomissar\" led each \"Generalbezirke\", \"Gebietskomissars\" and \"Hauptkommissars\" administered \"Kreigsbietes\" and \"Hauptgenbietes\", respectively. Alfred Rosenberg's (Minister für die besetzten Ostgebiete (Reich Ministry for the Occupied Eastern Territories) ministerial authority was, in practice, severely limited. The first reason was that many of the practicalities were commanded elsewhere: the Wehrmacht and the SS managed the military and security aspects, Fritz Saukel (Reich Director of Labour) had control over manpower and working areas, Hermann Göring and Albert Speer had total management of economic aspects in the territories and the Reich postal service administered the East territories' postal services. These German central government interventions in the affairs of Ostland, overriding the appropriate ministries was known as \"Sonderverwaltungen\" (special administration). Later, from September, the civil administration that had been decreed in the previous July was actually set up. Lohse and, for that matter, Koch would not bow to his authority seeking to administer their territories with the independence and authority of gauleiters. on 1 April 1942 an \"arbeitsbereich\" (lit. \"working sphere\", a name for the party cadre organisation outside the reich proper) was established in the civil administration part of the occupied Soviet territories, whereupon Koch and Lohse gradually ceased communication with him, preferring to deal directly with Hitler through Martin Bormann and the party chancellery. In the process they also displaced all other actors including notably the SS, except in central Belarus where HSSPF Erich von dem Bach-Zelewsky had a special command encompassing both military and civil administration territories and engaged in \"anti-partisan\" atrocities.\n\nThe historical land of Livonia has been split between Latvia and Estonia ever since. The Livonian language is spoken by fewer than 100 individuals as a second language, and is understood to be fast approaching extinction. The last native Livonian speaker died in June 2013.\nThe anthem (unofficial) of Livonians is \"Min izāmō, min sindimō\" sharing the melody of Finnish and Estonian anthems.\n\n valign=\"top\"width=\"25%\" \nBULLET::::- Bishopric of Reval\nBULLET::::- Courland\nBULLET::::- Livonian Coast\nBULLET::::- Duchy of Courland\n valign=\"top\"width=\"25%\" \nBULLET::::- History of Estonia\nBULLET::::- History of Latvia\nBULLET::::- History of Lithuania\nBULLET::::- History of Poland\n\nBULLET::::- Virtual Livonia\nBULLET::::- Deutsch-Baltische Ritterschaften in Livland, Kurland, Estland, Oesel\nBULLET::::- Joann Portantiuse Liivimaa kaart 1573. aastast\nBULLET::::- Estonian Manors Portal the English version includes the description of 438 well-preserved historical manors of nowadays Estonia (historically - northern part of Old-Livonia/Alt-Livland)\nBULLET::::- \"Atlas of Livonia, or of the Two Governments and Duchies Livonia and Estonia, and of the Province of Oesel\" from the World Digital Library\n"}
{"id": "18450", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18450", "title": "Lung cancer", "text": "Lung cancer\n\nLung cancer, also known as lung carcinoma, is a malignant lung tumor characterized by uncontrolled cell growth in tissues of the lung. This growth can spread beyond the lung by the process of metastasis into nearby tissue or other parts of the body. Most cancers that start in the lung, known as primary lung cancers, are carcinomas. The two main types are small-cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) and non-small-cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC). The most common symptoms are coughing (including coughing up blood), weight loss, shortness of breath, and chest pains.\nThe vast majority (85%) of cases of lung cancer are due to long-term tobacco smoking. About 10–15% of cases occur in people who have never smoked. These cases are often caused by a combination of genetic factors and exposure to radon gas, asbestos, second-hand smoke, or other forms of air pollution. Lung cancer may be seen on chest radiographs and computed tomography (CT) scans. The diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy which is usually performed by bronchoscopy or CT-guidance.\nAvoidance of risk factors, including smoking and air pollution, is the primary method of prevention. Treatment and long-term outcomes depend on the type of cancer, the stage (degree of spread), and the person's overall health. Most cases are not curable. Common treatments include surgery, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy. NSCLC is sometimes treated with surgery, whereas SCLC usually responds better to chemotherapy and radiotherapy.\nWorldwide in 2012, lung cancer occurred in 1.8 million people and resulted in 1.6 million deaths. This makes it the most common cause of cancer-related death in men and second most common in women after breast cancer. The most common age at diagnosis is 70 years. Overall, 17.4% of people in the United States diagnosed with lung cancer survive five years after the diagnosis, while outcomes on average are worse in the developing world.\nSigns and symptoms which may suggest lung cancer include:\nBULLET::::- Respiratory symptoms: coughing, coughing up blood, wheezing, or shortness of breath\nBULLET::::- Systemic symptoms: weight loss, weakness, fever, or clubbing of the fingernails\nBULLET::::- Symptoms due to the cancer mass pressing on adjacent structures: chest pain, bone pain, superior vena cava obstruction, or difficulty swallowing\n\nIf the cancer grows in the airways, it may obstruct airflow, causing breathing difficulties. The obstruction can also lead to accumulation of secretions behind the blockage, and increase the risk of pneumonia.\n\nDepending on the type of tumor, paraneoplastic phenomena — symptoms not due to the local presence of cancer — may initially attract attention to the disease. In lung cancer, these phenomena may include hypercalcemia, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH, abnormally concentrated urine and diluted blood), ectopic ACTH production, or Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome (muscle weakness due to autoantibodies). Tumors in the top of the lung, known as Pancoast tumors, may invade the local part of the sympathetic nervous system, resulting in Horner's syndrome (dropping of the eyelid and a small pupil on that side), as well as damage to the brachial plexus.\n\nMany of the symptoms of lung cancer (poor appetite, weight loss, fever, fatigue) are not specific. In many people, the cancer has already spread beyond the original site by the time they have symptoms and seek medical attention. Symptoms that suggest the presence of metastatic disease include weight loss, bone pain, and neurological symptoms (headaches, fainting, convulsions, or limb weakness). Common sites of spread include the brain, bone, adrenal glands, opposite lung, liver, pericardium, and kidneys. About 10% of people with lung cancer do not have symptoms at diagnosis; these cancers are incidentally found on routine chest radiography.\n\nCancer develops after genetic damage to DNA and epigenetic changes. Those changes affect the cell's normal functions, including cell proliferation, programmed cell death (apoptosis), and DNA repair. As more damage accumulates, the risk for cancer increases.\n\nTobacco smoking is by far the main contributor to lung cancer. Cigarette smoke contains at least 73 known carcinogens, including benzo[\"a\"]pyrene, NNK, 1,3-butadiene, and a radioactive isotope of polonium – polonium-210. Across the developed world, 90% of lung cancer deaths in men and 70% of those in women during the year 2000 were attributed to smoking. Smoking accounts for about 85% of lung cancer cases. A 2014 review found that vaping may be a risk factor for lung cancer but less than that of cigarettes.\n\nPassive smoking – the inhalation of smoke from another's smoking – is a cause of lung cancer in nonsmokers. A passive smoker can be defined as someone either living or working with a smoker. Studies from the US, Europe, and the UK have consistently shown a significantly-increased risk among those exposed to passive smoking. Those who live with someone who smokes have a 20–30% increase in risk while those who work in an environment with secondhand smoke have a 16–19% increase in risk. Investigations of sidestream smoke suggest that it is more dangerous than direct smoke. Passive smoking results in roughly 3,400 lung cancer-related deaths each year in the US.\n\nMarijuana smoke contains many of the same carcinogens as those found in tobacco smoke, however, the effect of smoking cannabis on lung cancer risk is not clear. A 2013 review did not find an increased risk from light to moderate use. A 2014 review found that smoking cannabis doubled the risk of lung cancer, though cannabis is in many countries commonly mixed with tobacco.\n\nRadon is a colorless and odorless gas generated by the breakdown of radioactive radium, which in turn is the decay product of uranium, found in the Earth's crust. The radiation decay products ionize genetic material, causing mutations that sometimes become cancerous. Radon is the second most-common cause of lung cancer in the US, causing about 21,000 deaths each year. The risk increases 8–16% for every 100 Bq/m³ increase in the radon concentration. Radon gas levels vary by locality and the composition of the underlying soil and rocks. About one in 15 homes in the US have radon levels above the recommended guideline of 4 picocuries per liter (pCi/l) (148 Bq/m³).\n\nAsbestos can cause a variety of lung diseases such as lung cancer. Tobacco smoking and asbestos both have synergistic effects on the development of lung cancer. In smokers who work with asbestos, the risk of lung cancer is increased 45-fold compared to the general population. Asbestos can also cause cancer of the pleura, called mesothelioma – which actually is different from lung cancer.\n\nOutdoor air pollutants, especially chemicals released from the burning of fossil fuels, increase the risk of lung cancer. Fine particulates (PM) and sulfate aerosols, which may be released in traffic exhaust fumes, are associated with a slightly-increased risk. For nitrogen dioxide, an incremental increase of 10 parts per billion increases the risk of lung cancer by 14%. Outdoor air pollution is estimated to cause 1–2% of lung cancers.\n\nTentative evidence supports an increased risk of lung cancer from indoor air pollution in relation to the burning of wood, charcoal, dung, or crop residue for cooking and heating. Women who are exposed to indoor coal smoke have roughly twice the risk, and many of the by-products of burning biomass are known or suspected carcinogens. This risk affects about 2.4 billion people worldwide, and it is believed to result in 1.5% of lung cancer deaths.\n\nAbout 8% of lung cancer is caused by inherited factors. In relatives of people that are diagnosed with lung cancer, the risk is doubled, likely due to a combination of genes. Polymorphisms on chromosomes 5, 6, and 15 are known to affect the risk of lung cancer. Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the genes encoding the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) – \"CHRNA5\", \"CHRNA3\", and \"CHRNB4\" – are of those associated with an increased risk of lung cancer, as well as \"RGS17\" – a gene regulating G-protein signaling.\n\nNumerous other substances, occupations, and environmental exposures have been linked to lung cancer. The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) states that there is some \"sufficient evidence\" to show that the following are carcinogenic in the lungs:\nBULLET::::- Some metals (aluminium production, cadmium and cadmium compounds, chromium(VI) compounds, beryllium and beryllium compounds, iron and steel founding, nickel compounds, arsenic and inorganic arsenic compounds, and underground hematite mining)\nBULLET::::- Some products of combustion (incomplete combustion, coal (indoor emissions from household coal burning), coal gasification, coal-tar pitch, coke production, soot, and diesel engine exhaust)\nBULLET::::- Ionizing radiation (X-ray and gamma)\nBULLET::::- Some toxic gases (methyl ether (technical grade), and bis-(chloromethyl) ether, sulfur mustard, MOPP (vincristine-prednisone-nitrogen mustard-procarbazine mixture) and fumes from painting)\nBULLET::::- Rubber production and crystalline silica dust\nBULLET::::- There is a small increase in the risk of lung cancer in people affected by systemic sclerosis.\n\nSimilar to many other cancers, lung cancer is initiated by either the activation of oncogenes or the inactivation of tumor suppressor genes. Carcinogens cause mutations in these genes that induce the development of cancer.\n\nMutations in the \"K-ras\" proto-oncogene cause roughly 10–30% of lung adenocarcinomas. Nearly 4% of non-small-cell lung carcinomas involve an EML4-ALK tyrosine kinase fusion gene.\n\nEpigenetic changes such as alteration of DNA methylation, histone tail modification, or microRNA regulation may result in the inactivation of tumor suppressor genes. Importantly, cancer cells develop resistance to oxidative stress, which enables them to withstand and exacerbate inflammatory conditions that inhibit the activity of the immune system against the tumor.\n\nThe epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) regulates cell proliferation, apoptosis, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion. Mutations and amplification of EGFR are common in non-small-cell lung carcinoma, and they provide the basis for treatment with EGFR-inhibitors. \"Her2/neu\" is affected less frequently. Other genes that are often mutated or amplified include \"c-MET\", \"NKX2-1\", \"LKB1\", \"PIK3CA\", and \"BRAF\".\n\nThe cell lines of origin are not fully understood. The mechanism may involve the abnormal activation of stem cells. In the proximal airways, stem cells that express keratin 5 are more likely to be affected, typically leading to squamous-cell lung carcinoma. In the middle airways, implicated stem cells include club cells and neuroepithelial cells that express club cell secretory protein. Small-cell lung carcinoma may originate from these cell lines or neuroendocrine cells, and it may express CD44.\n\nMetastasis of lung cancer requires transition from epithelial to mesenchymal cell type. This may occur through the activation of signaling pathways such as Akt/GSK3Beta, MEK-ERK, Fas, and Par6.\n\nPerforming a chest radiograph is one of the first investigative steps if a person reports symptoms that may be suggestive of lung cancer. This may reveal an obvious mass, the widening of the mediastinum (suggestive of spread to lymph nodes there), atelectasis (lung collapse), consolidation (pneumonia), or pleural effusion. CT imaging is typically used to provide more information about the type and extent of disease. Bronchoscopic or CT-guided biopsy is often used to sample the tumor for histopathology.\n\nLung cancer often appears as a solitary pulmonary nodule on a chest radiograph. However, the differential diagnosis is wide. Many other diseases can also give this appearance, including metastatic cancer, hamartomas, and infectious granulomas caused by tuberculosis, histoplasmosis or coccidioidomycosis. Lung cancer can also be an incidental finding, as a solitary pulmonary nodule on a chest radiograph or CT scan done for an unrelated reason. The definitive diagnosis of lung cancer is based on the histological examination of the suspicious tissue in the context of the clinical and radiological features.\n\nClinical practice guidelines recommend frequencies for pulmonary nodule surveillance. CT imaging should not be used for longer or more frequently than indicated, as the extended surveillance exposes people to increased radiation and is costly.\n\n+ style=\"background:#E5AFAA;\"Age-adjusted incidence of lung cancer by histological type\n! abbr=\"Type\"  Histological type\n! abbr=\"Frequency\"  Incidence per 100,000 per year\n\nLung cancers are classified according to histological type. This classification is important for determining both the management and predicting outcomes of the disease. Lung cancers are carcinomas – malignancies that arise from epithelial cells. Lung carcinomas are categorized by the size and appearance of the malignant cells seen by a histopathologist under a microscope. For therapeutic purposes, two broad classes are distinguished: non-small-cell lung carcinoma and small-cell lung carcinoma.\n\nThe three main subtypes of NSCLC are adenocarcinoma, squamous-cell carcinoma, and large-cell carcinoma. Rare subtypes include pulmonary enteric adenocarcinoma.\n\nNearly 40% of lung cancers are adenocarcinoma, which usually comes from peripheral lung tissue. Although most cases of adenocarcinoma are associated with smoking, adenocarcinoma is also the most-common form of lung cancer among people who have smoked fewer than 100 cigarettes in their lifetimes (\"never-smokers\") and ex-smokers with a modest smoking history. A subtype of adenocarcinoma, the bronchioloalveolar carcinoma, is more common in female never-smokers, and may have a better long-term survival.\n\nSquamous-cell carcinoma causes about 30% of lung cancers. They typically occur close to large airways. A hollow cavity and associated cell death are commonly found at the center of the tumor.\n\nNearly 9% of lung cancers are large-cell carcinoma. These are so named because the cancer cells are large, with excess cytoplasm, large nuclei, and conspicuous nucleoli.\n\nIn SCLC, the cells contain dense neurosecretory granules (vesicles containing neuroendocrine hormones), which give this tumor an endocrine or paraneoplastic syndrome association. Most cases arise in the larger airways (primary and secondary bronchi). Sixty to seventy percent have extensive disease (which cannot be targeted within a single radiation therapy field) at presentation.\n\nFour main histological subtypes are recognised, although some cancers may contain a combination of different subtypes, such as adenosquamous carcinoma. Rare subtypes include carcinoid tumors, bronchial gland carcinomas, and sarcomatoid carcinomas.\n\n+ style=\"background:#E5AFAA;\"Typical Napsin-A and TTF-1 immunostaining in primary lung carcinoma\n! abbr=\"Type\"  Histological type\n! abbr=\"Nap=A\"  Napsin-A\n! TTF-1\n\nThe lungs are a common place for the spread of tumors from other parts of the body. Secondary cancers are classified by the site of origin; for example, breast cancer that has been spread to the lung is called metastatic breast cancer. Metastases often have a characteristic round appearance on chest radiograph.\n\nPrimary lung cancers also most commonly metastasize to the brain, bones, liver, and adrenal glands. Immunostaining of a biopsy usually helps determine the original source. The presence of Napsin-A, TTF-1, CK7, and CK20 help confirm the subtype of lung carcinoma. SCLC that originates from neuroendocrine cells may express CD56, neural cell adhesion molecule, synaptophysin, or chromogranin.\n\nLung cancer staging is an assessment of the degree of spread of the cancer from its original source. It is one of the factors affecting both the prognosis and the potential treatment of lung cancer.\n\nThe evaluation of non-small-cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) staging uses the TNM classification (tumor, node, metastasis). This is based on the size of the primary tumor, lymph node involvement, and distant metastasis.\n\n+ TNM classification in lung cancer\n\n! colspan=\"3\"  T: Primary tumor\n! colspan=\"3\"  N: Lymph nodes\n! colspan=\"3\"  M: Metastasis\n\nUsing the TNM descriptors, a group is assigned, ranging from occult cancer, through stages 0, IA (one-A), IB, IIA, IIB, IIIA, IIIB, and IV (four). This stage group assists with the choice of treatment and estimation of prognosis.\n\n+ Stage group according to TNM classification in lung cancer\n! TNM\n! Stage group\n\nSCLC has traditionally been classified as \"limited stage\" (confined to one-half of the chest and within the scope of a single tolerable radiotherapy field) or \"extensive stage\" (more widespread disease). However, the TNM classification and grouping are useful in estimating prognosis.\n\nFor both NSCLC and SCLC, the two general types of staging evaluations are clinical staging and surgical staging. Clinical staging is performed before definitive surgery. It is based on the results of imaging studies (such as CT scans and PET scans) and biopsy results. Surgical staging is evaluated either during or after the operation. It is based on the combined results of surgical and clinical findings, including surgical sampling of thoracic lymph nodes.\n\nSmoking prevention and smoking cessation are effective ways of preventing the development of lung cancer.\n\nWhile in most countries industrial and domestic carcinogens have been identified and banned, tobacco smoking is still widespread. Eliminating tobacco smoking is a primary goal in the prevention of lung cancer, and smoking cessation is an important preventive tool in this process.\n\nPolicy interventions to decrease passive smoking in public areas such as restaurants and workplaces have become more common in many Western countries. Bhutan has had a complete smoking ban since 2005 while India introduced a ban on smoking in public in October 2008. The World Health Organization has called for governments to institute a total ban on tobacco advertising to prevent young people from taking up smoking. They assess that such bans have reduced tobacco consumption by 16% where instituted.\n\nCancer screening uses medical tests to detect disease in large groups of people who have no symptoms. For individuals with high risk of developing lung cancer, computed tomography (CT) screening can detect cancer and give a person options to respond to it in a way that prolongs life. This form of screening reduces the chance of death from lung cancer by an absolute amount of 0.3% (relative amount of 20%). High risk people are those age 55–74 who have smoked equivalent amount of a pack of cigarettes daily for 30 years including time within the past 15 years.\n\nCT screening is associated with a high rate of falsely positive tests which may result in unneeded treatment. For each true positive scan there are about 19 falsely positives scans. Other concerns include radiation exposure and the cost of testing along with follow up. Research has not found two other available tests—sputum cytology or chest radiograph (CXR) screening tests—to have any benefit.\n\nThe United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommends yearly screening using low-dose computed tomography in those who have a total smoking history of 30 pack-years and are between 55 and 80 years old until a person has not been smoking for more than 15 years. Screening should not be done in those with other health problems that would make treatment of lung cancer if found not an option. The English National Health Service was in 2014 re-examining the evidence for screening.\n\nThe long-term use of supplemental vitamin A, vitamin C, vitamin D or vitamin E does not reduce the risk of lung cancer. Some studies have found vitamin A, B, and E may increase the risk of lung cancer in those who have a history of smoking.\n\nSome studies suggest that people who eat diets with a higher proportion of vegetables and fruit tend to have a lower risk, but this may be due to confounding—with the lower risk actually due to the association of a high fruit and vegetables diet with less smoking. Several rigorous studies have not demonstrated a clear association between diet and lung cancer risk, although meta-analysis that accounts for smoking status may show benefit from a healthy diet.\n\nTreatment for lung cancer depends on the cancer's specific cell type, how far it has spread, and the person's performance status. Common treatments include palliative care, surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy. Targeted therapy of lung cancer is growing in importance for advanced lung cancer. People who have lung cancer should be encouraged to stop smoking. There is no clear evidence which smoking cessation program is most effective for people who have been diagnosed with lung cancer. It is unclear if exercise training is beneficial for people living with advanced lung cancer. Exercise training may benefit people with NSCLC who are recovering from lung surgery.\n\nIf investigations confirm NSCLC, the stage is assessed to determine whether the disease is localized and amenable to surgery or if it has spread to the point where it cannot be cured surgically. CT scan and positron emission tomography (PET-CT), non-invasive tests, can be used to help rule out malignancy or mediastinal lymph node involvement. If mediastinal lymph node involvement is suspected using PET-CT, the nodes should be sampled (using a biopsy) to assist staging, a PET-CT scan is not accurate enough to be used alone. Techniques used for obtaining a sample include transthoracic needle aspiration, transbronchial needle aspiration (with or without endobronchial ultrasound), endoscopic ultrasound with needle aspiration, mediastinoscopy, and thoracoscopy. Blood tests and pulmonary function testing are used to assess whether a person is well enough for surgery. If pulmonary function tests reveal poor respiratory reserve, surgery may not be possible.\n\nIn most cases of early-stage NSCLC, removal of a lobe of lung (lobectomy) is the surgical treatment of choice. In people who are unfit for a full lobectomy, a smaller sublobar excision (wedge resection) may be performed. However, wedge resection has a higher risk of recurrence than lobectomy. Radioactive iodine brachytherapy at the margins of wedge excision may reduce the risk of recurrence. Rarely, removal of a whole lung (pneumonectomy) is performed. Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) and VATS lobectomy use a minimally invasive approach to lung cancer surgery. VATS lobectomy is equally effective compared to conventional open lobectomy, with less postoperative illness.\n\nIn SCLC, chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy is typically used. However the role of surgery in SCLC is being reconsidered. Surgery might improve outcomes when added to chemotherapy and radiation in early stage SCLC.\n\nThe effectiveness of lung cancer surgery (resection) for people with stage I - IIA NSCLC is not clear, however, weak evidence suggests that a combined approach of lung cancer resection and removing the mediastinal lymph nodes (mediastinal lymph node dissection) may improve survival compared to lung resection and a sample of mediastinal nodes (not a complete node dissection).\n\nRadiotherapy is often given together with chemotherapy, and may be used with curative intent in people with NSCLC who are not eligible for surgery. This form of high-intensity radiotherapy is called radical radiotherapy. A refinement of this technique is continuous hyperfractionated accelerated radiotherapy (CHART), in which a high dose of radiotherapy is given in a short time period. Radiosurgery refers to the radiotherapy technique of giving a precise high-dose of radiotherapy that is guided by a computer. Postoperative (adjuvant) thoracic radiotherapy generally should not be used after curative-intent surgery for NSCLC. Some people with mediastinal N2 lymph node involvement might benefit from post-operative radiotherapy.\n\nFor potentially curable SCLC cases, chest radiotherapy is often recommended in addition to chemotherapy. The ideal timing of these therapies (the optimal time to give radiotherapy and chemotherapy for improving survival) is not known.\nIf cancer growth blocks a short section of bronchus, brachytherapy (localized radiotherapy) may be given directly inside the airway to open the passage. Compared to external beam radiotherapy, brachytherapy allows a reduction in treatment time and reduced radiation exposure to healthcare staff. Evidence for brachytherapy, however, is less than that for external beam radiotherapy.\n\nProphylactic cranial irradiation (PCI) is a type of radiotherapy to the brain, used to reduce the risk of metastasis. PCI is most useful in SCLC. In limited-stage disease, PCI increases three-year survival from 15% to 20%; in extensive disease, one-year survival increases from 13% to 27%. For people who have NSCLC and a single brain metastasis, it is not clear if surgery is more effective than radiosurgery.\n\nRecent improvements in targeting and imaging have led to the development of stereotactic radiation in the treatment of early-stage lung cancer. In this form of radiotherapy, high doses are delivered over a number of sessions using stereotactic targeting techniques. Its use is primarily in patients who are not surgical candidates due to medical comorbidities.\n\nFor both NSCLC and SCLC patients, smaller doses of radiation to the chest may be used for symptom control (palliative radiotherapy). The use of higher doses of radiotherapy for palliative care are not shown to prolong survival.\n\nThe chemotherapy regimen depends on the tumor type. SCLC, even relatively early stage disease, is treated primarily with chemotherapy and radiation. In SCLC, cisplatin and etoposide are most commonly used. Combinations with carboplatin, gemcitabine, paclitaxel, vinorelbine, topotecan, and irinotecan are also used. In advanced NSCLC, chemotherapy improves survival and is used as first-line treatment, provided the person is well enough for the treatment. Typically, two drugs are used, of which one is often platinum-based (either cisplatin or carboplatin). Other commonly used drugs are gemcitabine, paclitaxel, docetaxel, pemetrexed, etoposide or vinorelbine. Platinum-based drugs and combinations that include platinum therapy do not appear to be more beneficial for prolonging survival compared to other non-platinum medications, and may lead to a higher risk of serious adverse effects such as nausea, vomiting, anaemia, and thrombocytopenia, especially in people over the age of 70 years. There is not enough evidence to determine which chemotherapy approach is associated with the highest quality of life. There is also insufficient evidence to determine if treating people with NSCLC a second time when the first round of chemotherapy was not successful (second-line chemotherapy) causes more benefit or harm.\n\nAdjuvant chemotherapy refers to the use of chemotherapy after apparently curative surgery to improve the outcome. In NSCLC, samples are taken of nearby lymph nodes during surgery to assist staging. If stage II or III disease is confirmed, adjuvant chemotherapy (including or not including postoperative radiotherapy) improves survival by 4% at five years. The combination of vinorelbine and cisplatin is more effective than older regimens. Adjuvant chemotherapy for people with stage IB cancer is controversial, as clinical trials have not clearly demonstrated a survival benefit. Chemotherapy before surgery in NSCLC that can be removed surgically may improve outcomes.\n\nChemotherapy may be combined with palliative care in the treatment of the NSCLC. In advanced cases, appropriate chemotherapy improves average survival over supportive care alone, as well as improving quality of life. With adequate physical fitness maintaining chemotherapy during lung cancer palliation offers 1.5 to 3 months of prolongation of survival, symptomatic relief, and an improvement in quality of life, with better results seen with modern agents. The NSCLC Meta-Analyses Collaborative Group recommends if the recipient wants and can tolerate treatment, then chemotherapy should be considered in advanced NSCLC.\n\nSeveral drugs that target molecular pathways in lung cancer are available, especially for the treatment of advanced disease. Erlotinib, gefitinib and afatinib inhibit tyrosine kinase at the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). These EGFR inhibitors may help delay the spread of cancer cells for people with EGFR M+ lung cancer and may improve a person's quality of life. EGFR inhibitors have not been shown to help people survive longer. For people with EGFR mutations, treatment with gefitinib may result in an improved quality of life compared to treatment with chemotherapy. Denosumab is a monoclonal antibody directed against receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand and may be useful in the treatment of bone metastases.\n\nImmunotherapy may be used for both SCLC and NSCLC. Vaccine-based immunotherapy treatment after surgery or radiotherapy may not lead to improved survival for people with Stage I-III NSCLC.\n\nSeveral treatments can be provided via bronchoscopy for the management of airway obstruction or bleeding. If an airway becomes obstructed by cancer growth, options include rigid bronchoscopy, balloon bronchoplasty, stenting, and microdebridement. Laser photosection involves the delivery of laser light inside the airway via a bronchoscope to remove the obstructing tumor.\n\nPalliative care when added to usual cancer care benefits people even when they are still receiving chemotherapy. These approaches allow additional discussion of treatment options and provide opportunities to arrive at well-considered decisions. Palliative care may avoid unhelpful but expensive care not only at the end of life, but also throughout the course of the illness. For individuals who have more advanced disease, hospice care may also be appropriate.\n\nThere is weak evidence to suggest that supportive care interventions (non-invasive interventions) that focus on well-being for people with lung cancer may improve quality of life. Interventions such as nurse follow-ups, psychotherapy, psychosocial therapy, and educational programs may be beneficial, however, the evidence is not strong (further research is needed). Counselling may help people cope with emotional symptoms related to lung cancer. Reflexology may be effective in the short-term, however more research is needed. There is no evidence to suggest that nutritional interventions or exercise programs result in an improvement in the quality of life for a person with lung cancer.\n\n+ style=\"background:#E5AFAA;\"Outcomes in lung cancer according to clinical stage\n! abbr=\"Type\" rowspan=\"2\"  Clinical stage\n! abbr=\"5-year\" colspan=\"2\"  Five-year survival (%)\n! abbr=\"NSCLC\"  Non-small-cell lung carcinoma\n! abbr=\"SCLC\"  Small-cell lung carcinoma\n\nOf all people with lung cancer in the US, 16.8% survive for at least five years after diagnosis. In England and Wales, between 2010 and 2011, overall five-year survival for lung cancer was estimated at 9.5%. Outcomes are generally worse in the developing world. Stage is often advanced at the time of diagnosis. At presentation, 30–40% of cases of NSCLC are stage IV, and 60% of SCLC are stage IV. Survival for lung cancer falls as the stage at diagnosis becomes more advanced: the English data suggest that around 70% of patients survive at least a year when diagnosed at the earliest stage, but this falls to just 14% for those diagnosed with the most advanced disease (stage IV).\n\nPrognostic factors in NSCLC include presence of pulmonary symptoms, large tumor size (>3 cm), non-squamous cell type (histology), degree of spread (stage) and metastases to multiple lymph nodes, and vascular invasion. For people with inoperable disease, outcomes are worse in those with poor performance status and weight loss of more than 10%. Prognostic factors in small cell lung cancer include performance status, biological sex, stage of disease, and involvement of the central nervous system or liver at the time of diagnosis.\n\nFor NSCLC, the best prognosis is achieved with complete surgical resection of stage IA disease, with up to 70% five-year survival. People with extensive-stage SCLC have an average five-year survival rate of less than 1%. The average survival time for limited-stage disease is 20 months, with a five-year survival rate of 20%.\n\nAccording to data provided by the National Cancer Institute, the median age at diagnosis of lung cancer in the US is 70 years, and the median age at death is 72 years. In the US, people with medical insurance are more likely to have a better outcome.\n\nWorldwide, lung cancer is the most-common cancer among men in terms of both incidence and mortality, and among women has the third-highest incidence, and is second after breast cancer in mortality. In 2012, there were 1.82 million new cases worldwide, and 1.56 million deaths due to lung cancer, representing 19.4% of all deaths from cancer. The highest rates are in North America, Europe, and East Asia, with over a third of new cases in China that year. Rates in Africa and South Asia are much lower.\n\nThe population segment that is most likely to develop lung cancer is people aged over 50 who have a history of smoking. Unlike the mortality rate in men – which began declining more than 20 years ago, women's lung cancer mortality rates have risen over the last decades, and are just recently beginning to stabilize. In the US, the lifetime risk of developing lung cancer is 8% in men and 6% in women.\n\nFor every 3–4 million cigarettes smoked, one lung cancer death can occur. The influence of \"Big Tobacco\" plays a significant role in smoking. Young nonsmokers who see tobacco advertisements are more likely to smoke. The role of passive smoking is increasingly being recognized as a risk factor for lung cancer, resulting in policy interventions to decrease the undesired exposure of nonsmokers to others' tobacco smoke.\n\nFrom the 1960s, the rates of lung adenocarcinoma started to rise in relation to other kinds of lung cancer, partially due to the introduction of filter cigarettes. The use of filters removes larger particles from tobacco smoke, thus reducing deposition in larger airways. However, the smoker has to inhale more deeply to receive the same amount of nicotine, increasing particle deposition in small airways where adenocarcinoma tends to arise. Rates of lung adenocarcinoma continues to rise.\n\nIn the US, both black men and black women have a higher incidence. Lung cancer rates are currently lower in developing countries. With increased smoking in developing countries, the rates are expected to increase in the next few years, notably in both China and India.\n\nAlso in the US, military veterans have a 25–50% higher rate of lung cancer primarily due to higher rates of smoking. During World War II and the Korean War, asbestos also played a role, and Agent Orange may have caused some problems during the Vietnam War.\n\nLung cancer is the third most-common cancer in the UK (around 46,400 people were diagnosed with the disease in 2014), and it is the most common cause of cancer-related death (around 35,900 people died in 2014).\n\nLung cancer was uncommon before the advent of cigarette smoking; it was not even recognized as a distinct disease until 1761. Different aspects of lung cancer were described further in 1810. Malignant lung tumors made up only 1% of all cancers seen at autopsy in 1878, but had risen to 10–15% by the early 1900s. Case reports in the medical literature numbered only 374 worldwide in 1912, but a review of autopsies showed the incidence of lung cancer had increased from 0.3% in 1852 to 5.66% in 1952. In Germany in 1929, physician Fritz Lickint recognized the link between smoking and lung cancer, which led to an aggressive antismoking campaign. The British Doctors' Study, published in the 1950s, was the first solid epidemiological evidence of the link between lung cancer and smoking. As a result, in 1964 the Surgeon General of the United States recommended smokers should stop smoking.\n\nThe connection with radon gas was first recognized among miners in the Ore Mountains near Schneeberg, Saxony. Silver has been mined there since 1470, and these mines are rich in uranium, with its accompanying radium and radon gas. Miners developed a disproportionate amount of lung disease, eventually recognized as lung cancer in the 1870s. Despite this discovery, mining continued into the 1950s, due to the USSR's demand for uranium. Radon was confirmed as a cause of lung cancer in the 1960s.\n\nThe first successful pneumonectomy for lung cancer was performed in 1933. Palliative radiotherapy has been used since the 1940s. Radical radiotherapy, initially used in the 1950s, was an attempt to use larger radiation doses in patients with relatively early-stage lung cancer, but who were otherwise unfit for surgery. In 1997, CHART was seen as an improvement over conventional radical radiotherapy. With SCLC, initial attempts in the 1960s at surgical resection and radical radiotherapy were unsuccessful. In the 1970s, successful chemotherapy regimens were developed.\n\nCurrent research directions for lung cancer treatment include immunotherapy, which encourages the body's immune system to attack the tumor cells, epigenetics, and new combinations of chemotherapy and radiotherapy, both on their own and together. Many of these new treatments work through immune checkpoint blockade, disrupting cancer's ability to evade the immune system.\n\nIpilimumab blocks signaling through a receptor on T cells known as CTLA-4 which dampens down the immune system. It has been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for treatment of melanoma and is undergoing clinical trials for both NSCLC and SCLC.\n\nOther immunotherapy treatments interfere with the binding of programmed cell death 1 (PD-1) protein with its ligand PD-1 ligand 1 (PD-L1), and have been approved as first- and subsequent-line treatments for various subsets of lung cancers. Signaling through PD-1 inactivates T cells. Some cancer cells appear to exploit this by expressing PD-L1 in order to switch off T cells that might recognise them as a threat. Monoclonal antibodies targeting both PD-1 and PD-L1, such as pembrolizumab, nivolumab, atezolizumab, and durvalumab are currently in clinical trials for treatment for lung cancer.\n\nEpigenetics is the study of small, usually heritable, molecular modifications—or \"tags\"—that bind to DNA and modify gene expression levels. Targeting these tags with drugs can kill cancer cells. Early-stage research in NSCLC using drugs aimed at epigenetic modifications shows that blocking more than one of these tags can kill cancer cells with fewer side effects. Studies also show that giving patients these drugs before standard treatment can improve its effectiveness. Clinical trials are underway to evaluate how well these drugs kill lung cancer cells in humans. Several drugs that target epigenetic mechanisms are in development. Histone deacetylase inhibitors in development include valproic acid, vorinostat, belinostat, panobinostat, entinostat, and romidepsin. DNA methyltransferase inhibitors in development include decitabine, azacytidine, and hydralazine.\n\nThe TRACERx project is looking at how NSCLC develops and evolves, and how these tumors become resistant to treatment. The project will look at tumor samples from 850 NSCLC patients at various stages including diagnosis, after first treatment, post-treatment, and relapse. By studying samples at different points of tumor development, the researchers hope to identify the changes that drive tumor growth and resistance to treatment. The results of this project will help scientists and doctors gain a better understanding of NSCLC and potentially lead to the development of new treatments for the disease.\n\nFor lung cancer cases that develop resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) tyrosine kinase inhibitors, new drugs are in development. EGFR inhibitors include afatinib and dacomitinib. An alternative signaling pathway, c-Met, can be inhibited by tivantinib and onartuzumab. New ALK inhibitors include crizotinib and ceritinib. If the MAPK/ERK pathway is involved, the BRAF kinase inhibitor dabrafenib and the MAPK/MEK inhibitor trametinib may be beneficial.\n\nThe PI3K pathway has been investigated as a target for lung cancer therapy. The most promising strategies for targeting this pathway seem to be selective inhibition of one or more members of the class I PI3Ks, and co-targeted inhibition of this pathway with others such as MEK.\n\nLung cancer stem cells are often resistant to conventional chemotherapy and radiotherapy. This may lead to relapse after treatment. New approaches target protein or glycoprotein markers that are specific to the stem cells. Such markers include CD133, CD90, ALDH1A1, CD44 and ABCG2. Signaling pathways such as Hedgehog, Wnt and Notch are often implicated in the self-renewal of stem cell lines. Thus treatments targeting these pathways may help to prevent relapse.\n\n"}
{"id": "18452", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18452", "title": "Lists of office-holders", "text": "Lists of office-holders\n\nThese are lists of incumbents (individuals holding offices or positions), including heads of states or of subnational entities.\n\nA historical discipline, archontology, focuses on the study of past and current office holders.\n\nIncumbents may also be found in the countries' articles (main article and \"Politics of\") and the list of national leaders, recent changes in 2007 in politics, and past leaders on State leaders by year and Colonial governors by year.\n\nVarious articles group lists by title, function or topic: e.g. abdication, assassinated persons, cabinet (government), chancellor, ex-monarchs (20th century), head of government, head of state, lieutenant governor, mayor, military commanders, minister (and ministers by portfolio below), order of precedence, peerage, president, prime minister, Reichstag participants (1792), Secretary of State.\n\nBULLET::::- President of the European Council\nBULLET::::- President of the European Commission\nBULLET::::- United Nations Secretary-General\nBULLET::::- United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees\nBULLET::::- International Monetary Fund Managing Directors\nBULLET::::- Director-General of the World Trade Organization\nBULLET::::- NATO Secretaries General\nBULLET::::- FIFA presidents\nBULLET::::- International Olympic Committee Presidents\n\nBULLET::::- Burundi: Rulers of Burundi\nBULLET::::- Comoros:\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Comoros\nBULLET::::- Sultans on the Comoros\nBULLET::::- Kenya: Rulers of Kenya\nBULLET::::- Madagascar: Rulers of Madagascar\nBULLET::::- Monarchs of Madagascar (until 1897)\nBULLET::::- Colonial Heads of Madagascar\nBULLET::::- List of Presidents of Madagascar\nBULLET::::- Malawi (former Nyasaland, former British Central Africa Protectorate)\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of Malawi\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Malawi\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Malawi (Nyasaland)\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Malawi\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Nkamanga\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Ngoni Dynasty of Jere (Qeko)\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Ngoni Dynasty of Maseko (Gomani)\nBULLET::::- Mauritius\nBULLET::::- Queen of Mauritius\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Mauritius\nBULLET::::- Governors-General of Mauritius\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Mauritius\nBULLET::::- Mozambique\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of Mozambique\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Mozambique\nBULLET::::- Heads of National Resistance Government of Mozambique\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Mozambique\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Delagoa Bay\nBULLET::::- Rwanda\nBULLET::::- Kings of Rwanda\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Rwanda\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Rwanda\nBULLET::::- Seychelles\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Seychelles\nBULLET::::- Tanzania\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Tanzania\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Tanzania\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Zanzibar\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Zanzibar\nBULLET::::- Governors-General of Tanganyika\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Tanganyika\nBULLET::::- Sultans of Zanzibar\nBULLET::::- Uganda\nBULLET::::- Governors-General of Uganda\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Uganda\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Uganda\nBULLET::::- Kings of Nkole\nBULLET::::- Kings of Buganda\nBULLET::::- Zambia\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Zambia\nBULLET::::- Zimbabwe\nBULLET::::- Munhumutapa emperors\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Rhodesia\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Rhodesia\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Zimbabwe\n\nBULLET::::- Djibouti: Rulers of Djibouti\nBULLET::::- Eritrea: Rulers of Eritrea\nBULLET::::- Ethiopia: Rulers of Ethiopia\nBULLET::::- Somaliland\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Somaliland\n\nBULLET::::- Angola\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of Angola (\"see also: \"Presidents of Angola\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Angola (\"see also: \"Prime Minister of Angola\nBULLET::::- List of current Angolan ministers\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Angola\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of the Democratic People's Republic of Angola\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of the Democratic People's Republic of Angola\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of Cabinda\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Cabinda\nBULLET::::- Colonial and provincial heads of Cabinda\nBULLET::::- Cameroon\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of Cameroon\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Cameroon\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of British Cameroon (Cameroons)\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of British Cameroon (Cameroons)\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of French Cameroon (Cameroun)\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of French Cameroon (Cameroun)\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of German Cameroon (Kamerun)\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Ambas Bay (Victoria Colony)\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Bamoun (Mum)\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Mandara\nBULLET::::- Central African Republic\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of the Central African Republic (and Central African Empire)\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of the Central African Republic (and Central African Empire)\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Central Africa (Oubangui-Chari)\nBULLET::::- Chad\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of Chad\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Chad\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Chad\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Baguirmi\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Wada’i\nBULLET::::- Kanem-Bornu emperors\nBULLET::::- Congo, Democratic Republic of the (Zaire/'Congo-Kinshasa')\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of the Democratic Republic of the Congo\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of the Congo Free State\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Congo\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Katanga\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Kuba\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Luba\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Ruund (Luunda)\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Kasongo Luunda (Yaka)\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Kongo\nBULLET::::- Kongo\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Kongo\nBULLET::::- Congo, Republic of the (Congo-Brazzaville)\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of the Republic of the Congo\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of the Republic of the Congo\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of French Equatorial Africa\nBULLET::::- Equatorial Guinea\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of Equatorial Guinea\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Equatorial Guinea\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Equatorial Guinea (Fernando Poo/Spanish Guinea)\nBULLET::::- Gabon\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of Gabon\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Gabon\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Gabon\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Orungu\nBULLET::::- São Tomé and Príncipe\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of São Tomé and Príncipe\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of São Tomé and Príncipe\nBULLET::::- Presidents of the Regional Government of Príncipe\nBULLET::::- Colonial Heads of São Tomé and Príncipe\n\nBULLET::::- Algeria\nBULLET::::- People's Democratic Republic of Algeria\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of Algeria\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Algeria (\"see also: \"Prime Ministers of Algeria\nBULLET::::- French Algeria (French departements)\nBULLET::::- French Governors of Algeria\nBULLET::::- Ottoman regency of Algiers\nBULLET::::- Ottoman Pashas and Deys of the Regency of Algiers\nBULLET::::- Tlemcen (Western Algeria) before the Ottomans\nBULLET::::- Ziyanid dynasty\nBULLET::::- Western Ifriqiya (Eastern Algeria) before the Ottomans\nBULLET::::- Hammadid dynasty\nBULLET::::- Egypt\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Egypt\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Egypt\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Egypt\nBULLET::::- Pharaohs\nBULLET::::- Egyptian dynasties\nBULLET::::- Bahri dynasty of Egypt\nBULLET::::- Burji dynasty of Egypt\nBULLET::::- Ayyubid dynasty\nBULLET::::- Fatimid Caliphs\nBULLET::::- Monarchs of the Muhammad Ali Dynasty\nBULLET::::- Libya\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of Libya\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Libya\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Libya\nBULLET::::- Colonial Heads of Tripolitania\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Cyrenaica\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Fezzan\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Ottoman Libya\nBULLET::::- Chiefs of the Senussi order\nBULLET::::- Cyrene: Kings of Cyrene\nBULLET::::- Morocco\nBULLET::::- List of rulers of Morocco\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Morocco\nBULLET::::- French Resident Ministers in Morocco\nBULLET::::- Spanish High Commissioners in Morocco\nBULLET::::- Administrators of the Tangier International Zone\nBULLET::::- Alaouite dynasty\nBULLET::::- Saadi dynasty\nBULLET::::- Wattasid dynasty\nBULLET::::- Marinid dynasty\nBULLET::::- Almohad dynasty\nBULLET::::- Almoravid dynasty\nBULLET::::- Idrisid dynasty\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Western Sahara\nBULLET::::- Sudan (formerly Anglo-Egyptian -)\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Sudan\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Sudan\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Southern Sudan\nBULLET::::- Vice-Presidents of Southern Sudan\nBULLET::::- Kings of Makuria\nBULLET::::- Kings of Sennar\nBULLET::::- Kush\nBULLET::::- Kushite Kings\nBULLET::::- List of Egyptian viceroys of Kush\nBULLET::::- Tunisia\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Tunisia\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Tunisia\nBULLET::::- Beys of Tunis\nBULLET::::- Hafsid dynasty\nBULLET::::- Zirid dynasty\nBULLET::::- Aghlabid dynasty\nBULLET::::- Carthage: Kings of Carthage\n\nBULLET::::- Botswana\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of Botswana\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Botswana\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Botswana (Bechuanaland)\nBULLET::::- Rulers of baKgatla\nBULLET::::- Rulers of baKwêna\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Balete (baMalete)\nBULLET::::- Rulers of baNgwaketse\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Bangwato (bamaNgwato)\nBULLET::::- Rulers of baRôlông\nBULLET::::- Rulers of baTawana\nBULLET::::- Rulers of baTlôkwa\nBULLET::::- Lesotho\nBULLET::::- Kings of Lesotho\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Lesotho\nBULLET::::- Namibia\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Namibia\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Namibia\nBULLET::::- South Africa\nBULLET::::- Hlubi Kings\nBULLET::::- Mpondo Kings\nBULLET::::- Ndebele Kings\nBULLET::::- Thembu Kings\nBULLET::::- List of Xhosa Kings & Chiefs\nBULLET::::- List of Zulu kings\nBULLET::::- Governors-General of South Africa\nBULLET::::- State President of South Africa\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of South Africa\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of Bophuthatswana\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of Ciskei\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of Transkei\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Transkei\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of Venda\nBULLET::::- Chief Ministers of Gazankulu\nBULLET::::- Chief Ministers of KwaNdebele\nBULLET::::- Chief Ministers of KaNgwane\nBULLET::::- Chief Ministers of KwaZulu\nBULLET::::- Chief Ministers of Lebowa\nBULLET::::- Chief Ministers of QwaQwa\nBULLET::::- President of South Africa\n\nBULLET::::- Swaziland\nBULLET::::- Kings of Swaziland\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Swaziland\n\nBULLET::::- Benin (former Dahomey)\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of Benin\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Benin\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Benin (Dahomey and Porto-Novo)\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of São João Baptista de Ajudá\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Hogbonu (Ajashe/Porto-Novo)\nBULLET::::- Bariba (Borgu) states\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Bariba state of Kandi\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Bariba state of Kwande\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Bariba state of Nikki\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Bariba state of Paraku\nBULLET::::- Berba states\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Berba state of Gwande\nBULLET::::- Ewe states\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Ewe state of Agwe\nBULLET::::- Fon states\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Fon state of Alada (Allada)\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Fon state of Danhome (Agbome) (Dahomey)\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Fon state of Savi Hweda\nBULLET::::- Gurmanche states\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Gurmanche state of Jugu (Sugu)\nBULLET::::- Mahi states\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Mahi state of Fitta\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Mahi state of Savalu\nBULLET::::- Yoruba states\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Yoruba state of Dassa\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Yoruba state of Icha\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Yoruba state of Ketu\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Yoruba state of Sabe\nBULLET::::- Burkina Faso (former Upper Volta)\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of Burkina Faso\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Burkina Faso (\"see also:\" Prime Minister of Burkina Faso \"\")\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Burkina Faso (Upper Volta)\nBULLET::::- List of rulers of Liptako\nBULLET::::- Mossi States:-\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Mossi state of Gurunsi\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Mossi state of Gwiriko\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Mossi state of Tenkodogo\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Mossi state of Wogodogo\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Mossi state of Yatenga\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Gurma Mossi state of Bilanga\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Gurma Mossi state of Bilayanga\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Gurma Mossi state of Bongandini\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Gurma Mossi state of Con\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Gurma Mossi state of Macakoali\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Gurma Mossi state of Nungu\nBULLET::::- Rulers of the Gurma Mossi state of Piela\nBULLET::::- Cape Verde\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of Cape Verde\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Cape Verde (\"see also:\" Prime Minister of Cape Verde \"\")\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Cape Verde\nBULLET::::- Ivory Coast\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of Ivory Coast\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Ivory Coast\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Ivory Coast\nBULLET::::- The Gambia\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of the Gambia (\"see also\" Governors-General of the Gambia)\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of the Gambia\nBULLET::::- Colonial Heads of the Gambia\nBULLET::::- Ghana: Rulers of Ghana\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of Ghana\nBULLET::::- Emperors of Ghana\nBULLET::::- Guinea\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of Guinea\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Guinea\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Guinea\nBULLET::::- Guinea-Bissau\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of Guinea-Bissau\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Guinea-Bissau\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Portuguese Guinea\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Bissau\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Cacheu\nBULLET::::- Liberia\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Liberia\nBULLET::::- Agents and Governors of Liberia\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Maryland\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Mississippi\nBULLET::::- Colonial Heads of Port Cresson and Bassa Cove\nBULLET::::- Mali (former French Sudan)\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of Mali\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Mali\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Mali\nBULLET::::- Emperors of Mali, see \"Mali Empire\"\nBULLET::::- Kings of Mali, see \"Mansa\"\nBULLET::::- Songhai emperors, see \"Songhai Empire\"\nBULLET::::- Mauritania\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of Mauritania\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Mauritania\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Mauritania\nBULLET::::- Niger\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of Niger\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Niger\nBULLET::::- Nigeria\nBULLET::::- Governors-General of Nigeria\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Nigeria\nBULLET::::- Heads of State of Biafra\nBULLET::::- List of Sultans of Sokoto\nBULLET::::- Senegal\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Senegal\nBULLET::::- Sierra Leone\nBULLET::::- Governors-General of Sierra Leone\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Sierra Leone\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Sierra Leone\nBULLET::::- Togo\nBULLET::::- Heads of State of Togo\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Togo\n\nBULLET::::- Antigua and Barbuda\nBULLET::::- Governors-General of Antigua and Barbuda\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Antigua and Barbuda\nBULLET::::- Bahamas\nBULLET::::- Governors-General of the Bahamas\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of the Bahamas\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of the Bahamas\nBULLET::::- Barbados\nBULLET::::- Governors-General of Barbados\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Barbados\nBULLET::::- Cuba\nBULLET::::- First Secretary of the Communist Party of Cuba (\"de facto\" leader)\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Cuba\nBULLET::::- Premiers of Cuba\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Cuba\nBULLET::::- Dominica\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Dominica\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Dominica\nBULLET::::- Dominican Republic\nBULLET::::- Presidents of the Dominican Republic\nBULLET::::- Grenada\nBULLET::::- Governors-General of Grenada\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Grenada\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of Grenada\nBULLET::::- Colonial heads of the Windward Islands\nBULLET::::- Haiti\nBULLET::::- List of colonial governors of Saint-Domingue\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Haiti\nBULLET::::- Jamaica\nBULLET::::- Governors-General of Jamaica\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Jamaica\nBULLET::::- Saint Kitts and Nevis\nBULLET::::- Governors-General of Saint Kitts and Nevis\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Saint Kitts and Nevis\nBULLET::::- Saint Lucia\nBULLET::::- Governors-General of Saint Lucia\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Saint Lucia\nBULLET::::- Saint Vincent and the Grenadines\nBULLET::::- Governors-General of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines\nBULLET::::- Trinidad and Tobago\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Trinidad and Tobago\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Trinidad and Tobago\n\nBULLET::::- Belize\nBULLET::::- Governors-General of Belize\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Belize\nBULLET::::- Maya rulers of Caracol, see \"Caracol\"\nBULLET::::- Costa Rica\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Costa Rica\nBULLET::::- El Salvador\nBULLET::::- Presidents of El Salvador\nBULLET::::- Guatemala\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Guatemala\nBULLET::::- Maya rulers of Tikal, see \"Tikal\"\nBULLET::::- Honduras\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Honduras\nBULLET::::- Maya kings of Xukpi, see \"Copán\"\nBULLET::::- Nicaragua\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Nicaragua\nBULLET::::- Panama\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Panama\n\nBULLET::::- Canada\nBULLET::::- Office-holders of Canada\nBULLET::::- Mexico\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Mexico\nBULLET::::- Mexican monarchs\nBULLET::::- Aztec emperors, see \"Hueyi Tlatoani\"\nBULLET::::- Maya rulers of Calakmul, see \"Calakmul\"\nBULLET::::- Maya rulers of Palenque, see \"Palenque\"\nBULLET::::- Maya rulers of Tonina, see \"Tonina\"\nBULLET::::- Toltec rulers\nBULLET::::- Viceroys of New Spain\nBULLET::::- United States\nBULLET::::- Office-holders of the United States\n\nBULLET::::- Argentina\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Argentina\nBULLET::::- Bolivia\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Bolivia\nBULLET::::- Brazil\nBULLET::::- Brazilian monarchs\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Brazil\nBULLET::::- Governors of Distrito Federal\nBULLET::::- Governors of Minas Gerais\nBULLET::::- Mayors of Belo Horizonte\nBULLET::::- Governors of Rio de Janeiro\nBULLET::::- Mayors of Rio de Janeiro\nBULLET::::- Governors of São Paulo\nBULLET::::- Chile\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Chile\nBULLET::::- Governors of Cardenal Caro\nBULLET::::- Mayors of Pichilemu\nBULLET::::- Kings of Easter Island\nBULLET::::- Royal Governors of Chile\nBULLET::::- Colombia\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Colombia\nBULLET::::- List of Governors of the Department of Quindío\nBULLET::::- Ecuador\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Ecuador\nBULLET::::- Heads of State of Ecuador\nBULLET::::- Guyana\nBULLET::::- Governors-General of Guyana\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Guyana\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Guyana\nBULLET::::- Paraguay\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Paraguay\nBULLET::::- Peru\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Peru\nBULLET::::- Incan emperors, see \"Inca Empire\"\nBULLET::::- Viceroys of Peru\nBULLET::::- Suriname\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Suriname\nBULLET::::- Uruguay\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Uruguay\nBULLET::::- Venezuela\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Venezuela\n\nBULLET::::- Kazakhstan\nBULLET::::- Göktürk kagans\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Kazakhstan\nBULLET::::- Kyrgyzstan\nBULLET::::- Khans of Kara-Khitai, see \"Kara-Khitan Khanate\"\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Kyrgyzstan\nBULLET::::- Tajikistan\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Tajikistan\nBULLET::::- Turkmenistan\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Turkmenistan\nBULLET::::- Uzbekistan\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Uzbekistan\n\nBULLET::::- China & dependencies\nBULLET::::- Chinese sovereigns\nBULLET::::- Table of Chinese monarchs\nBULLET::::- People's Republic of China\nBULLET::::- General Secretary of the Communist Party of China (paramount leader)\nBULLET::::- President of the People's Republic of China\nBULLET::::- Premier of the State Council of the People's Republic of China\nBULLET::::- Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress\nBULLET::::- Chairman of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference\nBULLET::::- Politburo Standing Committee of the Communist Party of China\nBULLET::::- Hong Kong\nBULLET::::- Governor of Hong Kong (under British rule, now replaced by Chief Executive)\nBULLET::::- Chief Executive of Hong Kong\nBULLET::::- Macau\nBULLET::::- Governor of Macau (under Portuguese rule, now replaced by Chief Executive)\nBULLET::::- Chief Executive of Macau\nBULLET::::- Republic of China (Taiwan)\nBULLET::::- President of the Republic of China\nBULLET::::- Premier of the Republic of China\nBULLET::::- Governors and Chairpersons of Taiwan, see \"Taiwan Province\"\nBULLET::::- Tibet\nBULLET::::- List of imperial ambans in Tibet\nBULLET::::- The Table of Chinese monarchs China\nBULLET::::- List of kings of Tibet China\nBULLET::::- Japan\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Japan (Emperors, Regents, Shōguns and Prime Ministers)\nBULLET::::- Emperors of Japan\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Japan\nBULLET::::- Ashikaga shogunate\nBULLET::::- Kamakura shogunate\nBULLET::::- Tokugawa shogunate\nBULLET::::- List of Emperors of Japan\nBULLET::::- Mongolia\nBULLET::::- Grand Khan of Mongolia\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Mongolia\nBULLET::::- Prime Minister of Mongolia\nBULLET::::- Korea\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Korea\nBULLET::::- North Korea\nBULLET::::- First Secretary of the Workers' Party of Korea (supreme leader)\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of North Korea\nBULLET::::- Premiers of North Korea\nBULLET::::- South Korea\nBULLET::::- Presidents of South Korea\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of South Korea\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Korea\n\nBULLET::::- Brunei\nBULLET::::- Sultans of Brunei\nBULLET::::- Cambodia\nBULLET::::- King of Cambodia\nBULLET::::- Khmer emperors, see \"Khmer Empire\"\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Cambodia\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Cambodia\nBULLET::::- East Timor\nBULLET::::- Presidents of East Timor\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of East Timor\nBULLET::::- Indonesia\nBULLET::::- Majapahit\nBULLET::::- Sailendra\nBULLET::::- Srivijaya\nBULLET::::- Kings of Mataram, see \"Kingdom of Mataram\"\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Indonesia\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Indonesia\nBULLET::::- Laos\nBULLET::::- Kings of Laos\nBULLET::::- General Secretary of the Lao People's Revolutionary Party (\"de facto\" leader)\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Laos\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Laos\nBULLET::::- Malaysia\nBULLET::::- Yang di-Pertuan Agong\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Malaysia\nBULLET::::- Sultans of Malay states, example see \"Sultanate of Malacca\"\nBULLET::::- Myanmar\nBULLET::::- Kings of Myanmar\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Myanmar\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Myanmar\nBULLET::::- State Counsellor of Myanmar\nBULLET::::- Philippines\nBULLET::::- Spanish Royal Governor of the Philippines\nBULLET::::- American Governor-General of the Philippines\nBULLET::::- Presidents of the Philippines\nBULLET::::- Datus, Rajas, and Sultans of various historical polities within the Philippine Islands, see \"History of the Philippines\"\nBULLET::::- Sultans of the Sulu Sultanate\nBULLET::::- List of sovereign state leaders in the Philippines\nBULLET::::- Singapore\nBULLET::::- President of Singapore\nBULLET::::- Prime Minister of Singapore\nBULLET::::- Thailand\nBULLET::::- Kings of Thailand\nBULLET::::- Chakri dynasty\nBULLET::::- Kings of Ayutthaya, see \"Ayutthaya kingdom\"\nBULLET::::- Kings of Haripunchai, see \"Haripunchai\"\nBULLET::::- Kings of Lanna, see \"Lanna\"\nBULLET::::- Kings of Sukhothai, see \"Sukhothai kingdom\"\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Thailand\nBULLET::::- Presidents of the National Assembly of Thailand\nBULLET::::- Leaders of the Opposition of Thailand\nBULLET::::- Governors of Bangkok\nBULLET::::- Vietnam\nBULLET::::- Vietnamese dynasties\nBULLET::::- Kings of Vietnam\nBULLET::::- General Secretary of the Communist Party of Vietnam (\"de facto\" leader)\nBULLET::::- President of Vietnam\nBULLET::::- Prime Minister of Vietnam\nBULLET::::- Chairman of National Assembly of Vietnam\nBULLET::::- Chief Justice of Vietnam\n\nBULLET::::- Afghanistan\nBULLET::::- Afghan Transitional Administration personnel\nBULLET::::- Leaders of Afghanistan\nBULLET::::- Heads of Government of Afghanistan\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Kabul\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Herat\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Kandahar\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Peshawar\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Ghazni\nBULLET::::- Ghaznavid emperors, see \"Ghaznavid Empire\"\nBULLET::::- Shahi dynasty\nBULLET::::- Bangladesh\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Bangladesh\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Bangladesh\nBULLET::::- Bhutan\nBULLET::::- Kings of Bhutan\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Bhutan\nBULLET::::- India\nBULLET::::- List of Indian monarchs\nBULLET::::- List of Presidents of India\nBULLET::::- List of Prime Ministers of India\nBULLET::::- Governors, Lieutenant Governors and Administrators of Indian States and Union Territories\nBULLET::::- Chief Ministers of Indian States\nBULLET::::- Maldives\nBULLET::::- Sultans of the Maldives\nBULLET::::- Presidents of the Maldives\nBULLET::::- Nepal\nBULLET::::- List of monarchs of Nepal\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Nepal\nBULLET::::- Pakistan\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Pakistan\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Pakistan\nBULLET::::- Sri Lanka\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Sri Lanka\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Sri Lanka\n\nBULLET::::- Armenia\nBULLET::::- Kings of Urartu\nBULLET::::- List of Armenian Kings\nBULLET::::- Kings of Kommagene\nBULLET::::- Shaddadid dynasty\nBULLET::::- President of Armenia\nBULLET::::- Prime Minister of Armenia\nBULLET::::- Azerbaijan\nBULLET::::- Arsacid dynasty of Caucasian Albania\nBULLET::::- Mihranids\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Azerbaijan\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Azerbaijan\nBULLET::::- Presidents of the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic\nBULLET::::- Bahrain\nBULLET::::- Monarchs of Bahrain\nBULLET::::- Cyprus\nBULLET::::- Kings of Cyprus\nBULLET::::- Officers of the Kingdom of Cyprus\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Cyprus\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Northern Cyprus\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Northern Cyprus\nBULLET::::- Georgia\nBULLET::::- Lists of Georgian monarchs\nBULLET::::- Colchis\nBULLET::::- Kingdom of Abkhazia\nBULLET::::- Divan of the Abkhazian Kings\nBULLET::::- List of sovereigns of Kakheti\nBULLET::::- Kingdom of Imereti\nBULLET::::- Gurieli\nBULLET::::- Emirs of Tbilisi\nBULLET::::- List of leaders of Georgia\nBULLET::::- Prime Minister of Georgia\nBULLET::::- Chairman of the Government of Adjara\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Abkhazia\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Abkhazia\nBULLET::::- Presidents of South Ossetia\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of South Ossetia\nBULLET::::- Iran\nBULLET::::- List of heads of state of Iran\nBULLET::::- List of monarchs of Persia\nBULLET::::- Supreme Leader of Iran\nBULLET::::- List of Presidents of Iran\nBULLET::::- List of Premiers of Iran\nBULLET::::- List of Prime Ministers of Iran\nBULLET::::- Iraq\nBULLET::::- Sumer\nBULLET::::- Kings of Sumer\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Lagash\nBULLET::::- Akkad\nBULLET::::- Kings of Akkad\nBULLET::::- Gutian kings\nBULLET::::- Kings of Assyria\nBULLET::::- Kings of Babylon\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Adiabene\nBULLET::::- Abbasid Caliphs\nBULLET::::- Annazid dynasty\nBULLET::::- Kings of Iraq\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Iraq\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Iraq\nBULLET::::- Civilian Administrator of Iraq\nBULLET::::- Israel\nBULLET::::- Prime Minister of Israel\nBULLET::::- President of Israel\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Israel and Judah\nBULLET::::- Kings of Israel\nBULLET::::- Kings of Judah\nBULLET::::- High Priests of Israel\nBULLET::::- Crusader States\nBULLET::::- Kings of Jerusalem\nBULLET::::- Vassals of the Kingdom of Jerusalem\nBULLET::::- Princes of Galilee\nBULLET::::- Lords of Toron\nBULLET::::- Counts of Jaffa and Ascalon\nBULLET::::- Lords of Ramla\nBULLET::::- Lords of Ibelin\nBULLET::::- Lords of Oultrejordain\nBULLET::::- Lords of Sidon\nBULLET::::- Officers of the Kingdom of Jerusalem\nBULLET::::- Presidents of the Palestinian National Authority\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of the Palestinian National Authority\nBULLET::::- Jordan (formerly Transjordan)\nBULLET::::- Kings of Jordan\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Nabatea\nBULLET::::- Kuwait\nBULLET::::- Emirs of Kuwait\nBULLET::::- Al-Sabah\nBULLET::::- Lebanon\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Lebanon\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Lebanon\nBULLET::::- Kings of Tyre\nBULLET::::- Counts of Tripoli\nBULLET::::- Officers of the County of Tripoli\nBULLET::::- Oman (formerly Muscat (and Oman))\nBULLET::::- Sultans of Oman\nBULLET::::- Qatar\nBULLET::::- Emirs of Qatar\nBULLET::::- Saudi Arabia\nBULLET::::- Sharif of Mecca\nBULLET::::- Kings of Saudi Arabia\nBULLET::::- Syria\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Syria\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Syria\nBULLET::::- Kings of Syria\nBULLET::::- Osroene\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Damascus\nBULLET::::- Zengid dynasty\nBULLET::::- Counts of Edessa\nBULLET::::- Princes of Antioch\nBULLET::::- Officers of the Principality of Antioch\nBULLET::::- Emirs of Shaizar\nBULLET::::- Ghassanid kings\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Aleppo\nBULLET::::- Hanilgalbat: Kings of Hanilgabat, see \"Hanilgalbat\" and \"Mitanni\"\nBULLET::::- Kings of Ugarit\nBULLET::::- Turkey\nBULLET::::- List of Hittite kings\nBULLET::::- Kings of Arzawa\nBULLET::::- Kings of Lydia\nBULLET::::- Kings of Bithynia\nBULLET::::- Kings of Cappadocia\nBULLET::::- Attalid Kings of Pergamon\nBULLET::::- Kings of Pontus\nBULLET::::- Pharnacid Dynasty\nBULLET::::- Kings of Galatia\nBULLET::::- Byzantine Emperors\nBULLET::::- Tetrarchy\nBULLET::::- List of Latin Emperors\nBULLET::::- Empire of Trebizond\nBULLET::::- Seljuk sultans of Rüm\nBULLET::::- Anatolian beyliks\nBULLET::::- List of Sultans of the Ottoman Empire\nBULLET::::- Pretenders of the Ottoman Empire\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Turkey\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Turkey\nBULLET::::- United Arab Emirates\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of the United Arab Emirates\nBULLET::::- Presidents of the United Arab Emirates\nBULLET::::- Yemen\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Yemen\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Yemen\nBULLET::::- Presidents of North Yemen\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of North Yemen\nBULLET::::- Presidents of South Yemen\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of South Yemen\n\nBULLET::::- Belarus\nBULLET::::- List of Belarusian rulers\nBULLET::::- Moldova\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Moldova\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Moldova\nBULLET::::- Governors of Gagauzia\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Transnistria\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Transnistria\nBULLET::::- Romania\nBULLET::::- Dacian kings\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Wallachia\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Moldavia\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Transylvania\nBULLET::::- List of heads of state of Romania\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Romania\nBULLET::::- Russia and the Soviet Union\nBULLET::::- List of Russian rulers: early Grand Dukes and Tsars\nBULLET::::- Leaders of the Soviet Union\nBULLET::::- President of the Soviet Union\nBULLET::::- Premier of the Soviet Union\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Russia\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Russia\nBULLET::::- Khans of the Golden Horde\nBULLET::::- List of Kazan khans\nBULLET::::- List of Khazar rulers\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Kievan Rus'\nBULLET::::- Grand Prince of Tver\nBULLET::::- Ukraine\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Kievan Rus'\nBULLET::::- List of rulers of Halych and Volhynia\nBULLET::::- Hetmans of Ukrainian Cossacks\nBULLET::::- List of Crimean khans\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Ukraine\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Ukraine\n\nBULLET::::- Denmark\nBULLET::::- Danish monarchs\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Denmark\nBULLET::::- List of legendary kings of Denmark\nBULLET::::- Faroe Islands\nBULLET::::- Faroese monarchs\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of the Faroe Islands\nBULLET::::- Governor of the Faroe Islands\nBULLET::::- Greenland\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Greenland\nBULLET::::- Governors of Greenland\nBULLET::::- Inspectors of Greenland\nBULLET::::- Estonia\nBULLET::::- Estonian rulers\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Estonia\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Estonia\nBULLET::::- State Elders of Estonia\nBULLET::::- Finland\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Finland\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Finland\nBULLET::::- Finnish rulers\nBULLET::::- Provincial Governors of Finland\nBULLET::::- Premiers of Åland\nBULLET::::- Iceland\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Iceland\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Iceland\nBULLET::::- Icelandic rulers\nBULLET::::- List of lawspeakers, see Lawspeaker\nBULLET::::- Ireland: Rulers of Ireland\nBULLET::::- Latvia\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Latvia\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Latvia\nBULLET::::- Lithuania\nBULLET::::- List of Lithuanian rulers\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Lithuania\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Lithuania\nBULLET::::- Norway\nBULLET::::- Norwegian monarchs\nBULLET::::- Line of succession to the Norwegian Throne\nBULLET::::- Legendary kings of Norway\nBULLET::::- Norwegian Prime Ministers\nBULLET::::- Sweden\nBULLET::::- Swedish monarchs\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Sweden\nBULLET::::- Swedish Field Marshals\nBULLET::::- County Governors of Sweden\nBULLET::::- Swedish semi-legendary kings\nBULLET::::- Mythological kings of Sweden\nBULLET::::- Kings of Geatland\nBULLET::::- Blekinge Governors\nBULLET::::- Dalarna Governors\nBULLET::::- Gävleborg Governors\nBULLET::::- Gotland Governors\nBULLET::::- Halland Governors\nBULLET::::- Jämtland Governors\nBULLET::::- Jönköping Governors\n\nBULLET::::- Kalmar Governors\nBULLET::::- Kronoberg Governors\nBULLET::::- Norrbotten Governors\nBULLET::::- Skåne Governors\nBULLET::::- Stockholm Governors\nBULLET::::- Södermanland Governors\nBULLET::::- Uppsala Governors\n\nBULLET::::- Värmland Governors\nBULLET::::- Västerbotten Governors\nBULLET::::- Västernorrland Governors\nBULLET::::- Västmanland Governors\nBULLET::::- Västra Götaland Governors\nBULLET::::- Örebro Governors\nBULLET::::- Östergötland Governors\n\nBULLET::::- United Kingdom: List of rulers of the United Kingdom and predecessor states\n\nBULLET::::- Austria\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Austria\nBULLET::::- Emperors of Austria\nBULLET::::- Foreign Ministers of Austria-Hungary\nBULLET::::- Ministers-President of Austria\nBULLET::::- Federal Presidents of Austria\nBULLET::::- Chancellors of Austria (Vice Chancellors of Austria)\nBULLET::::- Habsburg\nBULLET::::- Babenberg\nBULLET::::- Margraves, dukes, and archdukes of Austria\nBULLET::::- Dukes of Styria, see \"Styria (duchy)\"\nBULLET::::- Dukes of Carinthia, see \"Carinthia (duchy)\"\nBULLET::::- Czech Republic\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Bohemia (Czech lands)\nBULLET::::- List of Presidents of Czechoslovakia\nBULLET::::- List of Prime Ministers of Czechoslovakia\nBULLET::::- List of rulers of the Protectorate Bohemia and Moravia\nBULLET::::- Presidents of the Czech Republic\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of the Czech Republic\nBULLET::::- Germany: Rulers of Germany\nBULLET::::- Hungary\nBULLET::::- List of Hungarian rulers\nBULLET::::- List of heads of state of Hungary\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Hungary\nBULLET::::- Liechtenstein\nBULLET::::- Princes of Liechtenstein\nBULLET::::- Liechtenstein Heads of Government\nBULLET::::- Poland\nBULLET::::- Polish rulers\nBULLET::::- Dukes of Silesia\nBULLET::::- Dukes of Mazovia\nBULLET::::- Dukes of Greater Poland\nBULLET::::- Dukes of Łęczyca\nBULLET::::- Dukes of Sieradz\nBULLET::::- Duchy of Cieszyn\nBULLET::::- Dukes of Pomerania\nBULLET::::- List of Prime Ministers of Poland\nBULLET::::- List of Polish presidents\nBULLET::::- Slovakia\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Slovakia\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Slovakia\nBULLET::::- Parliament leaders of Slovakia\nBULLET::::- Switzerland\nBULLET::::- Members of the Swiss Federal Council\nBULLET::::- Presidents of the Confederation\nBULLET::::- Heads of the Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sports, see \"Military of Switzerland\"\nBULLET::::- Heads of the Department of Foreign Affairs: see \"International relations of Switzerland\"\nBULLET::::- Heads of the Department of Home Affairs\nBULLET::::- Heads of the Federal Department of Finance\nBULLET::::- Heads of the Federal Department of Environment, Transport, Energy and Communications\nBULLET::::- Heads of the Federal Department of Economic Affairs\nBULLET::::- Heads of the Federal Department of Justice and Police\nBULLET::::- Federal Chancellors of Switzerland\nBULLET::::- Presidents of the Swiss National Council\nBULLET::::- Presidents of the Swiss Council of States\nBULLET::::- Members of the Swiss National Council\nBULLET::::- Members of the Swiss Council of States\nBULLET::::- Chief Justices of the Swiss Supreme Court\nBULLET::::- Presidents of the Swiss Diet (before 1848)\n\nBULLET::::- Albania\nBULLET::::- Monarchs of Albania\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Albania\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Albania\nBULLET::::- Andorra\nBULLET::::- Co-Princes of Andorra\nBULLET::::- Bishop of Urgell\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Andorra\nBULLET::::- Bosnia and Herzegovina\nBULLET::::- List of rulers of Bosnia\nBULLET::::- Members of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina\nBULLET::::- Bulgaria\nBULLET::::- Thracian kings\nBULLET::::- Kings of Odrysia\nBULLET::::- Moesia: Roman governors of Lower Moesia\nBULLET::::- Bulgarian monarchs\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Bulgaria\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Bulgaria\nBULLET::::- Croatia\nBULLET::::- List of rulers of Croatia\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Croatia\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Croatia\nBULLET::::- Governors and Heads of State of Fiume\nBULLET::::- Heads of state of Krajina\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Krajina\nBULLET::::- Greece: Rulers of Greece\nBULLET::::- Italy: Rulers of Italy\nBULLET::::- Kosovo\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Kosovo\nBULLET::::- Prime Minister of Kosovo\nBULLET::::- North Macedonia\nBULLET::::- Presidents of North Macedonia\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of North Macedonia\nBULLET::::- Malta\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Malta, 1974–present\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Malta, 1921–1933, 1947–1958, 1962–present\nBULLET::::- Monarchs of Malta, 1091-1798, 1800–1974\nBULLET::::- Grand Masters of Malta, 1530–1798\nBULLET::::- Civil Commissioners of Malta, 1799-1813\nBULLET::::- Governors of Malta, 1813-1964\nBULLET::::- Governors-General of Malta, 1964–1974\nBULLET::::- Montenegro\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Montenegro\nBULLET::::- List of Presidents of Montenegro\nBULLET::::- Prime Minister of Montenegro\nBULLET::::- Portugal\nBULLET::::- Portuguese monarchs\nBULLET::::- Dukes of Braganza\nBULLET::::- Princes of Beira\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Portugal\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Portugal\nBULLET::::- List of Portuguese monarchs\nBULLET::::- San Marino\nBULLET::::- Captains Regent of San Marino, 1900–present\nBULLET::::- Captains Regent of San Marino, 1700–1900\nBULLET::::- Captains Regent of San Marino, 1500–1700\nBULLET::::- Captains Regent of San Marino, 1243–1500\nBULLET::::- Serbia\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Serbia\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Serbia\nBULLET::::- President of the Government of Vojvodina\nBULLET::::- List of heads of state of Yugoslavia\nBULLET::::- Prime Minister of Yugoslavia\nBULLET::::- President of Serbia and Montenegro\nBULLET::::- Prime Minister of Serbia and Montenegro\nBULLET::::- Monarchs of Serbia\nBULLET::::- List of rulers of Illyria\nBULLET::::- Princes of Zeta\nBULLET::::- Slovenia\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Slovenia\nBULLET::::- Prime Minister of Slovenia\nBULLET::::- Spain\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Spain\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Spain\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Spain\nBULLET::::- Vatican City\nBULLET::::- Popes\nBULLET::::- Cardinal Secretary of State\n\nBULLET::::- Belgium\nBULLET::::- Belgian monarchs\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Belgium\nBULLET::::- Governors of the Habsburg Netherlands\nBULLET::::- Minister-President of the Brussels-Capital Region\nBULLET::::- List of Ministers-President of the Flemish Community\nBULLET::::- List of Ministers-President of the Walloon Region\nBULLET::::- List of Ministers-President of the French Community\nBULLET::::- List of Ministers-President of the German-speaking Community\nBULLET::::- France: Rulers of France\nBULLET::::- Luxembourg\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Luxembourg\nBULLET::::- Grand Duke of Luxembourg\nBULLET::::- List of Counts and Dukes of Luxembourg\nBULLET::::- Monaco\nBULLET::::- Princes of Monaco\nBULLET::::- Succession to the Monegasque Throne\nBULLET::::- Ministers of State\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Monaco\nBULLET::::- Netherlands\nBULLET::::- Dutch monarchy\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of the Netherlands\nBULLET::::- List of rulers of the Netherlands\nBULLET::::- Governors of the Habsburg Netherlands\nBULLET::::- Low Countries (Netherlands, Belgium):\nBULLET::::- Rulers of East Frisia\nBULLET::::- Rulers of Frisia\nBULLET::::- Prince of Orange\nBULLET::::- Duke of Brabant\nBULLET::::- Lords and margraves of Bergen op Zoom\nBULLET::::- Dukes and counts of Guelders\nBULLET::::- Duke of Lower Lorraine\nBULLET::::- Count of Bouillon\nBULLET::::- Count of Flanders\nBULLET::::- Count of Hainaut\nBULLET::::- Count of Holland\nBULLET::::- Counts of Leuven\nBULLET::::- Bishop of Utrecht\nBULLET::::- Marquis of Namur\n\nBULLET::::- Australia\nBULLET::::- Monarchs of Australia\nBULLET::::- Governors-General of Australia\nBULLET::::- Cabinet of Australia\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Australia\nBULLET::::- Deputy Prime Ministers of Australia\nBULLET::::- Attorneys General for Australia\nBULLET::::- Ministers for Defence\nBULLET::::- Ministers for Foreign Affairs\nBULLET::::- Treasurers of Australia\nBULLET::::- Premiers of New South Wales\nBULLET::::- Premiers of Queensland\nBULLET::::- Premiers of South Australia\nBULLET::::- Premiers of Tasmania\nBULLET::::- Premiers of Victoria\nBULLET::::- Premier of Western Australia\nBULLET::::- Heads of government of Norfolk Island\nBULLET::::- Chief Minister of the Northern Territory\nBULLET::::- Chief Minister of the Australian Capital Territory\n\nBULLET::::- Governors of New South Wales\nBULLET::::- Governors of Queensland\nBULLET::::- Governors of South Australia\nBULLET::::- Governors of Tasmania\nBULLET::::- Governors of Victoria\nBULLET::::- Governor of Western Australia\nBULLET::::- Administrative Heads of Norfolk Island\nBULLET::::- Administrator of the Northern Territory\nBULLET::::- Administrative Heads of Jervis Bay\nBULLET::::- Administrative Heads of Australian Antarctic Territory\nBULLET::::- Administrative Heads of Macquarie Island\n\nBULLET::::- Cocos Islands\nBULLET::::- King of the Cocos Islands\nBULLET::::- New Zealand\nBULLET::::- Governors-General of New Zealand\nBULLET::::- New Zealand Cabinet\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of New Zealand\nBULLET::::- Deputy Prime Ministers of New Zealand\nBULLET::::- Ministers of Finance\nBULLET::::- Ministers of Foreign Affairs\nBULLET::::- Speakers of the House of Representatives\nBULLET::::- Māori Kings and Queens\nBULLET::::- Mayors of Auckland\nBULLET::::- Mayors of Christchurch\nBULLET::::- Mayors of Dunedin\nBULLET::::- Mayors of Wellington\n\nBULLET::::- Fiji\nBULLET::::- Chairmen of Fiji's Great Council of Chiefs\nBULLET::::- Chief Justice of Fiji\nBULLET::::- Colonial Governors of Fiji\nBULLET::::- Fijian Heads of State\nBULLET::::- Foreign Ministers of Fiji\nBULLET::::- Governors-General of Fiji\nBULLET::::- House of Representatives of Fiji (abolished in 2013)\nBULLET::::- Ministers for Fijian Affairs\nBULLET::::- Presidents of Fiji\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Fiji\nBULLET::::- Senate of Fiji (abolished in 2013)\nBULLET::::- Speakers of the Fijian House of Representatives\nBULLET::::- Vice-Presidents of Fiji\nBULLET::::- Papua New Guinea\nBULLET::::- Governor-General of Papua New Guinea\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Papua New Guinea\nBULLET::::- Solomon Islands\nBULLET::::- Governor-General of Solomon Islands\nBULLET::::- Prime Minister of the Solomon Islands\nBULLET::::- Vanuatu\nBULLET::::- President of Vanuatu\nBULLET::::- Prime Minister of Vanuatu\n\nBULLET::::- Kiribati\nBULLET::::- President of Kiribati\nBULLET::::- Marshall Islands\nBULLET::::- Presidents of the Marshall Islands\nBULLET::::- Federated States of Micronesia\nBULLET::::- President of the Federated States of Micronesia\nBULLET::::- Nauru\nBULLET::::- President of Nauru\nBULLET::::- Palau\nBULLET::::- President of Palau\n\nBULLET::::- Cook Islands\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of the Cook Islands\nBULLET::::- Niue\nBULLET::::- Premiers of Niue\nBULLET::::- Samoa\nBULLET::::- Samoan Heads of State\nBULLET::::- Malietoa\nBULLET::::- Members of the Council of Deputies of Samoa\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Samoa\nBULLET::::- Chief Justice of Samoa\nBULLET::::- Finance Ministers of Samoa\nBULLET::::- Foreign Affairs Ministers of Samoa\nBULLET::::- Health Ministers of Samoa\nBULLET::::- Education Ministers of Samoa\nBULLET::::- Public Works Ministers of Samoa\nBULLET::::- Fono Aoao Faitulafono o Samoa - current membership (2006)\nBULLET::::- Tonga\nBULLET::::- Kings of Tonga\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Tonga\nBULLET::::- Tuvalu\nBULLET::::- Governor-Generals of Tuvalu\nBULLET::::- Prime Ministers of Tuvalu\n\nBULLET::::- List of current Christian leaders\n\nBULLET::::- List of popes\nBULLET::::- Grand Masters of the Knights Hospitaller\nBULLET::::- Priors of St John of Jerusalem in England\n\nBULLET::::- List of Archbishops of Canterbury\nBULLET::::- Anglican Primates\n\nBULLET::::- General of The Salvation Army\nBULLET::::- Moderator of the United Church of Canada\nBULLET::::- President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints\nBULLET::::- Patriarchs of Constantinople\n\nBULLET::::- Chief Rabbis of the United Kingdom\nBULLET::::- Chief Rabbis of Israel\n\nBULLET::::- Caliphate\nBULLET::::- Shi'a Imam\n\nBULLET::::- Dalai Lama\nBULLET::::- Panchen Lama\nBULLET::::- Karmapa\nBULLET::::- Shamarpa\nBULLET::::- Sakya Trizin\nBULLET::::- Supreme Patriarch of Thailand\nBULLET::::- Supreme Patriarch of Cambodia\n\nBULLET::::- List of the oldest living state leaders\n\nBULLET::::- Defence minister\nBULLET::::- Finance minister\nBULLET::::- Foreign minister\nBULLET::::- Interior minister\nBULLET::::- Justice minister\n\nBULLET::::- Current Heads of State\nBULLET::::- Archontology, by Oleg Schultz\nBULLET::::- Rulers, by B. Schemmel - detailed lists (including regional and religious leaders) from 1700.\nBULLET::::- World Statesmen, by Ben Cahoon\nBULLET::::- World Political Leaders, by Roberto Ortiz de Zárate\n"}
{"id": "18453", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18453", "title": "Liberal Party of Australia", "text": "Liberal Party of Australia\n\nThe Liberal Party of Australia is a major centre-right political party in Australia, one of the two major parties in Australian politics, along with the centre-left Australian Labor Party (ALP). It was founded in 1944 as the successor to the United Australia Party (UAP).\n\nThe Liberal Party is the largest and dominant party in the Coalition with the National Party of Australia. In two states and territories of Australia the parties have merged, forming the Country Liberal Party of the Northern Territory and the Liberal National Party of Queensland. Except for a few short periods, the Liberal Party and its predecessors have operated in similar coalitions since the 1920s. The party's leader is Scott Morrison and its deputy leader is Josh Frydenberg. The pair were elected to their positions at the August 2018 Liberal leadership ballot, with Frydenberg and Morrison as replacements for Julie Bishop and Malcolm Turnbull respectively, the latter of whom Morrison consequently succeeded as Prime Minister of Australia. Now the Morrison Government, the party had been elected at the 2013 federal election as the Abbott Government which took office on 18 September 2013. At state and territory level, the Liberal Party is in office in three states: Will Hodgman, Premier of Tasmania since 2014, Gladys Berejiklian, Premier of New South Wales since 2017 and Steven Marshall, Premier of South Australia since 2018. The party is in opposition in the states of Victoria, Queensland and Western Australia, and in both the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory.\n\nThe party's ideology has been referred to as conservative, liberal-conservative, conservative-liberal, and classical liberal. The Liberal Party tends to promote economic liberalism (which in the Australian usage refers to free markets and small government). Two past leaders of the party, Sir Robert Menzies and John Howard, are Australia's two longest-serving Prime Ministers.\n\nThe Liberals' immediate predecessor was the United Australia Party (UAP). More broadly, the Liberal Party's ideological ancestry stretched back to the anti-Labor groupings in the first Commonwealth parliaments. The Commonwealth Liberal Party was a fusion of the Free Trade Party and the Protectionist Party in 1909 by the second prime minister, Alfred Deakin, in response to Labor's growing electoral prominence. The Commonwealth Liberal Party merged with several Labor dissidents (including Billy Hughes) to form the Nationalist Party of Australia in 1917. That party, in turn, merged with Labor dissidents to form the UAP in 1931.\n\nThe UAP had been formed as a new conservative alliance in 1931, with Labor defector Joseph Lyons as its leader. The stance of Lyons and other Labor rebels against the more radical proposals of the Labor movement to deal the Great Depression had attracted the support of prominent Australian conservatives. With Australia still suffering the effects of the Great Depression, the newly formed party won a landslide victory at the 1931 Election, and the Lyons Government went on to win three consecutive elections. It largely avoided Keynesian pump-priming and pursued a more conservative fiscal policy of debt reduction and balanced budgets as a means of stewarding Australia out of the Depression. Lyons' death in 1939 saw Robert Menzies assume the Prime Ministership on the eve of war. Menzies served as Prime Minister from 1939 to 1941 but resigned as leader of the minority World War II government amidst an unworkable parliamentary majority. The UAP, led by Billy Hughes, disintegrated after suffering a heavy defeat in the 1943 election. In New South Wales, the party merged with the Commonwealth Party to form the Democratic Party, In Queensland the state party was absorbed into the Queensland People's Party.\n\nFrom 1942 onward Menzies had maintained his public profile with his series of \"The Forgotten People\" radio talks—similar to Franklin D. Roosevelt's \"fireside chats\" of the 1930s—in which he spoke of the middle class as the \"backbone of Australia\" but as nevertheless having been \"taken for granted\" by political parties.\n\nMenzies called a conference of conservative parties and other groups opposed to the ruling Australian Labor Party, which met in Canberra on 13 October 1944 and again in Albury, New South Wales in December 1944. Outlining his vision for a new political movement, Menzies said:\n\nThe formation of the party was formally announced at Sydney Town Hall on 31 August 1945. It took the name \"Liberal\" in honour of the old Commonwealth Liberal Party. The new party was dominated by the remains of the old UAP; with few exceptions, the UAP party room became the Liberal party room. The Australian Women's National League, a powerful conservative women's organisation, also merged with the new party. A conservative youth group Menzies had set up, the Young Nationalists, was also merged into the new party. It became the nucleus of the Liberal Party's youth division, the Young Liberals. By September 1945 there were more than 90,000 members, many of whom had not previously been members of any political party.\n\nIn New South Wales, the New South Wales division of the Liberal Party replaced the Liberal Democratic Party and Democratic Party between January and April 1945. In Queensland, the Queensland People's Party did not become part of the Liberal Party until July 1949, when it became the Queensland division of the Liberal Party.\n\nAfter an initial loss to Labor at the 1946 election, Menzies led the Liberals to victory at the 1949 election, and the party stayed in office for a record 23 years— the longest unbroken run ever in government at the federal level. Australia experienced prolonged economic growth during the post-war boom period of the Menzies Government (1949–1966) and Menzies fulfilled his promises at the 1949 election to end rationing of butter, tea and petrol and provided a five-shilling endowment for first-born children, as well as for others. While himself an unashamed anglophile, Menzies' government concluded a number of major defence and trade treaties that set Australia on its post-war trajectory out of Britain's orbit; opened up Australia to multi-ethnic immigration; and instigated important legal reforms regarding Aboriginal Australians.\n\nMenzies was strongly opposed to Labor's plans to nationalise the Australian banking system and, following victory at the 1949 election, secured a double dissolution election for April 1951, after the Labor-controlled Senate rejected his banking legislation. The Liberal-Country Coalition was returned with control of the Senate. The Government was re-elected again at the 1954 election; the formation of the anti-Communist Democratic Labor Party (DLP) and the consequent split in the Australian Labor Party early in 1955 helped the Liberals to secure another victory in December 1955. John McEwen replaced Arthur Fadden as leader of the Country Party in March 1958 and the Menzies-McEwen Coalition was returned again at elections in November 1958—their third victory against Labor's H. V. Evatt. The Coalition was narrowly returned against Labor's Arthur Calwell in the December 1961 election, in the midst of a credit squeeze. Menzies stood for office for the last time at the November 1963 election, again defeating Calwell, with the Coalition winning back its losses in the House of Representatives. Menzies went on to resign from parliament on 26 January 1966.\n\nMenzies came to power the year the Communist Party of Australia had led a coal strike to improve pit miners' working conditions. That same year Joseph Stalin's Soviet Union exploded its first atomic bomb, and Mao Zedong led the Communist Party of China to power in China; a year later came the invasion of South Korea by Communist North Korea. Anti-communism was a key political issue of the 1950s and 1960s. Menzies was firmly anti-Communist; he committed troops to the Korean War and attempted to ban the Communist Party of Australia in an unsuccessful referendum during the course of that war. The Labor Party split over concerns about the influence of the Communist Party over the Trade Union movement, leading to the foundation of the breakaway Democratic Labor Party whose preferences supported the Liberal and Country parties.\n\nIn 1951, during the early stages of the Cold War, Menzies spoke of the possibility of a looming third world war. The Menzies Government entered Australia's first formal military alliance outside of the British Commonwealth with the signing of the ANZUS Treaty between Australia, New Zealand and the United States in San Francisco in 1951. External Affairs Minister Percy Spender had put forward the proposal to work along similar lines to the NATO Alliance. The Treaty declared that any attack on one of the three parties in the Pacific area would be viewed as a threat to each, and that the common danger would be met in accordance with each nation's constitutional processes. In 1954, the Menzies Government signed the South East Asia Collective Defence Treaty (SEATO) as a South East Asian counterpart to NATO. That same year, Soviet diplomat Vladimir Petrov and his wife defected from the Soviet embassy in Canberra, revealing evidence of Russian spying activities; Menzies called a Royal Commission to investigate.\n\nIn 1956, a committee headed by Sir Keith Murray was established to inquire into the financial plight of Australia's universities, and Menzies injected funds into the sector under conditions which preserved the autonomy of universities.\n\nMenzies continued the expanded immigration program established under Chifley, and took important steps towards dismantling the White Australia Policy. In the early-1950s, external affairs minister Percy Spender helped to establish the Colombo Plan for providing economic aid to underdeveloped nations in Australia's region. Under that scheme many future Asian leaders studied in Australia. In 1958, the government replaced the Immigration Act's arbitrarily applied European language dictation test with an entry permit system, that reflected economic and skills criteria. In 1962, Menzies' \"Commonwealth Electoral Act\" provided that all Indigenous Australians should have the right to enrol and vote at federal elections (prior to this, indigenous people in Queensland, Western Australia and some in the Northern Territory had been excluded from voting unless they were ex-servicemen). In 1949, the Liberals appointed Dame Enid Lyons as the first woman to serve in an Australian Cabinet. Menzies remained a staunch supporter of links to the monarchy and British Commonwealth but formalised an alliance with the United States and concluded the Agreement on Commerce between Australia and Japan which was signed in July 1957 and launched post-war trade with Japan, beginning a growth of Australian exports of coal, iron ore and mineral resources that would steadily climb until Japan became Australia's largest trading partner.\n\nMenzies retired in 1966 as Australia's longest-serving Prime Minister.\n\nHarold Holt replaced the retiring Robert Menzies in 1966 and the Holt Government went on to win 82 seats to Labor's 41 at the 1966 election. Holt remained Prime Minister until 19 December 1967, when he was declared presumed dead two days after disappearing in rough surf in which he had gone for a swim. As of 2018, his body has still not been found.\n\nHolt increased Australian commitment to the growing War in Vietnam, which met with some public opposition. His government oversaw conversion to decimal currency. Holt faced Britain's withdrawal from Asia by visiting and hosting many Asian leaders and by expanding ties to the United States, hosting the first visit to Australia by an American president, his friend Lyndon B. Johnson. Holt's government introduced the \"Migration Act 1966\", which effectively dismantled the White Australia Policy and increased access to non-European migrants, including refugees fleeing the Vietnam War. Holt also called the 1967 Referendum which removed the discriminatory clause in the Australian Constitution which excluded Aboriginal Australians from being counted in the census – the referendum was one of the few to be overwhelmingly endorsed by the Australian electorate (over 90% voted \"Yes\"). By the end of 1967, the Liberals' initially popular support for the war in Vietnam was causing increasing public protest.\n\nThe Liberals chose John Gorton to replace Holt. Gorton, a former World War II Royal Australian Air Force pilot, with a battle scarred face, said he was \"Australian to the bootheels\" and had a personal style which often affronted some conservatives.\n\nThe Gorton Government increased funding for the arts, setting up the Australian Council for the Arts, the Australian Film Development Corporation and the National Film and Television Training School. The Gorton Government passed legislation establishing equal pay for men and women and increased pensions, allowances and education scholarships, as well as providing free health care to 250,000 of the nation's poor (but not universal health care). Gorton's government kept Australia in the Vietnam War but stopped replacing troops at the end of 1970.\n\nGorton maintained good relations with the United States and Britain, but pursued closer ties with Asia. The Gorton government experienced a decline in voter support at the 1969 election. State Liberal leaders saw his policies as too Centralist, while other Liberals didn't like his personal behaviour. In 1971, Defence Minister Malcolm Fraser, resigned and said Gorton was \"not fit to hold the great office of Prime Minister\". In a vote on the leadership the Liberal Party split 50/50, and although this was insufficient to remove him as the leader, Gorton decided this was also insufficient support for him, and he resigned.\n\nFormer treasurer, William McMahon, replaced Gorton as Prime Minister. Gorton remained a front bencher but relations with Fraser remained strained. The McMahon Government ended when Gough Whitlam led the Australian Labor Party out of its 23-year period in Opposition at the 1972 election.\n\nThe economy was weakening. McMahon maintained Australia's diminishing commitment to Vietnam and criticised Opposition leader, Gough Whitlam, for visiting Communist China in 1972—only to have the US President Richard Nixon announce a planned visit soon after.\n\nDuring McMahon's period in office, Neville Bonner joined the Senate and became the first Indigenous Australian in the Australian Parliament. Bonner was chosen by the Liberal Party to fill a Senate vacancy in 1971 and celebrated his maiden parliamentary speech with a boomerang throwing display on the lawns of Parliament. Bonner went on to win election at the 1972 election and served as a Liberal Senator for 12 years. He worked on Indigenous and social welfare issues and proved an independent minded Senator, often crossing the floor on Parliamentary votes.\n\nFollowing Whitlam's victory, John Gorton played a further role in reform by introducing a Parliamentary motion from Opposition supporting the legalisation of same-gender sexual relations. Billy Snedden led the party against Whitlam in the 1974 federal election, which saw a return of the Labor government. When Malcolm Fraser won the Liberal Party leadership from Snedden in 1975, Gorton walked out of the Party Room.\n\nFollowing the 1974–75 Loans Affair, the Malcolm Fraser led Liberal-Country Party Coalition argued that the Whitlam Government was incompetent and delayed passage of the Government's money bills in the Senate, until the government would promise a new election. Whitlam refused, yet Fraser insisted leading to the divisive 1975 Australian constitutional crisis. The deadlock came to an end when the Whitlam government was controversially dismissed by the Governor-General, Sir John Kerr on 11 November 1975 and Fraser was installed as caretaker Prime Minister, pending an election. Fraser won in a landslide at the resulting 1975 election.\n\nFraser maintained some of the social reforms of the Whitlam era, while seeking increased fiscal restraint. His government included the first Aboriginal federal parliamentarian, Neville Bonner, and in 1976, Parliament passed the Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976, which, while limited to the Northern Territory, affirmed \"inalienable\" freehold title to some traditional lands. Fraser established the multicultural broadcaster SBS, accepted Vietnamese refugees, opposed minority white rule in Apartheid South Africa and Rhodesia and opposed Soviet expansionism. A significant program of economic reform, however, was not pursued. By 1983, the Australian economy was suffering with the early 1980s recession and amidst the effects of a severe drought. Fraser had promoted \"states' rights\" and his government refused to use Commonwealth powers to stop the construction of the Franklin Dam in Tasmania in 1982. Liberal minister Don Chipp split off from the party to form a new social liberal party, the Australian Democrats in 1977. Fraser won further substantial majorities at the 1977 and 1980 elections, before losing to the Bob Hawke-led Australian Labor Party in the 1983 election.\n\nA period of division for the Liberals followed, with former Treasurer John Howard competing with former Foreign Minister Andrew Peacock for supremacy. The Australian economy was facing the early 1990s recession. Unemployment reached 11.4% in 1992. Under Dr John Hewson, in November 1991, the opposition launched the 650-page Fightback! policy document—a radical collection of \"dry\", economic liberal measures including the introduction of a Goods and Services Tax (GST), various changes to Medicare including the abolition of bulk billing for non-concession holders, the introduction of a nine-month limit on unemployment benefits, various changes to industrial relations including the abolition of awards, a $13 billion personal income tax cut directed at middle and upper income earners, $10 billion in government spending cuts, the abolition of state payroll taxes and the privatisation of a large number of government owned enterprises − representing the start of a very different future direction to the keynesian economic policies practiced by previous Liberal/National Coalition governments. The 15 percent GST was the centerpiece of the policy document. Through 1992, Labor Prime Minister Paul Keating mounted a campaign against the Fightback package, and particularly against the GST, which he described as an attack on the working class in that it shifted the tax burden from direct taxation of the wealthy to indirect taxation as a broad-based consumption tax. Pressure group activity and public opinion was relentless, which led Hewson to exempt food from the proposed GST—leading to questions surrounding the complexity of what food was and wasn't to be exempt from the GST. Hewson's difficulty in explaining this to the electorate was exemplified in the infamous birthday cake interview, considered by some as a turning point in the election campaign. Keating won a record fifth consecutive Labor term at the 1993 election. A number of the proposals were later adopted into law in some form, to a small extent during the Keating Labor government, and to a larger extent during the Howard Liberal government (most famously the GST), while unemployment benefits and bulk billing were re-targeted for a time by the Abbott Liberal government.\n\nAt the state level, the Liberals have been dominant for long periods in all states except Queensland, where they have always held fewer seats than the National Party (not to be confused with the old Nationalist Party). The Liberals were in power in Victoria from 1955 to 1982. Jeff Kennett led the party back to office in that state in 1992, and remained Premier until 1999.\n\nIn South Australia, initially a Liberal and Country Party affiliated party, the Liberal and Country League (LCL), mostly led by Premier of South Australia Tom Playford, was in power from the 1933 election to the 1965 election, though with assistance from an electoral malapportionment, or gerrymander, known as the Playmander. The LCL's Steele Hall governed for one term from the 1968 election to the 1970 election and during this time began the process of dismantling the Playmander. David Tonkin, as leader of the South Australian Division of the Liberal Party of Australia, became Premier at the 1979 election for one term, losing office at the 1982 election. The Liberals returned to power at the 1993 election, led by Premiers Dean Brown, John Olsen and Rob Kerin through two terms, until their defeat at the 2002 election. They remained in opposition for 16 years, under a record five Opposition Leaders, until Steven Marshall led the party to victory in 2018.\n\nThe dual aligned Country Liberal Party ruled the Northern Territory from 1978 to 2001.\n\nThe party has held office in Western Australia intermittently since 1947. Liberal Richard Court was Premier of the state for most of the 1990s.\n\nIn New South Wales, the Liberal Party has not been in office as much as its Labor rival, and just three leaders have led the party from opposition to government in that state: Sir Robert Askin, who was premier from 1965 to 1975, Nick Greiner, who came to office in 1988 and resigned in 1992, and Barry O'Farrell who would lead the party out of 16 years in opposition in 2011.\n\nThe Liberal Party does not officially contest most local government elections, although many members do run for office in local government as independents. An exception is the Brisbane City Council, where both Sallyanne Atkinson and Campbell Newman have been elected Lord Mayor of Brisbane.\n\nLabor's Paul Keating lost the 1996 Election to the Liberals' John Howard. The Liberals had been in Opposition for 13 years. With John Howard as Prime Minister, Peter Costello as Treasurer and Alexander Downer as Foreign Minister, the Howard Government remained in power until their electoral defeat to Kevin Rudd in 2007.\n\nHoward generally framed the Liberals as being conservative on social policy, debt reduction and matters like maintaining Commonwealth links and the American Alliance but his premiership saw booming trade with Asia and expanding multiethnic immigration. His government concluded the Australia-United States Free Trade Agreement with the Bush Administration in 2004.\n\nHoward differed from his Labor predecessor Paul Keating in that he supported traditional Australian institutions like the Monarchy in Australia, the commemoration of ANZAC Day and the design of the Australian flag, but like Keating he pursued privatisation of public utilities and the introduction of a broad based consumption tax (although Keating had dropped support for a GST by the time of his 1993 election victory). Howard's premiership coincided with Al Qaeda's 11 September attacks on the United States. The Howard Government invoked the ANZUS treaty in response to the attacks and supported America's campaigns in Afghanistan and Iraq.\n\nIn the 2004 Federal elections the party strengthened its majority in the Lower House and, with its coalition partners, became the first federal government in twenty years to gain an absolute majority in the Senate. This control of both houses permitted their passing of legislation without the need to negotiate with independents or minor parties, exemplified by industrial relations legislation known as WorkChoices, a wide-ranging effort to increase deregulation of industrial laws in Australia.\n\nIn 2005, Howard reflected on his government's cultural and foreign policy outlook in oft repeated terms:\n\nThe 2007 federal election saw the defeat of the Howard federal government, and the Liberal Party was in opposition throughout Australia at the state and federal level; the highest Liberal office-holder at the time was Lord Mayor of Brisbane Campbell Newman. This ended after the 2008 Western Australian state election, when Colin Barnett became Premier of that state.\n\nFollowing the 2007 federal election, Dr Brendan Nelson was elected leader by the Parliamentary Liberal Party. On 16 September 2008, in a second contest following a spill motion, Nelson lost the leadership to Malcolm Turnbull. On 1 December 2009, a subsequent leadership election saw Turnbull lose the leadership to Tony Abbott by 42 votes to 41 on the second ballot. Abbott led the party to the 2010 federal election, which saw an increase in the Liberal Party vote and resulted in the first hung parliament since the 1940 election.\n\nThrough 2010, the party remained in opposition at the Tasmanian and South Australian state elections and achieved state government in Victoria. In March 2011, the New South Wales Liberal-National Coalition led by Barry O'Farrell won government with the largest election victory in post-war Australian history at the State Election. In Queensland, the Liberal and National parties merged in 2008 to form the new Liberal National Party of Queensland (registered as the Queensland Division of the Liberal Party of Australia). In March 2012, the new party achieved Government in an historic landslide, led by former Brisbane Lord Mayor, Campbell Newman.\n\nIn March 2013, the Western Australian Liberal-National government won re-election while the party won government in Tasmania in 2014 and lost their fourth election in a row at the South Australian election. However, the Victorian Liberal-National government, now led by Denis Napthine, became the first one term government in Victoria in 60 years. Similarly, just two months later, the Liberal National government in Queensland was defeated just three years after its historic landslide victory. The New South Wales Liberal-National Coalition, however, managed to win re-election in March 2015. In 2016 the Federal Liberals narrowly won re-election in July 2016 while the Liberal-affiliated Country Liberals suffered a historic defeat in the Northern Territory and Canberra Liberals lost their fifth election in a row in October 2016. The Liberals fared little better in 2017 with the Barnett-led Liberal-National government in Western Australia also suffered a landslide defeat in March.\n\nTurbull's time in office saw tensions between Moderate and Conservative factions within the Liberal Party.\n\nOn 21 August 2018 after a week of mounting pressure on Mr Turnbull’s leadership over his handling of energy policy and election strategy, the prime minister used the regular party-room meeting to spill the party leadership in an attempt to head off a growing conservative-led move against him by Conservative Home Affairs Minister Peter Dutton. MrTurnbull survived the challenge, winning 48 votes to Mr Dutton's 35. \nA further spill was called by Mr Turnbull, in which he declined to stand and the leadership of the party was decided in favour of Treasurer Scott Morrison, over Mr Dutton.\n\nTurnbull resigned from parliament on 31 August 2018, triggering a by-election in the seat of Wentworth. The Liberals lost the by-election to an Independent, the Coalition also losing its majority in the House of Representatives.\n\nFurther dissatisfaction within the Liberal Party has seen a number of centrist and economically-liberal candidates announce that they will be nominating as independents in wealthy electorates for the 2019 federal election, with a specific focus on \"addressing climate change\".\n\nThe contemporary Liberal Party generally advocates economic liberalism (see New Right). Historically, the party has supported a higher degree of economic protectionism and interventionism than it has in recent decades. However, from its foundation the party has identified itself as an anti-socialist grouping of liberals and conservatives. Strong opposition to socialism and communism in Australia and abroad was one of its founding principles. The party's founder and longest-serving leader Robert Menzies envisaged that Australia's middle class would form its main constituency.\n\nTowards the end of his term as Prime Minister of Australia and in a final address to the Liberal Party Federal Council in 1964, Menzies spoke of the \"Liberal Creed\" as follows:\n\nSoon after the election of the Howard Government the new Prime Minister John Howard, who was to become the second-longest serving Liberal Prime Minister, spoke of his interpretation of the \"Liberal Tradition\" in a Robert Menzies Lecture in 1996:\n\nThroughout their history, the Liberals have been in electoral terms largely the party of the middle class (whom Menzies, in the era of the party's formation called \"The forgotten people\"), though such class-based voting patterns are no longer as clear as they once were. In the 1970s a left-wing middle class emerged that no longer voted Liberal. One effect of this was the success of a breakaway party, the Australian Democrats, founded in 1977 by former Liberal minister Don Chipp and members of minor liberal parties. On the other hand, the Liberals have done increasingly well in recent years among socially conservative working-class voters. However, the Liberal Party's key support base remains the upper-middle classes—16 of the 20 richest federal electorates are held by the Liberals, most of which are safe seats. In country areas they either compete with or have a truce with the Nationals, depending on various factors.\n\nMenzies was an ardent constitutional monarchist, who supported the monarchy in Australia and links to the Commonwealth of Nations. Today the party is divided on the question of republicanism, with some (such as incumbent leader Scott Morrison) being monarchists, while others (such as his predecessor Malcolm Turnbull) are republicans. The Menzies Government formalised Australia's alliance with the United States in 1951 and the party has remained a strong supporter of the mutual defence treaty.\n\nDomestically, Menzies presided over a fairly regulated economy in which utilities were publicly owned, and commercial activity was highly regulated through centralised wage-fixing and high tariff protection. Liberal leaders from Menzies to Malcolm Fraser generally maintained Australia's high tariff levels. At that time the Liberals' coalition partner, the Country Party, the older of the two in the coalition (now known as the \"National Party\"), had considerable influence over the government's economic policies. It was not until the late 1970s and through their period out of power federally in the 1980s that the party came to be influenced by what was known as the \"New Right\"—a conservative liberal group who advocated market deregulation, privatisation of public utilities, reductions in the size of government programs and tax cuts.\n\nSocially, while liberty and freedom of enterprise form the basis of its beliefs, elements of the party have wavered between what is termed \"small-l liberalism\" and social conservatism. Historically, Liberal Governments have been responsible for the carriage of a number of notable \"socially liberal\" reforms, including the opening of Australia to multiethnic immigration under Menzies and Harold Holt; Holt's 1967 Referendum on Aboriginal Rights; John Gorton's support for cinema and the arts; selection of the first Aboriginal Senator, Neville Bonner, in 1971; and Malcolm Fraser's Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976. A West Australian Liberal, Ken Wyatt, became the first Indigenous Australian elected to the House of Representatives in 2010.\n\nThe Prime Minister of Australia, Scott Morrison, stated the following in his 2019 victory speech;\n\nThis is, this is the best country in the world in which to live. It is those Australians that we have been working for, for the last five and a half years since we came to Government, under Tony Abbott's leadership back in 2013. It has been those Australians who have worked hard every day, they have their dreams, they have their aspirations; to get a job, to get an apprenticeship, to start a business, to meet someone amazing. To start a family, to buy a home, to work hard and provide the best you can for your kids. To save your retirement and to ensure that when you're in your retirement, that you can enjoy it because you've worked hard for it. These are The Quiet Australians who have won a great victory tonight.\n\nThe Liberal Party is a member of the International Democrat Union.\n\nThe Liberal Party and its predecessor parties have been the first to directly elect female representatives to the federal and every state and territory parliament nationwide. The first female member of the Australian House of Representatives and member of cabinet, Dame Enid Lyons, was elected in 1943 as a Liberal representing the division of Darwin in Tasmania. The first female representative elected in each state and territory for the Liberal Party or its direct predecessors were, in order of election: \nBULLET::::- Edith Cowan, representing the electoral district of West Perth in the Parliament of Western Australia in 1921 for the Nationalist Party of Australia\nBULLET::::- Millicent Preston-Stanley, representing the electoral district of Eastern Suburbs in the Parliament of New South Wales in 1925 for the Nationalist Party of Australia\nBULLET::::- Irene Longman, representing the electoral district of Bulimba in the Parliament of Queensland in 1929 for the Country and Progressive National Party\nBULLET::::- Millie Peacock, representing the electoral district of Allandale in the Parliament of Victoria in 1933 for the United Australia Party\nBULLET::::- Mary Stevenson, was elected to the Australian Capital Territory Advisory Council in 1951 for the Liberal Party of Australia\nBULLET::::- Amelia Best, in the division of Wilmot and Mabel Miller in the division of Franklin, in 1955 in the Parliament of Tasmania for the Liberal Party of Australia\nBULLET::::- Joyce Steele in the electoral district of Burnside and Jessie Cooper in the Legislative Council in 1959 for the Liberal and Country League in the Parliament of South Australia\nBULLET::::- Liz Andrew, representing the electoral division of Sanderson in the Parliament of the Northern Territory in 1974 for the Country Liberal Party (Dawn Lawrie was also elected as an independent at the same election)\n\nThe Liberal Party's organisation is dominated by the six state divisions, reflecting the party's original commitment to a federalised system of government (a commitment which was strongly maintained by all Liberal governments bar the Gorton government until 1983, but was to a large extent abandoned by the Howard Government, which showed strong centralising tendencies). Menzies deliberately created a weak national party machine and strong state divisions. Party policy is made almost entirely by the parliamentary parties, not by the party's rank-and-file members, although Liberal party members do have a degree of influence over party policy.\n\nThe Liberal Party's basic organisational unit is the \"branch\", which consists of party members in a particular locality. For each electorate there is a \"conference\"—notionally above the branches—which coordinates campaigning in the electorate and regularly communicates with the member (or candidate) for the electorate. As there are three levels of government in Australia, each branch elects delegates to a local, state, and federal conference.\n\nAll the branches in an Australian state are grouped into a \"Division\". The ruling body for the Division is a \"State Council\". There is also one \"Federal Council\" which represents the entire organisational Liberal Party in Australia. Branch executives are delegates to the Councils \"ex-officio\" and additional delegates are elected by branches, depending on their size.\n\nPreselection of electoral candidates is performed by a special electoral college convened for the purpose. Membership of the electoral college consists of head office delegates, branch officers, and elected delegates from branches.\n\nThe following is a complete list of Liberal Party leaders:\n\nKey:\n\n\"PM\": Prime Minister\n\"LO\": Leader of the Opposition\n†: Died in office\n\n! colspan=\"2\" No.\n! Leader\n! Portrait\n! colspan=\"2\" Term of Office\n! Position\n! colspan=\"2\" Prime Minister\n! rowspan=\"2\" style=\"background-color: \" \n! rowspan=\"2\" 1\n! style=\"background-color: \" \n! 2\n! style=\"background-color: \" \n! style=\"background-color: \" \n! 3\n! style=\"background-color: \" \n! 4\n! style=\"background-color: \" \n! 5\n! rowspan=\"2\" style=\"background-color: \" \n! rowspan=\"2\" 6\n! style=\"background-color: \" \n! 7\n! style=\"background-color: \" \n! 8\n! style=\"background-color: \" \n! (7)\n! rowspan=\"2\" style=\"background-color: \" \n! rowspan=\"2\" 9\n! style=\"background-color: \" \n! 10\n! rowspan=\"2\" style=\"background-color: \" \n! rowspan=\"2\" (8)\n! style=\"background-color: \" \n! 11\n! style=\"background-color: \" \n! 12\n! rowspan=\"4\" style=\"background-color: \" \n! rowspan=\"4\" 13\n! style=\"background-color: \" \n! (12)\n! style=\"background-color: \" \n! 14\n\n! No\n! Name\n! Term began\n! Term ended\n! Time in office\n! class=\"unsortable\"  Term as Prime Minister\n\nTotals for leaders who served multiple non-consecutive terms:\nBULLET::::- John Howard: 16 years, 184 days\nBULLET::::- Malcolm Turnbull:\nBULLET::::- Andrew Peacock: 3 years, 142 days\n\n! # !! Name !! State !! Term start !! Term end !! Duration !! Leader(s)\n\nBULLET::::- Notes\n! State/ Territory\n! Division\n! Leader\n! Notes\nLiza Harvey\n\n! Australian Capital Territory\n! Years\n\n! New South Wales\n! Years\nJohn Fahey\nBarry O'Farrell\nMike Baird\n\n! Queensland\n! Years\n\n! South Australia\n! Years\n\n! Tasmania\n! Years\n\n! Victoria\n! Years\nJeff Kennett\nTed Baillieu\nDenis Napthine\n\n! Western Australia\n! Years\n\nBULLET::::- 1945: Sir Malcolm Ritchie (first term)\nBULLET::::- 1947: Richard Casey (later, The Lord Casey)\nBULLET::::- 1950: Sir Malcolm Ritchie (second term)\nBULLET::::- 1951: Sir William Anderson\nBULLET::::- 1956: Lyle Moore\nBULLET::::- 1960: Sir Philip McBride\nBULLET::::- 1965: Sir John Pagan\nBULLET::::- 1970: Sir Robert Southey\nBULLET::::- 1975: Sir John Atwill\nBULLET::::- 1982: Dr Jim Forbes\nBULLET::::- 1985: John Valder\nBULLET::::- 1987: John Elliott\nBULLET::::- 1990: Professor Ashley Goldsworthy\nBULLET::::- 1993: Tony Staley\nBULLET::::- 1999: Shane Stone\nBULLET::::- 2005: Chris McDiven\nBULLET::::- 2008: Alan Stockdale\nBULLET::::- 2014: Richard Alston\nBULLET::::- 2017: Nick Greiner\n\n! Election\n! Seats won\n! Total votes\n! Share of votes\n! Position\n! Party Leader\n!1946\n!1949\n1,813,794\n39.39%\n!1951\n1,854,799\n40.62%\n!1954\n1,745,808\n38.31%\n!1955\n1,746,485\n39.73%\n!1958\n1,859,180\n37.23%\n!1961\n1,761,738\n33.58%\n!1963\n2,030,823\n37.09%\n!1966\n2,291,964\n40.14%\n!1969\n2,125,987\n34.77%\n!1972\n!1974\n!1975\n3,232,159\n41.80%\n!1977\n3,017,896\n38.09%\n!1980\n3,108,512\n37.43%\n!1983\n!1984\n!1987\n!1990\n!1993\n!1996\n4,210,689\n38.69%\n!1998\n3,764,707\n33.89%\n!2001\n4,244,072\n37.40%\n!2004\n4,741,458\n40.47%\n!2007\n!2010\n!2013\n4,134,865\n32.02%\n!2016\n3,882,905\n28.67%\n!2019\n3,989,435\n27.97%\n\nFor the 2015–2016 financial year, the top ten disclosed donors to the Liberal Party were: Paul Marks (Nimrod resources) ($1,300,000), Pratt Holdings ($790,000), Hong Kong Kingson Investment Company ($710,000), Aus Gold Mining Group ($410,000), Village Roadshow ($325,000), Waratah Group ($300,000), Walker Corporation ($225,000), Australian Gypsum Industries ($196,000), National Automotive Leasing and Salary Packaging Association ($177,000) and Westfield Corporation ($150,000).\n\nThe Liberal Party also receives undisclosed funding through several methods, such as \"associated entities\". Cormack Foundation, Eight by Five, Free Enterprise Foundation, Federal Forum and Northern Sydney Conservative forum are entities which have been used to funnel donations to the Liberal Party without disclosing the source.\n\nBULLET::::- Country Liberal Party (Northern Territory)\nBULLET::::- Liberal National Party (Queensland)\nBULLET::::- Liberal Party of Australia (New South Wales Division)\nBULLET::::- Liberal Party of Australia (South Australian Division)\nBULLET::::- Liberal Party of Australia (Tasmanian Division)\nBULLET::::- List of political parties in Australia\nBULLET::::- Turnbull Government\nBULLET::::- Abbott Government\nBULLET::::- Liberalism in Australia\nBULLET::::- List of Moderate Left Liberals\nBULLET::::- Young Liberal Movement of Australia\n\nBULLET::::- Henderson, Gerard (1994). \"Menzies' Child: The Liberal Party of Australia 1944–1994\", Allen and Unwin, Sydney, New South Wales.\nBULLET::::- Jaensch, Dean (1994) \"The Liberals\", Allen and Unwin, Sydney, New South Wales.\nBULLET::::- Nethercote, John (ed.)(2001), \"Liberalism and the Australian Federation\", Federation Press, Annandale, New South Wales.\nBULLET::::- Simms, Marian (1982) \"A Liberal Nation: The Liberal Party and Australian Politics\", Hale and Iremonger, Sydney, New South Wales.\nBULLET::::- Starr, Graeme (1980) \"The Liberal Party of Australia: A Documentary History\", Drummond/Heinemann, Richmond, Victoria.\nBULLET::::- Tiver, P.G. (1978), \"The Liberal Party. Principles and Performance\", Jacaranda, Milton, Queensland.\n\nBULLET::::- Liberal Party of Australia official site\nBULLET::::- Liberal Party of Australia ephemera digitised and held by the National Library of Australia\nBULLET::::- Records of the Victorian division of the Liberal Party held at the University of Melbourne Archives\n"}
{"id": "18454", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18454", "title": "Lindisfarne", "text": "Lindisfarne\n\nThe Holy Island of Lindisfarne, commonly known as either Holy Island or Lindisfarne is a tidal island off the northeast coast of England, which constitutes the civil parish of Holy Island in Northumberland. Holy Island has a recorded history from the 6th century AD; it was an important centre of Celtic Christianity under Saints Aidan of Lindisfarne, Cuthbert, Eadfrith of Lindisfarne and Eadberht of Lindisfarne. After the Viking invasions and the Norman conquest of England, a priory was reestablished. A small castle was built on the island in 1550.\n\nThe island of Lindisfarne appears under the Old Welsh name \"Medcaut\" in the 9th century \"Historia Brittonum\". Following up on a suggestion by Richard Coates, Andrew Breeze proposes that the name ultimately derives from Latin \"Medicata [Insula]\" (), owing perhaps to the island's reputation for medicinal herbs.\n\nBoth the\" Parker Chronicle \"and\" Peterborough Chronicle\" annals of AD 793 record the Old English name, \"Lindisfarena\". The soubriquet \"Holy Island\" was in use by the 11th century when it appears in Latin as \"Insula Sacra\". The reference was to Saints Aidan and Cuthbert.\n\nThe name Lindisfarne has an uncertain origin. The \"-farne\" part may be Old English \"–fearena\" meaning \"traveller\". The first part, \"Lindis-\", may refer to people from the Kingdom of Lindsey in modern Lincolnshire, referring to either regular visitors or settlers. Another possibility is that \"Lindisfarne\" is Brittonic in origin, containing the element \"Lind-\" meaning \"stream or pool\" (Welsh \"llyn\"), with the nominal morpheme \"-as(t)\" and an unknown element identical to that in the Farne Islands. Further suggested is that the name may be a wholly Irish formation, from corresponding \"*lind-is-\", plus \"–fearann\" meaning \"land, domain, territory\". Such an Irish formation, however, could have been based on a pre-existing Brittonic name.\n\nThere is also a supposition that the nearby Farne Islands are fern like in shape and the name may have come from there.\n\nThe island measures from east to west and from north to south, and comprises approximately at high tide. The nearest point of the island is about from the mainland of England. The island of Lindisfarne is located along the northeast coast of England, close to the border with Scotland. It is accessible, most times, at low tide by crossing sand and mudflats which are covered with water at high tides. These sand and mud flats carry an ancient pilgrims' path, and in more recent times, a modern causeway. Lindisfarne is surrounded by the Lindisfarne National Nature Reserve, which protects the island's sand dunes and the adjacent intertidal habitats. , the island had a population of 180.\n\nWarning signs urge visitors walking to the island to keep to the marked path, to check tide times and weather carefully, and to seek local advice if in doubt. For drivers, tide tables are prominently displayed at both ends of the causeway and also where the Holy Island road leaves the A1 Great North Road at Beal. The causeway is generally open from about three hours after high tide until two hours before the next high tide, but the period of closure may be extended during stormy weather. Tide tables giving the safe crossing periods are published by Northumberland County council.\n\nDespite these warnings, about one vehicle each month is stranded on the causeway, requiring rescue by HM Coastguard and/or Seahouses RNLI lifeboat. A sea rescue costs approximately £1,900 (quoted in 2009, ), while an air rescue costs more than £4,000 (also quoted in 2009, ). Local people have opposed a causeway barrier primarily on convenience grounds.\n\nTrinity House operates two lighthouses to guide vessels entering Holy Island Harbour, named Guile Point East and Heugh Hill. The former is one of a pair of stone obelisks standing on a small tidal island on the other side of the channel. The obelisks are leading marks which, when aligned, indicate the safe channel over the bar. When Heugh Hill bears 310° (in line with the church belfry) the bar is cleared and there is a clear run into the harbour. Since the early 1990s, a sector light has been fixed to it about one-third of the way up Guile Point East. The latter is a metal framework tower with a black triangular day mark, situated on a ridge on the south edge of Lindisfarne. Before November 1995 both were owned/operated by Newcastle-upon-Tyne Trinity House. Nearby is a former coastguard station (recently refurbished and opened to the public as a viewing platform). An adjacent ruin is known as the Lantern Chapel; its origin is unknown, but the name may indicate an earlier navigation light on this site.\n\nNot a lighthouse but simply a daymark for maritime navigation, a white brick pyramid, 35 feet high and built in 1810, stands at Emmanuel Head, the north-eastern point of Lindisfarne. It is said to be Britain's earliest purpose-built daymark.\n\nThe northeast coast of England was largely unsettled by Roman civilians apart from the Tyne valley and Hadrian's Wall. The area had been little affected during the centuries of nominal Roman occupation. The countryside had been subject to raids from both Scots and Picts and was \"not one to attract early Germanic settlement\". King Ida (reigned from 547) started the sea-borne settlement of the coast, establishing an \"urbs regia\" at Bamburgh across the bay from Lindisfarne. The conquest was not straightforward, however. The \"Historia Brittonum\" recounts how, in the 6th century, Urien, prince of Rheged, with a coalition of North British kingdoms, besieged Angles led by Theodric of Bernicia at the island for three days and nights, until internal power struggles led to the Britons' defeat.\n\nThe monastery of Lindisfarne was founded circa 634 by Irish monk Saint Aidan, who had been sent from Iona off the west coast of Scotland to Northumbria at the request of King Oswald. The priory was founded before the end of 634 and Aidan remained there until his death in 651. The priory remained the only seat of a bishopric in Northumbria for nearly thirty years. Finian (bishop 651–661) built a timber church \"suitable for a bishop's seat\". St Bede, however, was critical of the fact that the church was not built of stone but only of hewn oak thatched with reeds. A later bishop, Eadbert, removed the thatch and covered both walls and roof in lead. An abbot, who could be the bishop, was elected by the brethren and led the community. Bede comments on this:\nLindisfarne became the base for Christian evangelism in the North of England and also sent a successful mission to Mercia. Monks from the Irish community of Iona settled on the island. Northumbria's patron saint, Saint Cuthbert, was a monk and later abbot of the monastery, and his miracles and life are recorded by the Venerable Bede. Cuthbert later became Bishop of Lindisfarne. An anonymous life of Cuthbert written at Lindisfarne is the oldest extant piece of English historical writing. From its reference to \"Aldfrith, who now reigns peacefully\" it must date to between 685 and 704. Cuthbert was buried here, his remains later translated to Durham Cathedral (along with the relics of Saint Eadfrith of Lindisfarne). Eadberht of Lindisfarne, the next bishop (and saint) was buried in the place from which Cuthbert's body was exhumed earlier the same year when the priory was abandoned in the late 9th century.\n\nCuthbert's body was carried with the monks, eventually settling in Chester-le-Street before a final move to Durham. The saint's shrine was the major pilgrimage centre for much of the region until its despoliation by Henry VIII's commissioners in 1539 or 1540. The grave was preserved, however, and when opened in 1827 yielded a number of remarkable artefacts dating back to Lindisfarne. The inner (of three) coffins was of incised wood, the only decorated wood to survive from the period. It shows Jesus surrounded by the Four Evangelists. Within the coffin was a pectoral cross across made of gold and mounted with garnets and intricate tracery. There was a comb made of elephant ivory, a rare and expensive item in Northern England. Also inside was an embossed silver covered travelling altar. All were contemporary with the original burial on the island. When the body was placed in the shrine in 1104 other items were removed: a paten, scissors and a chalice of gold and onyx. Most remarkable of all was a gospel (known as the St Cuthbert Gospel or Stonyhurst Gospel from its association with the college). The manuscript is in an early, probably original, binding beautifully decorated with deeply embossed leather.\n\nFollowing Finian's death, Colman became Bishop of Lindisfarne. Up to this point the Northumbrian (and latterly Mercian) churches had looked to Lindisfarne as the mother church. There were significant liturgical and theological differences with the fledgling Roman party based at Canterbury. According to Stenton: \"There is no trace of any intercourse between these bishops [the Mercians] and the see of Canterbury\". The Synod of Whitby in 663 changed this. Allegiance switched southwards to Canterbury and thence to Rome. Colman departed his see for Iona and Lindisfarne ceased to be of such major importance.\n\nIn 735 the northern ecclesiastical province of England was established with the archbishopric at York. There were only three bishops under York: Hexham, Lindisfarne and Whithorn whereas Canterbury had the twelve envisaged by St Augustine. The Diocese of York encompassed roughly the counties of Yorkshire and Lancashire. Hexham covered County Durham and the southern part of Northumberland up to the River Coquet and eastwards into the Pennines. Whithorn covered most of Dumfries and Galloway region west of Dumfries itself. The remainder, Cumbria, northern Northumbria, Lothian and much of the Kingdom of Strathclyde formed the diocese of Lindisfarne.\n\nIn 737 Saint Ceolwulf of Northumbria abdicated as King of Northumbria and entered the Prior at Lindisfarne. He died in 764 and was buried alongside Cuthbert. In 830 his body was moved to Norham-upon-Tweed and later his head was translated to Durham Cathedral.\n\nAt some point in the early 8th century, the famous illuminated manuscript known as the Lindisfarne Gospels, an illustrated Latin copy of the Gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, was made probably at Lindisfarne and the artist was possibly Eadfrith, who later became Bishop of Lindisfarne. It is also speculated that a team of illuminators and calligraphers (monks of Lindisfarne Priory) worked on the text however, their identities are unknown. Sometime in the second half of the 10th century a monk named Aldred added an Anglo-Saxon (Old English) gloss to the Latin text, producing the earliest surviving Old English copies of the Gospels. Aldred attributed the original to Eadfrith (bishop 698–721). The Gospels were written with a good hand, but it is the illustrations done in an insular style containing a fusion of Celtic, Germanic and Roman elements that are truly outstanding. According to Aldred, Eadfrith's successor Æthelwald was responsible for pressing and binding it and then it was covered with a fine metal case made by a hermit called Billfrith. The Lindisfarne Gospels now reside in the British Library in London, somewhat to the annoyance of some Northumbrians. In 1971 professor Suzanne Kaufman of Rockford, Illinois presented a facsimile copy of the Gospels to the clergy of the island.\n\nIn 793, a Viking raid on Lindisfarne caused much consternation throughout the Christian west and is now often taken as the beginning of the Viking Age. The D and E versions of the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" record:\n\nHer wæron reðe forebecna cumene ofer Norðhymbra land, ⁊ þæt folc earmlic bregdon, þæt wæron ormete þodenas ⁊ ligrescas, ⁊ fyrenne dracan wæron gesewene on þam lifte fleogende. Þam tacnum sona fyligde mycel hunger, ⁊ litel æfter þam, þæs ilcan geares on .vi. Idus Ianuarii, earmlice hæþenra manna hergunc adilegode Godes cyrican in Lindisfarnaee þurh hreaflac ⁊ mansliht.\n\nIn this year fierce, foreboding omens came over the land of the Northumbrians, and the wretched people shook; there were excessive whirlwinds, lightning, and fiery dragons were seen flying in the sky. These signs were followed by great famine, and a little after those, that same year on 6th ides of January, the ravaging of wretched heathen men destroyed God's church at Lindisfarne.\n\nThe generally accepted date for the Viking raid on Lindisfarne is in fact 8 June; Michael Swanton writes: \"\"vi id Ianr\", presumably [is] an error for \"vi id Iun\" (8 June) which is the date given by the \"Annals of Lindisfarne\" (p. 505), when better sailing weather would favour coastal raids.\"\n\nAlcuin, a Northumbrian scholar in Charlemagne's court at the time, wrote:\n\nNever before has such terror appeared in Britain as we have now suffered from a pagan race ... The heathens poured out the blood of saints around the altar, and trampled on the bodies of saints in the temple of God, like dung in the streets.\n\nThe English seemed to have turned their back on the sea as they became more settled. Many monasteries were established on islands, peninsulas, river mouths and cliffs. Isolated communities were less susceptible to interference and the politics of the heartland. The amazement of the English at the raids from the sea must have been matched by the amazement of the raiders at such (to them) vulnerable, wealthy and unarmed settlements.\n\nThese preliminary raids, unsettling as they were, were not followed up. The main body of the raiders passed north around Scotland. The 9th-century invasions came not from Norway, but from the Danes from around the entrance to the Baltic. The first Danish raids into England were in the Isle of Sheppey, Kent during 835 and from there their influence spread north. During this period religious art continued to flourish on Lindisfarne, and the \"Liber Vitae\" of Durham began in the priory.\n\nBy 866 the Danes were in York and in 873 the army was moving into Northumberland. With the collapse of the Northumbrian kingdom the monks of Lindisfarne fled the island in 875 taking with them St Cuthbert's bones (which are now buried at the cathedral in Durham).\n\nPrior to the 9th century Lindisfarne Priory had, in common with other such establishments, held large tracts of land which were managed directly or leased to farmers with a life interest only. Following the Danish occupation land was increasingly owned by individuals and could be bought, sold and inherited. Following the Battle of Corbridge in 914 Ragnald seized the land giving some to his followers Scula and Onlafbal.\n\nThe priory was re-established in Norman times in 1093 as a Benedictine house and continued until its suppression in 1536 under Henry VIII. The standing remains date from this later priory, while the site of the original priory is now occupied by the parish church. The site is a grade I listed building number 1042304. The earliest parts of the area are a scheduled ancient monument number 1011650.\n\nIn 1462, during the Wars of the Roses, Margaret of Anjou made an abortive attempt to seize the Northumbrian castles. Following a storm at sea 400 troops had to seek shelter on Holy Island, where they surrendered to the Yorkists.\n\nAn early scholarly description of the priory was compiled by Dr Henry George Charles Clarke (presumed son of Admiral Sir Erasmus Gower) in 1838 during his term as president of the Berwickshire Naturalists' Club. . Dr Clarke surmised that this Norman priory was unique in that the centre aisle had a vault of stone. Of the six arches, Dr Clarke stated \"as if the architect had not previously calculated the space to be occupied by his arcade. The effect here has been to produce a horse-shoe instead of a semicircular arch, from its being of the same height, but lesser span, than the others. This arch is very rare, even in Norman buildings\".\n\nLindisfarne Castle was built in 1550, around the time that Lindisfarne Priory went out of use, and stones from the priory were used as building material. It is very small by the usual standards, and was more of a fort. The castle sits on the highest point of the island, a whinstone hill called Beblowe.\n\nAfter Henry VIII suppressed the priory, his troops used the remains as a naval store. In 1542 Henry VIII ordered the Earl of Rutland to fortify the site against possible Scottish invasion. By December 1547, Ralph Cleisbye, Captain of the fort, had guns including a wheel-mounted demi-culverin, two brass sakers, a falcon, and another fixed demi-culverin. However, Beblowe Crag itself was not fortified until 1549 and Sir Richard Lee saw only a decayed platform and turf rampart there in 1565. Elizabeth I then had work carried out on the fort, strengthening it and providing gun platforms for the new developments in artillery technology. When James VI and I came to power in England, he combined the Scottish and English thrones, and the need for the castle declined. At that time the castle was still garrisoned from Berwick and protected the small Lindisfarne Harbour.\n\nDuring the Jacobite Rising of 1715, Lancelot Errington, one of a number of locals who supported the Jacobite cause, visited the castle. Some sources say that he asked the Master Gunner, who also served as the unit's barber, for a shave. Once Errington was inside, it became clear that most of the garrison were away; later that day he returned with his nephew Mark Errington, claiming that he had lost the key to his watch. They were allowed in, overpowered the three soldiers present, and claimed the castle as a landing site for the Jacobite group led by Thomas Forster, Member of Parliament for the county of Northumberland. Reinforcements did not arrive to support the Erringtons, so when a detachment of 100 men arrived from Berwick to retake the castle they were only able to hold out for one day. Fleeing, they were captured at the tollbooth at Berwick and imprisoned, but were later able to tunnel out of their gaol and escape.\n\nA Dundee firm built lime kilns on Lindisfarne in the 1860s, and lime was burnt on the island until at least the end of the 19th century. The kilns are among the most complex in Northumberland. Horses carried limestone, along the Holy Island Waggonway, from a quarry on the north side of the island to the lime kilns, where it was burned with coal transported from Dundee on the east coast of Scotland. There are still some traces of the jetties by which the coal was imported and the lime exported close by at the foot of the crags. The remains of the waggon way between the quarries and the kilns makes for a pleasant and easy walk. At its peak over 100 men were employed. Crinoid columnals extracted from the quarried stone and threaded into necklaces or rosaries became known as St Cuthbert's beads. The large-scale quarrying in the 19th century had a devastating effect on the interesting limestone caves, but eight sea caves remain at Coves Haven.\n\nWorkings on the lime kilns stopped by the start of the 20th century. The lime kilns on Lindisfarne are among the few being actively preserved in Northumberland.\n\nHoly Island Golf Club was founded in 1907 but later closed in the 1960s.\n\nThe island is within an \"Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty\" on the Northumberland Coast. The ruined monastery is in the care of English Heritage, which also runs a museum/visitor centre nearby. The neighbouring parish church (see below) is still in use.\n\nLindisfarne also has the small Lindisfarne Castle, based on a Tudor fort, which was refurbished in the Arts and Crafts style by Sir Edwin Lutyens for the editor of Country Life, Edward Hudson. Lutyens also designed the island's Celtic-cross war-memorial on the Heugh. Lutyens' upturned herring busses near the foreshore provided the inspiration for Spanish architect Enric Miralles' Scottish Parliament Building in Edinburgh.\n\nOne of the most celebrated gardeners of modern times, Gertrude Jekyll (1843–1932), laid out a tiny garden just north of the castle in 1911. The castle, garden and nearby lime kilns are in the care of the National Trust and open to visitors.\n\nTurner, Thomas Girtin and Charles Rennie Mackintosh all painted on Holy Island.\n\nHoly Island was considered part of the Islandshire unit along with several mainland parishes. This came under the jurisdiction of the County Palatine of Durham until the Counties (Detached Parts) Act 1844.\n\nLindisfarne was mainly a fishing community for many years, with farming and the production of lime also of some importance.\n\nThe Holy Island of Lindisfarne is well known for mead. In the mediaeval days when monks inhabited the island, it was thought that if the soul was in God's keeping, the body must be fortified with Lindisfarne mead. The monks have long vanished, and the mead's recipe remains a secret of the family which still produces it; Lindisfarne Mead is produced at St Aidan's Winery, and sold throughout the UK and elsewhere.\n\nThe isle of Lindisfarne was featured on the television programme \"Seven Natural Wonders\" as one of the wonders of the North. The Lindisfarne Gospels have also featured on television among the top few Treasures of Britain. It also features in an ITV Tyne Tees programme \"Diary of an Island\" which started on 19 April 2007 and on a DVD of the same name.\n\nWhen the abbey was rebuilt by the Normans, the site was moved. The site of the original priory church was redeveloped in stone as the parish church. As such it is now the oldest building on the island still with a roof on. Remains of the Saxon church exist as the chancel wall and arch. A Norman apse (subsequently replaced in the 13th century) led eastwards from the chancel. The nave was extended in the 12th century with a northern arcade, and in the following century with a southern arcade.\n\nAfter the Reformation the church slipped into disrepair until the restoration of 1860. The church is built of coloured sandstone which has had the Victorian plaster removed from it. The north aisle is known as the \"fishermen's aisle\" and houses the altar of St Peter. The south aisle used to hold the altar of St Margaret of Scotland, but now houses the organ.\n\nThe church is a Grade I listed building number 1042304, listed as part of the whole priory. The church forms most of the earliest part of the site and is a scheduled ancient monument number 1011650.\n\nFor long years David Adam was rector of Holy Island and ministered to thousands of pilgrims and other visitors.\n\nIn response to the perceived lack of affordable housing on the isle of Lindisfarne, in 1996 a group of islanders established a charitable foundation known as the Holy Island of Lindisfarne Community Development Trust. They built a visitor centre on the island using the profits from sales. In addition, eleven community houses were built and are rented out to community members who want to continue to live on the island. The trust is also responsible for management of the inner harbour. The Holy Island Partnership was formed in 2009 by members of the community as well as organisations and groups operating on the island.\n\nTourism grew steadily throughout the 20th century, and the isle of Lindisfarne is now a popular destination for visitors. Those tourists staying on the island while it is cut off by the tide experience the island in a much quieter state, as most day trippers leave before the tide rises. At low tide it is possible to walk across the sands following an ancient route known as the Pilgrims' Way, but see the note above. This route is marked with posts and has refuge boxes for stranded walkers, just as the road has a refuge box for those who have left their crossing too late. The isle of Lindisfarne is surrounded by the 8,750-acre Lindisfarne National Nature Reserve which attracts bird-watchers to the tidal island. The island's prominent position and varied habitat make it particularly attractive to tired avian migrants, and 330 bird species had been recorded on the island.\n\nBULLET::::- Holy Island Safe Crossing Times\nBULLET::::- Lindisfarne Priory Opening Times\nBULLET::::- Lindisfarne Priory – English Heritage\nBULLET::::- Images of Lindisfarne Castle\nBULLET::::- Lindisfarne Castle\nBULLET::::- Teachers' resource pack: English Heritage\n"}
