{"id": "17895", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17895", "title": "Leap year", "text": "Leap year\n\nA leap year (also known as an intercalary year or bissextile year) is a calendar year containing an additional day (or, in the case of lunisolar calendars, a month) added to keep the calendar year synchronized with the astronomical or seasonal year. Because seasons and astronomical events do not repeat in a whole number of days, calendars that have the same number of days in each year drift over time with respect to the event that the year is supposed to track. By inserting (also called \"intercalating\") an additional day or month into the year, the drift can be corrected. A year that is not a leap year is called a common year.\n\nFor example, in the Gregorian calendar, each leap year has 366 days instead of 365, by extending February to 29 days rather than the common 28. These extra days occur in years which are multiples of four (with the exception of centennial years not divisible by 400). Similarly, in the lunisolar Hebrew calendar, Adar Aleph, a 13th lunar month, is added seven times every 19 years to the twelve lunar months in its common years to keep its calendar year from drifting through the seasons. In the Bahá'í Calendar, a leap day is added when needed to ensure that the following year begins on the vernal equinox.\n\nThe name \"leap year\" probably comes from the fact that while a fixed date in the Gregorian calendar normally advances one day of the week from one year to the next, the day of the week in the 12 months following the leap day (from March 1 through February 28 of the following year) will advance two days due to the extra day (thus \"leaping over\" one of the days in the week). For example, Christmas Day (December 25) fell on a Tuesday in 2012, Wednesday in 2013, Thursday in 2014, and Friday in 2015 but then \"leapt\" over Saturday to fall on a Sunday in 2016.\n\nThe length of a day is also occasionally changed by the insertion of leap seconds into Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), owing to the variability of Earth's rotational period. Unlike leap days, leap seconds are not introduced on a regular schedule, since the variability in the length of the day is not entirely predictable.\n\nIn the Gregorian calendar, the standard calendar in most of the world, most years that are multiples of 4 are leap years. In each leap year, the month of February has 29 days instead of 28. Adding one extra day in the calendar every four years compensates for the fact that a period of 365 days is shorter than a tropical year by almost 6 hours. Some exceptions to this basic rule are required since the duration of a tropical year is slightly less than 365.25 days. The Gregorian reform modified the Julian calendar's scheme of leap years as follows:\nEvery year that is exactly divisible by four is a leap year, except for years that are exactly divisible by 100, but these centurial years are leap years if they are exactly divisible by 400. For example, the years 1700, 1800, and 1900 are not leap years, but the years 1600 and 2000 are.\n\nOver a period of four centuries, the accumulated error of adding a leap day \"every\" four years amounts to about three extra days. The Gregorian calendar therefore drops three leap days every 400 years, which is the length of its \"leap cycle\". This is done by dropping February 29 in the three century years (multiples of 100) that cannot be exactly divided by 400. The years 1600, 2000 and 2400 are leap years, while 1700, 1800, 1900, 2100, 2200 and 2300 are not leap years. By this rule, the average number of days per year is 365 +  −  +  = 365.2425. The rule can be applied to years before the Gregorian reform (the proleptic Gregorian calendar), if astronomical year numbering is used.\n\n<br>\"This graph shows the variations in date and time of the June Solstice due to unequally spaced \"leap day\" rules. Contrast this with the Iranian Solar Hijri calendar, which generally has 8 leap year days every 33 years.\"\nThe Gregorian calendar was designed to keep the vernal equinox on or close to March 21, so that the date of Easter (celebrated on the Sunday after the ecclesiastical full moon that falls on or after March 21) remains close to the vernal equinox. The \"Accuracy\" section of the \"Gregorian calendar\" article discusses how well the Gregorian calendar achieves this design goal, and how well it approximates the tropical year.\n\nThe following pseudocode determines whether a year is a \"leap year\" or a \"common year\" in the Gregorian calendar (and in the proleptic Gregorian calendar before 1582). The \"year\" variable being tested is the integer representing the number of the year in the Gregorian calendar.\n<poem>\nif (\"year\" is not divisible by 4) then (it is a common year)\nelse if (\"year\" is not divisible by 100) then (it is a leap year)\nelse if (\"year\" is not divisible by 400) then (it is a common year)\nelse (it is a leap year)\n</poem>\n\nThe algorithm applies to proleptic Gregorian calendar years before 1, but only if the year is expressed with astronomical year numbering. It is not valid for the BC or BCE notation. The algorithm is not necessarily valid for years in the Julian calendar, such as years before 1752 in the British Empire. The year 1700 was a leap year in the Julian calendar, but not in the Gregorian calendar.\n\nFebruary 29 is a date that usually occurs every four years, and is called leap day. This day is added to the calendar in leap years as a corrective measure, because the Earth does not orbit the sun in precisely 365 days.\n\nThe Gregorian calendar is a modification of the Julian calendar first used by the Romans. The Roman calendar originated as a lunisolar calendar and named many of its days after the syzygies of the moon: the new moon (\"Kalendae\" or calends, hence \"calendar\") and the full moon (\"Idus\" or ides). The \"Nonae\" or nones was not the first quarter moon but was exactly one \"nundina\" or Roman market week of nine days before the ides, inclusively counting the ides as the first of those nine days. This is what we would call a period of eight days. In 1825, Ideler believed that the lunisolar calendar was abandoned about 450 BC by the decemvirs, who implemented the Roman Republican calendar, used until 46 BC. The days of these calendars were counted down (inclusively) to the next named day, so February 24 was \"ante diem sextum Kalendas Martias\" (\"the sixth day before the calends of March\") often abbreviated a. d. VI Kal. Mart. The Romans counted days inclusively in their calendars, so this was actually the fifth day before March 1 when counted in the modern exclusive manner (not including the starting day).\n\nThe Republican calendar's intercalary month was inserted on the first or second day after the Terminalia (a. d. VII Kal. Mar., February 23). The remaining days of Februarius were dropped. This intercalary month, named Intercalaris or Mercedonius, contained 27 days. The religious festivals that were normally celebrated in the last five days of February were moved to the last five days of Intercalaris. Because only 22 or 23 days were effectively added, not a full lunation, the calends and ides of the Roman Republican calendar were no longer associated with the new moon and full moon.\n\nThe Julian calendar, which was developed in 46 BC by Julius Caesar, and became effective in 45 BC, distributed an extra ten days among the months of the Roman Republican calendar. Caesar also replaced the intercalary month by a single intercalary day, located where the intercalary month used to be. To create the intercalary day, the existing \"ante diem sextum Kalendas Martias\" (February 24) was doubled, producing \"ante diem bis sextum Kalendas Martias\". Hence, the year containing the doubled day was a bissextile (\"bis sextum\", \"twice sixth\") year. For legal purposes, the two days of the \"bis sextum\" were considered to be a single day, with the second half being intercalated; but in common practice by 238, when Censorinus wrote, the intercalary day was followed by the last five days of February, a. d. VI, V, IV, III and pridie Kal. Mart. (the days numbered 24, 25, 26, 27, and 28 from the beginning of February in a common year), so that the intercalated day was the \"first\" half of the doubled day. Thus the intercalated day was effectively inserted between the 23rd and 24th days of February. All later writers, including Macrobius about 430, Bede in 725, and other medieval computists (calculators of Easter), continued to state that the bissextum (bissextile day) occurred before the last five days of February.\nUntil 1970, the Roman Catholic Church always celebrated the feast of Saint Matthias on a. d. VI Kal. Mart., so if the days were numbered from the beginning of the month, it was named February 24 in common years, but the presence of the bissextum in a bissextile year immediately before a. d. VI Kal. Mart. shifted the latter day to February 25 in leap years, with the Vigil of St. Matthias shifting from February 23 to the leap day of February 24. This shift did not take place in pre-Reformation Norway and Iceland; Pope Alexander III ruled that either practice was lawful (Liber Extra, 5. 40. 14. 1). Other feasts normally falling on February 25–28 in common years are also shifted to the following day in a leap year (although they would be on the same day according to the Roman notation). The practice is still observed by those who use the older calendars.\n\nThe Revised Bengali Calendar of Bangladesh and the Indian National Calendar organise their leap years so that the every leap day is close to a February 29 in the Gregorian calendar and vice versa. This makes it easy to convert dates to or from Gregorian.\n\nThe Thai solar calendar uses the Buddhist Era (BE), but has been synchronized with the Gregorian since AD 1941.\n\nFrom AD 8 the Julian calendar received an extra day added to February in years that are multiples of 4.\n\nThe Coptic calendar and Ethiopian calendar also add an extra day to the end of the year once every four years before a Julian 29-day February.\n\nThis rule gives an average year length of 365.25 days. However, it is 11 minutes longer than a tropical year. This means that the vernal equinox moves a day earlier in the calendar about every 131 years.\n\nThe Revised Julian calendar adds an extra day to February in years that are multiples of four, except for years that are multiples of 100 that do not leave a remainder of 200 or 600 when divided by 900. This rule agrees with the rule for the Gregorian calendar until 2799. The first year that dates in the Revised Julian calendar will not agree with those in the Gregorian calendar will be 2800, because it will be a leap year in the Gregorian calendar but not in the Revised Julian calendar.\n\nThis rule gives an average year length of 365.242222 days. This is a very good approximation to the \"mean\" tropical year, but because the \"vernal equinox\" year is slightly longer, the Revised Julian calendar for the time being does not do as good a job as the Gregorian calendar at keeping the vernal equinox on or close to March 21.\n\nThe Chinese calendar is lunisolar, so a leap year has an extra month, often called an \"embolismic\" month after the Greek word for it. In the Chinese calendar the leap month is added according to a rule which ensures that month 11 is always the month that contains the northern winter solstice. The intercalary month takes the same number as the preceding month; for example, if it follows the second month (二月) then it is simply called \"leap second month\" i.e. .\n\nThe Hebrew calendar is lunisolar with an embolismic month. This extra month is called \"Adar Alef\" (first Adar) and is added before \"Adar\", which then becomes \"Adar Bet\" (second Adar). According to the Metonic cycle, this is done seven times every nineteen years (specifically, in years 3, 6, 8, 11, 14, 17, and 19). This is to ensure that Passover () is always in the spring as required by the Torah (Pentateuch) in many verses relating to Passover.\n\nIn addition, the Hebrew calendar has postponement rules that postpone the start of the year by one or two days. These postponement rules reduce the number of different combinations of year length and starting days of the week from 28 to 14, and regulate the location of certain religious holidays in relation to the Sabbath. In particular, the first day of the Hebrew year can never be Sunday, Wednesday or Friday. This rule is known in Hebrew as \"\" (), i.e., \"Rosh [ha-Shanah, first day of the year] is not Sunday, Wednesday or Friday\" (as the Hebrew word is written by three Hebrew letters signifying Sunday, Wednesday and Friday). Accordingly, the first day of Passover is never Monday, Wednesday or Friday. This rule is known in Hebrew as \"\" (), which has a double meaning — \"Passover is not a legend\", but also \"Passover is not Monday, Wednesday or Friday\" (as the Hebrew word is written by three Hebrew letters signifying Monday, Wednesday and Friday).\n\nOne reason for this rule is that Yom Kippur, the holiest day in the Hebrew calendar and the tenth day of the Hebrew year, now must never be adjacent to the weekly Sabbath (which is Saturday), i.e., it must never fall on Friday or Sunday, in order not to have two adjacent Sabbath days. However, Yom Kippur can still be on Saturday. These rules for the Feasts do not apply to the years from the Creation to the deliverance of the Hebrews from Egypt under Moses. It was at that time (cf. Exodus 13) that the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob gave the Hebrews their \"Law\" including the days to be kept holy and the feast days and Sabbaths.\n\nYears consisting of 12 months have between 353 and 355 days. In a (\"in order\") 354-day year, months have alternating 30 and 29 day lengths. In a (\"lacking\") year, the month of Kislev is reduced to 29 days. In a (\"filled\") year, the month of Marcheshvan is increased to 30 days. 13-month years follow the same pattern, with the addition of the 30-day Adar Alef, giving them between 383 and 385 days.\n\nThe observed and calculated versions of the Islamic calendar do not have regular leap days, even though both have lunar months containing 29 or 30 days, generally in alternating order. However, the tabular Islamic calendar used by Islamic astronomers during the Middle Ages and still used by some Muslims does have a regular leap day added to the last month of the lunar year in 11 years of a 30-year cycle. This additional day is found at the end of the last month, Dhu 'l-Hijja, which is also the month of the Hajj.\n\nThe Hijri-Shamsi calendar, also adopted by the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community, is based on solar calculations and is similar to the Gregorian calendar in its structure with the exception that the first year starts with Hijra.\n\nThe Bahá'í calendar is a solar calendar composed of 19 months of 19 days each (361 days). Years begin at Naw-Rúz, on the vernal equinox, on or about March 21. A period of \"Intercalary Days\", called Ayyam-i-Ha, are inserted before the 19th month. This period normally has 4 days, but an extra day is added when needed to ensure that the following year starts on the vernal equinox. This is calculated and known years in advance.\n\nThe Iranian calendar is an observational calendar that starts on the spring equinox and adds a single intercalated day to the last month (Esfand) once every four or five years; the first leap year occurs as the fifth year of the typical 33-year cycle and the remaining leap years occur every four years through the remainder of the 33-year cycle. This system has less periodic deviation or jitter from its mean year than the Gregorian calendar, but is more complicated. The 33-year period is not completely regular; every so often the 33-year cycle will be broken by a cycle of 29 years.\n\nIn Ireland and Britain, it is a tradition that women may propose marriage only in leap years. While it has been claimed that the tradition was initiated by Saint Patrick or Brigid of Kildare in 5th century Ireland, this is dubious, as the tradition has not been attested before the 19th century. Supposedly, a 1288 law by Queen Margaret of Scotland (then age five and living in Norway), required that fines be levied if a marriage proposal was refused by the man; compensation was deemed to be a pair of leather gloves, a single rose, £1 and a kiss. In some places the tradition was tightened to restricting female proposals to the modern leap day, February 29, or to the medieval (bissextile) leap day, February 24.\n\nAccording to Felten: \"A play from the turn of the 17th century, 'The Maydes Metamorphosis,' has it that 'this is leape year/women wear breeches.' A few hundred years later, breeches wouldn't do at all: Women looking to take advantage of their opportunity to pitch woo were expected to wear a scarlet petticoat — fair warning, if you will.\"\n\nIn Finland, the tradition is that if a man refuses a woman's proposal on leap day, he should buy her the fabrics for a skirt.\n\nIn France, since 1980, a satirical newspaper entitled \"La Bougie du Sapeur\" is published only on leap year, on February 29.\n\nIn Greece, marriage in a leap year is considered unlucky. One in five engaged couples in Greece will plan to avoid getting married in a leap year.\n\nIn February 1988 the town of Anthony in Texas, declared itself \"leap year capital of the world\", and an international leapling birthday club was started.\n\nA person born on February 29 may be called a \"leapling\" or a \"leaper\". In common years, they usually celebrate their birthdays on February 28. In some situations, March 1 is used as the birthday in a non-leap year, since it is the day following February 28.\n\nTechnically, a leapling will have fewer \"birthday anniversaries\" than their age in years. This phenomenon is exploited when a person claims to be only a quarter of their actual age, by counting their leap-year birthday anniversaries only: for example, in Gilbert and Sullivan's 1879 comic opera \"The Pirates of Penzance\", Frederic the pirate apprentice discovers that he is bound to serve the pirates until his 21st \"birthday\" (that is, when he turns 88 years old, since 1900 was not a leap year) rather than until his 21st \"year\".\n\nFor legal purposes, legal birthdays depend on how local laws count time intervals.\n\nThe Civil Code of the Republic of China since October 10, 1929, implies that the legal birthday of a leapling is February 28 in common years:\n\nSince 1990 non-retroactively, Hong Kong considers the legal birthday of a leapling March 1 in common years:\n\nBULLET::::- Century leap year\nBULLET::::- Calendar reform includes proposals that have not (yet) been adopted.\nBULLET::::- Leap second\nBULLET::::- Leap week calendar\nBULLET::::- Leap year bug\nBULLET::::- Sansculottides\nBULLET::::- Summer Olympic Games which have been held in each leap year since 1896 (and also in 1900, which was not a leap year)\nBULLET::::- UEFA European Championship which have been held in each leap year since 1960\nBULLET::::- Zeller's congruence\n\nBULLET::::- Famous Leapers\nBULLET::::- Leap Day Campaign: Galileo Day\nBULLET::::- History Behind Leap Year National Geographic Society\n"}
{"id": "17897", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17897", "title": "Ludwig Mies van der Rohe", "text": "Ludwig Mies van der Rohe\n\nLudwig Mies van der Rohe ( ; ; born Maria Ludwig Michael Mies; March 27, 1886 – August 17, 1969) was a German-American architect. He was commonly referred to as Mies, his surname. Along with Alvar Aalto, Le Corbusier, Walter Gropius and Frank Lloyd Wright, he is regarded as one of the pioneers of modernist architecture.\n\nMies was the last director of the Bauhaus, a seminal school in modern architecture. After Nazism's rise to power, with its strong opposition to modernism (leading to the closing of the Bauhaus itself), Mies emigrated to the United States. He accepted the position to head the architecture school at the Armour Institute of Technology (later the Illinois Institute of Technology), in Chicago.\n\nMies sought to establish his own particular architectural style that could represent modern times just as Classical and Gothic did for their own eras. He created his own twentieth-century architectural style, stated with extreme clarity and simplicity. His mature buildings made use of modern materials such as industrial steel and plate glass to define interior spaces, as also conducted by other modernist architects in the 1920s and 1930s such as Richard Neutra. Mies strove toward an architecture with a minimal framework of structural order balanced against the implied freedom of unobstructed free-flowing open space. He called his buildings \"skin and bones\" architecture. He sought an objective approach that would guide the creative process of architectural design, but was always concerned with expressing the spirit of the modern era. He is often associated with his fondness for the aphorisms, \"less is more\" and \"God is in the details\".\n\nMies was born March 27, 1886 in Aachen, Germany. He worked in his father's stone carving shop and at several local design firms before he moved to Berlin, where he joined the office of interior designer Bruno Paul. He began his architectural career as an apprentice at the studio of Peter Behrens from 1908 to 1912, where he was exposed to the current design theories and to progressive German culture. He worked alongside Le Corbusier and Walter Gropius, who was later also involved in the development of the Bauhaus. Mies served as construction manager of the Embassy of the German Empire in Saint Petersburg under Behrens.\n\nLudwig Mies renamed himself as part of his transformation from a tradesman's son to an architect working with Berlin's cultural elite, adding \"van der\" and his mother's maiden name \"Rohe\" (the word \"mies\" means \"lousy\" in German) and using the Dutch \"van der\", because the German form \"von\" was a nobiliary particle legally restricted to those of genuine aristocratic lineage. He began his independent professional career designing upper-class homes. \n\nIn 1913, Mies married Adele Auguste (Ada) Bruhn (1885–1951), the daughter of a wealthy industrialist. The couple separated in 1918, after having three daughters: Dorothea (1914–2008), an actress and dancer who was known as Georgia, Marianne (1915–2003), and Waltraut (1917–1959), who was a research scholar and curator at the Art Institute of Chicago. During his military service in 1917, Mies fathered a son out of wedlock.\n\nIn 1925 Mies began a relationship with designer Lilly Reich that ended when he moved to the United States; from 1940 until his death, artist Lora Marx (1900–1989) was his primary companion. Mies carried on a romantic relationship with sculptor and art collector Mary Callery for whom he designed an artist's studio in Huntington, Long Island, New York. He also was rumored to have a brief relationship with Edith Farnsworth, who commissioned his work for the Farnsworth House. Marianne's son Dirk Lohan (b. 1938) studied under, and later worked for, Mies.\n\nAfter World War I, while still designing traditional neoclassical homes, Mies began a parallel experimental effort. He joined his avant-garde peers in the long-running search for a new style that would be suitable for the modern industrial age. The weak points of traditional styles had been under attack by progressive theorists since the mid-nineteenth century, primarily for the contradictions of hiding modern construction technology with a facade of ornamented traditional styles.\n\nThe mounting criticism of the historical styles gained substantial cultural credibility after World War I, a disaster widely seen as a failure of the old world order of imperial leadership of Europe. The aristocratic classical revival styles were particularly reviled by many as the architectural symbol of a now-discredited and outmoded social system. Progressive thinkers called for a completely new architectural design process guided by rational problem-solving and an exterior expression of modern materials and structure rather than what they considered the superficial application of classical facades.\n\nWhile continuing his traditional neoclassical design practice, Mies began to develop visionary projects that, though mostly unbuilt, rocketed him to fame as an architect capable of giving form that was in harmony with the spirit of the emerging modern society. Boldly abandoning ornament altogether, Mies made a dramatic modernist debut in 1921 with his stunning competition proposal for the faceted all-glass Friedrichstraße skyscraper, followed by a taller curved version in 1922 named the Glass Skyscraper.\n\nHe continued with a series of pioneering projects, culminating in his two European masterworks: the temporary German Pavilion for the Barcelona exposition (often called the Barcelona Pavilion) in 1929 (a 1986 reconstruction is now built on the original site) and the elegant Villa Tugendhat in Brno, Czech Republic, completed in 1930.\n\nHe joined the German avant-garde, working with the progressive design magazine \"G\", which started in July 1923. He developed prominence as architectural director of the Werkbund, organizing the influential Weissenhof Estate prototype modernist housing exhibition. He was also one of the founders of the architectural association Der Ring. He joined the avant-garde Bauhaus design school as their director of architecture, adopting and developing their functionalist application of simple geometric forms in the design of useful objects. He served as its last director.\n\nLike many other avant-garde architects of the day, Mies based his architectural mission and principles on his understanding and interpretation of ideas developed by theorists and critics who pondered the declining relevance of the traditional design styles. He selectively adopted theoretical ideas such as the aesthetic credos of Russian Constructivism with their ideology of \"efficient\" sculptural assembly of modern industrial materials. Mies found appeal in the use of simple rectilinear and planar forms, clean lines, pure use of color, and the extension of space around and beyond interior walls expounded by the Dutch De Stijl group. In particular, the layering of functional sub-spaces within an overall space and the distinct articulation of parts as expressed by Gerrit Rietveld appealed to Mies.\n\nThe design theories of Adolf Loos found resonance with Mies, particularly the ideas of replacing elaborate applied artistic ornament with the straightforward display of innate visual qualities of materials and forms. Loos had proposed that art and crafts should be entirely independent of architecture, that the architect should no longer control those cultural elements as the Beaux Arts principles had dictated. Mies also admired his ideas about the nobility that could be found in the anonymity of modern life.\n\nThe bold work of leading American architects was admired by European architects. Like other architects who viewed the drawings in Frank Lloyd Wright's Wasmuth Portfolio, Mies was enthralled with the free-flowing spaces of inter-connected rooms that encompass their outdoor surroundings, as demonstrated by the open floor plans of the Wright's American Prairie Style. American engineering structures were also held up as exemplary of the beauty possible in functional construction, and American skyscrapers were greatly admired.\n\nCommission opportunities dwindled with the Great Depression after 1929. Starting in 1930, Mies served as the last director of the faltering Bauhaus, at the request of his colleague and competitor Walter Gropius. In 1932, Nazi political pressure forced the state-supported school to leave its campus in Dessau, and Mies moved it to an abandoned telephone factory in Berlin. By 1933, however, the continued operation of the school was untenable (it was raided by the Gestapo in April), and in July of that year, Mies and the faculty voted to close the Bauhaus. He built very little in these years (one built commission was Philip Johnson's New York apartment); the Nazis rejected his style as not \"German\" in character.\n\nFrustrated and unhappy, he left his homeland reluctantly in 1937 as he saw his opportunity for any future building commissions vanish, accepting a residential commission in Wyoming and then an offer to head the department of architecture of the newly established Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT) in Chicago. There he introduced a new kind of education and attitude later known as Second Chicago School, which became very influential in the following decades in North America and Europe.\n\nMies settled in Chicago, Illinois, where he was appointed head of the architecture school at Chicago's Armour Institute of Technology (later renamed Illinois Institute of Technology). One of the benefits of taking this position was that he would be commissioned to design the new buildings and master plan for the campus. All his buildings still stand there, including Alumni Hall, the Chapel, and his masterpiece the S.R. Crown Hall, built as the home of IIT's School of Architecture. Crown Hall is widely regarded as Mies' finest work, the definition of Miesian architecture.\n\nIn 1944, he became an American citizen, completing his severance from his native Germany. His thirty years as an American architect reflect a more structural, pure approach toward achieving his goal of a new architecture for the twentieth century. He focused his efforts on enclosing open and adaptable \"universal\" spaces with clearly arranged structural frameworks, featuring prefabricated steel shapes filled in with large sheets of glass.\n\nHis early projects at the IIT campus, and for developer Herbert Greenwald, presented to Americans a style that seemed a natural progression of the almost forgotten nineteenth century Chicago School style. His architecture, with origins in the German Bauhaus and western European International Style, became an accepted mode of building for American cultural and educational institutions, developers, public agencies, and large corporations.\n\nMies worked from his studio in downtown Chicago for his entire 31-year period in America. His significant projects in the U.S. include in Chicago and the area: the residential towers of 860–880 Lake Shore Dr, the Chicago Federal Center complex, the Farnsworth House, Crown Hall and other structures at IIT; and the Seagram Building in New York. These iconic works became the prototypes for his other projects. He also built homes for wealthy clients.\n\nChicago Federal Center Plaza, also known as Chicago Federal Plaza, unified three buildings of varying scales: the mid-rise Everett McKinley Dirksen Building, the high-rise John C. Kluczynski Building, and the single-story Post Office building. The complex's plot area extends over two blocks; a one-block site, bounded by Jackson, Clark, Adams, and Dearborn streets, contains the Kluczynski Federal Building and U.S. Post Office Loop Station, while a parcel on an adjacent block to the east contains the Dirksen U.S. Courthouse. The structural framing of the buildings is formed of high-tensile bolted steel and concrete. The exterior curtain walls are defined by projecting steel I-beam mullions covered with flat black graphite paint, characteristic of Mies's designs. The balance of the curtain walls are of bronze-tinted glass panes, framed in shiny aluminum, and separated by steel spandrels, also covered with flat black graphite paint. The entire complex is organized on a 28-foot grid pattern subdivided into six 4-foot, 8-inch modules. This pattern extends from the granite-paved plaza into the ground-floor lobbies of the two tower buildings with the grid lines continuing vertically up the buildings and integrating each component of the complex. Associated architects that have played a role in the complex's long history from 1959 to 1974 include Schmidt, Garden & Erickson; C.F. Murphy Associates; and A. Epstein & Sons.\n\nBetween 1946 and 1951, Mies van der Rohe designed and built the Farnsworth House, a weekend retreat outside Chicago for an independent professional woman, Dr. Edith Farnsworth. Here, Mies explored the relationship between people, shelter, and nature. The glass pavilion is raised six feet above a floodplain next to the Fox River, surrounded by forest and rural prairies.\n\nThe highly crafted pristine white structural frame and all-glass walls define a simple rectilinear interior space, allowing nature and light to envelop the interior space. A wood-paneled fireplace (also housing mechanical equipment, kitchen, and toilets) is positioned within the open space to suggest living, dining and sleeping spaces without using walls. No partitions touch the surrounding all-glass enclosure. Without solid exterior walls, full-height draperies on a perimeter track allow freedom to provide full or partial privacy when and where desired. The house has been described as sublime, a temple hovering between heaven and earth, a poem, a work of art.\n\nThe Farnsworth House and its wooded site was purchased at auction for US$7.5 million by preservation groups in 2004 and is now owned and operated by the National Trust for Historic Preservation as a public museum. The building influenced the creation of hundreds of modernist glass houses, most notably the Glass House by Philip Johnson, located near New York City and also now owned by the National Trust.\n\nThe house is an embodiment of Mies' mature vision of modern architecture for the new technological age: a single unencumbered space within a minimal \"skin and bones\" framework, a clearly understandable arrangement of architectural parts. His ideas are stated with clarity and simplicity, using materials that are configured to express their own individual character.\n\nMies designed a series of four middle-income high-rise apartment buildings for developer Herbert Greenwald: the 860–880 (which was built between 1949 and 1951) and 900–910 Lake Shore Drive towers on Chicago's Lakefront. These towers, with façades of steel and glass, were radical departures from the typical residential brick apartment buildings of the time. Mies found their unit sizes too small for him, choosing instead to continue living in a spacious traditional luxury apartment a few blocks away. The towers were simple rectangular boxes with a non-hierarchical wall enclosure, raised on stilts above a glass-enclosed lobby.\n\nThe lobby is set back from the perimeter columns, which were exposed around the perimeter of the building above, creating a modern arcade not unlike those of the Greek temples. This configuration created a feeling of light, openness, and freedom of movement at the ground level that became the prototype for countless new towers designed both by Mies's office and his followers. Some historians argue that this new approach is an expression of the American spirit and the boundless open space of the frontier, which German culture so admired.\n\nOnce Mies had established his basic design concept for the general form and details of his tower buildings, he applied those solutions (with evolving refinements) to his later high-rise building projects. The architecture of his towers appears similar, but each project represents new ideas about the formation of highly sophisticated urban space at ground level. He delighted in the composition of multiple towers arranged in a seemingly casual non-hierarchical relation to each other.\n\nJust as with his interiors, he created free flowing spaces and flat surfaces that represented the idea of an oasis of uncluttered clarity and calm within the chaos of the city. He included nature by leaving openings in the pavement, through which plants seem to grow unfettered by urbanization, just as in the pre-settlement environment.\n\nAlthough now acclaimed and widely influential as an urban design feature, Mies had to convince Bronfman's bankers that a taller tower with significant \"unused\" open space at ground level would enhance the presence and prestige of the building. Mies' design included a bronze curtain wall with external H-shaped mullions that were exaggerated in depth beyond what was structurally necessary. Detractors criticized it as having committed Adolf Loos's \"crime of ornamentation\". Philip Johnson had a role in interior materials selections, and he designed the sumptuous Four Seasons Restaurant, which has endured un-remodeled to today. The Seagram Building is said to be an early example of the innovative \"fast-track\" construction process, where design documentation and construction are done concurrently.\n\nDuring 1951–1952, Mies' designed the steel, glass, and brick McCormick House, located in Elmhurst, Illinois (15 miles west of the Chicago Loop), for real-estate developer Robert Hall McCormick, Jr. A one-story adaptation of the exterior curtain wall of his famous 860–880 Lake Shore Drive towers, it served as a prototype for an unbuilt series of speculative houses to be constructed in Melrose Park, Illinois. The house has been moved and reconfigured as a part of the public Elmhurst Art Museum. He also built a residence for John M. van Beuren on a family estate near Morristown, New Jersey.\n\nMies designed two buildings for the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston (MFAH) as additions to the Caroline Wiess Law Building. In 1953, the MFAH commissioned Mies van der Rohe to create a master plan for the institution. He designed two additions to the building—Cullinan Hall, completed in 1958, and the Brown Pavilion, completed in 1974. A renowned example of the International Style, these portions of the Caroline Wiess Law Building comprise one of only two Mies-designed museums in the world.\n\nThe One Charles Center, built in 1962, is a 23-story aluminum and glass building that heralded the beginning of Baltimore's downtown modern buildings. The Highfield House, just to the northeast of the Johns Hopkins Homewood campus, was built in 1964 as a rental apartment building. The 15-story concrete tower became a residential condominium building in 1979. Both buildings are now on the National Register of Historic Places.\n\nMies's last work was the Neue Nationalgalerie art museum, the New National Gallery for the Berlin National Gallery. Considered one of the most perfect statements of his architectural approach, the upper pavilion is a precise composition of monumental steel columns and a cantilevered (overhanging) roof plane with a glass enclosure. The simple square glass pavilion is a powerful expression of his ideas about flexible interior space, defined by transparent walls and supported by an external structural frame. Art installations by Ulrich Rückriem (1998) or Jenny Holzer, as much as exhibitions on the work of Renzo Piano or Rem Koolhaas have demonstrated the exceptional possibilities of this space.\n\nThe glass pavilion is a relatively small portion of the overall building, serving as a symbolic architectural entry point and monumental gallery for temporary exhibits. A large podium building below the pavilion accommodates most of the museum's total built area with conventional white-walled art gallery spaces and support functions. A large window running along all the West facade opens these spaces up to the large sculpture garden which is part of the podium building.\n\nMies, often in collaboration with Lilly Reich, designed modern furniture pieces using new industrial technologies that have become popular classics, such as the Barcelona chair and table, the Brno chair, and the Tugendhat chair. His furniture is known for fine craftsmanship, a mix of traditional luxurious fabrics like leather combined with modern chrome frames, and a distinct separation of the supporting structure and the supported surfaces, often employing cantilevers to enhance the feeling of lightness created by delicate structural frames.\n\nMies served as the last director of Berlin's Bauhaus, and then headed the department of architecture, Illinois Institute of Technology in Chicago, where he developed the Second Chicago School. He played a significant role as an educator, believing his architectural language could be learned, then applied to design any type of modern building. He set up a new education at the department of architecture of the Illinois Institute of Technology in Chicago replacing the traditional Ecole des Beaux-Art curriculum by a three-step-education beginning with crafts of drawing and construction leading to planning skills and finishing with theory of architecture (compare Vitruvius: firmitas, utilitas, venustas). He worked personally and intensively on prototype solutions, and then allowed his students, both in school and his office, to develop derivative solutions for specific projects under his guidance.\n\nSome of Mies' curriculum is still put in practice in the first and second year programs at IIT, including the precise drafting of brick construction details so unpopular with aspiring student architects. When none was able to match the quality of his own work, he agonized about where his educational method had gone wrong. Nevertheless, his achievements in creating a teachable architecture language that can be used to express the modern technological era survives until today.\n\nMies placed great importance on education of architects who could carry on his design principles. He devoted a great deal of time and effort leading the architecture program at IIT. Mies served on the initial Advisory Board of the Graham Foundation in Chicago. His own practice was based on intensive personal involvement in design efforts to create prototype solutions for building types (860 Lake Shore Drive, the Farnsworth House, Seagram Building, S. R. Crown Hall, The New National Gallery), then allowing his studio designers to develop derivative buildings under his supervision.\n\nMies's grandson Dirk Lohan and two partners led the firm after he died in 1969. Lohan, who had collaborated with Mies on the New National Gallery, continued with existing projects but soon led the firm on his own independent path. Other disciples continued Mies's architectural language for years, notably Gene Summers, David Haid, Myron Goldsmith, Y.C. Wong, Jacques Brownson, and other architects at the firms of C.F. Murphy and Skidmore, Owings & Merrill.\n\nBut while Mies' work had enormous influence and critical recognition, his approach failed to sustain a creative force as a style after his death and was eclipsed by the new wave of Post Modernism by the 1980s. Proponents of the Post Modern style attacked the Modernism with clever statements such as \"less is a bore\" and with captivating images such as Crown Hall sinking in Lake Michigan. Mies had hoped his architecture would serve as a universal model that could be easily imitated, but the aesthetic power of his best buildings proved impossible to match, instead resulting mostly in drab and uninspired structures rejected by the general public. The failure of his followers to meet his high standard may have contributed to demise of Modernism and the rise of new competing design theories following his death.\n\nOver the last twenty years of his life, Mies developed and built his vision of a monumental \"skin and bones\" architecture that reflected his goal to provide the individual a place to fulfill himself in the modern era. Mies sought to create free and open spaces, enclosed within a structural order with minimal presence. In 1963, he was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom.\n\nMies van der Rohe died on August 17, 1969 from esophageal cancer caused by his smoking habit. After cremation, his ashes were buried near Chicago's other famous architects in Chicago's Graceland Cemetery. His grave is marked by a simple black slab of granite and a large honey locust tree.\n\nThe Ludwig Mies van der Rohe Archive, an administratively independent section of the Museum of Modern Art's department of architecture and design, was established in 1968 by the museum's trustees. It was founded in response to the architect's desire to bequeath his entire work to the museum. The archive consists of about nineteen thousand drawings and prints, one thousand of which are by the designer and architect Lilly Reich (1885–1947), Mies van der Rohe's close collaborator from 1927 to 1937; of written documents (primarily, the business correspondence) covering nearly the entire career of the architect; of photographs of buildings, models, and furniture; and of audiotapes, books, and periodicals.\n\nArchival materials are also held by the Ryerson & Burnham Libraries at the Art Institute of Chicago. The Ludwig Mies van der Rohe Collection, 1929–1969 (bulk 1948–1960) includes correspondence, articles, and materials related to his association with the Illinois Institute of Technology. The Ludwig Mies van der Rohe Metropolitan Structures Collection, 1961–1969, includes scrapbooks and photographs documenting Chicago projects.\n\nOther archives are held at the University of Illinois at Chicago (personal book collection), the Canadian Center for Architecture (drawings and photos) in Montreal, the Newberry Library in Chicago (personal correspondence), and at the Library of Congress in Washington D.C. (professional correspondence).\n\nBULLET::::- Early career in Berlin (1907–1938)\nBULLET::::- 1907 Riehl House – Residential Home, Potsdam, Germany\nBULLET::::- 1911 Perl House – Residential Home, Zehlendorf\nBULLET::::- 1913 Werner House – Residential Home, Zehlendorf\nBULLET::::- 1917 Urbig House – Residential Home, Potsdam\nBULLET::::- 1922 Kempner House – Residential Home, Charlottenburg\nBULLET::::- 1922 Eichstaedt House – Residential Home, Wannsee\nBULLET::::- 1922 Feldmann House – Residential Home, Wilmersdorf\nBULLET::::- 1923 Ryder House - Residential Home, Wiesbaden\nBULLET::::- 1925 Wolf House - Residential Home Guben\nBULLET::::- 1926 Mosler House – Residential Home, Babelsberg\nBULLET::::- 1926 - Monument dedicated to Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg, \"Zentralfriedhof Friedrichsfelde\", Berlin\nBULLET::::- 1927 Afrikanische Straße Apartments – Multi-Family Residential, Berlin, Germany\nBULLET::::- 1927 Weissenhof Estate – Housing Exhibition coordinated by Mies and with a contribution by him, Stuttgart\nBULLET::::- 1928 Haus Lange and Haus Esters – Residential Home and an art museum, Krefeld\nBULLET::::- 1929 Barcelona Pavilion – World's Fair Pavilion, Barcelona, Spain\nBULLET::::- 1930 Villa Tugendhat – Residential Home, Brno, Czech Republic, designated a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 2001\nBULLET::::- 1930 Verseidag Factory –Dyeing and HE Silk Mill Building Krefeld, Germany\nBULLET::::- 1932 Lemke House – Residential Home, Weissensee\n\nBULLET::::- Buildings after emigration to the United States (1939–1960)\nBULLET::::- 1939–1958 – Illinois Institute of Technology Campus Master Plan, Academic Campus & Buildings, Chicago, Illinois\nBULLET::::- 1949 The Promontory Apartments – Residential Apartment Complex, Chicago, Illinois\nBULLET::::- 1951 Sheridan-Oakdale Apartments (2933 N Sheridan Rd ) – Residential Apartment Complex, Chicago, Illinois\nBULLET::::- 1951 Lake Shore Drive Apartments – Residential Apartment Towers, Chicago\nBULLET::::- 1951 Algonquin Apartments – Residential Apartments, Chicago, Illinois\nBULLET::::- 1951 Farnsworth House – Vacation Home, Plano, Illinois\nBULLET::::- 1952 Arts Club of Chicago Interior Renovation – Art Gallery, demolished in 1997, Chicago, Illinois\nBULLET::::- 1952 Robert H. McCormick House - Residential Home, relocated to the Elmhurst Art Museum, Elmhurst, Illinois\nBULLET::::- 1954 Cullinan Hall – Museum of Fine Arts, Houston\nBULLET::::- 1956 Crown Hall, Illinois Institute of Technology College of Architecture– Academic Building, Chicago, Illinois\nBULLET::::- 1956 Esplanade Apartment Buildings (900–910 Lake Shore Dr) – Residential Apartment Complex, Chicago, Illinois\nBULLET::::- 1957 Commonwealth Promenade Apartments (330–330 W Diversey Parkway) – Residential Apartment Complex, Chicago (1957)\nBULLET::::- 1958 Seagram Building – Office Tower, New York City, New York\nBULLET::::- 1958 Caroline Wiess Law Building, Museum of Fine Art, Houston\nBULLET::::- 1959 Home Federal Savings and Loan Association Building– Office Building, Des Moines, Iowa\nBULLET::::- 1959 Lafayette Park – Residential Development, Detroit, Michigan.\nBULLET::::- 1960 Pavilion and Colonnade Apartments– Residential complex, Newark, New Jersey\n\nBULLET::::- Late career Worldwide (1961–69)\nBULLET::::- 1961 Bacardi Office Building – Office Building, Mexico City\nBULLET::::- 1962 Tourelle-Sur-Rive – Residential apartment complex of three towers, Nuns' Island, Montreal, Quebec, Canada\nBULLET::::- 1962 Home Federal Savings and Loan Association of Des Moines Building – Office Building, Des Moines, Iowa\nBULLET::::- 1962 One Charles Center – Office Tower, Baltimore, Maryland\nBULLET::::- 1963 2400 North Lakeview Apartments – Residential Apartment Complex, Chicago, Illinois\nBULLET::::- 1963 Morris Greenwald House – Vacation Home, Weston, Connecticut\nBULLET::::- 1964 Chicago Federal Center – Civic Complex, Chicago, Illinois\nBULLET::::- 1960–1964 Dirksen Federal Building – Office Tower, Chicago\nBULLET::::- Kluczynski Federal Building – Office Tower, Chicago\nBULLET::::- United States Post Office Loop Station – General Post Office, Chicago\nBULLET::::- 1964 Highfield House, 4000 North Charles – Originally Rental Apartments, and now Condominium Apartments, Baltimore, Maryland\nBULLET::::- 1965 University of Chicago School of Social Service Administration – Academic Building Chicago, Illinois\nBULLET::::- 1965 Richard King Mellon Hall – Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, PA\nBULLET::::- 1965 Meredith Hall – School of Journalism and Mass Communication, Drake University, Des Moines, IA\nBULLET::::- 1967 Westmount Square – Office & Residential Tower Complex, Westmount, Island of Montreal, Quebec, Canada\nBULLET::::- 1968 Neue Nationalgalerie – Modern Art Museum, Berlin, Germany\nBULLET::::- 1965–1968 Brown Pavilion, Museum of Fine Art, Houston\nBULLET::::- 1967–1969 Toronto-Dominion Centre – Office Tower Complex, Toronto, Ontario, Canada\nBULLET::::- 1969 Filling station – Nuns' Island, Montreal, Quebec, Canada (closed)\nBULLET::::- 1970 One Illinois Center – Office Tower, Chicago, Illinois (completed post-mortem)\nBULLET::::- 1972 Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial Library – District of Columbia Public Library, Washington, D.C. (completed post-mortem)\nBULLET::::- 1973 American Life Building – Louisville, Kentucky (completed after Mies's death by Bruno Conterato)\nBULLET::::- 1973 IBM Plaza – Office Tower, Chicago (completed post-mortem)\n\nBULLET::::- Buildings on the Illinois Institute of Technology Campus (1939–1958)\nBULLET::::- 1943 Minerals & Metals Research Building – Research\nBULLET::::- 1945 Engineering Research Building – Research\nBULLET::::- 1946 Alumni Memorial Hall – Classroom\nBULLET::::- 1946 Wishnick Hall – Classroom\nBULLET::::- 1946 Perlstein Hall – Classroom\nBULLET::::- 1950 I.I.T. Boiler Plant – Academic\nBULLET::::- 1950 Institute of Gas Technology Building – Research\nBULLET::::- 1950 American Association of Railroads Administration Building (now the College of Music Building) – Administration\nBULLET::::- 1952 Mechanical Engineering Research Building I – Research\nBULLET::::- 1952 Carr Memorial Chapel – Religious\nBULLET::::- 1953 American Association of Railroads Mechanical Engineering Building – Research\nBULLET::::- 1953 Carman Hall at IIT – Dormitory\nBULLET::::- 1955 Cunningham Hall – Dormitory\nBULLET::::- 1955 Bailey Hall – Dormitory\nBULLET::::- 1955 I.I.T. Commons Building\nBULLET::::- 1956 Crown Hall – Academic, College of Architecture\nBULLET::::- 1957 Physics & Electrical Engineering Research Building – Research\nBULLET::::- 1957 Siegel Hall – Classroom\nBULLET::::- 1953 American Association of Railroads Laboratory Building – Research\nBULLET::::- 1958 Metals Technology Building Extension – Research\n\nBULLET::::- International Style\nBULLET::::- Barcelona chair\n\nBULLET::::- Lamster, Mark (2018). \"The man in the Glass House: Philip Johnson, Architect of the Modern Century\" (hardcover,528 pages) Little, Brown & Co. English; ;\nBULLET::::- Rovira, Josep M; Casais, Lluis (2002). Mies van der Rohe Pavilion: Reflections,71 pages. Publisher:Triangle Postal.\n\nBULLET::::- Mies van der Rohe Society\nBULLET::::- Mies van der Rohe Foundation\nBULLET::::- Mies in Berlin-Mies in America\nBULLET::::- Great Buildings Architects\nBULLET::::- Mies van der Rohe Spotlight - ArchDaily\nBULLET::::- Elmhurst Art Museum, featuring McCormick House\nBULLET::::- Richard King Mellon Hall, Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, PA\nBULLET::::- Mies, IIT, and the Second Chicago School\nBULLET::::- Mies in America exhibition\nBULLET::::- Travel guide to Mies Buildings\nBULLET::::- Construction underway to transform famed Nuns’ Island gas station\nBULLET::::- Mies' Lafayette Park in Detroit\nBULLET::::- Mies in IR\nBULLET::::- Ludwig Mies van der Rohe architectural and furniture drawings, 1946-1961, held by the Avery Architectural and Fine Arts Library, Columbia University\n"}
{"id": "17898", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17898", "title": "Laundering", "text": "Laundering\n\nLaundering may refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- Child laundering, the illegal acquisition of children through monetary transactions, etc.\nBULLET::::- Laundry, washing clothes\nBULLET::::- Money laundering, disguising the origin of illegally gained wealth\nBULLET::::- Policy laundering, disguising the origin of legislation\n"}
{"id": "17900", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17900", "title": "Le Corbusier", "text": "Le Corbusier\n\nCharles-Édouard Jeanneret (6 October 1887 – 27 August 1965), known as Le Corbusier ( , , ), was a Swiss-French architect, designer, painter, urban planner, writer, and one of the pioneers of what is now called modern architecture. He was born in Switzerland and became a French citizen in 1930. His career spanned five decades, and he designed buildings in Europe, Japan, India, and North and South America.\n\nDedicated to providing better living conditions for the residents of crowded cities, Le Corbusier was influential in urban planning, and was a founding member of the Congrès International d'Architecture Moderne (CIAM). Le Corbusier prepared the master plan for the city of Chandigarh in India, and contributed specific designs for several buildings there, specially the government buildings.\n\nOn 17 July 2016, seventeen projects by Le Corbusier in seven countries were inscribed in the list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites as The Architectural Work of Le Corbusier, an Outstanding Contribution to the Modern Movement.\n\nCharles-Édouard Jeanneret was born on 6 October 1887 in La Chaux-de-Fonds, a small city in the French-speaking Neuchâtel canton in north-western Switzerland, in the Jura mountains, across the border from France. It was an industrial town, devoted to manufacturing watches. (He adopted the pseudonym \"Le Corbusier\" in 1920.) His father was an artisan who enameled boxes and watches, and his mother taught piano. His elder brother Albert was an amateur violinist. He attended a kindergarten that used Fröbelian methods.\n\nLike his contemporaries Frank Lloyd Wright and Mies van der Rohe, Le Corbusier lacked formal training as an architect. He was attracted to the visual arts; at the age of fifteen he entered the municipal art school in La-Chaux-de-Fonds which taught the applied arts connected with watchmaking. Three years later he attended the higher course of decoration, founded by the painter Charles L'Eplattenier, who had studied in Budapest and Paris. Le Corbusier wrote later that L'Eplattenier had made him \"a man of the woods\" and taught him painting from nature. His father frequently took him into the mountains around the town. He wrote later, \"we were constantly on mountaintops; we grew accustomed to a vast horizon.\" His architecture teacher in the Art School was architect René Chapallaz, who had a large influence on Le Corbusier's earliest house designs. He reported later that it was the art teacher L'Eplattenier who made him choose architecture. \"I had a horror of architecture and architects,\" he wrote. \"...I was sixteen, I accepted the verdict and I obeyed. I moved into architecture.\"\n\nLe Corbusier began teaching himself by going to the library to read about architecture and philosophy, by visiting museums, by sketching buildings, and by constructing them. In 1905, he and two other students, under the supervision of their teacher, René Chapallaz, designed and built his first house, the Villa Fallet, for the engraver Louis Fallet, a friend of his teacher Charles L'Eplattenier. Located on the forested hillside near Chaux-de-fonds, it was a large chalet with a steep roof in the local alpine style and carefully crafted colored geometric patterns on the façade. The success of this house led to his construction of two similar houses, the Villas Jacquemet and Stotzer, in the same area.\n\nIn September 1907, he made his first trip outside of Switzerland, going to Italy; then that winter traveling through Budapest to Vienna, where he stayed for four months and met Gustav Klimt and tried, without success, to meet Josef Hoffmann. In Florence, he visited the Florence Charterhouse in Galluzzo, which made a lifelong impression on him. \"I would have liked to live in one of what they called their cells,\" he wrote later. \"It was the solution for a unique kind of worker's housing, or rather for a terrestrial paradise.\" He traveled to Paris, and during fourteen months between 1908 until 1910 he worked as a draftsman in the office of the architect Auguste Perret, the pioneer of the use of reinforced concrete in residential construction and the architect of the Art Deco landmark Théâtre des Champs-Élysées. Two years later, between October 1910 and March 1911, he traveled to Germany and worked four months in the office Peter Behrens, where Ludwig Mies van der Rohe and Walter Gropius were also working and learning.\n\nIn 1911, he traveled again with his friend August Klipstein for five months; this time he journeyed to the Balkans and visited Serbia, Bulgaria, Turkey, Greece, as well as Pompeii and Rome, filling nearly 80 sketchbooks with renderings of what he saw—including many sketches of the Parthenon, whose forms he would later praise in his work \"Vers une architecture\" (1923). He spoke of what he saw during this trip in many of his books, and it was the subject of his last book, \"Le Voyage d'Orient\".\n\nIn 1912, he began his most ambitious project; a new house for his parents. also located on the forested hillside near La-Chaux-de-Fonds. The Jeanneret-Perret house was larger than the others, and in a more innovative style; the horizontal planes contrasted dramatically with the steep alpine slopes, and the white walls and lack of decoration were in sharp contrast with the other buildings on the hillside. The interior spaces were organized around the four pillars of the salon in the center, foretelling the open interiors he would create in his later buildings. The project was more expensive to build than he imagined; his parents were forced to move from the house within ten years, and relocate in a more modest house. However, it led to a commission to build an even more imposing villa in the nearby village of Le Locle for a wealthy watch manufacturer, Georges Favre-Jacot. Le Corbusier designed the new house in less than a month. The building was carefully designed to fit its hillside site, and interior plan was spacious and designed around a courtyard for maximum light, significant departure from the traditional house.\n\nDuring World War I, Le Corbusier taught at his old school in La-Chaux-de-Fonds. He concentrated on theoretical architectural studies using modern techniques. In December 1914, along with the engineer Max Dubois, he began a serious study of the use of reinforced concrete as a building material. He had first discovered concrete working in the office of Auguste Perret, the pioneer of reinforced concrete architecture in Paris, but now wanted to use it in new ways.\n\n\"Reinforced concrete provided me with incredible resources,\" he wrote later, \"and variety, and a passionate plasticity in which by themselves my structures will be rhythm of a palace, and a Pompieen tranquility.\" This led him to his plan for the Dom-Ino House (1914–15). This model proposed an open floor plan consisting of three concrete slabs supported by six thin reinforced concrete columns, with a stairway providing access to each level on one side of the floor plan. The system was originally designed to provide large numbers of temporary residences after World War I, producing only slabs, columns and stairways, and residents could build exterior walls with the materials around the site. He described it in his patent application as \"a juxtiposable system of construction according to an infinite number of combinations of plans. This would permit, he wrote, \"the construction of the dividing walls at any point on the façade or the interior.\"\n\nUnder this system, the structure of the house did not have to appear on the outside, but could be hidden behind a glass wall, and the interior could be arranged in any way the architect liked. After it was patented, Le Corbusier designed a number of houses according to the system, which were all white concrete boxes. Although some of these were never built, they illustrated his basic architectural ideas which would dominate his works throughout the 1920s. He refined the idea in his 1927 book on the \"Five Points of a New Architecture\". This design, which called for the disassociation of the structure from the walls, and the freedom of plans and façades, became the foundation for most of his architecture over the next ten years.\n\nIn August 1916, Le Corbusier received his largest commission ever, to construct a villa for the Swiss watchmaker Anatole Schwob, for whom he had already completed several small remodeling projects. He was given a large budget and the freedom to design not only the house, but also to create the interior decoration and choose the furniture. Following the precepts of Auguste Perret, he built the structure out of reinforced concrete and filled the gaps with brick. The center of the house is a large concrete box with two semicolumn structures on both sides, which reflects his ideas of pure geometrical forms. A large open hall with a chandelier occupied the center of the building. \"You can see,\" he wrote to Auguste Perret in July 1916, \"that Auguste Perret left more in me than Peter Behrens.\"\n\nLe Corbusier's grand ambitions collided with the ideas and budget of his client, and led to bitter conflicts. Schwob went to court and denied Le Corbusier access to site, or the right to claim to be the architect. Le Corbusier responded, \"Whether you like it or not, my presence is inscribed in every corner of your house.\" Le Corbusier took great pride in the house, and reproduced pictures in several of his books.\n\nLe Corbusier moved to Paris definitively in 1917 and began his own architectural practice with his cousin, Pierre Jeanneret (1896–1967), a partnership that would last until the 1950s, with an interruption in the World War II years\n\nIn 1918, Le Corbusier met the Cubist painter Amédée Ozenfant, in whom he recognised a kindred spirit. Ozenfant encouraged him to paint, and the two began a period of collaboration. Rejecting Cubism as irrational and \"romantic\", the pair jointly published their manifesto, \"Après le cubisme\" and established a new artistic movement, Purism. Ozenfant and Le Corbusier began writing for a new journal, \"L'Esprit Nouveau\", and promoted with energy and imagination his ideas of architecture.\n\nIn the first issue of the journal, in 1920, Charles-Edouard Jeanneret adopted Le Corbusier (an altered form of his maternal grandfather's name, Lecorbésier) as a pseudonym, reflecting his belief that anyone could reinvent themselves. Adopting a single name to identify oneself was in vogue by artists in many fields during that era, especially in Paris.\n\nBetween 1918 and 1922, Le Corbusier did not build anything, concentrating his efforts on Purist theory and painting. In 1922, he and his cousin Pierre Jeanneret opened a studio in Paris at 35 rue de Sèvres.\nThey set up an architectural practice together. From 1927 to 1937 they worked together with Charlotte Perriand at the Le Corbusier-Pierre Jeanneret studio. In 1929 the trio prepared  the “House fittings” section for the Decorative Artists Exhibition and asked for a group stand, renewing and widening the 1928 avant-garde group idea. This was refused by the Decorative Artists Committee. They resigned and founded the Union of Modern Artists (“Union des artistes modernes”: UAM).\n\nHis theoretical studies soon advanced into several different single-family house models. Among these, was the Maison \"Citrohan.\" The project's name was a reference to the French Citroën automaker, for the modern industrial methods and materials Le Corbusier advocated using in the house's construction as well as the way in which he intended the homes would be consumed, similar to other commercial products, like the automobile.\n\nAs part of the Maison Citrohan model, Le Corbusier proposed a three-floor structure, with a double-height living room, bedrooms on the second floor, and a kitchen on the third floor. The roof would be occupied by a sun terrace. On the exterior Le Corbusier installed a stairway to provide second-floor access from ground level. Here, as in other projects from this period, he also designed the façades to include large uninterrupted banks of windows. The house used a rectangular plan, with exterior walls that were not filled by windows but left as white, stuccoed spaces. Le Corbusier and Jeanneret left the interior aesthetically spare, with any movable furniture made of tubular metal frames. Light fixtures usually comprised single, bare bulbs. Interior walls also were left white.\n\nIn 1922 and 1923, Le Corbusier devoted himself to advocating his new concepts of architecture and urban planning in a series of polemical articles published in \"L'Esprit Nouveau\". At the Paris Salon d'Automne in 1922, he presented his plan for the Ville Contemporaine, a model city for three million people, whose residents would live and work in a group of identical sixty-story tall apartment buildings surrounded by lower zig-zag apartment blocks and a large park. In 1923, he collected his essays from \"L'Esprit Nouveau\" published his first and most influential book, \"Towards an Architecture\". He presented his ideas for the future of architecture in a series of maxims, declarations, and exhortations. commencing with \"A grand epoch has just begun. There exists a new spirit. There already exist a crowd of works in the new spirit, they are found especially in industrial production. Architecture is suffocating in its current uses. \"Styles\" are a lie. Style is a unity of principles which animates all the work of a period and which result in a characteristic spirit...Our epoch determines each day its style..-Our eyes, unfortunately don't know how to see it yet,\" and his most famous maxim, \"A house is a machine to live in.\" Most of the many photographs and drawings in the book came from outside the world of traditional architecture; the cover showed the promenade deck of an ocean liner, while others showed racing cars, airplanes, factories, and the huge concrete and steel arches of zeppelin hangars.\n\nAn important early work of Le Corbusier was the Esprit Nouveau Pavilion, built for the 1925 Paris International Exhibition of Modern Decorative and Industrial Arts, the event which later gave Art Deco its name. Le Corbusier built the pavilion in collaboration with Amédée Ozenfant and with his cousin Pierre Jeanneret. Le Corbusier and Ozenfant had broken with Cubism and formed the Purism movement in 1918 and in 1920 founded their journal \"L'Esprit Nouveau\". In his new journal, Le Corbusier vividly denounced the decorative arts: \"Decorative Art, as opposed to the machine phenomenon, is the final twitch of the old manual modes, a dying thing.\" To illustrate his ideas, he and Ozenfant decided to create small pavilion at the Exposition, representing his idea of the future urban housing unit. A house, he wrote, \"is a cell within the body of a city. The cell is made up of the vital elements which are the mechanics of a house...Decorative art is antistandarizational. Our pavilion will contain only standard things created by industry in factories and mass produced, objects truly of the style of today...my pavilion will therefore be a cell extracted from a huge apartment building.\"\n\nLe Corbusier and his collaborators were given a plot of land located behind the Grand Palais in the center of the Exposition. The plot was forested, and exhibitors could not cut down trees, so Le Corbusier built his pavilion with a tree in the center, emerging through a hole in the roof. The building was a stark white box with an interior terrace and square glass windows. The interior was decorated with a few cubist paintings and with a few pieces of mass-produced commercially available furniture, entirely different from the expensive, one-of-a-kind pieces in the other pavilions. The chief organizers of the Exposition were furious, and built a fence to partially hide the pavilion. Le Corbusier had to appeal to the Ministry of Fine Arts, which ordered that fence be taken down.\n\nBesides the furniture, the pavilion exhibited a model of his Plan Voisin his provocative plan for rebuilding a large part of the centre of Paris. He proposed to bulldoze a large area north of the Seine and replace the narrow streets, monuments and houses with giant sixty-story cruciform towers placed within an orthogonal street grid and park-like green space. His scheme was met with criticism and scorn from French politicians and industrialists, although they were favorable to the ideas of Taylorism and Fordism underlying his designs. The plan was never seriously considered, but it provoked discussion concerning how to deal with the overcrowded poor working-class neighborhoods of Paris, and it later saw partial realization in the housing developments built in the Paris suburbs in the 1950s and 1960s.\n\nThe Pavilion was ridiculed by many critics, but Le Corbusier, undaunted, wrote: \"Right now one thing is sure. 1925 marks the decisive turning point in the quarrel between the old and new. After 1925, the antique-lovers will have virtually ended their lives . . . Progress is achieved through experimentation; the decision will be awarded on the field of battle of the 'new'.\"\n\nIn 1925, Le Corbusier combined a series of articles about decorative art from \"L'Esprit Nouveau\" into a book, \"L'art décoratif d'aujourd'hui\" (\"The Decorative Art of Today\"). The book was a spirited attack on the very idea of decorative art. His basic premise, repeated throughout the book, was: \"Modern decorative art has no decoration.\" He attacked with enthusiasm the styles presented at the 1925 Exposition of Decorative Arts: \"The desire to decorate everything about one is a false spirit and an abominable small perversion...The religion of beautiful materials is in its final death agony...The almost hysterical onrush in recent years toward this quasi-orgy of decor is only the last spasm of a death already predictable.\" He cited the 1912 book of the Austrian architect Adolf Loos \"Ornament and crime\", and quoted Loos's dictum, \"The more a people are cultivated, the more decor disappears.\" He attacked the deco revival of classical styles, what he called \"Louis Philippe and Louis XVI moderne\"; he condemned the \"symphony of color\" at the Exposition, and called it \"the triumph of assemblers of colors and materials. They were swaggering in colors... They were making stews out of fine cuisine.\" He condemned the exotic styles presented at the Exposition based on the art of China, Japan, India and Persia. \"It takes energy today to affirm our western styles.\" He criticized the \"precious and useless objects that accumulated on the shelves\" in the new style. He attacked the \"rustling silks, the marbles which twist and turn, the vermilion whiplashes, the silver blades of Byzantium and the Orient…Let's be done with it!\"\n\n\"Why call bottles, chairs, baskets and objects decorative?\" Le Corbusier asked. \"They are useful tools….Decor is not necessary. Art is necessary.\" He declared that in the future the decorative arts industry would produce only \"objects which are perfectly useful, convenient, and have a true luxury which pleases our spirit by their elegance and the purity of their execution, and the efficiency of their services. This rational perfection and precise determinate creates the link sufficient to recognize a style.\" He described the future of decoration in these terms: \"The ideal is to go work in the superb office of a modern factory, rectangular and well-lit, painted in white Ripolin (a major French paint manufacturer); where healthy activity and laborious optimism reign.\" He concluded by repeating \"Modern decoration has no decoration\".\n\nThe book became a manifesto for those who opposed the more traditional styles of the decorative arts; In the 1930s, as Le Corbusier predicted, the modernized versions of Louis Philippe and Louis XVI furniture and the brightly colored wallpapers of stylized roses were replaced by a more sober, more streamlined style. Gradually the modernism and functionality proposed by Le Corbusier overtook the more ornamental style. The shorthand titles that Le Corbusier used in the book, \"1925 Expo: Arts Deco\" was adapted in 1966 by the art historian Bevis Hillier for a catalog of an exhibition on the style, and in 1968 in the title of a book, \"Art Deco of the 20s and 30s\". And thereafter the term \"Art Deco\" was commonly used as the name of the style.\n\nThe notoriety that Le Corbusier achieved from his writings and the Pavilion at the 1925 Exposition led to commissions to build a dozen residences in Paris and in the Paris region in his \"purist style.\" These included the Maison La Roche/Albert Jeanneret (1923–1925), which now houses the Fondation Le Corbusier; the Maison Guiette in Antwerp, Belgium (1926); a residence for Jacques Lipchitz; the Maison Cook, and the Maison Planeix. In 1927, he was invited by the German Werkbund to build three houses in the model city of Weissenhof near Stuttgart, based on the Citrohan House and other theoretical models he had published. He described this project in detail one of his best-known essays, the \"Five Points of Architecture\".\n\nThe following year he began the Villa Savoye (1928–1931), which became one of the most famous of Le Corbusier's works, and an icon of modernist architecture. Located in Poissy, in a landscape surrounded by trees and large lawn, the house is an elegant white box poised on rows of slender pylons, surrounded by a horizontal band of windows which fill the structure with light. The service areas (parking, rooms for servants and laundry room) are located under the house. Visitors enter a vestibule from which a gentle ramp leads to the house itself. The bedrooms and salons of the house are distributed around a suspended garden; the rooms look both out at the landscape and into the garden, which provides additional light and air. Another ramp leads up to the roof, and a stairway leads down to the cellar under the pillars.\n\nVilla Savoye succinctly summed up the five points of architecture that he had elucidated in \"L'Esprit Nouveau\" and the book \"Vers une architecture\", which he had been developing throughout the 1920s. First, Le Corbusier lifted the bulk of the structure off the ground, supporting it by \"pilotis\", reinforced concrete stilts. These \"pilotis\", in providing the structural support for the house, allowed him to elucidate his next two points: a free façade, meaning non-supporting walls that could be designed as the architect wished, and an open floor plan, meaning that the floor space was free to be configured into rooms without concern for supporting walls. The second floor of the Villa Savoye includes long strips of ribbon windows that allow unencumbered views of the large surrounding garden, and which constitute the fourth point of his system. The fifth point was the roof garden to compensate for the green area consumed by the building and replacing it on the roof. A ramp rising from ground level to the third-floor roof terrace allows for a promenade architecturale through the structure. The white tubular railing recalls the industrial \"ocean-liner\" aesthetic that Le Corbusier much admired.\n\nLe Corbusier was quite rhapsodic when describing the house in \"Précisions\" in 1930: \"the plan is pure, exactly made for the needs of the house. It has its correct place in the rustic landscape of Poissy. It is Poetry and lyricism, supported by technique.\" The house had its problems; the roof persistently leaked, due to construction faults; but it became a landmark of modern architecture and one of the best-known works of Le Corbusier.\n\nThanks to his passionate articles in L'Esprit Nouveau, his participation in the 1925 Decorative Arts Exposition and the conferences he gave on the new spirit of architecture, Le Corbusier had become well known in the architectural world, though he had only built residences for wealthy clients. In 1926, he entered the competition for the construction of a headquarters for the League of Nations in Geneva with a plan for an innovative lakeside complex of modernist white concrete office buildings and meeting halls. There were three-hundred thirty seven projects in competition. It appeared that the Corbusier's project was the first choice of the architectural jury, but after much behind-the scenes maneuvering the jury declared it was unable to pick a single winner, and the project was given instead to the top five architects, who were all neoclassicists. Le Corbusier was not discouraged; he presented his own plans to the public in articles and lectures to show the opportunity that the League of Nations had missed.\n\nIn 1927, Le Corbusier received the opportunity he had been looking for; he was commissioned by a Bordeaux industrialist, Henry Frugès a fervent admirer of his ideas on urban planning, to build a complex of worker housing, the Quartiers Modernes Frugès, at Pessac, near Bordeaux. Le Corbusier described Pessac as \"A little like a Balzac novel\", a chance to create a whole community for living and working. The Fruges quarter became his first laboratory for a residential housing; a series of rectangular blocks composed of modular housing units located in a garden setting. Like the unit displayed at the 1925 Exposition, each housing unit had its own small terrace. The earlier villas he constructed all had white exterior walls, but for Pessac, at the request of his clients, he added color; panels of brown, yellow and jade green, coordinated by Le Corbusier. Originally planned to have some two hundred units, it finally contained about fifty to seventy housing units, in eight buildings. Pessac became the model on a small scale for his later and much larger Cité Radieuse projects.\n\nIn 1928, Le Corbusier took a major step toward establishing modernist architecture as the dominant European style. Le Corbusier had met with many of the leading German and Austrian modernists during the competition for the League of Nations in 1927. In the same year, the German Werkbund organized an architectural exposition at the Weissenhof Estate Stuttgart. Seventeen leading modernist architects in Europe were invited to design twenty-one houses; Le Corbusier and Mies Van der Rohe played a major part. In 1927 Le Corbusier, Pierre Chareau and others proposed the foundation of an international conference to establish the basis for a common style. The first meeting of the \"Congrès Internationaux d'Architecture Moderne\" or International Congresses of Modern Architects (CIAM), was held in a château on Lake Leman in Switzerland 26–28 June 1928. Those attending included Le Corbusier, Robert Mallet-Stevens, Auguste Perret, Pierre Chareau and Tony Garnier from France; Victor Bourgeois from Belgium; Walter Gropius, Erich Mendelsohn, Ernst May and Mies Van der Rohe from Germany; Josef Frank from Austria; Mart Stam and Gerrit Rietveld from the Netherlands, and Adolf Loos from Czechoslovakia. A delegation of Soviet architects was invited to attend, but they were unable to obtain visas. Later members included Josep Lluís Sert of Spain and Alvar Aalto of Finland. No one attended from the United States. A second meeting was organized in 1930 in Brussels by Victor Bourgeois on the topic \"Rational methods for groups of habitations\". A third meeting, on \"The functional city\", was scheduled for Moscow in 1932, but was cancelled at the last minute. Instead the delegates held their meeting on a cruise ship traveling between Marseille and Athens. On board, they together drafted a text on how modern cities should be organized. The text, called The Athens Charter, after considerable editing by Le Corbusier and others, was finally published in 1943 and became an influential text for city planners in the 1950s and 1960s. The group met once more in Paris in 1937 to discuss public housing and was scheduled to meet in the United States in 1939, but the meeting was cancelled because of the war. The legacy of the CIAM was a roughly common style and doctrine which helped define modern architecture in Europe and the United States after World War II.\n\nLe Corbusier saw the new society founded in the Soviet Union after the Russian Revolution as a promising laboratory for his architectural ideas. He met the Russian architect Konstantin Melnikov during the 1925 Decorative Arts Exposition in Paris, and admired the construction of Melnikov's constructvist USSR pavilion, the only truly modernist building in the Exposition other than his own Esprit Nouveau pavilion. At Melnikov's invitation he traveled to Moscow, where found that his writings had been published in Russian; he gave lectures and interviews, and between 1928 and 1932 he constructed an office building for the Tsentrosoyuz, the headquarters of Soviet trade unions.\n\nIn 1932, he was invited to take part in an international competition for the new Palace of the Soviets in Moscow, which was to be built on the site of the Cathedral of Christ the Saviour, demolished on Stalin's orders. Le Corbusier contributed a highly original plan, a low-level complex of circular and rectangular buildings and a rainbow-like arch from which the roof of the main meeting hall was suspended. To Le Corbusier's distress, his plan was rejected by Stalin in favor of a plan for a massive neoclassical tower, the highest in Europe, crowned with a statue of Vladimir Lenin. The Palace was never built; construction was stopped by World War II, a swimming pool took its place; and after the collapse of the USSR the cathedral was rebuilt on its original site.\n\nBetween 1928 and 1934, as Le Corbusier's reputation grew, he received commissions to construct a wide variety of buildings. In 1928 he received a commission from the Soviet government to construct the headquarters of the Tsentrosoyuz, or central office of trade unions, a large office building whose glass walls alternated with plaques of stone. He built the Villa de Madrot in Le Pradet (1929–1931); and an apartment in Paris for Charles de Bestigui at the top of an existing building on the Champs-Élysées 1929–1932, (later demolished). In 1929–1930 he constructed a floating homeless shelter for the Salvation Army on the left bank of the Seine at the Pont d'Austerlitz. Between 1929 and 1933, he built a larger and more ambitious project for the Salvation Army, the Cité de Refuge, on rue Cantagrel in the 13th arrondissement of Paris. He also constructed the Swiss Pavilion in the Cité Universitaire in Paris with 46 units of student housing, (1929–33). He designed furniture to go with the building; the main salon was decorated with a montage of black-and-white photographs of nature. In 1948, he replaced this with a colorful mural he painted himself. In Geneva he built a glass-walled apartment building with forty-five units, the Immeuble Clarté. Between 1931 and 1945 he built an apartment building with fifteen units, including an apartment and studio for himself on the 6th and 7th floors, at 4 rue Nungesser-et-Coli in the 16th arrondissement in Paris. overlooking the Bois de Boulogne. His apartment and studio are owned today by the Fondation Le Corbusier, and can be visited.\n\nAs the global Great Depression enveloped Europe, Le Corbusier devoted more and more time to his ideas for urban design and planned cities. He believed that his new, modern architectural forms would provide an organizational solution that would raise the quality of life for the working classes. In 1922 he had presented his model of the Ville Contemporaine, a city of three million inhabitants, at the Salon d'Automne in Paris. His plan featured tall office towers with surrounded by lower residential blocks in a park setting. He reported that \"analysis leads to such dimensions, to such a new scale, and to such the creation of an urban organism so different from those that exist, that it that the mind can hardly imagine it.\" The Ville Contemporaine, presenting an imaginary city in an imaginary location, did not attract the attention that Le Corbusier wanted. For his next proposal, the Plan Voisin (1925), he took a much more provocative approach; he proposed to demolish a large part of central Paris and to replace it with a group of sixty-story cruciform office towers surrounded by parkland. This idea shocked most viewers, as it was certainly intended to do. The plan included a multi-level transportation hub that included depots for buses and trains, as well as highway intersections, and an airport. Le Corbusier had the fanciful notion that commercial airliners would land between the huge skyscrapers. He segregated pedestrian circulation paths from the roadways and created an elaborate road network. Groups of lower-rise zigzag apartment blocks, set back from the street, were interspersed among the office towers. Le Corbusier wrote: \"The center of Paris, currently threatened with death, threatened by exodus, is in reality a diamond mine...To abandon the center of Paris to its fate is to desert in face of the enemy.\" \n\nAs no doubt Le Corbusier expected, no one hurried to implement the Plan Voisin, but he continued working on variations of the idea and recruiting followers. In 1929, he traveled to Brazil where he gave conferences on his architectural ideas. He returned with drawings of his own vision for Rio de Janeiro; he sketched serpentine multi-story apartment buildings on pylons, like inhabited highways, winding through Rio Janeiro.\n\nIn 1931, he developed a visionary plan for another city Algiers, then part of France. This plan, like his Rio Janeiro plan, called for the construction of an elevated viaduct of concrete, carrying residential units, which would run from one end of the city to the other. This plan, unlike his early Plan Voisin, was more conservative, because it did not call for the destruction of the old city of Algiers; the residential housing would be over the top of the old city. This plan, like his Paris plans, provoked discussion, but never came close to realization.\n\nIn 1935, Le Corbusier made his first visit to the United States. He was asked by American journalists what he thought about New York City skyscrapers; he responded, characteristically, that he found them \"much too small\". He wrote a book describing his experiences in the States, \"Quand les Cathédrales etait blanc- voyages au pays des timides\" (When Cathedrals were White; voyage to the land of the timid) whose title expressed his view of the lack of boldness in American architecture.\n\nHe wrote a great deal but built very little in the late 1930s. The titles of his books expressed the combined urgency and optimism of his messages: \"Cannons? Munitions? No thank you, Lodging please!\" (1938) and \"The lyricism of modern times and urbanism\" (1939).\n\nIn 1928, the French Minister of Labour, Louis Loucheur, won the passage of a French law on public housing, calling for the construction of 260,000 new housing units within five years. Le Corbusier immediately began to design a new type of modular housing unit, which he called the Maison Loucheur, which would be suitable for the project. These units were in size, made with metal frames, and were designed to be mass-produced and then transported to the site, where they would be inserted into frameworks of steel and stone; The government insisted on stone walls to win the support of local building contractors. The standardisation of apartment buildings was the essence of what Le Corbusier termed the \"Ville Radieuse\" or \"radiant city\", in a new book which published in 1935. The Radiant City was similar to his earlier Contemporary City and Plan Voisin, with the difference that residences would be assigned by family size, rather than by income and social position. In his 1935 book, he developed his ideas for a new kind of city, where the principle functions; heavy industry, manufacturing, habitation and commerce, would be clearly separated into their own neighbourhoods, carefully planned and designed. However, before any units could be built, World War II intervened.\n\nDuring the War and the German occupation of France, Le Corbusier did his best to promote his architectural projects. He moved to Vichy for a time, where the collaborationist government of Marshal Philippe Petain was located, offering his services for architectural projects, including his plan for the reconstruction of Algiers, but they were rejected. He continued writing, completing \"Sur les Quatres routes\" (On the Four Routes) in 1941. After 1942, Le Corbusier left Vichy for Paris. He became for a time a technical adviser at Alexis Carrel's eugenic foundation, he resigned from this position on 20 April 1944. In 1943, he founded a new association of modern architects and builders, the Ascoral, the Assembly of Constructors for a renewal of architecture, but there were no projects to build.\n\nWhen the war ended, Le Corbusier was nearly sixty years old, and he had not had a single project realized in ten years. He tried, without success, to obtain commissions for several of the first large reconstruction projects, but his proposals for the reconstruction of the town of Saint-Dié and for La Rochelle were rejected. Still, he persisted; Le Corbusier finally found a willing partner in Raoul Dautry, the new Minister of Reconstruction and Urbanism. Dautry agreed to fund one of his projects, a \"Unité d'habitation de grandeur conforme\", or housing units of standard size, with the first one to be built in Marseille, which had been heavily damaged during the war.\n\nThis was his first public commission, and was a major breakthrough for Le Corbusier. He gave the building the name of his pre-war theoretical project, the \"Cité Radieuse\", and followed the principles that he had studied before the war, he proposed a giant reinforced concrete framework, into which modular apartments would be fit like bottles into a bottle rack. Like the Villa Savoye, the structure was poised on concrete pylons though, because of the shortage of steel to reinforce the concrete, the pylons were more massive than usual. The building contained 337 duplex apartment modules to house a total of 1,600 people. Each module was three stories high, and contained two apartments, combined so each had two levels (see diagram above). The modules ran from one side of the building to the other, and each apartment had a small terrace at each end. They were ingeniously fitted together like pieces of a Chinese puzzle, with a corridor slotted through the space between the two apartments in each module. Residents had a choice of twenty-three different configurations for the units. Le Corbusier designed furniture, carpets and lamps to go with the building, all purely functional; the only decoration was a choice of interior colors that Le Corbusier gave to residents. The only mildly decorative features of the building were the ventilator shafts on the roof, which Le Corbusier made to look like the smokestacks of an ocean liner, a functional form that he admired.\n\nThe building was designed not just to be a residence, but to offer all the services needed for living. Every third floor, between the modules, there was a wide corridor, like an interior street, which ran the length of the building from one end of the building to the other. This served as a sort of commercial street, with shops, eating places, a nursery school and recreational facilities. A running track and small stage for theater performances was located in the roof. The building itself was surrounded by trees and a small park.\n\nLe Corbusier wrote later that the Unité d'Habitation concept was inspired by the visit he had made to the Florence Charterhouse at Galluzzo in Italy, in 1907 and 1910 during his early travels. He wanted to recreate, he wrote, an ideal place \"for meditation and contemplation.\" He also learned from the monastery, he wrote, that \"standardization led to perfection,\" and that \"all of his life a man labours under this impulse: to make the home the temple of the family.\"\n\nThe Unité d'Habitation marked a turning point in the career of Le Corbusier; in 1952, he was made a Commander of the Légion d'Honneur in a ceremony held on the roof of his new building. He had progressed from being an outsider and critic of the architectural establishment to its centre, as the most prominent French architect.\n\nLe Corbusier made another almost identical Unité d'Habitation in Rezé-les-Nantes in the Loire-Atlantique Department between 1948 and 1952, and three more over the following years, in Berlin, Briey-en-Forêt and Firminy; and he designed a factory for the company of Claude and Duval, in Saint-Dié in the Vosges. In the post-Second World War decades Le Corbusier’s fame moved beyond architectural and planning circles as he became one of the leading intellectual figures of the time. \n\nIn early 1947 Le Corbusier submitted a design for the headquarters of the United Nations, which was to be built beside the East River in New York. Instead of competition, the design was to be selected by a Board of Design Consultants composed of leading international architects nominated by member governments, including Le Corbusier, Oscar Niemeyer of Brazil, Howard Robertson from Britain, Nikolai Bassov of the Soviet Union, and five others from around the world. The committee was under the direction of the American architect Wallace K. Harrison, who was also architect for the Rockefeller family, which had donated the site for the building.\n\nLe Corbusier had submitted his plan for the Secretariat, called Plan 23 of the 58 submitted. In Le Corbusier's plan offices, council chambers and General Assembly hall were in a single block in the center of the site. He lobbied hard for his project, and asked the younger Brazilian architect, Niemeyer, to support and assist him on his plan. Niemeyer, to help Le Corbusier, refused to submit his own design and did not attend the meetings until the Director, Harrison, insisted. Niemeyer then submitted his plan, Plan 32, with the office building and councils and General Assembly in separate buildings. After much discussion, the Committee chose Niemeyer's plan, but suggested that he collaborate with Le Corbusier on the final project. Le Corbusier urged Niemeyer to put the General Assembly Hall in the center of the site, though this would eliminate Niemeyer's plan to have a large plaza in the center. Niemeyer agreed with Le Corbusier's suggestion, and the headquarters was built, with minor modifications, according to their joint plan.\n\nLe Corbusier was an avowed atheist, but he also had a strong belief in the ability of architecture to create a sacred and spiritual environment. In the postwar years, he designed two important religious buildings; the chapel of Notre-Dame-du-Haut at Ronchamp (1950–1955); and the Convent of Sainte Marie de La Tourette (1953–1960). Le Corbusier wrote later that he was greatly aided in his religious architecture by a Dominican father, Père Couturier, who had founded a movement and review of modern religious art.\n\nLe Corbusier first visited the remote mountain site of Ronchamp in May 1950, saw the ruins of the old chapel, and drew sketches of possible forms. He wrote afterwards: \"In building this chapel, I wanted to create a place of silence, of peace, of prayer, of interior joy. The feeling of the sacred animated our effort. Some things are sacred, others aren't, whether they're religious or not.\"\n\nThe second major religious project undertaken by Le Corbusier was the Convent of Sainte Marie de La Tourette in L'Arbresle in the Rhone Department (1953–1960). Once again it was Father Couturier who engaged Le Corbusier in the project. He invited Le Corbusier to visit the starkly simple and imposing 12th–13th century Le Thoronet Abbey in Provence, and also used his memories of his youthful visit to the Erna Charterhouse in Florence. This project involved not only a chapel, but a library, refectory, rooms for meetings and reflection, and dormitories for the nuns. For the living space he used the same Modulor concept for measuring the ideal living space that he had used in the Unité d'Habitation in Marseille; height under the ceiling of ; and width .\n\nLe Corbusier used raw concrete to construct the convent, which is placed on the side of a hill. The three blocks of dormitories U, closed by the chapel, with a courtyard in the center. The Convent has a flat roof, and is placed on sculpted concrete pillars. Each of the residential cells has small loggia with a concrete sunscreen looking out at the countryside. The centerpiece of the convent is the chapel, a plain box of concrete, which he called his \"Box of miracles.\" Unlike the highly finished façade of the Unité d'Habitation, the façade of the chapel is raw, unfinished concrete. He described the building in a letter to Albert Camus in 1957: \"I'm taken with the idea of a \"box of miracles\"...as the name indicates, it is a rectangual box made of concrete. It doesn't have any of the traditional theatrical tricks, but the possibility, as its name suggests, to make miracles.\" The interior of the chapel is extremely simple, only benches in a plain, unfinished concrete box, with light coming through a single square in the roof and six small band on the sides. The Crypt beneath has intense blue, red and yellow walls, and illumination by sunlight channeled from above. The monastery has other unusual features, including floor to ceiling panels of glass in the meeting rooms, window panels that fragmented the view into pieces, and a system of concrete and metal tubes like gun barrels which aimed sunlight through colored prisms and projected it onto the walls of sacristy and to the secondary altars of the crypt on the level below. These were whimsically termed the \"\"machine guns\" of the sacristy and the \"light cannons\" of the crypt.\n\nIn 1960, Le Corbusier began a third religious building, the Church of Saint Pierre in the new town of Firminy-Vert, where he had built a Unité d'Habitation and a cultural and sports centre. While he made the original design, construction did not begin until five years after his death, and work continued under different architects until it was completed in 2006. The most spectacular feature of the church is the sloping concrete tower that covers the entire interior. similar to that in the Assembly Building in his complex at Chandigarh. Windows high in the tower illuminate the interior. Le Corbusier originally proposed that tiny windows also project the form of a constellation on the walls. Later architects designed the church to project the constellation Orion.\n\nLe Corbusier's largest and most ambitious project was the design of Chandigarh, the capital city of the Haryana and Punjab States of India, created after India received independence in 1947. Le Corbusier was contacted in 1950 by Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, and invited to propose a project. An American architect, Albert Mayer, had made a plan in 1947 for a city of 150,000 inhabitants, but the Indian government wanted a grander and more monumental city. Corbusier worked on the plan with two British specialists in urban design and tropical climate architecture, Maxwell Fry and Jane Drew, and with his cousin, Pierre Jeanneret, who moved to India and supervised the construction until his death.\n\nLe Corbusier, as always, was rhapsodic about his project; \"It will be a city of trees,\" he wrote, \"of flowers and water, of houses as simple as those at the time of Homer, and of a few splendid edifices of the highest level of modernism, where the rules of mathematics will reign.\". His plan called for residential, commercial and industrial areas, along with parks and a transportation infrastructure. In the middle was the capitol, a complex of four major government buildings; the Palace of the National Assembly, the High Court of Justice; the Palace of Secretariat of Ministers, and the Palace of the Governor. For financial and political reasons, the Palace of the Governor was dropped well into the construction of the city, throwing the final project somewhat off-balance. From the beginning, Le Corbusier worked, as he reported, \"Like a forced laborer.\" He dismissed the earlier American plan as \"Faux-Moderne\" and overly filled with parking spaces roads. His intent was to present what he had learned in forty years of urban study, and also to show the French government the opportunities they had missed in not choosing him to rebuild French cities after the War. His design made use of many of his favorite ideas; an architectural promenade, incorporating the local landscape and the sunlight and shadows into the design; the use of the Modulor to give a correct human scale to each element; and his favourite symbol, the open hand; (\"The hand is open to give and to receive'.\") He placed a monumental open hand statue in a prominent place in the design.\n\nLe Corbusier's design called for the use of raw concrete, whose surface not smoothed or polished and which showed the marks of the forms in which it dried. Pierre Jeanneret wrote to his cousin that he was in a continual battle with the construction workers, who could not resist the urge to smooth and finish the raw concrete, particularly when important visitors were coming to the site. At one point one thousand workers were employed on the site of the High Court of Justice. Le Corbusier wrote to his mother, \"It is an architectural symphony which surpasses all my hopes, which flashes and develops under the light in a way which is unimaginable and unforgettable. From far, from up close, it provokes astonishment; all made with raw concrete and a cement cannon. Adorable, and grandiose. In all the centuries no one has seen that.\"\n\nThe High Court of Justice, begun in 1951, was finished in 1956. The building was radical in its design; a parallelogram topped with an inverted parasol. Along the walls were high concrete grills thick which served as sunshades. The entry featured a monumental ramp and columns that allowed the air to circulate. The pillars were originally white limestone, but in the 1960s they were repainted in bright colors, which better resisted the weather.\n\nThe Secretariat, the largest building that housed the government offices, was constructed between 1952 and 1958. It is an enormous block long and eight levels high, served by a ramp which extends from the ground to the top level. The ramp was designed to be partly sculptural and partly practical. Since there were no modern building cranes at the time of construction, the ramp was the only way to get materials to the top of the construction site. The Secretariat had two features which were borrowed from his design for the Unité d'Habitation in Marseille: concrete grill sunscreens over the windows and a roof terrace.\n\nThe most important building of the capitol complex was the Palace of Assembly (1952–61), which faced the High Court at the other end of a five hundred meter esplanade with a large reflecting pool in the front. This building features a central courtyard, over which is the main meeting hall for the Assembly. On the roof on the rear of the building is a signature feature of Le Corbusier, a large tower, similar in form to the smokestack of a ship or the ventilation tower of a heating plant. Le Corbusier added touches of color and texture with an immense tapestry in the meeting hall and large gateway decorated with enamel. He wrote of this building, \"A Palace magnificent in its effect, from the new art of raw concrete. It is magnificent and terrible; terrible meaning that there is nothing cold about it to the eyes.\"\n\nThe 1950s and 1960s, were a difficult period for Le Corbusier's personal life; his wife Yvonne died in 1957, and his mother, to whom he was closely attached, died in 1960. He remained active in a wide variety of fields; in 1955 he published \"Poéme de l'angle droits\", a portfolio of lithographs, published in the same collection as the book \"Jazz\" by Henri Matisse. In 1958 he collaborated with the composer Edgar Varèse on a work called \"Le Poème électronique\", a show of sound and light, for the Philips Pavilion at the International Exposition in Brussels. In 1960 he published a new book, \"L'Atelier de la recherché patiente\" \"The workshop of patient research\"), simultaneously published in four languages. He received growing recognition for his pioneering work in modernist architecture; in 1959, a successful international campaign was launched to have his Villa Savoye, threatened with demolition, declared an historic monument; it was the first time that a work by a living architect received this distinction. In 1962, in the same year as the dedication of the Palace of the Assembly in Chandigarh, the first retrospective exhibit on his work was held at the National Museum of Modern Art in Paris. In 1964, in a ceremony held in his atelier on rue de Sèvres, he was awarded the Grand Cross of the Légion d'honneur by Culture Minister André Malraux.\n\nHis later architectural work was extremely varied, and often based on designs of earlier projects. In 1952–1958, he designed a series of tiny vacation cabins, in size, for a site next to the Mediterranean at Roquebrune-Cap-Martin. He built a similar cabin for himself, but the rest of the project was not realized until after his death. In 1953–1957, he designed a residential building for Brazilian students for the Cité de la Université in Paris. Between 1954 and 1959, he built the National Museum of Western Art in Tokyo. His other projects included a cultural centre and stadium for the town of Firminy, where he had built his first housing project (1955–1958); and a stadium in Baghdad, Iraq (much altered since its construction). He also constructed three new \"Unités d'Habitation\", apartment blocks on the model of the original in Marseille, the first in Berlin (1956–1958), the second in Briey-en-Forêt in the Meurthe-et-Moselle Department; and the third (1959–1967) in Firminy. In 1960–1963, he built his only building in the United States; the Carpenter Center for the Visual Arts in Cambridge, Massachusetts.\n\nAt the time of his death in 1965, several projects were on the drawing boards; the church of Saint-Pierre in Firminy, finally completed in modified form in 2006; a Palace of Congresses for Strasbourg (1962–65), and a hospital in Venice, (1961–1965) which were never built. Le Corbusier designed an art gallery beside the lake in Zürich for gallery owner Heidi Weber in 1962–1967. Now called the Centre Le Corbusier, it is one of his last finished works.\n\nThe Fondation Le Corbusier (FLC) functions as his official estate. The US copyright representative for the Fondation Le Corbusier is the Artists Rights Society.\n\nLe Corbusier defined the principles of his new architecture in \"Les cinq points de l'architecture moderne\", published in 1927, and co-authored by his cousin, Pierre Jeanneret. They summarized the lessons he had learned in the previous years, which he put literally into concrete form in his villas constructed of the late 1920s, most dramatically in the Villa Savoye (1928–1931)\n\nThe five points are:\n\nBULLET::::- The Pilotis, or pylon. The building is raised up on reinforced concrete pylons, which allows for free circulation on the ground level, and eliminates dark and damp parts of the house.\nBULLET::::- The Roof Terrace. The sloping roof is replaced by a flat roof; the roof can be used as a garden, for promenades, sports or a swimming pool.\nBULLET::::- The Free Plan. Load-bearing walls are replaced by steel or reinforced concrete columns, so the interior can be freely designed, and interior walls can put anywhere, or left out entirely. The structure of the building is not visible from the outside.\nBULLET::::- The Ribbon Window. Since the walls do not support the house, the windows can run the entire length of the house, so all rooms can get equal light.\nBULLET::::- The Free Façade. Since the building is supported by columns in the interior, the façade can be much lighter and more open, or made entirely of glass. There is no need for lintels or other structure around the windows.\n\nThe \"Architectural Promenade\" was another idea dear to Le Corbusier, which he particularly put into play in his design of the Villa Savoye. In 1928, in \"Une Maison, un Palais\", he described it: \"Arab architecture gives us a precious lesson: it is best appreciated in walking, on foot. It is in walking, in going from one place to another, that you see develop the features of the architecture. In this house (Villa Savoye) you find a veritable architectural promenade, offering constantly varying aspects, unexpected, sometimes astonishing.\" The promenade at Villa Savoye, Le Corbusier wrote, both in the interior of the house and on the roof terrace, often erased the traditional difference between the inside and outside.\n\nIn the 1930s, Le Corbusier expanded and reformulated his ideas on urbanism, eventually publishing them in \"La Ville radieuse\" (The Radiant City) in 1935. Perhaps the most significant difference between the Contemporary City and the Radiant City is that the latter abandoned the class-based stratification of the former; housing was now assigned according to family size, not economic position. Some have read dark overtones into \"The Radiant City\": from the \"astonishingly beautiful assemblage of buildings\" that was Stockholm, for example, Le Corbusier saw only \"frightening chaos and saddening monotony.\" He dreamed of \"cleaning and purging\" the city, bringing \"a calm and powerful architecture\"—referring to steel, plate glass, and reinforced concrete. Although Le Corbusier's designs for Stockholm did not succeed, later architects took his ideas and partly \"destroyed\" the city with them.\n\nLe Corbusier hoped that politically minded industrialists in France would lead the way with their efficient Taylorist and Fordist strategies adopted from American industrial models to reorganize society. As Norma Evenson has put it, \"the proposed city appeared to some an audacious and compelling vision of a brave new world, and to others a frigid megalomaniacally scaled negation of the familiar urban ambient.\"\n\nLe Corbusier \"His ideas—his urban planning and his architecture—are viewed separately,\" Perelman noted, \"whereas they are one and the same thing.\"\n\nIn \"La Ville radieuse\", he conceived an essentially apolitical society, in which the bureaucracy of economic administration effectively replaces the state.\n\nLe Corbusier was heavily indebted to the thought of the 19th-century French utopians Saint-Simon and Charles Fourier. There is a noteworthy resemblance between the concept of the unité and Fourier's phalanstery. From Fourier, Le Corbusier adopted at least in part his notion of administrative, rather than political, government.\n\nThe Modulor was a standard model of the human form which Le Corbusier devised to determine the correct amount of living space needed for residents in his buildings. It was also his rather original way of dealing with differences between the metric system and British or American system, since the Modulor was not attached to either one.\n\nLe Corbusier explicitly used the golden ratio in his Modulor system for the scale of architectural proportion. He saw this system as a continuation of the long tradition of Vitruvius, Leonardo da Vinci's \"Vitruvian Man\", the work of Leon Battista Alberti, and others who used the proportions of the human body to improve the appearance and function of architecture. In addition to the golden ratio, Le Corbusier based the system on human measurements, Fibonacci numbers, and the double unit. Many scholars see the Modulor as a humanistic expression but it is also argued that: \"It's exactly the opposite (...) It's the mathematicization of the body, the standardization of the body, the rationalization of the body.\"\n\nHe took Leonardo's suggestion of the golden ratio in human proportions to an extreme: he sectioned his model human body's height at the navel with the two sections in golden ratio, then subdivided those sections in golden ratio at the knees and throat; he used these golden ratio proportions in the Modulor system.\n\nLe Corbusier's 1927 Villa Stein in Garches exemplified the Modulor system's application. The villa's rectangular ground plan, elevation, and inner structure closely approximate golden rectangles.\n\nLe Corbusier placed systems of harmony and proportion at the centre of his design philosophy, and his faith in the mathematical order of the universe was closely bound to the golden section and the Fibonacci series, which he described as \"rhythms apparent to the eye and clear in their relations with one another. And these rhythms are at the very root of human activities. They resound in Man by an organic inevitability, the same fine inevitability which causes the tracing out of the Golden Section by children, old men, savages, and the learned.\"\n\nThe Open Hand (La Main Ouverte) is a recurring motif in Le Corbusier's architecture, a sign for him of \"peace and reconciliation. It is open to give and open to receive.\" The largest of the many Open Hand sculptures that Le Corbusier created is a version in Chandigarh, India known as \"Open Hand Monument\".\n\nLe Corbusier was an eloquent critic of the finely crafted, hand-made furniture, made with rare and exotic woods, inlays and coverings, presented at the 1925 Exposition of Decorative Arts. Following his usual method, Le Corbusier first wrote a book with his theories of furniture, complete with memorable slogans. In his 1925 book \"L'Art Décoratif d'aujourd'hui\", he called for furniture that used inexpensive materials and could be mass-produced. Le Corbusier described three different furniture types: \"type-needs\", \"type-furniture\", and \"human-limb objects\". He defined human-limb objects as: \"Extensions of our limbs and adapted to human functions that are type-needs and type-functions, therefore type-objects and type-furniture. The human-limb object is a docile servant. A good servant is discreet and self-effacing in order to leave his master free. Certainly, works of art are tools, beautiful tools. And long live the good taste manifested by choice, subtlety, proportion, and harmony\". He further declared, \"Chairs are architecture, sofas are bourgeois\",\n\nLe Corbusier first relied on ready-made furniture from Thonet to furnish his projects, such as his pavilion at the 1925 Exposition. In 1928, following the publication of his theories, he began experimenting with furniture design. In 1928, he invited the architect Charlotte Perriand to join his studio as a furniture designer. His cousin, Pierre Jeanneret, also collaborated on many of the designs. For the manufacture of his furniture, he turned to the German firm Gebrüder Thonet, which had begun making chairs with tubular steel, a material originally used for bicycles, in the early 1920s. Le Corbusier admired the design of Marcel Breuer and the Bauhaus, who in 1925 had begun making sleek modern tubular club chairs. Mies van der Rohe had begun making his own version in a sculptural curved form with a cane seat in 1927.\n\nThe first results of the collaboration between Le Corbusier and Perriand were three types of chairs made with chrome-plated tubular steel frames: The LC4, Chaise Longue, (1927–28), with a covering of cowhide, which gave it a touch of exoticism; the \"Fauteuil Grand Confort\" (LC3) (1928–29), a club chair with a tubular frame which resembled the comfortable Art Deco club chairs that became popular in the 1920s; and the \"Fauteuil à dossier basculant\" (LC4) (1928–29), a low seat suspended in a tubular steel frame, also with a cowhide upholstery. These chairs were designed specifically for two of his projects, the \"Maison la Roche\" in Paris and a pavilion for Barbara and Henry Church. All three clearly showed the influence of Mies van der Rohe and Marcel Breuer. The line of furniture was expanded with additional designs for Le Corbusier's 1929 \"Salon d'Automne\" installation, 'Equipment for the Home'. Despite the intention of Le Corbusier that his furniture should be inexpensive and mass-produced, his pieces were originally costly to make and were not mass-produced until many years later, when he was famous. \n\nThe political views of Le Corbusier were rather vague and variable over time. In the 1920s, he co-founded and contributed articles about urbanism to the fascist journals \"Plans\", \"Prélude\" and \"L'Homme Réel\". He also allegedly penned pieces in favour of Nazi anti-semitism for those journals, as well as \"hateful editorials\". Between 1925 and 1928, Le Corbusier had connections to Le Faisceau, a short-lived French fascist party led by Georges Valois. Valois later became an anti-fascist. Le Corbusier knew another former member of Faisceau, Hubert Lagardelle, a former labor leader and syndicalist who had become disaffected with the political left. In 1934, after Lagardelle had obtained a position at the French embassy in Rome, he arranged for Le Corbusier to lecture on architecture in Italy. Lagardelle later served as minister of labor in the pro-Axis Vichy regime. While Le Corbusier sought commissions from the Vichy regime, particularly the redesign of Marseille after its Jewish population had been forcefully removed, he was unsuccessful, and the only appointment he received from it was membership of a committee studying urbanism. Alexis Carrel, a eugenicist surgeon, appointed Le Corbusier to the Department of Bio-Sociology of the \"Foundation for the Study of Human Problems\", an institute promoting eugenics policies under the Vichy regime.\n\nLe Corbusier has been accused of anti-semitism. He wrote to his mother in October 1940, prior to a referendum held by the Vichy government: \"The Jews are having a bad time. I occasionally feel sorry. But it appears their blind lust for money has rotted the country\". He was also accused of belittling the Muslim population of Algeria, then part of France. When Le Corbusier proposed a plan for the rebuilding of Algiers, he condemned the existing housing for European Algerians, complaining that it was inferior to that inhabited by indigenous Algerians: \"the civilized live like rats in holes\", while \"the barbarians live in solitude, in well-being.\" His plan for rebuilding Algiers was rejected, and thereafter Le Corbusier mostly avoided politics.\n\nFew other 20th-century architects were praised, or criticized, as much as Le Corbusier. In his eulogy to Le Corbusier at the memorial ceremony for the architect in the courtyard of the Louvre on 1 September 1965, French Culture Minister André Malraux declared, \"Le Corbusier had some great rivals, but none of them had the same significance in the revolution of architecture, because none bore insults so patiently and for so long.\"\n\nLater criticism of Le Corbusier was directed at his ideas of urban planning. In 1998 the architectural historian Witold Rybczynski wrote in \"Time\" magazine: \"He called it the Ville Radieuse, the Radiant City. Despite the poetic title, his urban vision was authoritarian, inflexible and simplistic. Wherever it was tried—in Chandigarh by Le Corbusier himself or in Brasilia by his followers—it failed. Standardization proved inhuman and disorienting. The open spaces were inhospitable; the bureaucratically imposed plan, socially destructive. In the US, the Radiant City took the form of vast urban-renewal schemes and regimented public housing projects that damaged the urban fabric beyond repair. Today, these megaprojects are being dismantled, as superblocks give way to rows of houses fronting streets and sidewalks. Downtowns have discovered that combining, not separating, different activities is the key to success. So is the presence of lively residential neighborhoods, old as well as new. Cities have learned that preserving history makes more sense than starting from zero. It has been an expensive lesson, and not one that Le Corbusier intended, but it too is part of his legacy.\"\n\nThe public housing projects influenced by his ideas have been criticized for isolating poor communities in monolithic high-rises and breaking the social ties integral to a community's development. One of his most influential detractors has been Jane Jacobs, who delivered a scathing critique of Le Corbusier's urban design theories in her seminal work \"The Death and Life of Great American Cities\".\n\nFor some critics, the urbanism of Le Corbusier's was the model for a fascist state. These critics cited Le Corbusier himself when he wrote that \"not all citizens could become leaders. The technocratic elite, the industrialists, financiers, engineers, and artists would be located in the city centre, while the workers would be removed to the fringes of the city\".\n\nLe Corbusier was concerned by problems he saw in industrial cities at the turn of the 20th century. He thought that industrial housing techniques led to crowding, dirtiness, and a lack of a moral landscape. He was a leader of the modernist movement to create better living conditions and a better society through housing. Ebenezer Howard's \"Garden Cities of Tomorrow\" heavily influenced Le Corbusier and his contemporaries.\n\nLe Corbusier revolutionized urban planning, and was a founding member of the Congrès International d'Architecture Moderne (CIAM). One of the first to realize how the automobile would change human society, Le Corbusier conceived the city of the future with large apartment buildings isolated in a park-like setting on pilotis. Le Corbusier's plans were adopted by builders of public housing in Europe and the United States. In Great Britain urban planners turned to Le Corbusier's \"Cities in the Sky\" as a cheaper method of building public housing from the late 1950s. Le Corbusier criticized any effort at ornamentation of the buildings. The large spartan structures in cities, but not part of it, have been criticized for being boring and unfriendly to pedestrians.\n\nSeveral of the many architects who worked for Le Corbusier in his studio became prominent, including painter-architect Nadir Afonso, who absorbed Le Corbusier's ideas into his own aesthetics theory. Lúcio Costa's city plan of Brasília and the industrial city of Zlín planned by František Lydie Gahura in the Czech Republic are based on his ideas. Le Corbusier's thinking had profound effects on city planning and architecture in the Soviet Union during the Constructivist era.\n\nLe Corbusier harmonized and lent credence to the idea of space as a set of destinations between which mankind moved continuously. He gave credibility to the automobile as transporter, and to freeways in urban spaces. His philosophies were useful to urban real estate developers in the American post-World War II period because they justified and lent intellectual support to the desire to raze traditional urban space for high density, high profit urban concentration. The freeways connected this new urbanism to low density, low cost, highly profitable suburban locales available to be developed for middle class single-family housing.\n\nMissing from this scheme of movement was connectivity between isolated urban villages created for lower-middle and working classes, and the destination points in Le Corbusier's plan: suburban and rural areas, and urban commercial centers. The freeways as designed traveled over, at, or beneath grade levels of the living spaces of the urban poor, for example the Cabrini–Green housing project in Chicago. Such projects with no freeway exit ramps, cut off by freeway rights-of-way, became isolated from jobs and services concentrated at Le Corbusier's nodal transportation end points. As jobs migrated to the suburbs, urban village dwellers found themselves without freeway access points in their communities or public mass transit that could economically reach suburban job centers. Late in the post-War period, suburban job centers found labor shortages to be such a critical problem that they sponsored urban-to-suburban shuttle bus services to fill vacant working class and lower-middle class jobs, which did not typically pay enough to afford car ownership.\n\nLe Corbusier influenced architects and urbanists worldwide. In the United States, Shadrach Woods; in Spain, Francisco Javier Sáenz de Oiza; in Brazil, Oscar Niemeyer; In Mexico, Mario Pani Darqui; in Chile, Roberto Matta; in Argentina, Antoni Bonet i Castellana (a Catalan exile), Juan Kurchan, Jorge Ferrari Hardoy, Amancio Williams, and Clorindo Testa in his first era; in Uruguay, the professors Justino Serralta and Carlos Gómez Gavazzo; in Colombia, Germán Samper Gnecco, Rogelio Salmona, and Dicken Castro; in Peru, Abel Hurtado and José Carlos Ortecho.\n\nLe Corbusier's design was cited as an inspiration for Kanye West's album \"My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy\".\n\nThe Fondation Le Corbusier is a private foundation and archive honoring the work of Le Corbusier. It operates Maison La Roche, a museum located in the 16th arrondissement at 8–10, square du Dr Blanche, Paris, France, which is open daily except Sunday.\n\nThe foundation was established in 1968. It now owns Maison La Roche and Maison Jeanneret (which form the foundation's headquarters), as well as the apartment occupied by Le Corbusier from 1933 to 1965 at rue Nungesser et Coli in Paris 16e, and the \"Small House\" he built for his parents in Corseaux on the shores of Lac Leman (1924).\n\nMaison La Roche and Maison Jeanneret (1923–24), also known as the La Roche-Jeanneret house, is a pair of semi-detached houses that was Le Corbusier's third commission in Paris. They are laid out at right angles to each other, with iron, concrete, and blank, white façades setting off a curved two-story gallery space. Maison La Roche is now a museum containing about 8,000 original drawings, studies and plans by Le Corbusier (in collaboration with Pierre Jeanneret from 1922 to 1940), as well as about 450 of his paintings, about 30 enamels, about 200 other works on paper, and a sizable collection of written and photographic archives. It describes itself as the world's largest collection of Le Corbusier drawings, studies, and plans.\n\nBULLET::::- In 1937, Le Corbusier was named Chevalier of the Légion d'honneur. In 1945, he was promoted to Officier of the Légion d'honneur. In 1952, he was promoted to Commandeur of the Légion d'honneur. Finally, on 2 July 1964, Le Corbusier was named Grand Officier of the Légion d'honneur.\nBULLET::::- He received the Frank P. Brown Medal and AIA Gold Medal in 1961.\nBULLET::::- The University of Cambridge awarded Le Corbusier an honorary degree in June 1959.\n\nIn 2016, seventeen of Le Corbusier's buildings spanning seven countries were identified as UNESCO World Heritage Sites, reflecting \"outstanding contribution to the Modern Movement\".\n\nLe Corbusier's portrait was featured on the 10 Swiss francs banknote, pictured with his distinctive eyeglasses.\n\nThe following place-names carry his name:\n\nBULLET::::- Place Le Corbusier, Paris, near the site of his \"atelier\" on the Rue de Sèvres\nBULLET::::- Le Corbusier Boulevard, Laval, Quebec, Canada\nBULLET::::- Place Le Corbusier in his hometown of La Chaux-de-Fonds, Switzerland\nBULLET::::- Le Corbusier Street in the \"partido\" of Malvinas Argentinas, Buenos Aires Province, Argentina\nBULLET::::- Le Corbusier Street in \"Le Village Parisien\" of Brossard, Quebec, Canada\nBULLET::::- Le Corbusier Promenade, a promenade along the water at Roquebrune-Cap-Martin\nBULLET::::- Le Corbusier Museum, Sector- 19 Chandigarh, India\nBULLET::::- Le Corbusier Museum in Stuttgart am Weissenhof\n\nBULLET::::- 1923: Villa La Roche, Paris, France\nBULLET::::- 1925: Villa Jeanneret, Paris, France\nBULLET::::- 1928: Villa Savoye, Poissy-sur-Seine, France\nBULLET::::- 1929: Cité du Refuge, Armée du Salut, Paris, France\nBULLET::::- 1931: Palace of the Soviets, Moscow, USSR (project)\nBULLET::::- 1931: Immeuble Clarté, Geneva, Switzerland\nBULLET::::- 1933: Tsentrosoyuz, Moscow, USSR\nBULLET::::- 1947–1952: Unité d'Habitation, Marseille, France\nBULLET::::- 1949–1952: United Nations headquarters, New York City, U.S. (Consultant)\nBULLET::::- 1949–1953: Curutchet House, La Plata, Argentina (project manager: Amancio Williams)\nBULLET::::- 1950–1954: Chapelle Notre Dame du Haut, Ronchamp, France\nBULLET::::- 1951: Maisons Jaoul, Neuilly-sur-Seine, France\nBULLET::::- 1951: Buildings in Ahmedabad, India\nBULLET::::- 1951: Sanskar Kendra Museum, Ahmedabad\nBULLET::::- 1951: ATMA House\nBULLET::::- 1951: Villa Sarabhai, Ahmedabad\nBULLET::::- 1951: Villa Shodhan, Ahmedabad\nBULLET::::- 1951: Villa of Chinubhai Chimanlal, Ahmedabad\nBULLET::::- 1952: Unité d'Habitation of Nantes-Rezé, Nantes, France\nBULLET::::- 1952–1959: Buildings in Chandigarh, India\nBULLET::::- 1952: Palace of Justice\nBULLET::::- 1952: Museum and Gallery of Art\nBULLET::::- 1953: Secretariat Building\nBULLET::::- 1953: Governor's Palace\nBULLET::::- 1955: Palace of Assembly\nBULLET::::- 1959: Government College of Art (GCA) and the Chandigarh College of Architecture (CCA)\nBULLET::::- 1957: Maison du Brésil, Cité Universitaire, Paris, France\nBULLET::::- 1957–1960: Sainte Marie de La Tourette, near Lyon, France (with Iannis Xenakis)\nBULLET::::- 1957: Unité d'Habitation of Berlin-Charlottenburg, Flatowallee 16, Berlin, Germany\nBULLET::::- 1962: Carpenter Center for the Visual Arts at Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, U.S.\nBULLET::::- 1964–1969: Firminy-Vert, France\nBULLET::::- 1964: Unité d'Habitation of Firminy\nBULLET::::- 1965: Maison de la culture de Firminy-Vert\nBULLET::::- 1967: Heidi Weber Museum (Centre Le Corbusier), Zürich, Switzerland\n\nBULLET::::- 1918: \"Après le cubisme\" (\"After Cubism\"), with Amédée Ozenfant\nBULLET::::- 1923: \"Vers une architecture\" (\"Towards an Architecture\") (frequently mistranslated as \"Towards a New Architecture\")\nBULLET::::- 1925: \"Urbanisme\" (\"Urbanism\")\nBULLET::::- 1925: \"La Peinture moderne\" (\"Modern Painting\"), with Amédée Ozenfant\nBULLET::::- 1925: \"L'Art décoratif d'aujourd'hui\" (\"The Decorative Arts of Today\")\nBULLET::::- 1930: \"Précisions sur un état présent de l'architecture et de l'urbanisme\" (\"Precisions on the present state of architecture and urbanism\")\nBULLET::::- 1931: \"Premier clavier de couleurs\" (\"First Color Keyboard\")\nBULLET::::- 1935: \"Aircraft\"\nBULLET::::- 1935: \"La Ville radieuse\" (\"The Radiant City\")\nBULLET::::- 1942: \"Charte d'Athènes\" (\"Athens Charter\")\nBULLET::::- 1943: \"Entretien avec les étudiants des écoles d'architecture\" (\"A Conversation with Architecture Students\")\nBULLET::::- 1945: \"Les Trois établissements Humains\" (\"The Three Human Establishments\")\nBULLET::::- 1948: \"Le Modulor\" (\"The Modulor\")\nBULLET::::- 1953: \"Le Poeme de l'Angle Droit\" (\"The Poem of the Right Angle\")\nBULLET::::- 1955: \"Le Modulor 2\" (\"The Modulor 2\")\nBULLET::::- 1959: \"Deuxième clavier de couleurs\" (\"Second Colour Keyboard\")\nBULLET::::- 1966: \"Le Voyage d'Orient\" (\"The Voyage to the East\")\n\nBULLET::::- Crystal Cubism\nBULLET::::- Butterfly roof\nBULLET::::- Mathematics and art\nBULLET::::- Raoul Albert La Roche (swiss donator and collector of art)\n\nBULLET::::- Sarbjit Bahga, Surinder Bahga (2014) \"Le Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret: The Indian Architecture\", CreateSpace, .\nBULLET::::- Behrens, Roy R. (2005). \"Cook Book: Gertrude Stein, William Cook and Le Corbusier\". Dysart, Iowa: Bobolink Books. .\nBULLET::::- Brooks, H. Allen (1999) \"Le Corbusier's Formative Years: Charles-Edouard Jeanneret at La Chaux-de-Fonds\", Paperback Edition, University of Chicago Press, .\nBULLET::::- Eliel, Carol S. (2002). \"L'Esprit Nouveau: Purism in Paris, 1918–1925\". New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc. .\nBULLET::::- Curtis, William J.R. (1994) \"Le Corbusier: Ideas and Forms\", Phaidon, .\nBULLET::::- Frampton, Kenneth. (2001). \"Le Corbusier\", London, Thames and Hudson.\nBULLET::::- Jencks, Charles (2000) \"Le Corbusier and the Continual Revolution in Architecture\", The Monacelli Press, .\nBULLET::::- Jornod, Naïma and Jornod, Jean-Pierre (2005) \"Le Corbusier (Charles Edouard Jeanneret), catalogue raisonné de l'oeuvre peint\", Skira, .\nBULLET::::- Korolija Fontana-Giusti, Gordana. (2015) 'Transgression and Ekphrasis in Le Corbusier's \"Journey to the East\"' in \"Transgression: Towards the Expanded Field in Architecture\", edited by Louis Rice and David Littlefield, London: Routledge, 57–75, .\nBULLET::::- Solitaire, Marc (2016) \"Au retour de La Chaux-de-Fonds: Le Corbusier & Froebel\", editions Wiking, .\nBULLET::::- Von Moos, Stanislaus (2009) \"Le Corbusier: Elements of A Synthesis\", Rotterdam, 010 Publishers.\nBULLET::::- Weber, Nicholas Fox (2008) \"Le Corbusier: A Life\", Alfred A. Knopf, .\n\nBULLET::::- Le Corbusier architectural drawings, 1935–1961. Held by the Department of Drawings & Archives, Avery Architectural & Fine Arts Library, Columbia University.\nBULLET::::- Fondation Le Corbusier – Official site\nBULLET::::- Projects by Le Corbusier - ArchDaily\nBULLET::::- Related news about Le Corbusier - ArchDaily\nBULLET::::- Spotlight - ArchDaily\nBULLET::::- Le Corbusier on Artsy.net\nBULLET::::- Le Corbusier's Working Lifestyle: 'Working with Le Corbusier'\nBULLET::::- Plummer, Henry. \"Cosmos of Light: The Sacred Architecture of Le Corbusier\". Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2013.\n"}
{"id": "17901", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17901", "title": "Ludovico Ariosto", "text": "Ludovico Ariosto\n\nLudovico Ariosto (, , ; 8 September 1474 – 6 July 1533) was an Italian poet. He is best known as the author of the romance epic \"Orlando Furioso\" (1516). The poem, a continuation of Matteo Maria Boiardo's \"Orlando Innamorato\", describes the adventures of Charlemagne, Orlando, and the Franks as they battle against the Saracens with diversions into many sideplots. Ariosto composed the poem in the ottava rima rhyme scheme and introduced narrative commentary throughout the work.\n\nAriosto also coined the term \"humanism\" (in Italian, umanesimo) for choosing to focus upon the strengths and potential of humanity, rather than only upon its role as subordinate to God. This led to Renaissance humanism.\n\nAriosto was born in Reggio nell’Emilia, where his father Niccolò Ariosto was commander of the citadel. He was the oldest of 10 children and was seen as the successor to the patriarchal position of his family. From his earliest years, Ludovico was very interested in poetry, but he was obliged by his father to study law.\n\nAfter five years of law, Ariosto was allowed to read classics under Gregorio da Spoleto. Ariosto's studies of Greek and Latin literature were cut short by Spoleto's move to France to tutor Francesco Sforza. Shortly after this, Ariosto's father died.\n\nAfter the death of his father, Ludovico Ariosto was compelled to forgo his literary occupations and take care of his family, whose affairs were in disarray. Despite his family obligations, Ariosto managed to write some comedies in prose as well as lyrical pieces. Some of these attracted the notice of Cardinal Ippolito d'Este, who took the young poet under his patronage and appointed him one of the gentlemen of his household. Este compensated Ariosto poorly for his efforts; the only reward he gave the poet for \"Orlando Furioso\", dedicated to him, was the question, \"Where did you find so many stories, Master Ludovico?\" Ariosto later said that the cardinal was ungrateful, that he deplored the time which he spent under his yoke, and that if he received some small pension, it was not to reward him for his poetry – which the prelate despised – but for acting as a messenger.\n\nLudovico Ariosto and Leonardo da Vinci shared a patron in Cardinal Ippolito d'Este's older sister the Marchioness Isabella d’Este, the \"First Lady of the Renaissance.\" Isabella d’Este appears in Ludovico's masterpiece, \"Orlando Furioso\". She also appears in Leonardo's, \"Sketch for a Portrait of Isabella d’Este,\" at the Louvre.\n\n\"\"A statue no less jocund, no less bright,/\nSucceeds, and on the writing is impressed;/\nLo! Hercules’ daughter, Isabella hight,/\nIn whom Ferrara deems city blest,/\nMuch more because she first shall see the light/\nWithin its circuit, than for all the rest/\nWhich kind and favouring Fortune in the flow/\nOf rolling years, shall on that town bestow.\"\"\nOrlando Furioso, Canto XLII.\n\nThe cardinal went to Hungary in 1518, and wished Ariosto to accompany him. The poet excused himself, pleading ill health, his love of study, and the need to care for his elderly mother. His excuses were not well-received, and he was denied even an interview. Ariosto and d'Este got into a heated argument, and Ariosto was promptly dismissed from service.\n\nThe cardinal's brother, Alfonso, duke of Ferrara, now took Ariosto under his patronage. By then, Ariosto had already distinguished himself as a diplomat, chiefly on the occasion of two visits to Rome as ambassador to Pope Julius II. The fatigue of one of these journeys brought on an illness from which he never recovered, and on his second mission he was nearly killed by order of the Pope, who happened at the time to be in conflict with Alfonso.\n\nOn account of the war, his salary of 84 crowns a year was suspended, and it was withdrawn altogether after the peace. Because of this, Ariosto asked the duke either to provide for him, or to allow him to seek employment elsewhere. He was appointed to the province of Garfagnana, then without a governor, situated on the Apennines, an appointment he held for three years. The province was distracted by factions and bandits, the governor had not the requisite means to enforce his authority and the duke did little to support his minister. Ariosto's government satisfied both the sovereign and the people given over to his care, however; indeed, there is a story about a time when he was walking alone and fell into the company of a group of bandits, the chief of which, on discovering that his captive was the author of \"Orlando Furioso\", apologized for not having immediately shown him the respect due his rank.\n\nIn 1508 Ariosto's play \"Cassaria\" appeared, and the next year \"\" was first acted in Ferrara and ten years later in the Vatican. A prose edition was published in Rome in 1524, and the first verse edition was published at Venice in 1551. The play was translated by George Gascoigne and acted at Gray's Inn in London in 1566 and published in 1573, which was later used by Shakespeare as a source for \"The Taming of the Shrew\".\n\nIn 1516, the first version of the \"Orlando Furioso\" in 40 cantos, was published at Ferrara.\n\nThe third and final version of the \"Orlando Furioso\", in 46 cantos, appeared on 8 September 1532.\n\nThroughout Ariosto's writing are narratorial comments dubbed by Dr. Daniel Javitch as \"Cantus Interruptus\". Javitch's term refers to Ariosto's narrative technique to break off one plot line in the middle of a canto, only to pick it up again in another, often much later, canto. Javitch argues that while many critics have assumed Ariosto does this so as to build narrative tension and keep the reader turning pages, the poet in reality defuses narrative tension because so much time separates the interruption and the resumption. By the time the reader gets to the continuation of the story, he or she has often forgotten or ceased to care about the plot and is usually wrapped up in another plot. Ariosto does this, Javitch argues, to undermine \"man's foolish but persistent desire for continuity and completion\". Ariosto uses it throughout his works.\n\nFor example, in Canto II, stanza 30, of \"Orlando Furioso\", the narrator says:\nSome have attributed this piece of metafiction as one component of the \"Sorriso ariostesco\" or Ariosto's smile, the wry sense of humor that Ariosto adds to the text.\n\nIn explaining this humor, Thomas Greene, in \"Descent from Heaven\", says:\nLodovico Ariosto is featured in the novelization of \"\" (the novel describes Ezio's journey to Masyaf, his marriage to Sofia Sartor, the birth of his children and his retirement in more detail) as an Assassin. When Ezio retires after the events of the game, in 1513, he gives his position of Mentor to Lodovico.\n\nBULLET::::- Greene, Thomas. \"The Descent from Heaven, a Study in Epic Continuity\". New Haven: Yale University Press, 1963.\nBULLET::::- Robert Durling, \"The figure of the poet in Renaissance epic\", Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1965.\nBULLET::::- Charles P. Brand, \"Ludovico Ariosto : a preface to the 'Orlando furioso\"', Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1974.\nBULLET::::- Daniel Javitch, \"Cantus interruptus in the 'Orlando Furioso\"', \"Modern language notes\", 95 (1980), 66–80.\nBULLET::::- Albert R. Ascoli, \"Ariosto's bitter harmony : crisis and evasion in the Italian renaissance\", Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1987.\nBULLET::::- Daniel Javitch, 'The Poetics of \"Variatio\" in \"Orlando Furioso\"', \"Modern Language Quarterly\", 2005, 66(1): 1–20.\nBULLET::::- Giuseppe Sangirardi, \"Ludovico Ariosto\", Firenze: Le Monnier, 2006.\nBULLET::::- Giulio Ferroni, \"Ludovico Ariosto\", Roma: Salerno Editrice, 2008.\nBULLET::::- , \"Ariosto\", Bologna: il Mulino, 2009.\n\nBULLET::::- Ludovico Ariosto's works, translations and chronology\nBULLET::::- Ludovico Ariosto's works: text, concordances and frequency lists\nBULLET::::- LitWeb: Ludovico Ariosto\nBULLET::::- Daniel Javitch, The Poetics of Variatio in Orlando Furioso.pdf\nBULLET::::- The Medieval & Classical Literature Library: Orlando Furioso: Canto 1 & Canto 2\n"}
{"id": "17902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17902", "title": "Leonhard Euler", "text": "Leonhard Euler\n\nLeonhard Euler ( ; ; 15 April 170718 September 1783) was a Swiss mathematician, physicist, astronomer, geographer, logician and engineer who made important and influential discoveries in many branches of mathematics, such as infinitesimal calculus and graph theory, while also making pioneering contributions to several branches such as topology and analytic number theory. He also introduced much of the modern mathematical terminology and notation, particularly for mathematical analysis, such as the notion of a mathematical function. He is also known for his work in mechanics, fluid dynamics, optics, astronomy and music theory.\n\nEuler was one of the most eminent mathematicians of the 18th century and is held to be one of the greatest in history. He is also widely considered to be the most prolific mathematician of all time. His collected works fill 92 volumes, more than anyone else in the field. He spent most of his adult life in Saint Petersburg, Russia, and in Berlin, then the capital of Prussia.\n\nA statement attributed to Pierre-Simon Laplace expresses Euler's influence on mathematics: \"Read Euler, read Euler, he is the master of us all.\"\n\nLeonhard Euler was born on 15 April 1707, in Basel, Switzerland, to Paul III Euler, a pastor of the Reformed Church, and Marguerite Brucker, a pastor's daughter. He had two younger sisters, Anna Maria and Maria Magdalena, and a younger brother, Johann Heinrich. Soon after the birth of Leonhard, the Eulers moved from Basel to the town of Riehen, where Leonhard spent most of his childhood. Paul was a friend of the Bernoulli family; Johann Bernoulli, then regarded as Europe's foremost mathematician, would eventually be the most important influence on young Leonhard.\n\nEuler's formal education started in Basel, where he was sent to live with his maternal grandmother. In 1720, at age thirteen, he enrolled at the University of Basel. In 1723, he received a Master of Philosophy with a dissertation that compared the philosophies of Descartes and Newton. During that time, he was receiving Saturday afternoon lessons from Johann Bernoulli, who quickly discovered his new pupil's incredible talent for mathematics. At that time Euler's main studies included theology, Greek and Hebrew at his father's urging in order to become a pastor, but Bernoulli convinced his father that Leonhard was destined to become a great mathematician.\n\nIn 1726, Euler completed a dissertation on the propagation of sound with the title \"De Sono\". At that time, he was unsuccessfully attempting to obtain a position at the University of Basel. In 1727, he first entered the \"Paris Academy Prize Problem\" competition; the problem that year was to find the best way to place the masts on a ship. Pierre Bouguer, who became known as \"the father of naval architecture\", won and Euler took second place. Euler later won this annual prize twelve times.\n\nAround this time Johann Bernoulli's two sons, Daniel and Nicolaus, were working at the Imperial Russian Academy of Sciences in Saint Petersburg. On 31 July 1726, Nicolaus died of appendicitis after spending less than a year in Russia. When Daniel assumed his brother's position in the mathematics/physics division, he recommended that the post in physiology that he had vacated be filled by his friend Euler. In November 1726 Euler eagerly accepted the offer, but delayed making the trip to Saint Petersburg while he unsuccessfully applied for a physics professorship at the University of Basel.\nEuler arrived in Saint Petersburg on 17 May 1727. He was promoted from his junior post in the medical department of the academy to a position in the mathematics department. He lodged with Daniel Bernoulli with whom he often worked in close collaboration. Euler mastered Russian and settled into life in Saint Petersburg. He also took on an additional job as a medic in the Russian Navy.\n\nThe Academy at Saint Petersburg, established by Peter the Great, was intended to improve education in Russia and to close the scientific gap with Western Europe. As a result, it was made especially attractive to foreign scholars like Euler. The academy possessed ample financial resources and a comprehensive library drawn from the private libraries of Peter himself and of the nobility. Very few students were enrolled in the academy in order to lessen the faculty's teaching burden. The academy emphasized research and offered to its faculty both the time and the freedom to pursue scientific questions.\n\nThe Academy's benefactress, Catherine I, who had continued the progressive policies of her late husband, died on the day of Euler's arrival. The Russian nobility then gained power upon the ascension of the twelve-year-old Peter II. The nobility, suspicious of the academy's foreign scientists, cut funding and caused other difficulties for Euler and his colleagues.\n\nConditions improved slightly after the death of Peter II, and Euler swiftly rose through the ranks in the academy and was made a professor of physics in 1731. Two years later, Daniel Bernoulli, who was fed up with the censorship and hostility he faced at Saint Petersburg, left for Basel. Euler succeeded him as the head of the mathematics department.\n\nOn 7 January 1734, he married Katharina Gsell (1707–1773), a daughter of Georg Gsell, a painter from the Academy Gymnasium. The young couple bought a house by the Neva River. Of their thirteen children, only five survived childhood.\n\nConcerned about the continuing turmoil in Russia, Euler left St. Petersburg on 19 June 1741 to take up a post at the \"Berlin Academy\", which he had been offered by Frederick the Great of Prussia. He lived for 25 years in Berlin, where he wrote over 380 articles. In Berlin, he published the two works for which he would become most renowned: the \"Introductio in analysin infinitorum\", a text on functions published in 1748, and the \"Institutiones calculi differentialis\", published in 1755 on differential calculus. In 1755, he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.\n\nIn addition, Euler was asked to tutor Friederike Charlotte of Brandenburg-Schwedt, the Princess of Anhalt-Dessau and Frederick's niece. Euler wrote over 200 letters to her in the early 1760s, which were later compiled into a best-selling volume entitled \"Letters of Euler on different Subjects in Natural Philosophy Addressed to a German Princess\". This work contained Euler's exposition on various subjects pertaining to physics and mathematics, as well as offering valuable insights into Euler's personality and religious beliefs. This book became more widely read than any of his mathematical works and was published across Europe and in the United States. The popularity of the \"Letters\" testifies to Euler's ability to communicate scientific matters effectively to a lay audience, a rare ability for a dedicated research scientist.\n\nDespite Euler's immense contribution to the Academy's prestige, he eventually incurred the ire of Frederick and ended up having to leave Berlin. The Prussian king had a large circle of intellectuals in his court, and he found the mathematician unsophisticated and ill-informed on matters beyond numbers and figures. Euler was a simple, devoutly religious man who never questioned the existing social order or conventional beliefs, in many ways the polar opposite of Voltaire, who enjoyed a high place of prestige at Frederick's court. Euler was not a skilled debater and often made it a point to argue subjects that he knew little about, making him the frequent target of Voltaire's wit. Frederick also expressed disappointment with Euler's practical engineering abilities:\n\nEuler's eyesight worsened throughout his mathematical career. In 1738, three years after nearly expiring from fever, he became almost blind in his right eye, but Euler rather blamed the painstaking work on cartography he performed for the St. Petersburg Academy for his condition. Euler's vision in that eye worsened throughout his stay in Germany, to the extent that Frederick referred to him as \"Cyclops\". Euler remarked on his loss of vision, \"Now I will have fewer distractions.\" He later developed a cataract in his left eye, which was discovered in 1766. Just a few weeks after its discovery, a failed surgical restoration rendered him almost totally blind. He was 59 years old then. However, his condition appeared to have little effect on his productivity, as he compensated for it with his mental calculation skills and exceptional memory. For example, Euler could repeat the \"Aeneid\" of Virgil from beginning to end without hesitation, and for every page in the edition he could indicate which line was the first and which the last. With the aid of his scribes, Euler's productivity on many areas of study actually increased. He produced, on average, one mathematical paper every week in the year 1775. The Eulers bore a double name, Euler-Schölpi, the latter of which derives from \"schelb\" and \"schief\", signifying squint-eyed, cross-eyed, or crooked. This suggests that the Eulers may have had a susceptibility to eye problems.\n\nIn 1760, with the Seven Years' War raging, Euler's farm in Charlottenburg was ransacked by advancing Russian troops. Upon learning of this event, General Ivan Petrovich Saltykov paid compensation for the damage caused to Euler's estate, with Empress Elizabeth of Russia later adding a further payment of 4000 roubles—an exorbitant amount at the time. The political situation in Russia stabilized after Catherine the Great's accession to the throne, so in 1766 Euler accepted an invitation to return to the St. Petersburg Academy. His conditions were quite exorbitant—a 3000 ruble annual salary, a pension for his wife, and the promise of high-ranking appointments for his sons. All of these requests were granted. He spent the rest of his life in Russia. However, his second stay in the country was marred by tragedy. A fire in St. Petersburg in 1771 cost him his home, and almost his life. In 1773, he lost his wife Katharina after 40 years of marriage.\n\nThree years after his wife's death, Euler married her half-sister, Salome Abigail Gsell (1723–1794). This marriage lasted until his death. In 1782 he was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. \n\nIn St. Petersburg on 18 September 1783, after a lunch with his family, Euler was discussing the newly discovered planet Uranus and its orbit with a fellow academician Anders Johan Lexell, when he collapsed from a brain hemorrhage. He died a few hours later. wrote a short obituary for the Russian Academy of Sciences and Russian mathematician Nicolas Fuss, one of Euler's disciples, wrote a more detailed eulogy, which he delivered at a memorial meeting. In his eulogy for the French Academy, French mathematician and philosopher Marquis de Condorcet, wrote:\n\nEuler was buried next to Katharina at the Smolensk Lutheran Cemetery on Goloday Island. In 1785, the Russian Academy of Sciences put a marble bust of Leonhard Euler on a pedestal next to the Director's seat and, in 1837, placed a headstone on Euler's grave. To commemorate the 250th anniversary of Euler's birth, the headstone was moved in 1956, together with his remains, to the 18th-century necropolis at the Alexander Nevsky Monastery.\n\nEuler worked in almost all areas of mathematics, such as geometry, infinitesimal calculus, trigonometry, algebra, and number theory, as well as continuum physics, lunar theory and other areas of physics. He is a seminal figure in the history of mathematics; if printed, his works, many of which are of fundamental interest, would occupy between 60 and 80 quarto volumes. Euler's name is associated with a large number of topics.\n\nEuler is the only mathematician to have \"two\" numbers named after him: the important Euler's number in calculus, \"e\", approximately equal to 2.71828, and the Euler–Mascheroni constant γ (gamma) sometimes referred to as just \"Euler's constant\", approximately equal to 0.57721. It is not known whether γ is rational or irrational.\nEuler introduced and popularized several notational conventions through his numerous and widely circulated textbooks. Most notably, he introduced the concept of a function and was the first to write \"f\"(\"x\") to denote the function \"f\" applied to the argument \"x\". He also introduced the modern notation for the trigonometric functions, the letter for the base of the natural logarithm (now also known as Euler's number), the Greek letter Σ for summations and the letter to denote the imaginary unit. The use of the Greek letter \"π\" to denote the ratio of a circle's circumference to its diameter was also popularized by Euler, although it originated with Welsh mathematician William Jones.\n\nThe development of infinitesimal calculus was at the forefront of 18th-century mathematical research, and the Bernoullis—family friends of Euler—were responsible for much of the early progress in the field. Thanks to their influence, studying calculus became the major focus of Euler's work. While some of Euler's proofs are not acceptable by modern standards of mathematical rigour (in particular his reliance on the principle of the generality of algebra), his ideas led to many great advances.\nEuler is well known in analysis for his frequent use and development of power series, the expression of functions as sums of infinitely many terms, such as\n\nNotably, Euler directly proved the power series expansions for and the inverse tangent function. (Indirect proof via the inverse power series technique was given by Newton and Leibniz between 1670 and 1680.) His daring use of power series enabled him to solve the famous Basel problem in 1735 (he provided a more elaborate argument in 1741):\n\nEuler introduced the use of the exponential function and logarithms in analytic proofs. He discovered ways to express various logarithmic functions using power series, and he successfully defined logarithms for negative and complex numbers, thus greatly expanding the scope of mathematical applications of logarithms. He also defined the exponential function for complex numbers, and discovered its relation to the trigonometric functions. For any real number (taken to be radians), Euler's formula states that the complex exponential function satisfies\n\nA special case of the above formula is known as Euler's identity,\ncalled \"the most remarkable formula in mathematics\" by Richard P. Feynman, for its single uses of the notions of addition, multiplication, exponentiation, and equality, and the single uses of the important constants 0, 1, , and . In 1988, readers of the \"Mathematical Intelligencer\" voted it \"the Most Beautiful Mathematical Formula Ever\". In total, Euler was responsible for three of the top five formulae in that poll.\n\nDe Moivre's formula is a direct consequence of Euler's formula.\n\nIn addition, Euler elaborated the theory of higher transcendental functions by introducing the gamma function and introduced a new method for solving quartic equations. He also found a way to calculate integrals with complex limits, foreshadowing the development of modern complex analysis. He also invented the calculus of variations including its best-known result, the Euler–Lagrange equation.\n\nEuler also pioneered the use of analytic methods to solve number theory problems. In doing so, he united two disparate branches of mathematics and introduced a new field of study, analytic number theory. In breaking ground for this new field, Euler created the theory of hypergeometric series, q-series, hyperbolic trigonometric functions and the analytic theory of continued fractions. For example, he proved the infinitude of primes using the divergence of the harmonic series, and he used analytic methods to gain some understanding of the way prime numbers are distributed. Euler's work in this area led to the development of the prime number theorem.\n\nEuler's interest in number theory can be traced to the influence of Christian Goldbach, his friend in the St. Petersburg Academy. A lot of Euler's early work on number theory was based on the works of Pierre de Fermat. Euler developed some of Fermat's ideas and disproved some of his conjectures.\n\nEuler linked the nature of prime distribution with ideas in analysis. He proved that the sum of the reciprocals of the primes diverges. In doing so, he discovered the connection between the Riemann zeta function and the prime numbers; this is known as the Euler product formula for the Riemann zeta function.\n\nEuler proved Newton's identities, Fermat's little theorem, Fermat's theorem on sums of two squares, and he made distinct contributions to Lagrange's four-square theorem. He also invented the totient function φ(\"n\"), the number of positive integers less than or equal to the integer \"n\" that are coprime to \"n\". Using properties of this function, he generalized Fermat's little theorem to what is now known as Euler's theorem. He contributed significantly to the theory of perfect numbers, which had fascinated mathematicians since Euclid. He proved that the relationship shown between even perfect numbers and Mersenne primes earlier proved by Euclid was one-to-one, a result otherwise known as the Euclid–Euler theorem. Euler also conjectured the law of quadratic reciprocity. The concept is regarded as a fundamental theorem of number theory, and his ideas paved the way for the work of Carl Friedrich Gauss.\nBy 1772 Euler had proved that 2 − 1 = 2,147,483,647 is a Mersenne prime. It may have remained the largest known prime until 1867.\n\nIn 1735, Euler presented a solution to the problem known as the Seven Bridges of Königsberg. The city of Königsberg, Prussia was set on the Pregel River, and included two large islands that were connected to each other and the mainland by seven bridges. The problem is to decide whether it is possible to follow a path that crosses each bridge exactly once and returns to the starting point. It is not possible: there is no Eulerian circuit. This solution is considered to be the first theorem of graph theory, specifically of planar graph theory.\n\nEuler also discovered the formula formula_5 relating the number of vertices, edges and faces of a convex polyhedron, and hence of a planar graph. The constant in this formula is now known as the Euler characteristic for the graph (or other mathematical object), and is related to the genus of the object. The study and generalization of this formula, specifically by Cauchy and L'Huilier, is at the origin of topology.\n\nSome of Euler's greatest successes were in solving real-world problems analytically, and in describing numerous applications of the Bernoulli numbers, Fourier series, Euler numbers, the constants and , continued fractions and integrals. He integrated Leibniz's differential calculus with Newton's Method of Fluxions, and developed tools that made it easier to apply calculus to physical problems. He made great strides in improving the numerical approximation of integrals, inventing what are now known as the Euler approximations. The most notable of these approximations are Euler's method and the Euler–Maclaurin formula. He also facilitated the use of differential equations, in particular introducing the Euler–Mascheroni constant:\n\nOne of Euler's more unusual interests was the application of mathematical ideas in music. In 1739 he wrote the \"Tentamen novae theoriae musicae,\" hoping to eventually incorporate musical theory as part of mathematics. This part of his work, however, did not receive wide attention and was once described as too mathematical for musicians and too musical for mathematicians.\n\nIn 1911, almost 130 years after Euler's death, Alfred J. Lotka used Euler's work to derive the Euler–Lotka equation for calculating rates of population growth for age-structured populations, a fundamental method that is commonly used in population biology and ecology. \n\nEuler helped develop the Euler–Bernoulli beam equation, which became a cornerstone of engineering. Aside from successfully applying his analytic tools to problems in classical mechanics, Euler also applied these techniques to celestial problems. His work in astronomy was recognized by a number of Paris Academy Prizes over the course of his career. His accomplishments include determining with great accuracy the orbits of comets and other celestial bodies, understanding the nature of comets, and calculating the parallax of the Sun. His calculations also contributed to the development of accurate longitude tables.\n\nIn addition, Euler made important contributions in optics. He disagreed with Newton's corpuscular theory of light in the \"Opticks\", which was then the prevailing theory. His 1740s papers on optics helped ensure that the wave theory of light proposed by Christiaan Huygens would become the dominant mode of thought, at least until the development of the quantum theory of light.\n\nIn 1757 he published an important set of equations for inviscid flow, that are now known as the Euler equations. In differential form, the equations are:\n\nwhere\nBULLET::::- \"ρ\" is the fluid mass density,\nBULLET::::- u is the fluid velocity vector, with components \"u\", \"v\", and \"w\",\nBULLET::::- \"E\" = \"ρ e\" + ½ \"ρ\" (\"u\" + \"v\" + \"w\") is the total energy per unit volume, with \"e\" being the internal energy per unit mass for the fluid,\nBULLET::::- \"p\" is the pressure,\nBULLET::::- \"⊗\" denotes the tensor product, and\nBULLET::::- 0 being the zero vector.\n\nEuler is also well known in structural engineering for his formula giving the critical buckling load of an ideal strut, which depends only on its length and flexural stiffness:\n\nwhere\nBULLET::::- \"F\" = maximum or critical force (vertical load on column),\nBULLET::::- \"E\" = modulus of elasticity,\nBULLET::::- \"I\" = area moment of inertia,\nBULLET::::- \"L\" = unsupported length of column,\nBULLET::::- \"K\" = column effective length factor, whose value depends on the conditions of end support of the column, as follows.\nBULLET::::- \"K L\" is the effective length of the column.\n\nEuler is also credited with using closed curves to illustrate syllogistic reasoning (1768). These diagrams have become known as Euler diagrams.\nAn Euler diagram is a diagrammatic means of representing sets and their relationships. Euler diagrams consist of simple closed curves (usually circles) in the plane that depict sets. Each Euler curve divides the plane into two regions or \"zones\": the interior, which symbolically represents the elements of the set, and the exterior, which represents all elements that are not members of the set. The sizes or shapes of the curves are not important; the significance of the diagram is in how they overlap. The spatial relationships between the regions bounded by each curve (overlap, containment or neither) corresponds to set-theoretic relationships (intersection, subset and disjointness). Curves whose interior zones do not intersect represent disjoint sets. Two curves whose interior zones intersect represent sets that have common elements; the zone inside both curves represents the set of elements common to both sets (the intersection of the sets). A curve that is contained completely within the interior zone of another represents a subset of it. Euler diagrams (and their generalization in Venn diagrams) were incorporated as part of instruction in set theory as part of the new math movement in the 1960s. Since then, they have also been adopted by other curriculum fields such as reading.\n\nEven when dealing with music, Euler's approach is mainly mathematical. His writings on music are not particularly numerous (a few hundred pages, in his total production of about thirty thousand pages), but they reflect an early preoccupation and one that did not leave him throughout his life.\n\nA first point of Euler's musical theory is the definition of \"genres\", i.e. of possible divisions of the octave using the prime numbers 3 and 5. Euler describes 18 such genres, with the general definition 2A, where A is the \"exponent\" of the genre (i.e. the sum of the exponents of 3 and 5) and 2 (where \"m is an indefinite number, small or large, so long as the sounds are perceptible\"), expresses that the relation holds independently of the number of octaves concerned. The first genre, with A = 1, is the octave itself (or its duplicates); the second genre, 2.3, is the octave divided by the fifth (fifth + fourth, C–G–C); the third genre is 2.5, major third + minor sixth (C–E–C); the fourth is 2.3, two fourths and a tone (C–F–B–C); the fifth is 2.3.5 (C–E–G–B–C); etc. Genres 12 (2.3.5), 13 (2.3.5) and 14 (2.3.5) are corrected versions of the diatonic, chromatic and enharmonic, respectively, of the Ancients. Genre 18 (2.3.5) is the \"diatonico-chromatic\", \"used generally in all compositions\", and which turns out to be identical with the system described by Johann Mattheson. Euler later envisaged the possibility of describing genres including the prime number 7.\n\nEuler devised a specific graph, the \"Speculum musicum\", to illustrate the diatonico-chromatic genre, and discussed paths in this graph for specific intervals, recalling his interest in the Seven Bridges of Königsberg (see above). The device drew renewed interest as the Tonnetz in neo-Riemannian theory (see also Lattice (music)).\n\nEuler further used the principle of the \"exponent\" to propose a derivation of the \"gradus suavitatis\" (degree of suavity, of agreeableness) of intervals and chords from their prime factors – one must keep in mind that he considered just intonation, i.e. 1 and the prime numbers 3 and 5 only. Formulas have been proposed extending this system to any number of prime numbers, e.g. in the form\n\nwhere \"p\" are prime numbers and \"k\" their exponents.\n\nEuler and his friend Daniel Bernoulli were opponents of Leibniz's monadism and the philosophy of Christian Wolff. Euler insisted that knowledge is founded in part on the basis of precise quantitative laws, something that monadism and Wolffian science were unable to provide. Euler's religious leanings might also have had a bearing on his dislike of the doctrine; he went so far as to label Wolff's ideas as \"heathen and atheistic\".\n\nMuch of what is known of Euler's religious beliefs can be deduced from his \"Letters to a German Princess\" and an earlier work, \"Rettung der Göttlichen Offenbahrung Gegen die Einwürfe der Freygeister\" (\"Defense of the Divine Revelation against the Objections of the Freethinkers\"). These works show that Euler was a devout Christian who believed the Bible to be inspired; the \"Rettung\" was primarily an argument for the divine inspiration of scripture.\n\nThere is a famous legend inspired by Euler's arguments with secular philosophers over religion, which is set during Euler's second stint at the St. Petersburg Academy. The French philosopher Denis Diderot was visiting Russia on Catherine the Great's invitation. However, the Empress was alarmed that the philosopher's arguments for atheism were influencing members of her court, and so Euler was asked to confront the Frenchman. Diderot was informed that a learned mathematician had produced a proof of the existence of God: he agreed to view the proof as it was presented in court. Euler appeared, advanced toward Diderot, and in a tone of perfect conviction announced this non-sequitur: \"Sir, =\"x\", hence God exists—reply!\"\nDiderot, to whom (says the story) all mathematics was gibberish, stood dumbstruck as peals of laughter erupted from the court. Embarrassed, he asked to leave Russia, a request that was graciously granted by the Empress. However amusing the anecdote may be, it is apocryphal, given that Diderot himself did research in mathematics.\nThe legend was apparently first told by\nDieudonné Thiébault with significant embellishment by Augustus De Morgan.\n\nEuler was featured on the sixth series of the Swiss 10-franc banknote and on numerous Swiss, German, and Russian postage stamps. The asteroid 2002 Euler was named in his honor. He is also commemorated by the Lutheran Church on their Calendar of Saints on 24 May—he was a devout Christian (and believer in biblical inerrancy) who wrote apologetics and argued forcefully against the prominent atheists of his time.\n\nEuler has an extensive bibliography. His best-known books include:\n\nBULLET::::- \"Mechanica\" (1736).\nBULLET::::- \"Methodus inveniendi lineas curvas maximi minimive proprietate gaudentes, sive solutio problematis isoperimetrici latissimo sensu accepti\" (1744). The Latin title translates as \"a method for finding curved lines enjoying properties of maximum or minimum, or solution of isoperimetric problems in the broadest accepted sense\".\nBULLET::::- \"Introductio in analysin infinitorum\" (1748). English translation \"Introduction to Analysis of the Infinite\" by John Blanton (Book I, , Springer-Verlag 1988; Book II, , Springer-Verlag 1989).\nBULLET::::- Two influential textbooks on calculus: \"Institutiones calculi differentialis\" (1755) and \"Institutionum calculi integralis\" (1768–1770).\nBULLET::::- (A translation of Euler's \"Vollständige Anleitung zur Algebra\", 1765. This elementary algebra text starts with a discussion of the nature of numbers and gives a comprehensive introduction to algebra, including formulae for solutions of polynomial equations.)\nBULLET::::- \"Letters to a German Princess\" (1768–1772).\n\nThe first collection of Euler's work was made by Paul Heinrich von Fuss in 1862. A definitive collection of Euler's works, entitled \"Opera Omnia\", has been published since 1911 by the Euler Commission of the Swiss Academy of Sciences. A complete chronological list of Euler's works is available at \"The Eneström Index\". \n\nBULLET::::- Euler's number, , the base of the natural logarithm, also known as \"Napier's constant\"\nBULLET::::- Martin Knutzen\nBULLET::::- List of things named after Leonhard Euler\nBULLET::::- The Story of Maths#\"The Frontiers of Space\"\n\nBULLET::::- \"Lexikon der Naturwissenschaftler\", (2000), Heidelberg: Spektrum Akademischer Verlag.\nBULLET::::- In\nBULLET::::- Hascher, Xavier and Papadopoulos, Athanase (editors). 2015. \"Leonhard Euler : Mathématicien, physicien et théoricien de la musique\", Paris, CNRS Editions, 2015, 516 p. ()\nBULLET::::- Heimpell, Hermann, Theodor Heuss, Benno Reifenberg (editors). 1956. \"Die großen Deutschen\", volume 2, Berlin: Ullstein Verlag.\nBULLET::::- In\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- LeonhardEuler.com\nBULLET::::- How Euler did it contains columns explaining how Euler solved various problems\nBULLET::::- Euler Archive\nBULLET::::- Leonhard Euler – Œuvres complètes Gallica-Math\nBULLET::::- Euler Committee of the Swiss Academy of Sciences\nBULLET::::- References for Leonhard Euler\nBULLET::::- Euler Tercentenary 2007\nBULLET::::- The Euler Society\nBULLET::::- Euler Family Tree\nBULLET::::- Euler's Correspondence with Frederick the Great, King of Prussia\nBULLET::::- Euler Quartic Conjecture\nBULLET::::- Portrait of Leonhard Euler from the Lick Observatory Records Digital Archive, UC Santa Cruz Library's Digital Collections\nBULLET::::- Euler's (1769–1771) \"Dioptricae, 3 vols.\" – digital facsimile from the Linda Hall Library\n"}
{"id": "17904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17904", "title": "Linear model", "text": "Linear model\n\nIn statistics, the term linear model is used in different ways according to the context. The most common occurrence is in connection with regression models and the term is often taken as synonymous with linear regression model. However, the term is also used in time series analysis with a different meaning. In each case, the designation \"linear\" is used to identify a subclass of models for which substantial reduction in the complexity of the related statistical theory is possible.\n\nFor the regression case, the statistical model is as follows. Given a (random) sample formula_1 the relation between the observations \"Y\" and the independent variables \"X\" is formulated as\n\nwhere formula_3 may be nonlinear functions. In the above, the quantities \"ε\" are random variables representing errors in the relationship. The \"linear\" part of the designation relates to the appearance of the regression coefficients, \"β\" in a linear way in the above relationship. Alternatively, one may say that the predicted values corresponding to the above model, namely\nare linear functions of the \"β\".\n\nGiven that estimation is undertaken on the basis of a least squares analysis, estimates of the unknown parameters \"β\" are determined by minimising a sum of squares function\nFrom this, it can readily be seen that the \"linear\" aspect of the model means the following:\n\nAn example of a linear time series model is an autoregressive moving average model. Here the model for values {\"X\"} in a time series can be written in the form\n\nwhere again the quantities \"ε\" are random variables representing innovations which are new random effects that appear at a certain time but also affect values of \"X\" at later times. In this instance the use of the term \"linear model\" refers to the structure of the above relationship in representing \"X\" as a linear function of past values of the same time series and of current and past values of the innovations. This particular aspect of the structure means that it is relatively simple to derive relations for the mean and covariance properties of the time series. Note that here the \"linear\" part of the term \"linear model\" is not referring to the coefficients \"φ\" and \"θ\", as it would be in the case of a regression model, which looks structurally similar.\n\nThere are some other instances where \"nonlinear model\" is used to contrast with a linearly structured model, although the term \"linear model\" is not usually applied. One example of this is nonlinear dimensionality reduction.\n\nBULLET::::- General linear model\nBULLET::::- Generalized linear model\nBULLET::::- Linear predictor function\nBULLET::::- Linear system\nBULLET::::- Statistical model\n"}
{"id": "17905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17905", "title": "Likelihood principle", "text": "Likelihood principle\n\nIn statistics, the likelihood principle is the proposition that, given a statistical model, all the evidence in a sample relevant to model parameters is contained in the likelihood function.\n\nA likelihood function arises from a probability density function considered as a function of its distributional parameterization argument. For example, consider a model which gives the probability density function \"ƒ\"(\"x\"  \"θ\") of observable random variable \"X\" as a function of a parameter \"θ\". Then for a specific value \"x\" of \"X\", the function formula_1(\"θ\"  \"x\") = \"ƒ\"(\"x\"  \"θ\") is a likelihood function of \"θ\": it gives a measure of how \"likely\" any particular value of \"θ\" is, if we know that \"X\" has the value \"x\". The density function may be a density with respect to counting measure, i.e. a probability mass function.\n\nTwo likelihood functions are \"equivalent\" if one is a scalar multiple of the other. The likelihood principle is this: all information from the data that is relevant to inferences about the value of the model parameters is in the equivalence class to which the likelihood function belongs. The strong likelihood principle applies this same criterion to cases such as sequential experiments where the sample of data that is available results from applying a stopping rule to the observations earlier in the experiment.\n\nSuppose\n\nBULLET::::- \"X\" is the number of successes in twelve independent Bernoulli trials with probability \"θ\" of success on each trial, and\nBULLET::::- \"Y\" is the number of independent Bernoulli trials needed to get three successes, again with probability \"θ\" (= 1/2 for a coin-toss) of success on each trial.\n\nThen the observation that \"X\" = 3 induces the likelihood function\n\nwhile the observation that \"Y\" = 12 induces the likelihood function\n\nThe likelihood principle says that, as the data are the same in both cases, the inferences drawn about the value of θ should also be the same. In addition, all the inferential content in the data about the value of θ is contained in the two likelihoods, and is the same if they are proportional to one another. This is the case in the above example, reflecting the fact that the difference between observing \"X\" = 3 and observing \"Y\" = 12 lies not in the actual data, but merely in the design of the experiment. Specifically, in one case, one has decided in advance to try twelve times; in the other, to keep trying until three successes are observed. The inference about θ should be the same, and this is reflected in the fact that the two likelihoods are proportional to each other.\n\nThis is not always the case, however. The use of frequentist methods involving p-values leads to different inferences for the two cases above, showing that the outcome of frequentist methods depends on the experimental procedure, and thus violates the likelihood principle.\n\nA related concept is the law of likelihood, the notion that the extent to which the evidence supports one parameter value or hypothesis against another is equal to the ratio of their likelihoods, their likelihood ratio. That is,\nis the degree to which the observation x supports parameter value or hypothesis \"a\" against \"b\". If this ratio is 1, the evidence is indifferent; if greater than 1, the evidence supports the value \"a\" against \"b\"; or if less, then vice versa.\n\nIn Bayesian statistics, this ratio is known as the Bayes factor, and Bayes' rule can be seen as the application of the law of likelihood to inference.\n\nIn frequentist inference, the likelihood ratio is used in the likelihood-ratio test, but other non-likelihood tests are used as well. The Neyman–Pearson lemma states the likelihood-ratio test is the most powerful test for comparing two simple hypotheses at a given significance level, which gives a frequentist justification for the law of likelihood.\n\nCombining the likelihood principle with the law of likelihood yields the consequence that the parameter value which maximizes the likelihood function is the value which is most strongly supported by the evidence. This is the basis for the widely used method of maximum likelihood.\n\nThe likelihood principle was first identified by that name in print in 1962\n(Barnard et al., Birnbaum, and Savage et al.),\nbut arguments for the same principle, unnamed, and the use of the principle in applications goes back to the works of R.A. Fisher in the 1920s. \nThe law of likelihood was identified by that name by I. Hacking (1965).\nMore recently the likelihood principle as a general principle of inference has been championed by A. W. F. Edwards. The likelihood principle has been applied to the philosophy of science by R. Royall.\n\nBirnbaum proved that the likelihood principle follows from two more primitive and seemingly reasonable principles, the \"conditionality principle\" and the \"sufficiency principle\". The conditionality principle says that if an experiment is chosen by a random process independent of the states of nature formula_5, then only the experiment actually performed is relevant to inferences about formula_5. The sufficiency principle says that if formula_7 is a sufficient statistic for formula_5, and if in two experiments with data formula_9 and formula_10 we have formula_11, then the evidence about formula_5 given by the two experiments is the same.\n\nSome widely used methods of conventional statistics, for example many significance tests, are not consistent with the likelihood principle.\n\nLet us briefly consider some of the arguments for and against the likelihood principle.\n\nBirnbaum's proof of the likelihood principle has been disputed by philosophers of science, including Deborah Mayo and statisticians including Michael Evans. On the other hand, a new proof of the likelihood principle has been provided by Greg Gandenberger.\n\nUnrealized events play a role in some common statistical methods. For example, the result of a significance test depends on the \"p\"-value, the probability of a result as extreme or more extreme than the observation, and that probability may depend on the design of the experiment. To the extent that the likelihood principle is accepted, such methods are therefore denied.\n\nSome classical significance tests are not based on the likelihood. A commonly cited example is the optional stopping problem. Suppose I tell you that I tossed a coin 12 times and in the process observed 3 heads. You might make some inference about the probability of heads and whether the coin was fair. Suppose now I tell that I tossed the coin \"until\" I observed 3 heads, and I tossed it 12 times. Will you now make some different inference?\n\nThe likelihood function is the same in both cases: it is proportional to\n\nAccording to the likelihood principle, the inference should be the same in either case.\n\nSuppose a number of scientists are assessing the probability of a certain outcome (which we shall call 'success') in experimental trials. Conventional wisdom suggests that if there is no bias towards success or failure then the success probability would be one half. Adam, a scientist, conducted 12 trials and obtains 3 successes and 9 failures. Then he left the lab.\n\nBill, a colleague in the same lab, continued Adam's work and published Adam's results, along with a significance test. He tested the null hypothesis that \"p\", the success probability, is equal to a half, versus \"p\" < 0.5. The probability of the observed result that out of 12 trials 3 or something fewer (i.e. more extreme) were successes, if \"H\" is true, is\n\nwhich is 299/4096 = 7.3%. Thus the null hypothesis is not rejected at the 5% significance level.\n\nCharlotte, another scientist, reads Bill's paper and writes a letter, saying that it is possible that Adam kept trying until he obtained 3 successes, in which case the probability of needing to conduct 12 or more experiments is given by\n\nwhich is 134/4096 = 3.27%. Now the result \"is\" statistically significant at the 5% level. Note that there is no contradiction among these two results; both computations are correct.\n\nTo these scientists, whether a result is significant or not depends on the design of the experiment, not on the likelihood (in the sense of the likelihood function) of the parameter value being 1/2.\n\nResults of this kind are considered by some as arguments against the likelihood principle. For others it exemplifies the value of the likelihood principle and is an argument against significance tests.\n\nSimilar themes appear when comparing Fisher's exact test with Pearson's chi-squared test.\n\nAn argument in favor of the likelihood principle is given by Edwards in his book \"Likelihood\". He cites the following story from J.W. Pratt, slightly condensed here. Note that the likelihood function depends only on what actually happened, and not on what \"could\" have happened.\n\nThis story can be translated to Adam's stopping rule above, as follows. Adam stopped immediately after 3 successes, because his boss Bill had instructed him to do so. After the publication of the statistical analysis by Bill, Adam realizes that he has missed a second instruction from Bill to conduct 12 trials instead, and that Bill's paper is based on this second instruction. Adam is very glad that he got his 3 successes after exactly 12 trials, and explains to his friend Charlotte that by coincidence he executed the second instruction. Later, he is astonished to hear about Charlotte's letter explaining that \"now\" the result is significant.\n\nBULLET::::- Conditionality principle\nBULLET::::- Likelihoodist statistics\n\nBULLET::::- \"(With discussion.)\"\n\nBULLET::::- Anthony W.F. Edwards. \"Likelihood\".\nBULLET::::- Jeff Miller. Earliest Known Uses of Some of the Words of Mathematics (L)\nBULLET::::- John Aldrich. Likelihood and Probability in R. A. Fisher’s Statistical Methods for Research Workers\n"}
{"id": "17909", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17909", "title": "Led Zeppelin", "text": "Led Zeppelin\n\nLed Zeppelin were an English rock band formed in London in 1968. The group consisted of vocalist Robert Plant, guitarist Jimmy Page, bassist/keyboardist John Paul Jones, and drummer John Bonham. With their heavy, guitar-driven sound, Led Zeppelin are regularly cited as one of the progenitors of heavy metal, although their style drew from a variety of influences, including blues and folk music.\n\nAfter changing their name from the New Yardbirds, Led Zeppelin signed a deal with Atlantic Records that afforded them considerable artistic freedom. Although the group were initially unpopular with critics, they achieved significant commercial success with eight studio albums released over ten years, from \"Led Zeppelin\" (1969) to \"In Through the Out Door\" (1979). Their untitled fourth studio album, commonly known as \"Led Zeppelin IV\" (1971) and featuring the song \"Stairway to Heaven\", is among the most popular and influential works in rock music, and it helped to secure the group's popularity.\n\nPage wrote most of Led Zeppelin's music, particularly early in their career, while Plant generally supplied the lyrics. Jones's keyboard-based compositions later became central to the group's catalogue, which featured increasing experimentation. The latter half of their career saw a series of record-breaking tours that earned the group a reputation for excess and debauchery. Although they remained commercially and critically successful, their output and touring schedule were limited during the late 1970s, and the group disbanded following Bonham's death from alcohol-related asphyxia in 1980. In the decades that followed, the surviving members sporadically collaborated and participated in one-off Led Zeppelin reunions. The most successful of these was the 2007 Ahmet Ertegun Tribute Concert in London, with Jason Bonham taking his late father's place behind the drums.\n\nMany critics consider Led Zeppelin to be one of the most successful, innovative, and influential rock groups in history. They are one of the best-selling music artists in the history of audio recording; various sources estimate the group's record sales at 200 to 300 million units worldwide. With RIAA-certified sales of 111.5 million units, they are the third-best-selling band and fifth-best-selling act in the US. Each of their nine studio albums placed in the top 10 of the \"Billboard\" album chart and six reached the number-one spot. They achieved eight consecutive UK number-one albums. \"Rolling Stone\" magazine described them as \"the heaviest band of all time\", \"the biggest band of the Seventies\", and \"unquestionably one of the most enduring bands in rock history\". They were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1995; the museum's biography of the band states that they were \"as influential\" during the 1970s as the Beatles were during the 1960s.\n\nIn 1966, London-based session guitarist Jimmy Page joined the blues-influenced rock band the Yardbirds to replace bassist Paul Samwell-Smith. Page soon switched from bass to lead guitar, creating a dual lead guitar line-up with Jeff Beck. Following Beck's departure in October 1966, the Yardbirds, tired from constant touring and recording, began to wind down. Page wanted to form a supergroup with him and Beck on guitars, and the Who's Keith Moon and John Entwistle on drums and bass, respectively. Vocalists Steve Winwood and Steve Marriott were also considered for the project. The group never formed, although Page, Beck, and Moon did record a song together in 1966, \"Beck's Bolero\", in a session that also included bassist-keyboardist John Paul Jones.\n\nThe Yardbirds played their final gig in July 1968 at Luton College of Technology in Bedfordshire. They were still committed to several concerts in Scandinavia, so drummer Jim McCarty and vocalist Keith Relf authorised Page and bassist Chris Dreja to use the Yardbirds' name to fulfill the band's obligations. Page and Dreja began putting a new line-up together. Page's first choice for the lead singer was Terry Reid, but Reid declined the offer and suggested Robert Plant, a singer for the Band of Joy and Hobbstweedle. Plant eventually accepted the position, recommending former Band of Joy drummer John Bonham. John Paul Jones inquired about the vacant position of bass guitarist, at the suggestion of his wife, after Dreja dropped out of the project to become a photographer. Page had known Jones since they were both session musicians, and agreed to let him join as the final member.\n\nThe four played together for the first time in a room below a record store on Gerrard Street in London. Page suggested that they attempt \"Train Kept A-Rollin'\", originally a jump blues song popularised in a rockabilly version by Johnny Burnette, which had been covered by the Yardbirds. \"As soon as I heard John Bonham play\", Jones recalled, \"I knew this was going to be great ... We locked together as a team immediately\". Before leaving for Scandinavia, the group took part in a recording session for the P. J. Proby album \"Three Week Hero\". The album's track \"Jim's Blues\", with Plant on harmonica, was the first studio track to feature all four future members of Led Zeppelin.\n\nThe band completed the Scandinavian tour as the New Yardbirds, playing together for the first time in front of a live audience at Gladsaxe Teen Clubs in Gladsaxe, Denmark, on 7 September 1968. Later that month, they began recording their first album, which was based on their live set. The album was recorded and mixed in nine days, and Page covered the costs. After the album's completion, the band were forced to change their name after Dreja issued a cease and desist letter, stating that Page was allowed to use the New Yardbirds moniker for the Scandinavian dates only. One account of how the new band's name was chosen held that Moon and Entwistle had suggested that a supergroup with Page and Beck would go down like a \"lead balloon\", an idiom for disastrous results. The group dropped the 'a' in \"lead\" at the suggestion of their manager, Peter Grant, so that those unfamiliar with the term would not pronounce it \"leed\". The word \"balloon\" was replaced by \"zeppelin\", a word which, according to music journalist Keith Shadwick, brought \"the perfect combination of heavy and light, combustibility and grace\" to Page's mind.\n\nGrant secured a $143,000 advance contract ($ today) from Atlantic Records in November 1968—at the time, the biggest deal of its kind for a new band. Atlantic was a label with a catalogue of mainly blues, soul, and jazz artists, but in the late 1960s it began to take an interest in British progressive rock acts. Record executives signed Led Zeppelin without having ever seen them. Under the terms of their contract, the band had autonomy in deciding when they would release albums and tour, and had the final say over the contents and design of each album. They would also decide how to promote each release and which tracks to release as singles. They formed their own company, Superhype, to handle all publishing rights.\n\nThe band began their first tour of the UK on 4 October 1968, still billed as the New Yardbirds; they played their first show as Led Zeppelin at the University of Surrey in Battersea on 25 October. Tour manager Richard Cole, who would become a major figure in the touring life of the group, organised their first North American tour at the end of the year. Their debut album, \"Led Zeppelin\", was released in the US during the tour on 12 January 1969 and peaked at number 10 on the \"Billboard\" chart; it was released in the UK, where it peaked at number 6, on 31 March. According to Steve Erlewine, the album's memorable guitar riffs, lumbering rhythms, psychedelic blues, groovy, bluesy shuffles and hints of English folk music made it \"a significant turning point in the evolution of hard rock and heavy metal\".\nIn their first year Led Zeppelin completed four US and four UK concert tours, and also released their second album, \"Led Zeppelin II\". Recorded mostly on the road at various North American studios, it was an even greater commercial success than their first album, and reached the number one chart position in the US and the UK. The album further developed the mostly blues-rock musical style established on their debut release, creating a sound that was \"heavy and hard, brutal and direct\", and which would be highly influential and frequently imitated. Steve Waksman has suggested that \"Led Zeppelin II\" was \"the musical starting point for heavy metal\".\n\nThe band saw their albums as indivisible, complete listening experiences, disliking the re-editing of existing tracks for release as singles. Grant maintained an aggressive pro-album stance, particularly in the UK, where there were few radio and TV outlets for rock music. Without the band's consent, however, some songs were released as singles, particularly in the US. In 1969 an edited version of \"Whole Lotta Love\", a track from their second album, was released as a single in the US. It reached number four in the \"Billboard\" chart in January 1970, selling over one million copies and helping to cement the band's popularity. The group also increasingly shunned television appearances, citing their preference that their fans hear and see them in live concerts.\n\nFollowing the release of their second album, Led Zeppelin completed several more US tours. They played initially in clubs and ballrooms, and then in larger auditoriums as their popularity grew. Some early Led Zeppelin concerts lasted more than four hours, with expanded and improvised live versions of their repertoire. Many of these shows have been preserved as bootleg recordings. It was during this period of intensive concert touring that the band developed a reputation for off-stage excess.\n\nIn 1970, Page and Plant retired to Bron-Yr-Aur, a remote cottage in Wales, to commence work on their third album, \"Led Zeppelin III\". The result was a more acoustic style that was strongly influenced by folk and Celtic music, and showcased the band's versatility. The album's rich acoustic sound initially received mixed reactions, with critics and fans surprised at the turn from the primarily electric arrangements of the first two albums, further fuelling the band's hostility to the musical press. It reached number one in the UK and US charts, but its stay would be the shortest of their first five albums. The album's opening track, \"Immigrant Song\", was released as a US single in November 1970 against the band's wishes, reaching the top twenty on the \"Billboard\" chart.\n\nDuring the 1970s, Led Zeppelin reached new heights of commercial and critical success that made them one of the most influential groups of the era, eclipsing their earlier achievements. The band's image also changed as the members began to wear elaborate, flamboyant clothing, with Page taking the lead on the flamboyant appearance by wearing a glittering moon-and-stars outfit. Led Zeppelin changed their show by using things such as lasers, professional light shows and mirror balls. They began travelling in a private jet airliner, a Boeing 720 (nicknamed \"the Starship\"), rented out entire sections of hotels (including the Continental Hyatt House in Los Angeles, known colloquially as the \"Riot House\"), and became the subject of frequently repeated stories of debauchery. One involved John Bonham riding a motorcycle through a rented floor of the Riot House, while another involved the destruction of a room in the Tokyo Hilton, leading to the group being banned from that establishment for life. Although Led Zeppelin developed a reputation for trashing their hotel suites and throwing television sets out of the windows, some suggest that these tales have been exaggerated. According to music journalist Chris Welch, \"[Led Zeppelin's] travels spawned many stories, but it was a myth that [they] were constantly engaged in acts of wanton destruction and lewd behaviour\".\n\nLed Zeppelin released their fourth album on 8 November 1971. It is variously referred to as \"Led Zeppelin IV\", \"Untitled\", \"IV\", or, due to the four symbols appearing on the record label, as \"Four Symbols\", \"Zoso\" or \"Runes\". The band had wanted to release the fourth album with no title or information, in response to the music press \"going on about Zeppelin being a hype\", but the record company wanted something on the cover, so in discussions it was agreed to have four symbols to represent both the four members of the band, and that it was the fourth album. With 37 million copies sold, \"Led Zeppelin IV\" is one of the best-selling albums in history, and its massive popularity cemented Led Zeppelin's status as superstars in the 1970s.{{sfnBukszpan2003p=128}}{{sfnBrown2001p=480}} By 2006, it had sold 23 million copies in the United States alone.{{sfnRIAA2009}} The track \"Stairway to Heaven\", never released as a single, was the most requested and most played song on American rock radio in the 1970s. The group followed up the album's release with tours of the UK, Australasia, North America, Japan, and the UK again from late 1971 through early 1973.\n\n\"Houses of the Holy\" topped charts worldwide,{{sfnWall2008p=294}} and the band's subsequent concert tour of North America in 1973 broke records for attendance, as they consistently filled large auditoriums and stadiums. At Tampa Stadium in Florida, they played to 56,800 fans, breaking the record set by the Beatles' 1965 Shea Stadium concert and grossing $309,000.{{sfnDavis1985p=194}} Three sold-out shows at Madison Square Garden in New York City were filmed for a motion picture, but the theatrical release of this project (\"The Song Remains the Same\") was delayed until 1976. Before the final night's performance, $180,000 (${{formatnum:{{InflationUS1800001973r=-3}}}} today) of the band's money from gate receipts was stolen from a safe deposit box at the Drake Hotel.{{sfnYorke1993pp=186–187}} In a special report for NBC News on 31 August 1973, John Chancellor announced that a poll taken by a leading British music magazine saw Led Zeppelin overtake the Beatles as the most popular rock band in England.\n\nA North American tour, the band's first since 1977, was scheduled to commence on 17 October 1980. On 24 September, Bonham was picked up by Led Zeppelin assistant Rex King to attend rehearsals at Bray Studios.{{sfnWelch1994p=92}} During the journey, Bonham asked to stop for breakfast, where he downed four quadruple vodkas (from {{convert16to24usozabbr=on}}), with a ham roll. After taking a bite of the ham roll he said to his assistant, \"breakfast\". He continued to drink heavily after arriving at the studio. The rehearsals were halted late that evening and the band retired to Page's house—the Old Mill House in Clewer, Windsor.\n\nAfter midnight, Bonham, who had fallen asleep, was taken to bed and placed on his side. At 1:45 pm the next day, Benji LeFevre (Led Zeppelin's new tour manager) and John Paul Jones found Bonham dead. The cause of death was asphyxiation from vomit; the finding was accidental death. An autopsy found no other recreational drugs in Bonham's body. Although he had recently begun to take Motival (a cocktail of the antipsychotic fluphenazine and the tricyclic antidepressant nortriptyline) to combat his anxiety, it is unclear if these substances interacted with the alcohol in his system. Bonham's remains were cremated and his ashes interred on 12 October 1980, at Rushock parish church, Worcestershire.\n\nOn 10 December 2007, Zeppelin reunited for the Ahmet Ertegun Tribute Concert at the O Arena in London, with Jason Bonham again taking his father's place on drums. According to \"Guinness World Records 2009\", the show set a record for the \"Highest Demand for Tickets for One Music Concert\" as 20 million requests were submitted online.{{sfnTVNZ2009}} Critics praised the performance{{sfnGardner2007}} and there was widespread speculation about a full reunion.{{sfnWall2008p=472}} Page, Jones and Jason Bonham were reported to be willing to tour, and to be working on material for a new Zeppelin project.{{sfnBBC Mobile2008}} Plant continued his touring commitments with Alison Krauss,{{sfnTalmadge2008}} stating in September 2008 that he would not record or tour with the band.{{sfnRobertplant.com2008}}{{sfnBeech2008}} \"I told them I was busy and they'd simply have to wait,\" he recalled in 2014. \"I would come around eventually, which they were fine with – at least to my knowledge. But it turns out they weren't. And what's even more disheartening, Jimmy used it against me.\"\n\nJones and Page reportedly looked for a replacement for Plant; candidates including Steven Tyler of Aerosmith, and Myles Kennedy of Alter Bridge.{{sfnWall2008pp=459–460}} However, in January 2009, it was confirmed that the project had been abandoned.{{sfnBosso2009}} \"Getting the opportunity to play with Jimmy Page, John Paul Jones and Jason Bonham was pretty special,\" Kennedy recalled. \"That is pretty much the zenith right there. That was a crazy, good experience. It's something I still think of often ... It's so precious to me.\"\n\nA film of the O2 performance, \"Celebration Day\", premiered on 17 October 2012 and was released on DVD on 19 November.{{sfnGreene2012}} The film grossed $2 million in one night, and the live album peaked at number 4 and 9 in the UK and US, respectively.{{sfnVariety2012}}{{sfnUK Charts2012}}{{sfnAllmusic2010}} Following the film's premiere, Page revealed that he had been remastering the band's discography. The first wave of albums, \"Led Zeppelin\", \"Led Zeppelin II\", and \"Led Zeppelin III\", were released on 2 June 2014. The second wave of albums, \"Led Zeppelin IV\" and \"Houses of the Holy\", were released on 27 October 2014. \"Physical Graffiti\" was released on 23 February 2015, almost exactly forty years to the day after the original release. The fourth and final wave of studio album reissues, \"Presence\", \"In Through the Out Door\", and \"Coda\", were released on 31 July 2015.\n\nThrough this remastering project, each studio album was reissued on CD and vinyl and was also available in a Deluxe Edition, which contained a bonus disc of previously unheard material (\"Coda's\" Deluxe Edition would include two bonus discs). Each album was also available in a Super Deluxe Edition Box Set, which included the remastered album and bonus disc on both CD and 180-gram vinyl, a high-definition audio download card of all content at 96 kHz/24 bit, a hard bound book filled with rare and previously unseen photos and memorabilia, and a high quality print of the original album cover.\n\nOn 6 November 2015, the \"Mothership\" compilation was reissued using the band's newly remastered audio tracks. The reissuing campaign continued the next year with the re-release of \"BBC Sessions\" on 16 September 2016. The reissue contained a bonus disc with nine unreleased BBC recordings, including the heavily bootlegged but never officially released \"Sunshine Woman\".\n\nTo commemorate the band's 50th anniversary, Page, Plant and Jones announced an official illustrated book celebrating 50 years since the formation of the band. Also released for the celebration was a reissue of \"How the West Was Won\" on 23 March 2018, which includes the album's first pressing on vinyl. For Record Store Day on 21 April 2018, Led Zeppelin released a 7\" single \"Rock and Roll\" (Sunset Sound Mix)/\"Friends\" (Olympic Studio Mix), their first single in 21 years.\n\nLed Zeppelin have been credited with a major impact on the nature of the music business, particularly in the development of album-orientated rock (AOR) and stadium rock.{{sfnBukszpan2003p=121}}{{sfnWaksman2009pp=21–31}} In 1988 John Kalodner, then-A&R executive of Geffen Records, remarked that \"In my opinion, next to the Beatles they're the most influential band in history. They influence the way music is on records, AOR radio, concerts. They set the standards for the AOR-radio format with 'Stairway to Heaven,' having AOR hits without necessarily having Top 40 hits. They're the ones who did the first real big arena concert shows, consistently selling out and playing stadiums without support. People can do as well as them, but nobody surpasses them\".{{sfnPond1988pp=68–69}} Andrew Loog Oldham, the former producer and manager of the Rolling Stones, commented on how Led Zeppelin had a major influence on the record business, and the way rock concerts were managed and presented to huge audiences.{{sfnHughes2010}} In 2007, they were a featured artist in the stadium rock episode of the BBC/VH1 series \"Seven Ages of Rock\".\n\nBULLET::::- \"Led Zeppelin\" (1969)\nBULLET::::- \"Led Zeppelin II\" (1969)\nBULLET::::- \"Led Zeppelin III\" (1970)\nBULLET::::- Untitled album commonly known as \"Led Zeppelin IV\" (1971)\nBULLET::::- \"Houses of the Holy\" (1973)\nBULLET::::- \"Physical Graffiti\" (1975)\nBULLET::::- \"Presence\" (1976)\nBULLET::::- \"In Through the Out Door\" (1979)\nBULLET::::- \"Coda\" (1982)\n{{div col end}}\n\nBULLET::::- Robert Plant – vocals, harmonica, percussion\nBULLET::::- Jimmy Page – guitars\nBULLET::::- John Paul Jones – bass, keyboards\nBULLET::::- John Bonham – drums\n\nLive performance guests\nBULLET::::- Tony Thompson – drums (1985)\nBULLET::::- Phil Collins – drums (1985)\nBULLET::::- Paul Martinez – bass (1985)\nBULLET::::- Jason Bonham – drums, percussion (1988, 1995, 2007)\nBULLET::::- Michael Lee – drums (1995)\n\nBULLET::::- List of Led Zeppelin songs written or inspired by others\nBULLET::::- List of cover versions of Led Zeppelin songs\n\nBULLET::::- {{cite weburl=http://www.billboard.com/bbcom/retrieve_chart_history.do?model.chartFormatGroupName=Singles&model.vnuArtistId=5047&model.vnuAlbumId=10333title=Artist Chart History – Led Zeppelinarchiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20090221050358/http://www.billboard.com/bbcom/retrieve_chart_history.do?model.chartFormatGroupName=Singles&model.vnuArtistId=5047&model.vnuAlbumId=10333 work=Billboard year=2009 archivedate=21 February 2009accessdate=1 October 2011ref={{SfnRefBillboard2009}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite weburl=http://www.allmusic.com/artist/led-zeppelin-p4739/charts-awards title=Led Zeppelin Billboard Albums website=AllMusic accessdate=5 September 2010 archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20110906193322/http://allmusic.com/artist/led-zeppelin-p4739/charts-awards archivedate= 6 September 2011 ref={{SfnRefAllmusic2010}} url-status=live }}\nBULLET::::- {{cite weburl=http://www.officialcharts.com/artist/_/led%20zeppelin/ title=Led Zeppelin – Charting History publisher=Official Charts Company accessdate=12 January 2013 archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20121029092333/http://www.officialcharts.com/artist/_/led%20zeppelin/ archivedate=29 October 2012 url-status=live ref={{SfnRefUK Charts2012}} }}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newsurl=http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/4261905.stm title=Zeppelin celebrate Grammy honour publisher=BBC archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20130615104949/http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/4261905.stm archivedate= 15 June 2013 accessdate=22 September 2011 ref={{SfnRefBBC Home2005}} date=13 February 2005 url-status=live }}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newsurl=http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/entertainment/5007476.stm publisher=BBC title=Award for 'pioneers' Led Zeppelin date=23 May 2006 archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20120210002035/http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/entertainment/5007476.stm archivedate= 10 February 2012 accessdate=16 September 2011 ref={{SfnRefBBC Home2006a}} url-status=live }}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newsurl=http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/entertainment/5338196.stm publisher=BBC title=Led Zeppelin make UK Hall of Fame date=12 September 2006 archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20110813230616/http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/entertainment/5338196.stm archivedate= 13 August 2011 accessdate=16 September 2011 ref={{SfnRefBBC Home2006b}} url-status=live }}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newsurl=http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio2/soldonsong/songlibrary/indepth/stairway.shtml title=Sold on song: Stairway to Heaven publisher=BBC year=2011 archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20120311062808/http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio2/soldonsong/songlibrary/indepth/stairway.shtml archivedate= 11 March 2012 accessdate=22 September 2011 ref={{SfnRefBBC Home2011}} url-status=live }}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newsurl=http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/entertainment/7582917.stm title=Led Zeppelin trio back in studio publisher=BBC date=26 August 2008 accessdate=25 November 2008 archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20111031035611/http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/entertainment/7582917.stm archivedate= 31 October 2011 ref={{SfnRefBBC Mobile2008}} url-status=live }}\nBULLET::::- {{cite weburl=http://www.bbc.co.uk/wales/music/sites/history/pages/led-zeppelin-bron-yr-aur.shtml publisher=BBC title=Led Zeppelin at Bron-Yr-Aur archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20110514164952/http://www.bbc.co.uk/wales/music/sites/history/pages/led-zeppelin-bron-yr-aur.shtml archivedate= 14 May 2011 accessdate=16 September 2011 year=2011 ref={{SfnRefBBC Wales Music2011}} url-status=live }}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst1=Bob last1=Batchelor first2=Scott last2=Stoddart title=American Popular Culture Through History: the 1980s location=Westport, Connecticutpublisher=Greenwood year=2007 isbn=978-0-313-33000-1 ref={{SfnRefBatchelorStoddart2007}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite news last=Beech first=Mark url=https://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=newsarchive&sid=aU_5GfM1LTsc&refer=muse title=Led Zeppelin Singer Robert Plant rules out reunion record, tour work=Bloomberg date=29 September 2008 archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20110805024112/http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=newsarchive&sid=aU_5GfM1LTsc&refer=muse archivedate=5 August 2011 accessdate=29 September 2008 ref={{SfnRefBeech2008}} url-status=dead df= }}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newslast=Billboardurl=https://books.google.com/books?id=2UQEAAAAMBAJ&pg=PT3&dq=ivor+novello+award+led+zeppelin+outstanding+1977+billboard&hl=En&ei=fDfuTpfTLY258gPe7dToCQ&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=book-thumbnail&resnum=3&ved=0CEIQ6wEwAg#v=onepage&q&f=false title=PRS/Novello Awards shared by intl artistswork=Billboard date=28 May 1977 accessdate=18 December 2011ref={{SfnRefBillboard1977}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite weblast=Bosso first=Joe title='Led Zeppelin are over!', says Jimmy Page's manager url=http://www.musicradar.com/news/guitars/led-zeppelin-are-over-says-jimmy-pages-manager-190946 work=MusicRadar date=7 January 2009 archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20111012165241/http://www.musicradar.com/news/guitars/led-zeppelin-are-over-says-jimmy-pages-manager-190946 archivedate= 12 October 2011 accessdate=1 October 2011 ref={{SfnRefBosso2009}} url-status=live }}\nBULLET::::- {{cite weburl=http://www.bpi.co.uk/certifiedawards/search.aspx archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20110805005459/http://www.bpi.co.uk/certifiedawards/search.aspx archivedate=5 August 2011 title=Certified Awards Search—Led Zeppelin work=British Phonographic Industry year=2011 accessdate=18 December 2011 ref={{SfnRefBPI2011}} url-status=dead }}\nBULLET::::- {{cite journal first=John last=Brackett title=Examining rhythmic and metric practices in Led Zeppelin's musical style journal=Popular Music volume=27  issue = 1pages=53–76year=2008ref={{SfnRefBrackett2008}} doi=10.1017/s0261143008001487}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst=Patlast=Brownyear=2001title=The Guide to United States Popular Culturelocation=Minneapolispublisher=Popular Pressisbn=978-0-87972-821-2ref={{SfnRefBrown2001}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite book first=Peter last=Buckley year=2003 title=The Rough Guide to Rock location=London publisher=Penguin Books isbn=978-1-85828-457-6 ref={{SfnRefBuckley2003}} url=https://archive.org/details/roughguidetorock00roug }}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst=Adam last=Budofsky url=https://books.google.com/books?id=MWA6a9AKhzUC&pg=PA147 title=The Drummer: 100 Years of Rhythmic Power and Invention location=Milwaukeepublisher=Hal Leonard year=2006 isbn=978-1-4234-0567-2 ref={{SfnRefBudofsky2006}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst=Daniellast=Bukszpanyear=2003title=The Encyclopedia of Heavy Metallocation=New Yorkpublisher=Barnes & Noble isbn=978-0-7607-4218-1ref={{SfnRefBukszpan2003}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newsref={{SfnRefChristgau1972a}}last=Christgaufirst=Robertauthorlink=Robert Christgaudate=15 June 1972url=https://www.robertchristgau.com/xg/news/nd720615.phptitle=A Power Plantnewspaper=Newsdayaccessdate=10 September 2018}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newsref={{SfnRefChristgau1972b}}last=Christgaufirst=Robertdate=December 1972url=https://www.robertchristgau.com/xg/bk-aow/mott.phptitle=Growing Up Grim With Mott the Hooplenewspaper=Newsdayaccessdate=10 September 2018}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newsref=harvlast=Christgaufirst=Robertdate=31 March 1980url=https://www.robertchristgau.com/xg/cg/cgv3-80.phptitle=Christgau's Consumer Guidenewspaper=The Village Voiceaccessdate=6 September 2018}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite journal title=50 Best Live Acts of All Time journal=Classic Rock issue=118 date=May 2008 ref={{SfnRefClassic Rock2008}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst=Heylinlast=Clintonyear=2004title=Bootleg! The Rise & Fall of the Secret Recording Industrylocation=London publisher=Omnibus Pressisbn=978-1-84449-151-3ref={{SfnRefClinton2004}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newslast=Cochranefirst=Gregpublisher=BBC accessdate=13 March 2011url=http://news.bbc.co.uk/newsbeat/hi/music/newsid_7846000/7846658.stmtitle=Lady GaGa reveals her touring secretsdate=23 January 2009ref={{SfnRefCochrane2009}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newslast=CNN url=http://articles.cnn.com/1999-01-19/entertainment/9901_19_madonna.lkl_1_dancer-madonna-madonna-ciccone-modern-dance/12?_s=PM:SHOWBIZ title=Interview Madonna reviews life on Larry King Live publisher=CNN date=19 January 1999 accessdate=5 September 2010 ref={{SfnRefCNN1999}} url-status=dead archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20120121105431/http://articles.cnn.com/1999-01-19/entertainment/9901_19_madonna.lkl_1_dancer-madonna-madonna-ciccone-modern-dance/12?_s=PM%3ASHOWBIZ archivedate=21 January 2012 df= }}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newslast=Cohenfirst=Jonathanurl=http://www.billboard.com/articles/news/1050472/led-zeppelin-readies-fall-reissue-bonanza title=Led Zeppelin readies fall reissue bonanzawork=Billboarddate=27 July 2007 accessdate=1 October 2011ref={{SfnRefCohen2007}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst=Andrew L.last=Copetitle=Black Sabbath and the Rise of Heavy Metal Music location=Aldershot publisher=Ashgate isbn=978-0-7546-6881-7 year=2010ref={{SfnRefCope2010}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite weblast=Davies first=Claire url=http://www.musicradar.com/totalguitar/monster-riffs-week-megadeth-interview-280473/3 title=Megadeth interview (Monster Riffs Week): Megadeth axeman Dave Mustaine walks Total Guitar through the fiery riff from 'Hangar 18' work=Total Guitar date=29 September 2010 archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20120202082432/http://www.musicradar.com/totalguitar/monster-riffs-week-megadeth-interview-280473?cpn=RSS&source=MRTOTALGUITAR archivedate=2 February 2012 accessdate=22 February 2012 ref={{SfnRefDavies2010}} url-status=dead df= }}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst=Eriklast=Davisyear=2005title=Led Zeppelin IVlocation=New Yorkpublisher=Continuumisbn=978-0-8264-1658-2ref={{sfnRefDavis2005}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite webauthor=Davis, Stephen url=https://www.rollingstone.com/artists/ledzeppelin/albums/album/224305/review/5945483/presencearchiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20090423153508/http://www.rollingstone.com/artists/ledzeppelin/albums/album/224305/review/5945483/presencearchivedate=23 April 2009title=Album Review: Led Zeppelin: Presencework=Rolling Stonedate=20 May 1976accessdate=29 July 2011ref={{SfnRefDavis1976}}author-link=Stephen Davis (music journalist)}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst=Stephenlast=Davisauthorlink=Stephen Davis (music journalist)year=1985title=Hammer of the Gods: The Led Zeppelin Saga location=London publisher=Pan isbn=978-0-330-34287-2ref={{SfnRefDavis1985}}title-link=Hammer of the Gods (book)}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite weblast=Dawtrey first=Adam url=http://www.variety.com/article/VR1118061306.html title='Zeppelin' film grosses $2 mil in one night work=Variety publisher=Penske Business Media date=26 October 2012 accessdate=12 January 2013 archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20130106173816/http://www.variety.com/article/VR1118061306/ archivedate=6 January 2013 url-status=live ref={{SfnRefVariety2012}} }}\nBULLET::::- {{cite web last=Erlewine url ={{Allmusicclass=artistid=p4001pure_url=yes}} first=Stephen Thomas title =The Cult – Biography website=AllMusicyear=2007 accessdate=15 January 2007 ref={{SfnRefErlewine2007}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite weblast=Erlewine first=Stephen Thomas year=2010 url={{Allmusicclass=albumid=r11460pure_url=yes}} title=Led Zeppelin: Led Zeppelin II: review website=AllMusic accessdate=5 September 2010ref={{SfnRefErlewine2010}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite weblast=Erlewinefirst=Stephen Thomasdate=2011atitle=Led Zeppelin: biographywebsite=AllMusic url=http://www.allmusic.com/artist/led-zeppelin-p4739/biography accessdate=8 September 2011 ref={{SfnRefErlewine2011a}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite weblast=Erlewinefirst=Stephen Thomasdate=2011btitle=Led Zeppelin: Led Zeppelin: reviewwebsite=AllMusicurl=http://www.allmusic.com/album/led-zeppelin-r11459/reviewaccessdate=16 September 2011 ref={{SfnRefErlewine2011b}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite weblast=Erlewinefirst=Stephen Thomas year=2011c url=http://www.allmusic.com/album/led-zeppelin-box-set-r11470/reviewtitle=Led Zeppelin: Led Zeppelin Box Set: review website=AllMusic accessdate=22 September 2011 ref={{SfnRefErlewine2011c}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite weblast=Erlewinefirst=Stephen Thomasyear=2011eurl=http://www.allmusic.com/album/led-zeppelin-box-set-2-r168735title=Led Zeppelin: Led Zeppelin Box Set 2: reviewwebsite=AllMusic accessdate=22 September 2011 ref={{SfnRefErlewine2011e}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite weblast=Erlewinefirst=Stephen Thomasyear=2011furl=http://www.allmusic.com/album/bbc-sessions-r318040/reviewtitle=Led Zeppelin: BBC Sessions: reviewwebsite=AllMusicaccessdate=22 September 2011ref={{SfnRefErlewine2011f}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst=Susanlast=Fastyear=2001title=In the Houses of the Holy: Led Zeppelin and the Power of Rock Musiclocation=New Yorkpublisher=Oxford University Press isbn=978-0-19-514723-0 ref={{SfnRefFast2001}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst=Susan last=Fast year=2011 encyclopedia=Encyclopædia Britannica title=Led Zeppelin (British Rock Group) url=http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/334473/Led-Zeppelin location=Londonisbn=978-0-19-514723-0 ref={{SfnRefFast2011}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newslast=The List url=http://www.list.co.uk/article/5700-jimmy-page-says-last-led-zeppelin-reunion-was-a-disaster/title=Jimmy Page says last Led Zeppelin reunion was a disaster work=The List date=20 November 2007 accessdate=29 July 2011 ref={{SfnRefList2007}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst=Ian last=Fortnam title=Classic Rock Magazine: Dazed and Confused: Classic Rock Presents Led Zeppelin year=2008 ref={{SfnRefFortnam2008}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite weblast=Frickefirst=Davidauthorlink=David Frickedate=26 November 2012title=Jimmy Page Digs Up 'Substantial' Rarities for New Led Zeppelin Remastersurl=https://www.rollingstone.com/music/blogs/alternate-take/jimmy-page-digs-up-substantial-rarities-for-new-led-zeppelin-remasters-20121126work=Rolling Stoneaccessdate=27 November 2012ref={{SfnrefFricke2012}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite book first=Andy last=Fyfe year=2003 title=When the Levee Breaks: The Making of Led Zeppelin IV location=Chicago publisher=Chicago Review Press isbn=978-1-55652-508-7 ref={{SfnRefFyfe2003}} url=https://archive.org/details/whenleveebreaks00andy }}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newslast=Gans first=Alan title=Dustin Hoffman, David Letterman, Natalia Makarova, Buddy Guy, Led Zeppelin Are Kennedy Center Honorees url=http://www.playbill.com/news/article/169937-Dustin-Hoffman-David-Letterman-Natalia-Makarova-Buddy-Guy-Led-Zeppelin-Are-Kennedy-Center-Honorees work=Playbill accessdate=12 September 2012 date=11 December 2007 ref={{SfnRefGans2012}} url-status=dead archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20121109035635/http://www.playbill.com/news/article/169937-Dustin-Hoffman-David-Letterman-Natalia-Makarova-Buddy-Guy-Led-Zeppelin-Are-Kennedy-Center-Honorees archivedate= 9 November 2012 df= }}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newslast=Gardner first=Alan title=You review: Led Zeppelin url=https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2007/dec/11/youreviewledzeppelinwork=The Guardian accessdate=20 February 2012 date=11 December 2007 ref={{SfnRefGardner2007}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite booklast=Gaar first=Gillian G. title=The Rough Guide to Nirvana location=London publisher=Dorling Kindersley year=2009isbn=978-1-85828-945-8 ref={{SfnRefGaar2009}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookref=harvlast=Garofalofirst=Reebeeyear=2008title=Rockin' Out: Popular Music in the USApublisher=Pearson Prentice Hallisbn=978-0132343053edition=4th}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite weblast=Grammy url=http://www.uncut.co.uk/music/jimmy_page/special_features/12529 title=Grammy Hall of Fame publisher=National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences year=2011 accessdate=18 December 2011 archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20111124012108/http://www.grammy.org/recording-academy/awards/hall-of-fame archivedate=24 November 2011 ref={{SfnRefGrammy2011}} url-status=dead }}\nBULLET::::- {{cite journallast=Gilmore first=Mikal title=The Long Shadow of Led Zeppelinjournal=Rolling Stone issue=2006 date=10 August 2007 url=https://www.rollingstone.com/news/story/11027261/the_long_shadow_of_led_zeppelin/printarchiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20071212022936/http://www.rollingstone.com/news/story/11027261/the_long_shadow_of_led_zeppelin/printarchivedate=12 December 2007accessdate=9 December 2007ref={{SfnRefGilmore2006}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite webfirst=Andy last=Greene url=https://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/led-zeppelins-2007-reunion-concert-to-hit-theaters-in-october-20120913 title=Led Zeppelin's 2007 reunion concert to hit theaters in October work=Rolling Stone date=13 September 2012 accessdate=29 September 2012 ref={{SfnRefGreene2012}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newsfirst=Perry last=Grossman year=2002 url=http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_g1epc/is_tov/ai_2419100030/ title=Alternative rock encyclopedia=St. James Encyclopedia of Pop Culture 2002 publisher=Gale Group isbn=1-55862-400-7 ref={{SfnRefGrossman2002}} url-status=dead archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20101013070816/http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_g1epc/is_tov/ai_2419100030/ archivedate=13 October 2010 df= }}\nBULLET::::- {{cite webfirst=Paul last=Greinurl=http://music.yahoo.com/blogs/chart-watch/chart-watch-extra-led-zep-road-kennedy-center-205104385.htmltitle=Chart watch extra: Led Zep's road to the Kennedy Center Honors work=Yahoo Chart Watch date=20 December 2012 accessdate=27 December 2012 ref={{SfnRefYahoo Chart Watch2012}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst=Boblast=Gullayear=2001title=Guitar Gods: The 25 Players Who Made Rock Historylocation=Santa Barbara, Californiapublisher=ABC-CLIO isbn=978-0-313-35806-7 ref={{SfnRefGulla2001}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst=Django last=Haskins url=https://books.google.com/books?id=VwS-wUBRvnoC&pg=PR15&dq=smashing+pumpkins+led+zeppelin title=Stand Alone Tracks '90s Rock: Handy Guide, Book & CDlocation=Los Angelespublisher=Alfred Music year=1995 isbn=978-0-88284-658-3 ref={{SfnRefHaskins1995}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite webfirst=Steve last=Huey year=2011 url=http://www.allmusic.com/artist/the-honeydrippers-p4507/biography title=The Honeydrippers: biography website=AllMusic accessdate=19 September 2011 ref={{SfnRefHuey2011}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite webfirst=Rob last=Hughes url=http://www.uncut.co.uk/music/jimmy_page/special_features/12529 title=The real Jimmy Page work=Uncut year=2010 accessdate=31 May 2010 ref={{SfnRefHughes2010}} url-status=dead archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20111124012108/http://www.grammy.org/recording-academy/awards/hall-of-fame archivedate=24 November 2011 df= }}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newsfirst=Nigel last=Hunter url=https://books.google.com/?id=KBAEAAAAMBAJ&pg=PA48&lpg=PA48&dq=ivor+novello+award+led+zeppelin+1997+lifetime+achievement#v=onepage&q=ivor%20novello%20award%20led%20zeppelin%201997%20lifetime%20achievement&f=false title=Anniversaries abound at the Novello Awards work=Billboard date=21 June 1997accessdate=18 December 2011ref={{SfnRefHunter1997}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newslast=Independent url=https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/music/features/led-zeppelin-katie-melua-on-rocknroll-riffs-that-rake-the-psyche-763443.htmltitle=Led Zeppelin: Katie Melua on rock'n'roll riffs that rake the psyche work=The Independent date=7 December 2007 accessdate=5 March 2010 ref={{SfnRefIndependent2007}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite webfirst=Robert last=Jones url=http://www.robertjonesphoto.com/johnnyramone.html title=Conservative Punk's interview with Johnny Ramone date=2 April 2003 accessdate=2 December 2010 ref={{SfnRefJones2003}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite weblast=Kielty first=Martin url=http://www.classicrockmagazine.com/news/led-zeppelin-talks-will-delay-remasters/ title=Led Zep talks will delay remasters work=Classic Rock date=28 November 2012 accessdate=30 November 2012 ref={{SfnRefKielty2012}} url-status=dead archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20121201080946/http://www.classicrockmagazine.com/news/led-zeppelin-talks-will-delay-remasters/ archivedate=1 December 2012 df= }}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newsfirst=Michael last=Leonard title=Robert Plant awarded CBE in UK Honours list url=http://www.musicradar.com/news/guitars/robert-plant-awarded-cbe-in-uk-honours-list-189898 work=MusicRadar date=31 December 2008 accessdate=18 December 2011 archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20120513154843/http://www.musicradar.com/news/guitars/robert-plant-awarded-cbe-in-uk-honours-list-189898 archivedate=13 May 2012 ref={{SfnRefLeonard2008}} url-status=live }}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst=Dave last=Lewis year=1994 title=The Complete Guide to the Music of Led Zeppelin location=London publisher=Omnibus Press isbn=978-0-7119-3528-0 ref={{SfnRefLewis1994}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst=Dave last=Lewis year=2003 url=https://books.google.com/books?id=oFWS0Xx3esYC&pg=PA166 title=Led Zeppelin: Celebration II: The 'Tight But Loose' Files location=London publisher=Omnibus Press isbn=978-1-84449-056-1 ref={{SfnRefLewis2003}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst1=Dave last1=Lewis first2=Simon last2=Pallett year=1997 title=Led Zeppelin: The Concert File location=London publisher=Omnibus Press isbn=978-0-7119-5307-9 ref={{SfnRefLewis & Pallett1997}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newsfirst=Carola last=Long title=Led Zeppelin: the enduring influence of flares and flowing locks url=https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/music/features/led-zeppelin-the-enduring-influence-of-flares-and-flowing-locks-763442.html work=The Independent date=7 December 2007 accessdate=27 September 2011 ref={{SfnRefLong2007}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite news first=Gabriel García last=Márquez  url=https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2002/jun/08/shopping.colombiatitle =The poet and the princesswork=The Guardian accessdate=20 February 2012 date=8 June 2002ref={{SfnRefMárquez2002}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite webfirst=Jimlast=Millerurl=https://www.rollingstone.com/music/albumreviews/physical-graffiti-19750327archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20090423132813/http://www.rollingstone.com/artists/ledzeppelin/albums/album/158693/review/5944206/physical_graffitiarchivedate=23 April 2009title=Album review: Physical Graffitiwork=Rolling Stone date=27 March 1975 accessdate=29 July 2011 ref={{SfnRefMiller1975}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite weblast=Mojourl=http://www.ledzeppelin.com/node/3312/2112title=Mojo Awards 'Best Live Act' 2008 – Acceptance Speechformat=videoyear=2008ref={{SfnRefMojo2008}}url-status=deadarchiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20111013003739/http://www.ledzeppelin.com/node/3312/2112archivedate=13 October 2011}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite weblast=MTV url=http://www.mtv.com/bands/m/metal/greatest_metal_bands/071406/index2.jhtml title=MTV – Black Sabbath: the greatest metal bands of all time publisher=MTV date=9 March 2006 accessdate=5 September 2010 ref={{SfnRefMTV2006}} url-status=dead archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20080319045933/http://www.mtv.com/bands/m/metal/greatest_metal_bands/071406/index2.jhtml archivedate=19 March 2008 df= }}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newsfirst=Charles Shaarlast=Murrayauthorlink=Charles Shaar Murraytitle=The Guv'norswork=Mojodate=August 2004ref={{SfnRefMurray2004}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite webauthor=Newswireurl=http://ledzeppelin.com/show/june-3-1977 title=Led Zeppelin official website: concert summary publisher=LedZeppelin.com date=3 June 1977 accessdate=5 September 2010ref={{SfnRefNewswire2011}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newslast=Parelesfirst=Jonurl=https://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9903EEDF1738F937A25754C0A961958260 title=Lollapalooza's recycled hormones: rebellion by the numbers work=The New York Times date=14 July 1997 accessdate=4 December 2010 ref={{SfnRefPareles1997}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst=Ianlast=Peddieyear=2006chapter=The bleak country: the Black Country and the rhetoric of escapeeditor=Ian Peddie title=The Resisting Muse: Popular Music and Social Protestlocation=Aldershotpublisher=Ashgateisbn=978-0-7546-5114-7ref={{SfnRefPeddie2006}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newsfirst=Steven last=Pond title=Led Zeppelin: The Song Remains the Same work=Rolling Stone volume=522date=24 March 1988 ref={{SfnRefPond1988}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite weburl=http://www.allmusic.com/artist/jimmy-page-p5091/biographytitle= Jimmy Page: biography accessdate=11 November 2008last= Pratofirst= Gregwebsite=AllMusicyear=2008 ref={{SfnRefPrato2008}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst1=Petelast1=Prownfirst2=H. P.last2=Newquistfirst3=Jon F.last3=Eicheyear=1997title=Legends of Rock Guitar: The Essential Reference of Rock's Greatest Guitaristslocation=Milwaukeepublisher=H.Leonard isbn=978-0-7935-4042-6 ref={{SfnRefPrown, Newquist & Eiche1997}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newsurl=https://www.reuters.com/article/2007/10/17/music-zeppelin-downloads-dc-idUSL1535184120071017 title=Led Zeppelin to sell music online agency=Reuters date=15 October 2007accessdate=23 September 2010ref={{SfnRefReuters2007}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite weblast=RIAA url=https://www.riaa.com/goldandplatinumdata.php?resultpage=4&table=SEARCH_RESULTS&action=&title=&artist=Led_Zeppelin&format=&debutLP=&category=&sex=&releaseDate=&requestNo=&type=&level=&label=&company=&certificationDate=&awardDescription=&catalogNo=&aSex=&rec_id=&charField=&gold=&platinum=&multiPlat=&level2=&certDate=&album=&id=&after=&before=&startMonth=&endMonth=&startYear=&endYear=&sort=Artist&perPage=100 archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20150924154623/http://www.riaa.com/goldandplatinumdata.php?resultpage=4&table=SEARCH_RESULTS&action=&title=&artist=Led_Zeppelin&format=&debutLP=&category=&sex=&releaseDate=&requestNo=&type=&level=&label=&company=&certificationDate=&awardDescription=&catalogNo=&aSex=&rec_id=&charField=&gold=&platinum=&multiPlat=&level2=&certDate=&album=&id=&after=&before=&startMonth=&endMonth=&startYear=&endYear=&sort=Artist&perPage=100 url-status=dead archive-date=24 September 2015 title=Gold & Platinum database search: 'Led Zeppelin' work=Recording Industry Association of America year=2009 accessdate=26 March 2009 ref={{SfnRefRIAA2009}} }}\nBULLET::::- {{cite weblast=RIAA url=https://www.riaa.com/goldandplatinum.php?content_selector=top-selling-artiststitle=Top-Selling Artistswork=Recording Industry Association of Americayear=2011 accessdate=8 January 2011ref={{SfnRefRIAA2011}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite weblast=Rock and Roll Hall of Fame url=http://rockhall.com/inductees/led-zeppelin/bio/ title=Led Zeppelin: biography work=Rock and Roll Hall of Fame accessdate=5 September 2010 year=2010 ref={{SfnRefRock and Roll Hall of Fame2010}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newsurl=https://www.rollingstone.com/news/story/5938174/the_rs_500_greatest_albums_of_all_time title=The RS 500 Greatest Albums of All Time archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20080710133428/http://www.rollingstone.com/news/story/5938174/the_rs_500_greatest_albums_of_all_time date=18 November 2003 archivedate=10 July 2008 accessdate=4 June 2013 newspaper=Rolling Stone ref={{SfnRefRolling Stone2003}} url-status=dead df= }}\nBULLET::::- {{cite booklast=Grohlfirst=Daveyear=2011chapter= Led Zeppelintitle= Rolling Stone: The 100 Greatest Artists of All Timeeditor1-last=Brackett editor1-first=Nathanpublisher=Rolling Stonechapter-url=https://www.rollingstone.com/music/lists/100-greatest-artists-of-all-time-19691231/led-zeppelin-20110419ref=harv}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite weblast=Robertplant.com url=http://www.robertplant.com/index.php?l1=2&l2=0&l3=0&articleID=186&rt=NE&PHPSESSID=6235928e9e15317186503f0c80686264title=Robert Plant – official statementpublisher=robertplant.comdate=29 September 2008accessdate=29 September 2008ref={{SfnRefRobertplant.com2008}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newslast=Rolling Stone url=http://archive.rollingstone.com/Desktop#/20060810/C1title=Led Zeppelin: the heaviest band of all time date=10 August 2006 volume=1006 work=Rolling Stone location=New York accessdate=29 July 2011 ref={{SfnRefRolling Stone2006}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite weblast=Rolling Stone url= https://www.rollingstone.com/music/artists/led-zeppelin/biography title= Led Zeppelinwork=Rolling Stonelocation=New York accessdate=24 December 2009 year=2009ref={{SfnRefRolling Stone2009}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newslast=Rolling Stone url=https://www.rollingstone.com/music/lists/100-greatest-guitarists-of-all-time-19691231/jimmy-page-19691231title=Greatest guitarists of all time: 9 – Jimmy Pagework=Rolling Stone location=New York year=2011 accessdate=28 July 2011archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20110804000452/http://www.rollingstone.com/music/lists/100-greatest-guitarists-of-all-time-19691231/jimmy-page-19691231 archive-date=4 August 2011ref={{SfnRefRolling Stone2011a}}}}{{failed verification date=August 2015}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst1=Scottlast1=Schinderfirst2=Andylast2=Schwartzyear=2008title=Icons of Rockurl=https://archive.org/details/iconsofrockencyc0000schiurl-access=registrationlocation=Westport, Connecticutpublisher=Greenwood isbn=978-0-313-33846-5 ref={{SfnRefSchinder & Schwartz2008}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst=Keithlast=Shadwickyear=2005title=Led Zeppelin: The Story of a Band and Their Music 1968–1980location=San Franciscopublisher=Backbeat Booksisbn=978-0-87930-871-1ref={{SfnRefShadwick2005}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newsurl=http://edition.cnn.com/2007/SHOWBIZ/Music/12/09/led.zep/index.htmltitle=Can Led Zeppelin still rock? last=Sorel-Cameron first=Peter date=9 December 2007 work=CNN.com Entertainment accessdate=17 February 2011 ref={{SfnRefSorel-Cameron2007}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite weblast=Sparks first=Ryan url=http://www.classicrockrevisited.com/interviewsportnoy.htmtitle=Carpe Diem: an exclusive interview with Mike Portnoy from Dream Theaterarchiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20100103230524/http://classicrockrevisited.com/interviewsportnoy.htmarchivedate=3 January 2010publisher=classicrockrevisited.comaccessdate=29 July 2011 year=2010 ref={{SfnRefSparks2010}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst=Will last=Straw chapter=Characterizing rock music culture: the case of heavy metal title=On Record: Rock, Pop and the Written Word editor=Simon Frith editor2=Andrew Goodwin location=London publisher=Routledge year=1990 isbn=978-0-415-05306-8 ref={{SfnRefStraw1990}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newslast=Talmadgefirst=Ericurl=http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2008/01/28/led-zeppelin-guitarist-wa_n_83534.htmltitle=Led Zeppelin guitarist wants World tourwork=The Huffington Post date=28 January 2008 accessdate=25 November 2008 ref={{SfnRefTalmadge2008}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst=Davelast=Thompsonyear=2004title=Smoke on the Water: The Deep Purple Storylocation=Toronto, Ontariopublisher=ECW Pressurl=https://books.google.com/?id=LzzCw6xs9roC&pg=PA61&dq=Led+Zeppelin+Deep+Purple#v=onepage&q=Led%20Zeppelin%20Deep%20Purple&f=falseisbn=978-1-55022-618-8ref={{SfnRefThompson2004}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newsfirst=Vanessalast=Thorpeurl=https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2007/jul/29/musicnews.musictitle=Led Zeppelin join the net generation work=The Observer date=29 July 2007 accessdate=23 July 2011ref={{SfnRefThorpe2007}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newsfirst=Gustavo last=Turner url=http://www.laweekly.com/2010-08-26/music/the-l-a-weekly-interview-billy-corgan/3/ title=The L.A. weekly interview: Billy Corgan work=LA Weekly date=26 August 2010 ref={{SfnRefTurner2010}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newslast=TVNZ url=http://tvnz.co.nz/entertainment-news/guinness-2010-entertainment-winners-revealed-3313600title=Guinness 2010 entertainment winnerswork=TVNZdate=17 December 2009 accessdate=23 September 2009ref={{SfnRefTVNZ2009}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite weblast=VH1 url=http://www.rockonthenet.com/archive/2000/vh1hardrock.htmtitle=Greatest artists of hard rock publisher=VH1year=2010 accessdate=17 February 2010ref={{SfnRefVH12010}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst=Stevelast=Waksmanyear=2001title=Instruments of Desire: the Electric Guitar and the Shaping of Musical Experiencelocation=Cambridge, Massachusettspublisher=Harvard University Pressurl=https://books.google.com/books?id=-DWxyYapaBwC&pg=PA238&dq=led+zeppelin#v=onepage&q=led%20zeppelin&f=falseisbn=978-0-674-00547-1ref={{SfnRefWaksman2001}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst=Stevelast=Waksmanyear=2009title=This Ain't the Summer of Love: Conflict and Crossover in Heavy Metal and Punklocation=Berkeley, Californiapublisher=University of California Pressisbn=978-0-520-25310-0ref={{SfnRefWaksman2009}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newsfirst=Michaellast=Waleurl=http://archive.timesonline.co.uk/tol/viewArticle.arc?articleId=ARCHIVE-The_Times-1973-07-11-11-003&pageId=ARCHIVE-The_Times-1973-07-11-11title=Led Zeppelinwork=The Timesdate=11 July 1973ref={{SfnRefWale1973}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst=Mick last=Wall authorlink=Mick Wall year=2008 title=When Giants Walked the Earth: A Biography of Led Zeppelinlocation=London publisher=Orion isbn=978-1-4091-0319-6 url=https://books.google.com/books?id=d0-nmLBW-SUC&dqref={{SfnRefWall2008}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst=Robertlast=Walser authorlink=Robert Walser (musicologist) year=1993 title=Running with the Devil: Power, Gender, and Madness in Heavy Metal Music location=New York publisher=Wesleyan University Press isbn=978-0-8195-6260-9ref={{SfnRefWalser1993}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst=Chrislast=Welchauthorlink=Chris Welchyear=1994title=Led Zeppelinlocation=Londonpublisher=Orionisbn=978-1-85797-930-5ref={{SfnRefWelch1994}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst1=Chrislast1=Welchfirst2=Geofflast2=Nichollsyear=2001title=John Bonham: A Thunder of Drumslocation=San Franciscopublisher=Backbeat isbn=978-0-87930-658-8ref={{SfnRefWelch & Nicholls2001}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newsfirst=Nigellast=Williamsontitle=Forget the myths work=Uncut date=May 2005 ref={{SfnRefWilliamson2005}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst=Nigellast=Williamsonyear=2007title=The Rough Guide to Led Zeppelinplace=Londonpublisher=Dorling Kindersleyisbn=978-1-84353-841-7ref={{SfnRefWilliamson2007}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst=Scottlast=Witmeryear=2010title=History of Rock Bandslocation=Edina, Minnesotapublisher=ABDOisbn=978-1-60453-692-8ref={{SfnRefWitmer2010}}}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookfirst=Ritchielast=Yorkeauthorlink=Ritchie Yorkeyear=1993title=Led Zeppelin: The Definitive Biographyurl=https://archive.org/details/ledzeppelindefin0000yorkurl-access=registrationlocation=Novato, Californiapublisher=Underwood–Millerisbn=978-0-88733-177-0ref={{SfnRefYorke1993}}}}\n{{refend}}\n\nBULLET::::- {{cite booklast=Christgaufirst=Robertauthorlink=Robert Christgauchapter=Genius Dumb: Led Zeppelinchapter-url=https://books.google.com/books?id=EdN8VLiEZtcC&pg=PA89#v=onepage&q&f=falsetitle=Grown Up All Wrong: 75 Great Rock and Pop Artists from Vaudeville to Technopages=89–90year=1998publisher=Harvard University Pressisbn=978-0674443181}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite weblast=Greenefirst=Andy title=This week in rock history: Bob Dylan wins his first Grammy and Led Zeppelin become the Nobs work=Rolling Stone date=28 February 2011 accessdate=24 April 2011 url= https://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/this-week-in-rock-history-bob-dylan-wins-his-first-grammy-and-led-zeppelin-become-the-nobs-20110228}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite newslast=Rogersfirst=Georgieaccessdate=8 December 2008url=http://www.bbc.co.uk/6music/news/20080616_mojo.shtml title=MOJO award winnerspublisher=BBCdate=16 June 2008}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite journallast=Brackettfirst=Johnaccessdate=15 June 2014url=https://search.proquest.com/docview/1325852 title=Examining Rhythmic and Metric Practices in Led Zeppelin's Musical Stylejournal=Popular Musicyear=2008doi=10.1017/S0261143008001487volume=27issue=1pages=53–76}}\n{{refend}}\n\nBULLET::::- {{Official website}}\nBULLET::::- Led Zeppelin at Atlantic Records\nBULLET::::- {{YouTubeu=ledzeppelin{{PAGENAMEBASE}}}} (Official)\nBULLET::::- {{CurlieArts/Music/Bands_and_Artists/L/Led_Zeppelin/}}\n"}
{"id": "17911", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17911", "title": "Edward Plunkett, 18th Baron of Dunsany", "text": "Edward Plunkett, 18th Baron of Dunsany\n\nEdward John Moreton Drax Plunkett, 18th Baron of Dunsany (; 24 July 1878 – 25 October 1957), was an Anglo-Irish writer and dramatist; his work, mostly in the fantasy genre, was published under the name Lord Dunsany. More than ninety books of his work were published in his lifetime, and both original work and compilations have continued to appear. Dunsany's œuvre includes many hundreds of published short stories, as well as plays, novels and essays. He achieved great fame and success with his early short stories and plays, and during the 1910s was considered one of the greatest living writers of the English-speaking world; he is today best known for his 1924 fantasy novel \"The King of Elfland's Daughter\". He was the inventor of an asymmetric version of chess called Dunsany's Chess.\n\nBorn and raised in London, to the second-oldest title (created 1439) in the Irish peerage, Dunsany lived much of his life at what may be Ireland's longest-inhabited house, Dunsany Castle near Tara, worked with W. B. Yeats and Lady Gregory, received an honorary doctorate from Trinity College, Dublin, was chess and pistol-shooting champion of Ireland, and travelled and hunted extensively. He died in Dublin after an attack of appendicitis.\n\nEdward Plunkett (\"Dunsany\"), known to his family as \"Eddie,\" was the first son of John William Plunkett, 17th Baron of Dunsany (1853–1899), and his wife, Ernle Elizabeth Louisa Maria Grosvenor Ernle-Erle-Drax, Ernle Elizabeth Louisa Maria Grosvenor Burton (1855–1916).\n\nFrom a historically wealthy and famous family, Lord Dunsany was related to many well-known Irish figures. He was a kinsman of the Catholic Saint Oliver Plunkett, the martyred Archbishop of Armagh, whose ring and crozier head are still held by the Dunsany family. He was also related to the prominent Anglo-Irish unionist, and later nationalist / Home Rule politician Sir Horace Plunkett, and George Count Plunkett, Papal Count and Republican politician, father of Joseph Plunkett, executed for his part in the 1916 Rising.\n\nHis mother was a cousin of Sir Richard Burton, and he inherited from her considerable height, being 6' 4\". The Countess of Fingall, wife of Dunsany's cousin, the Earl of Fingall, wrote a best-selling account of the life of the aristocracy in Ireland in the late 19th century and early 20th century, called \"Seventy Years Young\".\n\nPlunkett's only grown sibling, a younger brother, from whom he was estranged from around 1916, for reasons not fully clear but connected to his mother's will, was the noted British naval officer Sir Reginald Drax. Another, younger, brother died in infancy.\nEdward Plunkett grew up at the family properties, most notably Dunstall Priory in Shoreham, Kent, and Dunsany Castle in County Meath, but also family homes such as in London. His schooling was at Cheam, Eton College and finally the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, which he entered in 1896.\n\nThe title passed to him at his father's death at a fairly young age, in 1899, and the young Lord Dunsany returned to Dunsany Castle after war duty, in 1901. In that year he was also confirmed as an elector for the Representative Peers for Ireland in the House of Lords.\n\nIn 1903, he met Lady Beatrice Child Villiers (1880–1970), youngest daughter of The 7th Earl of Jersey (head of the Jersey banking family), who was then living at Osterley Park, and they were married in 1904. Their only child, Randal, was born in 1906. Beatrice was supportive of Dunsany's interests, and assisted him in his writing, typing his manuscripts, helping to select work for his collections, including the 1954 retrospective short story collection, and overseeing his literary heritage after his death.\n\nThe Dunsanys were socially active in both Dublin and London, and travelled between their homes in Meath, London and Kent, other than during World Wars I and II, and the Irish War of Independence. Dunsany himself circulated with many other literary figures of the time. To many of these in Ireland he was first introduced by his uncle, the co-operative pioneer Sir Horace Plunkett, who also helped to manage his estate and investments for a time. He was friendly with, for example, George William Russell, Oliver St. John Gogarty and, for a time, W. B. Yeats. He also socialised at times with George Bernard Shaw, H.G. Wells and was a friend of Rudyard Kipling.\n\nIn 1910 Dunsany commissioned a two-storey extension to Dunsany Castle, with a billiards room, bedrooms and other facilities. The billiards room includes the crests of all the Lords Dunsany up to the 18th.\n\nDunsany served as a Second Lieutenant in the Coldstream Guards during the Second Boer War.\n\nHe volunteered in the First World War, and was appointed Captain in the Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers. He was stationed for some time at Ebrington Barracks in Derry. Having heard of disturbances in Dublin in 1916, during the Easter Rising, while on leave, he drove in to offer assistance and was wounded, with a bullet lodged in his skull. After recovery at Jervis Street Hospital, and later what was then the King George V Hospital (now St. Bricin's Military Hospital), he returned to duty. His military belt was lost in this episode and was later used at the burial of Michael Collins. Having been refused forward positioning in 1916, being listed as valuable as a trainer, in the latter stages of the war he spent time in the trenches, and in the very last period wrote propaganda material for the War Office with MI7b(1). At Dunsany Castle there is a book of wartime photos with lost members of his command marked.\n\nDuring the Second World War, Dunsany signed up for the Irish Army Reserve and the British Home Guard, the two countries' local defence forces, and was especially active in Shoreham, Kent, the most-bombed village in England during the Battle of Britain.\n\nDunsany's fame arose chiefly from his prolific writings, and he was involved with the Irish Literary Revival. Supporting the Revival, Dunsany was a major donor to the Abbey Theatre, and he moved in Irish literary circles. He was well-acquainted with W. B. Yeats (who rarely acted as editor, but gathered and published a Dunsany selection), Lady Gregory, Percy French, \"AE\" Russell, Oliver St John Gogarty, Padraic Colum (with whom he jointly wrote a play) and others. He befriended and supported Francis Ledwidge to whom he gave the use of his library and Mary Lavin.\n\nDunsany made his first literary tour to the United States in 1919, and made further such visits right up to the 1950s, in the early years mostly to the eastern seaboard, later notably to California.\n\nDunsany's own work, and contribution to the Irish literary heritage, was recognised through an honorary degree from Trinity College, Dublin.\n\nIn 1940, Dunsany was appointed Byron Professor of English in Athens University, Greece. Having reached Athens by a circuitous route, he was so successful that he was offered a post as Professor of English in Istanbul. However, he had to be evacuated due to the German invasion of Greece in April 1941, returning home by an even more complex route than he had come on, his travels forming a basis for a long poem published in book form (A Journey, in 5 cantos: The Battle of Britain, The Battle of Greece, The Battle of the Mediterranean, Battles Long Ago, The Battle of the Atlantic; Special edition January 1944). Olivia Manning's character, \"Lord Pinkrose\", in her novel sequence, the \"Fortunes of War\", was a mocking portrait of Dunsany during this period.\n\nIn 1947, Dunsany transferred his Meath estate to his son and heir under a trust, and settled in Kent, at his Shoreham house, Dunstall Priory and farm, not far from the home of Rudyard Kipling, a friend. He visited Ireland only occasionally thereafter, and engaged actively in life in Shoreham and London. He also began a new period of visits to the United States, notably California, as recounted in Hazel Littlefield-Smith's biographical \"Dunsany, King of Dreams.\"\n\nIn 1957, Lord Dunsany became ill while eating with the Earl and Countess of Fingall at Dunsany, in what proved to be an attack of appendicitis, and died in hospital in Dublin at the age of 79. He had directed that he be buried in the churchyard of the ancient church of St. Peter and St. Paul, Shoreham, Kent, in memory of shared war times. His funeral was attended by a wide range of family (including the Pakenhams, Jerseys and Fingals) and Shoreham figures, and representatives of his old regiment and various bodies in which he had taken an interest. A memorial service was held at Kilmessan in Meath, with a reading of Crossing the Bar which was noted as coinciding with a passing flock of geese.\n\nLady Beatrice survived Lord Dunsany, living on primarily at Shoreham, overseeing his literary legacy until her death in 1970, while their son, Randal, succeeded him in the Barony, and was in turn succeeded by his grandson, the artist Edward Plunkett, to whom literary rights passed directly.\n\nAside from his literary work, Dunsany was a keen chess player, set chess puzzles for journals including \"The Times\" (of London), played José Raúl Capablanca to a draw (in a simultaneous exhibition), and also invented Dunsany's Chess, an asymmetric chess variant that is notable for not involving any fairy pieces, unlike many variants that require the player to learn unconventional piece movements. He was president of both the Irish Chess Union and the Kent County Chess Association for some years, and of Sevenoaks Chess Club for 54 years.\n\nDunsany was a keen horseman and hunter, for many years hosting the hounds of a local hunt, as well as hunting in parts of Africa, and sportsman, and was at one time the pistol-shooting champion of Ireland.\n\nDunsany also campaigned for animal rights, being known especially for his opposition to the \"docking\" of dogs' tails, and was president of the West Kent branch of the RSPCA in his later years.\n\nHe enjoyed cricket, provided the local cricket ground situated near Dunsany Crossroads, and later played for and presided at Shoreham Cricket Club in Kent.\n\nHe was a supporter of Scouting over many years, serving as President of the Sevenoaks district Boy Scouts Association. He also supported the amateur drama group, the Shoreham Players.\n\nDunsany provided support for the British Legion in both Ireland and Kent, including grounds in Trim and poetry for the Irish branch's annual memorial service on a number of occasions.\n\nDunsany was a prolific writer, penning short stories, novels, plays, poetry, essays and autobiography, and publishing over 90 books in his lifetime, not including individual plays. Books have continued to appear, with more than 120 having issued as of 2017. Dunsany's works have been published in many languages.\n\nThe then Edward Plunkett began his authorial career in the late 1890s, with a few published verses, such as \"Rhymes from a Suburb\" and \"The Spirit of the Bog\", but he made a lasting impression in 1905 when he burst onto the publishing scene, writing as Lord Dunsany, with the well-received collection \"The Gods of Pegāna.\"\n\nDunsany's most notable fantasy short stories were published in collections from 1905 to 1919, though fantasy as a genre did not yet exist, so they were just a curious form of literature. He paid for the publication of the first collection, \"The Gods of Pegāna,\" earning a commission on sales. This he never again had to do, the vast majority of his extensive writings selling.\n\nThe stories in his first two books, and perhaps the beginning of his third, were set within an invented world, Pegāna, with its own gods, history and geography. Starting with this book, Dunsany's name is linked to that of Sidney Sime, his chosen artist, who illustrated much of his work, notably until 1922.\n\nDunsany's style varied significantly throughout his writing career. Prominent Dunsany scholar S. T. Joshi has described these shifts as Dunsany moving on after he felt he had exhausted the potential of a style or medium. From the naïve fantasy of his earliest writings, through his early short story work in 1904–1908, he turned to the self-conscious fantasy of \"The Book of Wonder\" in 1912, in which he almost seems to be parodying his lofty early style.\n\nEach of his collections varies in mood; \"A Dreamer's Tales\" varies from the wistfulness of \"Blagdaross\" to the horrors of \"Poor Old Bill\" and \"Where the Tides Ebb and Flow\" to the social satire of \"The Day of the Poll.\"\n\nThe opening paragraph of \"The Hoard of the Gibbelins\" from \"The Book of Wonder,\" (1912) gives a good indication of both the tone and tenor of Dunsany's style at the time:\n\nAfter \"The Book of Wonder,\" Dunsany began to write plays – many of which were even more successful, at the time, than his early story collections – while also continuing to write short stories. He continued to write plays for the theatre into the 1930s, including the famous \"If\", and a number for radio production.\n\nAlthough many of Dunsany's stage plays were successfully produced within his lifetime, he also wrote a number of \"chamber plays\" (or closet dramas), which were intended only to be read privately (as if they were stories) or performed on the radio, rather than staged . Some of Dunsany's chamber or radio plays contain supernatural events – such as a character spontaneously appearing out of thin air, or vanishing in full view of the audience, without any explanation of how the effect is to be staged, a matter of no importance, since Dunsany did not intend these works actually to be performed live and visible.\n\nFollowing a successful lecture touring in the US in 1919–1920 and with his reputation now principally related to his plays, Dunsany temporarily reduced his output of short stories, concentrating on plays, novels and poetry for a time.\n\nHis poetry, now little seen, was for a time so popular that it is recited by the lead character of F. Scott Fitzgerald's \"This Side of Paradise\" and one of his poems, the sonnet \"A Dirge of Victory\" – the only poem included in the Armistice Day edition of the Times of London.\n\nLaunching another phase of his work, Dunsany's first novel, \"\", was published in 1922. It is set in \"a Romantic Spain that never was,\" and follows the adventures of a young nobleman, Don Rodriguez, and his servant in their search for a castle for Rodriguez. It has been argued that Dunsany's inexperience with the novel form shows in the episodic nature of \"Don Rodriguez.\" In 1924, Dunsany published his second novel, \"The King of Elfland's Daughter,\" a return to his early style of writing, which is considered by many to be Dunsany's finest novel and a classic in the realm of the fantasy writing. In his next novel, \"The Charwoman's Shadow,\" Dunsany returned to the Spanish milieu and to the light style of \"Don Rodriguez,\" to which it is related.\n\nThough his style and medium shifted frequently, Dunsany's thematic concerns remained essentially the same. Many of Dunsany's later novels had an explicitly Irish theme, from the semi-autobiographical \"The Curse of the Wise Woman\" to \"His Fellow Men.\"\n\nOne of Dunsany's best-known characters was Joseph Jorkens, an obese middle-aged raconteur who frequented the fictional Billiards Club in London, and who would tell fantastic stories if someone would buy him a large whiskey and soda. From his tales, it was obvious that Mr Jorkens had travelled to all seven continents, was extremely resourceful, and well-versed in world cultures, but always came up short on becoming rich and famous. The \"Jorkens\" books, which sold well, were among the first of a type which was to become popular in fantasy and science fiction writing: extremely improbable \"club tales\" told at a gentleman's club or bar.\n\nDunsany's writing habits were considered peculiar by some. Lady Beatrice said that \"He always sat on a crumpled old hat while composing his tales.\" (The hat was eventually stolen by a visitor to Dunsany Castle.) Dunsany almost never rewrote anything; everything he ever published was a first draft. Much of his work was penned with quill pens, which he made himself; Lady Beatrice was usually the first to see the writings, and would help type them. It has been said that Lord Dunsany would sometimes conceive stories while hunting, and would return to the Castle and draw in his family and servants to re-enact his visions before he set them on paper.\n\nDunsany's work was translated from an early stage, to languages including Spanish, French, Japanese, German, Italian, Dutch, Russian, Czech and Turkish. His uncle, Horace Plunkett, mentioned that he had been translated into 14 languages already by the 1920s.\n\nBULLET::::- Most of Dunsany's plays were performed during his lifetime, some of them many times in many locations, including the West End, Broadway and Off-Broadway. At one time, five ran simultaneously in New York, possibly all on Broadway, while on another occasion, he was in performance in four European capitals plus New York.\n\nBULLET::::- Dunsany wrote several plays for radio production, most being broadcast on the BBC and some being collected in \"Plays for Earth and Air\". The BBC had records of the broadcasts, but according to articles on the author, these recordings are not extant.\nBULLET::::- Dunsany is recorded as having read short stories and poetry on air, and for private recording by Hazel Littlefield-Smith and friends in California, and it is believed that one or two of these recordings survive.\nBULLET::::- The successful film \"It Happened Tomorrow\" was later adapted for radio.\nBULLET::::- The radio drama \"Fortress of Doom\" (2005) in the \"Radio Tales\" series is an adaptation of Dunsany's short story \"The Fortress Unvanquishable, Save for Sacnoth\".\n\nBULLET::::- Dunsany appeared on early television a number of times, notably on \"The Brains Trust\" (reaching over a quarter of the UK population), but no recordings are known to exist.\nBULLET::::- A 1946 BBC television production of \"A Night at an Inn\", starring Oliver Burt\nBULLET::::- A half-hour television dramatization of \"A Night at an Inn\", starring Boris Karloff, adapted from Dunsany's play by Halsted Welles and directed by Robert Stevens, was produced for \"Suspense\" and aired in April 1949.\nBULLET::::- In 1952, \"Four Star Playhouse\" presented \"The Lost Silk Hat\", directed by Robert Florey and starring Ronald Colman, who also collaborated with Milton Merli on the script.\nBULLET::::- An adaptation of \"The Pirates of the Round Pond\", as \"'The Pirates of Central Park\", aired in 2001\nBULLET::::- A dramatised reading of \"Charon\" within USA TV series \"Fantasmagori\", 2017\n\nBULLET::::- The 1944 film \"It Happened Tomorrow\", critically and commercially successful, and nominated for two Oscars, credited The Jest of Hahalaba as one of its sources, and it was said that 1998 British-American romantic comedy-drama film \"Sliding Doors\", with some similar plot points, directed by Peter Howitt, also had a Dunsanian link with that material and with If.\nBULLET::::- The short film \"In the Twilight\", a 15-minute colour production from the short story of the same name, directed by Digby Rumsey showcased in the mid-1970s at the London Film Festival.\nBULLET::::- The short film \"Nature and Time\", a 1976 colour production from the short story of the same name, directed by Digby Rumsey and starring Helen York and Paul Goodchild.\nBULLET::::- The short film \"The Pledge\", a 22-minute colour production from the short story \"The Highwayman\", directed by Digby Rumsey, released by Fantasy Films in 1981 and distributed by Twentieth Century Fox, with music by Michael Nyman.\nBULLET::::- The 2008 film \"Dean Spanley\", adapted by Alan Sharp from the short novel \"My Talks With Dean Spanley\", directed by Toa Fraser and produced by Matthew Metcalfe and Alan Harris, and starring Peter O'Toole, Sam Neill, Jeremy Northam and Bryan Brown.\nBULLET::::- George Pal took an option on the science fiction novel \"The Last Revolution\" for some years in the 1960s, and at least the short story Charon and the novel \" The King of Elfland's Daughter\" were also optioned at different times, but none are believed to have proceeded to production. Granada TV also bought options to or rights for certain stories.\n\nBULLET::::- In 1977, Peter Knight and Bob Johnson, two members of Steeleye Span recorded a concept album based on Dunsany's \"The King of Elfland's Daughter\", released by Chrysalis Records on LP and later on CD. The album starred Christopher Lee.\nBULLET::::- An adaptation of \"The Fortress Unvanquishable, Save for Sacnoth\" by Destiny's End, 1998\nBULLET::::- An interpretation of The King of Elfland's Daughter by metal band Falcon, 2008\n\nBULLET::::- An LP of Vincent Price reading a number of Dunsany's short stories was released in the 1980s.\nBULLET::::- A number of Dunsany short stories have been published as audiobooks in Germany, and played on the German national railway, Deutsche Bahn (DB).\nBULLET::::- \"The Little Tales of Smethers and Other Stories\", published in the UK and USA in 2017.\nBULLET::::- A set of short stories set to music, The Vengeance of Thor, released by Pegana Press, Olympia, Washington, USA in 2017.\n\nBULLET::::- Dunsany appears as a playable character in the 1999 PlayStation game \"Koudelka\".\n\nLord Dunsany was a Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature, a member, and at once point the President, of the Authors' Society, and likewise President of the Shakespeare Reading Society from 1938 until his death in 1957, succeeded by Sir John Gielgud.\n\nDunsany was also a Fellow of the Royal Geographical Society, and an honorary member of the Institut Historique et Heraldique de France.\n\nHe was initially an Associate Member of the Irish Academy of Letters, founded by Yeats and others, and later a full member. At one of their meetings, after 1922, he asked Seán Ó Faoláin, who was presiding, \"Do we not toast the King?\" Ó Faoláin replied that there was only one toast: to the Nation; but after it was given and O'Faolain had called for coffee, he saw Dunsany, standing quietly among the bustle, raise his glass discreetly, and whisper \"God bless him\".\n\n\"The Curse of the Wise Woman\" received the Harmsworth Literary Award in Ireland.\n\nDunsany received an honorary doctorate, D.Litt., from Trinity College, Dublin, in 1940.\n\nDunsany was nominated for the Nobel Prize by Irish PEN, but lost to Bertrand Russell.\n\nBULLET::::- Dunsany studied Greek and Latin, particularly Greek drama and Herodotus, the \"Father of History\". Dunsany wrote in a letter: \"When I learned Greek at Cheam and heard of other gods a great pity came on me for those beautiful marble people that had become forsaken and this mood has never quite left me.\"1\nBULLET::::- The King James Bible. In a letter to Frank Harris, Dunsany wrote: \"When I went to Cheam School I was given a lot of the Bible to read. This turned my thoughts eastward. For years no style seemed to me natural but that of the Bible and I feared that I never would become a writer when I saw that other people did not use it.\"\nBULLET::::- The wide-ranging collection in the Library of Dunsany Castle, dating back centuries and comprising many classic works, from early encyclopedias through parliamentary records, Greek and Latin works and Victorian illustrated books\nBULLET::::- The fairy tales of the Brothers Grimm and Hans Christian Andersen.\nBULLET::::- The work of Edgar Allan Poe.\nBULLET::::- Irish speech patterns\nBULLET::::- \"The Darling of the Gods\", a stage play written by David Belasco and John Luther Long, first performed 1902–1903. The play presents a fantastical, imaginary version of Japan that powerfully affected Dunsany and may be a key template for his own imaginary kingdoms.\nBULLET::::- Algernon Charles Swinburne, who wrote the line \"Time and the Gods are at strife\" in his 1866 poem \"Hymn to Proserpine\". Dunsany later realized this was his unconscious influence for the title \"Time and the Gods\".\nBULLET::::- The heroic romances of William Morris, set in imaginary lands of the author's creation, such as \"The Well at the World's End\".\nBULLET::::- Dunsany's 1922 novel \"Don Rodriguez: Chronicles of Shadow Valley\" seems to draw openly from Cervantes' \"Don Quixote de la Mancha\" (1605, 1615).\nBULLET::::- Dunsany named his play \"The Seventh Symphony\" (collected in \"Plays for Earth and Air\" [1937]) after Beethoven's 7th Symphony, which was one of Dunsany's favourite works of music. One of the last \"Jorkens\" stories returns to this theme, referring to Beethoven's \"Tenth Symphony\".\n\nBULLET::::- Francis Ledwidge, who wrote to Dunsany in 1912 asking for help with getting his poetry published. After a delay due to a hunting trip in Africa, Dunsany invited the poet to his home, and they met and corresponded regularly thereafter, and Dunsany was so impressed that he helped with publication, and with introductions to literary society. The two became friendly and Dunsany, trying to discourage Ledwidge from joining the army when the First World War broke out, offered financial support. Ledwidge, however, did join up and found himself for a time in the same unit as Dunsany, who helped with publication of his first collection, \"Songs of the Fields,\" which was received with critical success upon its release in 1915. Throughout the war years, Ledwidge kept in contact with Dunsany, sending him poems. Ledwidge was killed at the Battle of Passchendaele two years later, even as his second collection of poetry, also selected by Dunsany, circulated. Dunsany subsequently arranged for the publication of a third collection, and later a first \"Collected Edition\". Some unpublished Ledwidge poetry and drama, given or sent to Dunsany, is still held at the Castle.\nBULLET::::- Mary Lavin, who received support and encouragement from Dunsany over many years\nBULLET::::- William Butler Yeats, who, although he rarely acted as an editor, selected and edited a collection of Dunsany's work in 1912\nBULLET::::- Lady Wentworth, a poet, writing in a classical style, received support from Dunsany\n\nBULLET::::- H. P. Lovecraft was greatly impressed by Dunsany after seeing him on a speaking tour of the United States, and Lovecraft's \"Dream Cycle\" stories, his dark pseudo-history of how the universe came to be, and his god Azathoth all clearly show Dunsany's influence. Lovecraft once wrote, \"There are my 'Poe' pieces and my 'Dunsany' pieces—but alas—where are my Lovecraft pieces?\"\nBULLET::::- Robert E. Howard included Dunsany in a list of his favourite poets in a 1932 letter to Lovecraft. Lovecraft also wrote a poem about Dunsany.\nBULLET::::- Clark Ashton Smith was familiar with Dunsany's work, and it had some influence on his own fantasy stories.\nBULLET::::- J. R. R. Tolkien, according to John D. Rateliff's report, presented Clyde S. Kilby with a copy of \"The Book of Wonder\" as kind of a preparation to his auxiliary role in the compilation and development of \"The Silmarillion\" during the Sixties. Tolkien's letters and divulged notes made allusions to two of the stories found in this volume, \"Chu-Bu and Sheemish\" and \"The Distressing Tale of Thangobrind the Jeweller.\" Dale J. Nelson has argued in \"Tolkien Studies 01\" that Tolkien may have been inspired by another of \"The Book of Wonder\"'s tales, \"The Hoard of the Gibbelins,\" while writing one of his poems, \"The Mewlips,\" included in \"The Adventures of Tom Bombadil\".\nBULLET::::- Guillermo Del Toro, Mexican filmmaker, has cited Dunsany as an influence .\nBULLET::::- Neil Gaiman has expressed admiration for Dunsany and has written an introduction to a collection of his stories. Some commentators have posited links between \"The King of Elfland's Daughter\" and Gaiman's \"Stardust\" (book and film), a connection seemingly supported by a comment of Gaiman's quoted in \"The Neil Gaiman Reader\".\nBULLET::::- Jorge Luis Borges included Dunsany's short story \"The Idle City\" in \"Antología de la Literatura Fantástica\" (1940, revised 1976), a collection of short works Borges selected and provided forewords for. Borges also, in his essay \"Kafka and His Precursors,\" included Dunsany's story \"Carcassonne\" as one of the texts that presaged, or paralleled, Kafka's themes.\nBULLET::::- Donald Wandrei, in a 7 February 1927 letter to H.P. Lovecraft, listed Dunsany's \"The King of Elfland's Daughter\" among his collection of \"weird books\" that Wandrei had read.\nBULLET::::- Talbot Mundy greatly admired Dunsany's \"plays and fantasy\", according to Mundy biographer Brian Taves.\nBULLET::::- C. M. Kornbluth was an avid reader of Dunsany as a young man, and mentions Dunsany in his short fantasy story \"Mr. Packer Goes to Hell\" (1941).\nBULLET::::- Arthur C. Clarke enjoyed Dunsany's work and corresponded with him between 1944 and 1956. Those letters are collected in the book \"Arthur C. Clarke & Lord Dunsany: A Correspondence\". Clarke also edited and allowed the use of an early essay as an introduction to one volume of \"The Collected Jorkens\" and that essay acknowledges the link between Jorkens and \"Tales from the White Hart\". Clarke states, humorously, that any reader who sees a link between the two works will *not* be hearing from his solicitors.\nBULLET::::- Manly Wade Wellman esteemed Dunsany's fiction.\nBULLET::::- Margaret St. Clair was an admirer of Dunsany's work, and her story \"The Man Who Sold Rope to the Gnoles\" (1951) is a sequel to Dunsany's \"How Nuth Would Have Practised His Art Upon the Gnoles\".\nBULLET::::- Evangeline Walton stated in an interview that Dunsany inspired her to write fantasy.\nBULLET::::- Jack Vance was a keen reader of Dunsany's work as a child.\nBULLET::::- Michael Moorcock often cites Dunsany as a strong influence.\nBULLET::::- Peter S. Beagle also cites Dunsany as an influence, and wrote an introduction for one of the recent reprint editions.\nBULLET::::- David Eddings once named Lord Dunsany as his personal favourite fantasy writer, and recommended aspiring authors to sample him.\nBULLET::::- Gene Wolfe used one of Dunsany's poems to open his bestselling 2004 work \"The Knight\".\nBULLET::::- Fletcher Pratt's 1948 novel \"The Well of the Unicorn\" was written as a sequel to Dunsany's play \"King Argimenes and the Unknown Warrior\".\nBULLET::::- Ursula K. Le Guin, in her essay on style in fantasy \"From Elfland to Poughkeepsie\", wryly referred to Lord Dunsany as the \"First Terrible Fate that Awaiteth Unwary Beginners in Fantasy\", alluding to the (at the time) very common practice of young writers attempting to write in Lord Dunsany's style.\nBULLET::::- M. J. Engh has acknowledged Lord Dunsany as an influence on her work.\nBULLET::::- Welleran Poltarnees, an author of numerous non-fantasy \"blessing books\" employing turn-of-the-century artwork, is a pen name based on two of Lord Dunsany's most famous stories.\nBULLET::::- Gary Myers's 1975 short story collection \"The House of the Worm\" is a double pastiche of Dunsany and Lovecraft.\nBULLET::::- Álvaro Cunqueiro openly admitted the influence of Lord Dunsany on his work, and wrote him an epitaph which is included in \"Herba de aquí e de acolá\".\n\nS. T. Joshi and Darrell Schweitzer have been working on the Dunsany œuvre for over twenty years, gathering stories and essays and reference material, and producing both an initial bibliography (together) and scholarly studies of Dunsany's work (separate works). They issued an updated version of the bibliography in 2013. Joshi edited \"The Collected Jorkens\", \"The Ginger Cat and other lost plays\" and co-edited \"The Ghost in the Corner and other stories\". Both are well-known figures in the fields of speculative fiction.\n\nIn the late 1990s a curator, J.W. (Joe) Doyle, was appointed by the Dunsany estate, working at Dunsany Castle, among other things locating and organising the author's manuscripts, typescripts and other materials. Doyle discovered both works known to exist but \"lost\", such as the plays \"The Ginger Cat\" and \"The Murderers,\" some Jorkens stories, and the novel \"The Pleasures of a Futuroscope\" (subsequently published by Hippocampus Press) and unknown, unpublished works, notably including \"The Last Book of Jorkens\", to the first edition of which he wrote an introduction, and an unnamed 1956 short story collection, published as part of \"The Ghost in the Corner and other stories\" in 2017.\n\nIn the 2000s a PhD researcher, Tania Scott, from the University of Glasgow, worked on Dunsany for some time, and has spoken at literary and other conventions. A Swedish fan, Martin Andersson, has also been active in research and publication in the mid-2010s.\n\nDunsany's literary rights passed from the author to a Trust, which still owns them. These rights were first managed by Beatrice, Lady Dunsany, and are currently administered by Curtis Brown of London and partner companies worldwide (some past US deals, for example, have been listed by Locus Magazine as by SCG).\n\nAll of Dunsany's work is in copyright in parts of the world , including the UK and European Union, with the early work (published before 1 January 1923) being in the public domain in the United States, and all of his work out of copyright in parts of the world with copyright durations of life + 60 or less. \nDunsany's primary home, over 820 years old, can be visited at certain times of year, and tours usually include the Library, but not the tower room he often liked to work in. His other home, Dunstall Priory, was sold to a fan, Grey Gowrie, later head of the Arts Council of the UK, and thence passed on to other owners; the family still own farm- and down-land in the area, and a Tudor cottage in Shoreham village. The grave of Lord Dunsany and his wife can be seen in the Church of England graveyard in the village (most of the previous barons are buried in the grounds of Dunsany Castle).\n\nDunsany's original manuscripts are collected in the family archive, including some specially bound volumes of some of his works. As noted, there has been a curator since the late 1990s and scholarly access is possible by application.\n\nBULLET::::- List of fantasy authors\nBULLET::::- List of horror fiction authors\n\nBULLET::::- Schweitzer, Darrell. \"Lord Dunsany: Visions of Wonder\". \"Studies in Weird Fiction\" 5 (Spring 1989), 20–26.\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- S.T. Joshi. \"Lord Dunsany: The Career of a Fantaisiste\" in Darrell Schweitzer (ed). \"Discovering Classic Fantasy Fiction\", Gillette, NJ: Wildside Press, 1996, pp. 7–48.\nBULLET::::- .\n\nBULLET::::- Lin Carter \"The World's Edge, and Beyond: The Fiction of Dunsany, Eddison and Cabell\" in \"Imaginary Worlds: The Art of Fantasy\". NY: Ballantine Books, 1973, 27-48.\n\nBULLET::::- Lord Dunsany: the author's page in the official family site\nBULLET::::- Works by Lord Dunsany at Online Books\nBULLET::::- Dunsany Bibliography, including cover images and summaries\nBULLET::::- Review of Lord Dunsany's short stories by Jo Walton\nBULLET::::- Edward Winter, Lord Dunsany and Chess (2006)\n"}
{"id": "17914", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17914", "title": "Ludwig van Beethoven", "text": "Ludwig van Beethoven\n\nLudwig van Beethoven (; ; baptised 17 December 177026 March 1827) was a German composer and pianist. A crucial figure in the transition between the classical and romantic eras in classical music, he remains one of the most recognized and influential musicians of this period, and is considered to be one of the greatest composers of all time.\n\nBeethoven was born in Bonn, the capital of the Electorate of Cologne, and part of the Holy Roman Empire. He displayed his musical talents at an early age and was vigorously taught by his father Johann van Beethoven, and was later taught by composer and conductor Christian Gottlob Neefe. At age 21, he moved to Vienna and studied composition with Joseph Haydn. Beethoven then gained a reputation as a virtuoso pianist, and was soon courted by Karl Alois, Prince Lichnowsky for compositions, which resulted in Opus 1 in 1795.\n\nThe piece was a great critical and commercial success, and was followed by Symphony No. 1 in 1800. This composition was distinguished for its frequent use of \"sforzandi\", as well as sudden shifts in tonal centers that were uncommon for traditional symphonic form, and the prominent, more independent use of wind instruments. In 1801, he also gained notoriety for his six String Quartets and for the ballet \"The Creatures of Prometheus\". During this period, his hearing began to deteriorate, but he continued to conduct, premiering his third and fifth symphonies in 1804 and 1808, respectively. His condition worsened to almost complete deafness by 1811, and he then gave up performing and appearing in public.\n\nDuring this period of self exile, Beethoven composed many of his most admired works; his seventh symphony premiered in 1813, with its second movement, \"Allegretto\", achieving widespread critical acclaim. He composed the piece \"Missa Solemnis\" for a number of years until it premiered 1824, which preceded his ninth symphony, with the latter gaining fame for being among the first examples of a choral symphony. In 1826, his fourteenth String Quartet was noted for having seven linked movements played without a break, and is considered the final major piece performed before his death a year later.\n\nHis career is conventionally divided into early, middle, and late periods; the \"early\" period is typically seen to last until 1802, the \"middle\" period from 1802 to 1812, and the \"late\" period from 1812 to his death in 1827. During his life, he composed nine symphonies; five piano concertos; one violin concerto; thirty-two piano sonatas; sixteen string quartets; two masses; and the opera \"Fidelio\". Other works, like Für Elise, were discovered after his death, and are also considered historical musical achievements. Beethoven's legacy is characterized for his innovative compositions, namely through the combinations of vocals and instruments, and also for widening the scope of sonata, symphony, concerto, and quartet, while he is also noted for his troublesome relationship with his contemporaries.\n\nBeethoven was the grandson of Ludwig van Beethoven (1712–1773), a musician from the town of Mechelen in the Austrian Duchy of Brabant (in what is now the Flemish region of Belgium) who had moved to Bonn at the age of 21. Ludwig was employed as a bass singer at the court of Clemens August, Archbishop-Elector of Cologne, eventually rising to become, in 1761, (music director) and thereafter the pre-eminent musician in Bonn. The portrait he commissioned of himself towards the end of his life remained displayed in his grandson's rooms as a talisman of his musical heritage. Ludwig had one son, Johann (1740–1792), who worked as a tenor in the same musical establishment and gave keyboard and violin lessons to supplement his income. Johann married Maria Magdalena Keverich in 1767; she was the daughter of Johann Heinrich Keverich (1701–1751), who had been the head chef at the court of the Archbishopric of Trier.\n\nBeethoven was born of this marriage in Bonn. There is no authentic record of the date of his birth; however, the registry of his baptism, in a Catholic service at the Parish of St. Regius on 17 December 1770, survives. As children of that era were traditionally baptised the day after birth in the Catholic Rhine country, and it is known that Beethoven's family and his teacher Johann Albrechtsberger celebrated his birthday on 16 December, most scholars accept 16 December 1770 as his date of birth. \n\nOf the seven children born to Johann van Beethoven, only Ludwig, the second-born, and two younger brothers survived infancy. Kaspar Anton Karl was born on 8 April 1774, and Nikolaus Johann, the youngest, was born on 2 October 1776.\n\nBeethoven's first music teacher was his father. He later had other local teachers: the court organist Gilles van den Eeden (d. 1782), Tobias Friedrich Pfeiffer (a family friend, who provided keyboard tuition), and Franz Rovantini (a relative, who instructed him in playing the violin and viola). From the outset his tuition regime, which began in his fifth year, was harsh and intensive, often reducing him to tears; with the involvement of the insomniac Pfeiffer there were irregular late-night sessions with the young Beethoven being dragged from his bed to the keyboard. His musical talent was obvious at a young age. Johann, aware of Leopold Mozart's successes in this area (with his son Wolfgang and daughter Nannerl), attempted to promote his son as a child prodigy, claiming that Beethoven was six (he was seven) on the posters for his first public performance in March 1778.\n\nSome time after 1779, Beethoven began his studies with his most important teacher in Bonn, Christian Gottlob Neefe, who was appointed the Court's Organist in that year. Neefe taught him composition, and by March 1783 had helped him write his first published composition: a set of keyboard variations (WoO 63). Beethoven soon began working with Neefe as assistant organist, at first unpaid (1781), and then as a paid employee (1784) of the court chapel conducted by the Kapellmeister Andrea Luchesi. His first three piano sonatas, named \"\" (\"Elector\") for their dedication to the Elector Maximilian Friedrich (1708–1784), were published in 1783. Maximilian Frederick noticed his talent early, and subsidised and encouraged the young man's musical studies.\n\nMaximilian Frederick's successor as the Elector of Bonn was Maximilian Francis, the youngest son of Empress Maria Theresa of Austria, and he brought notable changes to Bonn. Echoing changes made in Vienna by his brother Joseph, he introduced reforms based on Enlightenment philosophy, with increased support for education and the arts. The teenage Beethoven was almost certainly influenced by these changes. He may also have been influenced at this time by ideas prominent in freemasonry, as Neefe and others around Beethoven were members of the local chapter of the Order of the Illuminati.\n\nIn December 1786, Beethoven travelled to Vienna, at his employer's expense, for the first time, apparently in the hope of studying with Mozart. The details of their relationship are uncertain, including whether they actually met. Having learned that his mother was ill, Beethoven returned quickly to Bonn in May 1787. His mother died shortly thereafter, and his father lapsed deeper into alcoholism. As a result, he became responsible for the care of his two younger brothers, and spent the next five years in Bonn.\n\nHe was introduced in these years to several people who became important in his life. Franz Wegeler, a young medical student, introduced him to the von Breuning family (one of whose daughters Wegeler eventually married). He often visited the von Breuning household, where he taught piano to some of the children. Here he encountered German and classical literature. The von Breuning family environment was less stressful than his own, which was increasingly dominated by his father's decline. He also came to the attention of Count Ferdinand von Waldstein, who became a lifelong friend and financial supporter.\n\nIn 1789 Beethoven obtained a legal order by which half of his father's salary was paid directly to him for support of the family. He also contributed further to the family's income by playing viola in the court orchestra. This familiarised him with a variety of operas, including three by Mozart that were performed at court in this period. He also befriended Anton Reicha, a flautist and violinist of about his own age who was a nephew of the court orchestra's conductor, Josef Reicha.\n\nFrom 1790 to 1792, he composed a significant number of works (none were published at the time, and most are now listed as \"WoO\", works without opus number) that demonstrated his growing range and maturity. Musicologists have identified a theme similar to those of his Third Symphony in a set of variations written in 1791. It was probably on Neefe's recommendation that Beethoven received his first commissions; the municipal leaders in Bonn had commissioned cantatas to mark the occasion of the death in 1790 of Joseph II and the subsequent accession of Leopold II as Holy Roman Emperor. The two \"Emperor Cantatas\" (WoO 87, WoO 88) he scored were never performed at the time and they remained lost until the 1880s. But they were, according to Brahms, distinctively \"Beethoven through and through\" and as such prophetic of the tragic style which would mark his music as distinct from the classical tradition.\n\nHe was probably first introduced to Joseph Haydn in late 1790, when the latter was travelling to London and stopped in Bonn around Christmas time. A year and a half later, they met in Bonn on Haydn's return trip from London to Vienna in July 1792, when Beethoven played in the orchestra at the Redoute in Godesberg. It is likely that arrangements were made at that time for Beethoven to study with the old master.\n\nWith the Elector's help, he left Bonn for Vienna in November 1792, amid rumours of war spilling out of France; he learned shortly after his arrival that his father had died. Mozart had also recently died. Count Waldstein, in his farewell note to Beethoven, wrote: \"Through uninterrupted diligence you will receive Mozart's spirit through Haydn's hands.\" Over the next few years, Beethoven responded to the widespread feeling that he was a successor to the recently deceased Mozart by studying that master's work and writing works with a distinctly Mozartean flavour.\nHe did not immediately set out to establish himself as a composer, but rather devoted himself to study and performance. Working under Haydn's direction, he sought to master counterpoint. He also studied violin under Ignaz Schuppanzigh. Early in this period, he also began receiving occasional instruction from Antonio Salieri, primarily in Italian vocal composition style; this relationship persisted until at least 1802, and possibly as late as 1809. With Haydn's departure for England in 1794, Beethoven was expected by the Elector to return home to Bonn. He chose instead to remain in Vienna, continuing his instruction in counterpoint with Johann Albrechtsberger and other teachers. In any case, by this time it must have seemed clear to his employer that Bonn would fall to the French, as it did in October 1794, effectively leaving Beethoven without a stipend or the necessity to return. However, a number of Viennese noblemen had already recognised his ability and offered him financial support, among them Prince Joseph Franz Lobkowitz, Prince Karl Lichnowsky, and Baron Gottfried van Swieten.\n\nBy 1793, he had established a reputation as an improviser in the salons of the nobility, often playing the preludes and fugues of J.S. Bach's \"Well-Tempered Clavier\". His friend Nikolaus Simrock had begun publishing his compositions; the first are believed to be a set of variations (WoO 66). By 1793, he had established a reputation in Vienna as a piano virtuoso, but he apparently withheld works from publication so that their publication in 1795 would have greater impact. His first public performance in Vienna was in March 1795, a concert in which he first performed one of his piano concertos. It is uncertain whether this was the First or Second. Documentary evidence is unclear, and both concertos were in a similar state of near-completion (neither was completed or published for several years). Shortly after this performance, he arranged for the publication of the first of his compositions to which he assigned an opus number, the three piano trios, Opus 1. These works were dedicated to his patron Prince Lichnowsky, and were a financial success; Beethoven's profits were nearly sufficient to cover his living expenses for a year.\n\nBeethoven composed his first six string quartets (Op. 18) between 1798 and 1800 (commissioned by, and dedicated to, Prince Lobkowitz). They were published in 1801. With premieres of his First and Second Symphonies in 1800 and 1803, he became regarded as one of the most important of a generation of young composers following Haydn and Mozart. He also continued to write in other forms, turning out widely known piano sonatas like the \"Pathétique\" sonata (Op. 13), which Cooper describes as \"surpass[ing] any of his previous compositions, in strength of character, depth of emotion, level of originality, and ingenuity of motivic and tonal manipulation.\" He also completed his Septet (Op. 20) in 1799, which was one of his most popular works during his lifetime.\nFor the premiere of his \"First Symphony\", he hired the Burgtheater on 2 April 1800, and staged an extensive programme of music, including works by Haydn and Mozart, as well as his Septet, the First Symphony, and one of his piano concertos (the latter three works all then unpublished). The concert, which the \"Allgemeine musikalische Zeitung\" described as \"the most interesting concert in a long time,\" was not without difficulties; among the criticisms was that \"the players did not bother to pay any attention to the soloist.\"\n\nMozart and Haydn were undeniable influences. For example, Beethoven's quintet for piano and winds is said to bear a strong resemblance to Mozart's work for the same configuration, albeit with his own distinctive touches.\n\nBut his melodies, musical development, use of modulation and texture, and characterisation of emotion all set him apart from his influences, and heightened the impact some of his early works made when they were first published. By the end of 1800, Beethoven and his music were already much in demand from patrons and publishers.\n\nIn May 1799, he taught piano to the daughters of Hungarian Countess Anna Brunsvik. During this time, he fell in love with the younger daughter Josephine who has therefore been identified as one of the more likely candidates for the addressee of his letter to the \"Immortal Beloved\" (in 1812). Shortly after these lessons, Josephine was married to Count Josef Deym. Beethoven was a regular visitor at their house, continuing to teach Josephine, and playing at parties and concerts. Her marriage was by all accounts happy (despite initial financial problems), and the couple had four children. Her relationship with Beethoven intensified after Deym died suddenly in 1804.\nHe also had a few other students. From 1801 to 1805, he tutored Ferdinand Ries, who went on to become a composer and later wrote \"Beethoven remembered\", a book about their encounters. The young Carl Czerny studied with Beethoven from 1801 to 1803. Czerny later became a renowned music teacher himself, instructing Franz Liszt, and on 11 February 1812 gave the Vienna premiere of Beethoven's fifth piano concerto (the \"Emperor\").\n\nHis compositions between 1800 and 1802 were dominated by two large-scale orchestral works, although he continued to produce other important works such as the piano sonata Sonata quasi una fantasia known as the \"Moonlight Sonata\". In the spring of 1801 he completed \"The Creatures of Prometheus\", a ballet. The work received numerous performances in 1801 and 1802, and he rushed to publish a piano arrangement to capitalise on its early popularity. In the spring of 1802 he completed the Second Symphony, intended for performance at a concert that was cancelled. The symphony received its premiere instead at a subscription concert in April 1803 at the Theater an der Wien, where he had been appointed composer in residence. In addition to the Second Symphony, the concert also featured the First Symphony, the Third Piano Concerto, and the oratorio \"Christ on the Mount of Olives\". Reviews were mixed, but the concert was a financial success; he was able to charge three times the cost of a typical concert ticket.\n\nHis business dealings with publishers also began to improve in 1802 when his brother Kaspar, who had previously assisted him casually, began to assume a larger role in the management of his affairs. In addition to negotiating higher prices for recently composed works, Kaspar also began selling some of his earlier unpublished compositions, and encouraged him (against Beethoven's preference) to also make arrangements and transcriptions of his more popular works for other instrument combinations. Beethoven acceded to these requests, as he could not prevent publishers from hiring others to do similar arrangements of his works.\n\nBeethoven is reported to have dated his hearing loss from a fit he suffered in 1798 induced by a rage at the interruption of his work—having fallen over, he got up to find himself deaf. His hearing only ever partially recovered and, during its gradual decline, was impeded by a severe form of tinnitus. As early as 1801, he wrote to friends describing his symptoms and the difficulties they caused in both professional and social settings (although it is likely some of his close friends were already aware of the problems).\n\nThe cause of his deafness is unknown, but has variously been attributed to typhus, auto-immune disorders (such as systemic lupus erythematosus), and even his habit of immersing his head in cold water to stay awake. The explanation from his autopsy was that he had a \"distended inner ear\", which developed lesions over time.\nPaget's disease is another possible cause of his deafness.\nOn the advice of his doctor, he lived in the small Austrian town of Heiligenstadt, just outside Vienna, from April to October 1802 in an attempt to come to terms with his condition. There he wrote his Heiligenstadt Testament, a letter to his brothers which records his thoughts of suicide due to his growing deafness and records his resolution to continue living for and through his art. Over time, his hearing loss became profound: at the end of the premiere of his Ninth Symphony in 1824, he had to be turned around to see the tumultuous applause of the audience because he could hear neither it nor the orchestra. His hearing loss did not prevent him from composing music, but it made playing at concerts—a lucrative source of income—increasingly difficult. After a failed attempt in 1811 to perform his own Piano Concerto No. 5 (the \"Emperor\"), which was premiered by his student Carl Czerny, he never performed in public again until he directed the premiere performance of the Ninth Symphony in 1824, which involved him giving cues to conductor Michael Umlauf.\n\nA large collection of his hearing aids, such as a special ear horn, can be viewed at the Beethoven House Museum in Bonn, Germany. Despite his obvious distress, Czerny remarked that Beethoven could still hear speech and music normally until 1812. Around 1814 however, by the age of 44, he was almost totally deaf, and when a group of visitors saw him play a loud arpeggio of thundering bass notes at his piano remarking, \"Ist es nicht schön?\" (Is it not beautiful?), they felt deep sympathy considering his courage and sense of humour (he lost the ability to hear higher frequencies first).\n\nAs a result of Beethoven's hearing loss, his conversation books are an unusually rich written resource. Used primarily in the last ten or so years of his life, his friends wrote in these books so that he could know what they were saying, and he then responded either orally or in the book. The books contain discussions about music and other matters, and give insights into his thinking; they are a source for investigations into how he intended his music should be performed, and also his perception of his relationship to art. Out of a total of 400 conversation books, it has been suggested by Alexander Wheelock Thayer that 264 were destroyed (and others were altered) after his death by his secretary Anton Schindler, who wished only an idealised biography of the composer to survive. However, Theodore Albrecht contests the verity of Schindler's destruction of numerous conversation books.\n\nWhile Beethoven earned income from publication of his works and from public performances, he also depended on the generosity of patrons for income, for whom he gave private performances and copies of works they commissioned for an exclusive period prior to their publication. Some of his early patrons, including Prince Lobkowitz and Prince Lichnowsky, gave him annual stipends in addition to commissioning works and purchasing published works.\n\nPerhaps his most important aristocratic patron was Archduke Rudolph, the youngest son of Emperor Leopold II, who in 1803 or 1804 began to study piano and composition with him. The cleric (Cardinal-Priest) and the composer became friends, and their meetings continued until 1824. Beethoven dedicated 14 compositions to Rudolph, including the Archduke Trio (1811) and \"Missa solemnis\" (1823). Rudolph, in turn, dedicated one of his own compositions to Beethoven. The letters Beethoven wrote to Rudolph are today kept at the Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde in Vienna. Another patron was Count (later Prince) Andreas Razumovsky, for whom the String Quartets Nos. 7–9, Op. 59, \"Rasumovsky\" were named.\n\nIn the autumn of 1808, after having been rejected for a position at the royal theatre, he received an offer from Napoleon's brother Jérôme Bonaparte, then king of Westphalia, for a well-paid position as Kapellmeister at the court in Cassel. To persuade him to stay in Vienna, the Archduke Rudolph, Prince Kinsky and Prince Lobkowitz, after receiving representations from the composer's friends, pledged to pay him a pension of 4000 florins a year. Only Archduke Rudolph paid his share of the pension on the agreed date. Kinsky, immediately called to military duty, did not contribute and soon died after falling from his horse. Lobkowitz stopped paying in September 1811. No successors came forward to continue the patronage, and Beethoven relied mostly on selling composition rights and a small pension after 1815. The effects of these financial arrangements were undermined to some extent by war with France, which caused significant inflation when the government printed money to fund its war efforts.\n\nBeethoven's middle period spanned from 1802 through 1812.\n\nHis return to Vienna from Heiligenstadt was marked by a change in musical style, and is now designated as the start of his middle or \"heroic\" period. According to Carl Czerny, Beethoven said, \"I am not satisfied with the work I have done so far. From now on I intend to take a new way.\" This \"heroic\" phase was characterised by many original works composed on a grand scale. The first major work employing this new style was the Third Symphony in E flat, known as the \"Eroica\". This work was longer and larger in scope than any previous symphony. When it premiered in early 1805 it received a mixed reception. Some listeners objected to its length or misunderstood its structure, while others viewed it as a masterpiece.\n\nThe \"middle period\" is sometimes associated with a \"heroic\" manner of composing, but the use of the term \"heroic\" has become increasingly controversial in Beethoven scholarship. The term is more frequently used as an alternative name for the middle period. The appropriateness of the term \"heroic\" to describe the whole middle period has been questioned as well: while some works, like the Third and Fifth Symphonies, are easy to describe as \"heroic\", many others, like his Symphony No. 6, \"Pastoral\", are not.\n\nSome of the middle period works extend the musical language he had inherited from Haydn and Mozart. The middle period work includes the Third through Eighth Symphonies, the Rasumovsky, \"Harp\" and \"Serioso\" string quartets, the \"Waldstein\" and \"Appassionata\" piano sonatas, \"Christ on the Mount of Olives\", the opera \"Fidelio\", the Violin Concerto, and many other compositions. A minor work, his 1815 finale \"Es ist vollbracht\", reflected the heroic style in an exaggerated fashion.\n\nDuring this time his income came from publishing his works, from performances of them, and from his patrons. His position at the Theater an der Wien was terminated when the theatre changed management in early 1804, and he was forced to move temporarily to the suburbs of Vienna with his friend Stephan von Breuning. This slowed work on \"Fidelio\", his largest work to date, for a time. It was delayed again by the Austrian censor, and finally premiered in November 1805 to houses that were nearly empty because of the French occupation of the city. In addition to being a financial failure, this version of \"Fidelio\" was also a critical failure, and Beethoven began revising it.\n\nIn May 1809, when the attacking forces of Napoleon bombarded Vienna, according to Ferdinand Ries, Beethoven, very worried that the noise would destroy what remained of his hearing, hid in the basement of his brother's house, covering his ears with pillows.\n\nThe work of the middle period established Beethoven as a master. In a review from 1810, he was enshrined by E. T. A. Hoffmann as one of the three great \"Romantic\" composers, along with Haydn and Mozart; Hoffmann called his Fifth Symphony \"one of the most important works of the age\".\n\nBeethoven's love life was hampered by class issues. In late 1801, he met a young countess, Julie (\"Giulietta\") Guicciardi, through the Brunsvik family, at a time when he was giving regular piano lessons to Josephine Brunsvik. He mentions his love for Julie in a November 1801 letter to his boyhood friend, Franz Wegeler, but he could not consider marrying her, due to the class difference. He later dedicated his Sonata No. 14, now commonly known as the \"Moonlight sonata\", to her.\n\nHis relationship with Josephine Brunsvik deepened after the death in 1804 of her aristocratic first husband, the Count Joseph Deym. He wrote Josephine 15 passionate love letters from late 1804 to around 1809/10. Although his feelings were obviously reciprocated, Josephine was forced by her family to withdraw from him in 1807. She cited her \"duty\" and the fact that she would have lost the custodianship of her aristocratic children had she married a commoner. After Josephine married Baron von Stackelberg in 1810, Beethoven may have proposed unsuccessfully to Therese Malfatti, the supposed dedicatee of \"Für Elise\"; his status as a commoner may again have interfered with those plans.\n\nIn the spring of 1811 he became seriously ill, suffering headaches and high fever. On the advice of his doctor, he spent six weeks in the Bohemian spa town of Teplitz. The following winter, which was dominated by work on the Seventh symphony, he was again ill, and his doctor ordered him to spend the summer of 1812 at the spa Teplitz. It is certain that he was at Teplitz when he wrote a love letter to his \"Immortal Beloved\". The identity of the intended recipient has long been a subject of debate; candidates include Guicciardi, Malfatti, Brunsvik, Anna Maria Erdődy and Antonie Brentano.\n\nHe visited his brother Johann at the end of October 1812. He wished to end Johann's cohabitation with Therese Obermayer, a woman who already had an illegitimate child. He was unable to convince Johann to end the relationship and appealed to the local civic and religious authorities. Johann and Therese married on 9 November.\n\nIn early 1813 he apparently went through a difficult emotional period, and his compositional output dropped. His personal appearance degraded—it had generally been neat—as did his manners in public, especially when dining. He took care of his brother (who was suffering from tuberculosis) and his family, an expense that he claimed left him penniless.\nBeethoven was finally motivated to begin significant composition again in June 1813, when news arrived of the defeat of one of Napoleon's armies at Vitoria, Spain, by a coalition of forces under the Duke of Wellington. This news stimulated him to write the battle symphony known as \"Wellington's Victory\". It was first performed on 8 December, along with his Seventh Symphony, at a charity concert for victims of the war. The work was a popular hit, probably because of its programmatic style, which was entertaining and easy to understand. It received repeat performances at concerts he staged in January and February 1814. His renewed popularity led to demands for a revival of \"Fidelio\", which, in its third revised version, was also well received at its July opening. That summer he composed a piano sonata for the first time in five years (\"No. 27, Opus 90\"). This work was in a markedly more Romantic style than his earlier sonatas. He was also one of many composers who produced music in a patriotic vein to entertain the many heads of state and diplomats who came to the Congress of Vienna that began in November 1814. His output of songs included his only song cycle, \"An die ferne Geliebte,\" and the extraordinarily expressive second setting of the poem \"An die Hoffnung\" (Op. 94) in 1815. Compared to its first setting in 1805 (a gift for Josephine Brunsvik), it was \"far more dramatic ... The entire spirit is that of an operatic scena.\"\n\nBetween 1815 and 1817 Beethoven's output dropped again. He attributed part of this to a lengthy illness (he called it an \"inflammatory fever\") that he had for more than a year, starting in October 1816. Biographers have speculated on a variety of other reasons that also contributed to the decline, including the difficulties in the personal lives of his would-be paramours and the harsh censorship policies of the Austrian government. The illness and death of his brother Kaspar from tuberculosis may also have played a role.\nKaspar had been ill for some time, and Beethoven spent a small fortune in 1815 on his care. After Kaspar died on 15 November 1815, Beethoven immediately became embroiled in a protracted legal dispute with Kaspar's wife Johanna over custody of their son Karl, then nine years old. Beethoven, who considered Johanna an unfit parent because of her financial management and her morals (she had an illegitimate child by a different father before marrying Kaspar and had been convicted of theft), had successfully applied to Kaspar to have himself named sole guardian of the boy. A late codicil to Kaspar's will gave him and Johanna joint guardianship. While Beethoven was successful at having his nephew removed from her custody in February 1816, the case was not fully resolved until 1820, and he was frequently preoccupied by the demands of the litigation and seeing to the welfare of Karl, whom he first placed in a private school.\n\nThe Austrian court system had one court for the nobility and members of the Landtafel, the Landrechte, and many other courts for commoners, among them the Civil Court of the Vienna Magistrate. Beethoven disguised the fact that the Dutch \"van\" in his name did not denote nobility as does the German \"von\" and his case was tried in the Landrechte. Owing to his influence with the court, Beethoven felt assured of the favourable outcome of being awarded sole guardianship. While giving evidence to the Landrechte, however, he was unable to prove being of noble birth and as a consequence, on 18 December 1818 the case was transferred to the Magistracy, where he lost sole guardianship.\n\nHe appealed and regained custody. Johanna's appeal to the Emperor was not successful: the Emperor \"washed his hands of the matter\". During the years of custody that followed, Beethoven attempted to ensure that Karl lived to the highest moral standards. Beethoven had an overbearing manner and frequently interfered in his nephew's life. Karl attempted suicide on 31 July 1826 by shooting himself in the head. He survived and was brought to his mother's house, where he recuperated. He and Beethoven were reconciled, but Karl insisted on joining the army and last saw Beethoven in January 1827.\n\nBeethoven's late period spanned from 1812 to his death in 1827.\n\nHe began a renewed study of older music, including works by Johann Sebastian Bach and George Frideric Handel, that were then being published in the first attempts at complete editions. He composed the overture \"The Consecration of the House\", which was the first work to attempt to incorporate these influences. A new style emerged, now called his \"late period\". He returned to the keyboard to compose his first piano sonatas in almost a decade: the works of the late period include the last five piano sonatas and the \"Diabelli Variations\", the last two sonatas for cello and piano, the late string quartets (see below), and two works for very large forces: the \"Missa Solemnis\" and the Ninth Symphony.\n\nBy early 1818 his health had improved, and his nephew moved in with him in January. On the downside, his hearing had deteriorated to the point that conversation became difficult, necessitating the use of conversation books. His household management had also improved somewhat; Nanette Streicher, who had assisted in his care during his illness, continued to provide some support, and he finally found a skilled cook. His musical output in 1818 was still somewhat reduced, but included song collections and the \"Hammerklavier\" Sonata, as well as sketches for two symphonies that eventually coalesced into the epic Ninth. In 1819 he was again preoccupied by the legal processes around Karl, and began work on the \"Diabelli Variations\" and the \"Missa Solemnis\".\nFor the next few years he continued to work on the \"Missa\", composing piano sonatas and bagatelles to satisfy the demands of publishers and the need for income, and completing the \"Diabelli Variations\". He was ill again for an extended time in 1821, and completed the \"Missa\" in 1823, three years after its original due date. He also opened discussions with his publishers over the possibility of producing a complete edition of his work, an idea that was arguably not fully realised until 1971. His brother Johann began to take a hand in his business affairs, much in the way Kaspar had earlier, locating older unpublished works to offer for publication and offering the \"Missa\" to multiple publishers with the goal of getting a higher price for it.\n\nTwo commissions in 1822 improved his financial prospects. The Philharmonic Society of London offered a commission for a symphony, and Prince Nikolas Golitsin of St. Petersburg offered to pay Beethoven's price for three string quartets. The first of these commissions spurred him to finish the Ninth Symphony, which was first performed, along with the \"Missa Solemnis\", on 7 May 1824, to great acclaim at the Kärntnertortheater. The \"Allgemeine musikalische Zeitung\" gushed, \"inexhaustible genius had shown us a new world\", and Carl Czerny wrote that his symphony \"breathes such a fresh, lively, indeed youthful spirit ... so much power, innovation, and beauty as ever [came] from the head of this original man, although he certainly sometimes led the old wigs to shake their heads.\" Unlike his more lucrative earlier concerts, this did not make him much money, as the expenses of mounting it were significantly higher. A second concert on 24 May, in which the producer guaranteed him a minimum fee, was poorly attended; nephew Karl noted that \"many people [had] already gone into the country\". It was Beethoven's last public concert.\n\nBeethoven then turned to writing the string quartets for Golitsin. This series of quartets, known as the \"Late Quartets,\" went far beyond what musicians or audiences were ready for at that time. Composer Louis Spohr called them \"indecipherable, uncorrected horrors.\" Opinion has changed considerably from the time of their first bewildered reception: their forms and ideas inspired musicians and composers including Richard Wagner and Béla Bartók, and continue to do so. Of the late quartets, Beethoven's favourite was the Fourteenth Quartet, op. 131 in C minor, which he rated as his most perfect single work. The last musical wish of Schubert was to hear the Op. 131 quartet, which he did on 14 November 1828, five days before his death.\n\nHe wrote the last quartets amidst failing health. In April 1825 he was bedridden, and remained ill for about a month. The illness—or more precisely, his recovery from it—is remembered for having given rise to the deeply felt slow movement of the Fifteenth Quartet, which he called \"Holy song of thanks ('Heiliger Dankgesang') to the divinity, from one made well.\" He went on to complete the quartets now numbered Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Sixteenth. The last work completed by Beethoven was the substitute final movement of the Thirteenth Quartet, which replaced the difficult \"Große Fuge\". Shortly thereafter, in December 1826, illness struck again, with episodes of vomiting and diarrhoea that nearly ended his life.\n\nIn 1825, his nine symphonies were performed in a cycle for the first time, by the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra under Johann Philipp Christian Schulz. This was repeated in 1826.\n\nBeethoven was bedridden for most of his remaining months, and many friends came to visit. He died on 26 March 1827 at the age of 56 during a thunderstorm. His friend Anselm Hüttenbrenner, who was present at the time, said that there was a peal of thunder at the moment of death. An autopsy revealed significant liver damage, which may have been due to heavy alcohol consumption. It also revealed considerable dilation of the auditory and other related nerves.\n\nBeethoven's funeral procession on 29 March 1827 was attended by an estimated 20,000 people. Franz Schubert, who died the following year and was buried next to him, was one of the torchbearers. He was buried in a dedicated grave in the Währing cemetery, north-west of Vienna, after a requiem mass at the church of the Holy Trinity (Dreifaltigkeitskirche). His remains were exhumed for study in 1862, and moved in 1888 to Vienna's Zentralfriedhof. In 2012, his crypt was checked to see if his teeth had been stolen during a series of grave robberies of other famous Viennese composers.\n\nThere is dispute about the cause of his death: alcoholic cirrhosis, syphilis, infectious hepatitis, lead poisoning, sarcoidosis and Whipple's disease have all been proposed. Friends and visitors before and after his death clipped locks of his hair, some of which have been preserved and subjected to additional analysis, as have skull fragments removed during the 1862 exhumation. Some of these analyses have led to controversial assertions that he was accidentally poisoned to death by excessive doses of lead-based treatments administered under instruction from his doctor.\n\nBeethoven is acknowledged to be one of the giants of classical music. Together with Bach and Johannes Brahms, he is referred to as one of the \"three \"B\"s\" who epitomize that tradition. He was a pivotal figure in the transition from the 18th century musical classicism to 19th century romanticism, and his influence on subsequent generations of composers was profound. His music features twice on the Voyager Golden Record, a phonograph record containing a broad sample of the images, common sounds, languages, and music of Earth, sent into outer space with the two Voyager probes.\n\nBeethoven composed in several musical genres and for a variety of instrument combinations. His works for symphony orchestra include nine symphonies (of which the Ninth Symphony includes a chorus), and about a dozen pieces of \"occasional\" music. He wrote seven concerti for one or more soloists and orchestra, as well as four shorter works that include soloists accompanied by orchestra. His only opera is \"Fidelio\"; other vocal works with orchestral accompaniment include two masses and a number of shorter works.\n\nHis large body of compositions for piano includes 32 piano sonatas and numerous shorter pieces, including arrangements of some of his other works. Works with piano accompaniment include 10 violin sonatas, 5 cello sonatas, and a sonata for French horn, as well as numerous lieder.\n\nHe also wrote a significant quantity of chamber music. In addition to 16 string quartets, he wrote five works for string quintet, seven for piano trio, five for string trio, and more than a dozen works for various combinations of wind instruments.\n\nBeethoven's career as a composer is conventionally divided into early, middle, and late periods. The \"early\" period is typically seen to last until 1802, the \"middle\" period from 1802 to 1812, and the \"late\" period thereafter. This distinction was first introduced in 1828, just one year after his death, and while often challenged and refined it remains a starting point to understand the development of Beethoven's work.\n\nBeethoven's early years in Bonn arguably represent a further, preliminary, period. His earliest known composition was from 1782, and a total of 40 pieces by him dating from 1792 or earlier are known today (though mainly from much later sources). Today his best-known works from before 1790 are three piano quartets and three piano sonatas, the quartets being closely modelled on Mozart's sonatas for piano and violin. From 1790 to 1802, his best music can be found in a cantata and a number of concert arias, and in some variations for solo piano, while his instrumental music (including movements of symphonies and a violin concerto, as well as various fragmentary chamber works) is conservative and uninspired.\n\nThe conventional \"first period\" begins after Beethoven's arrival in Vienna in 1792. In the first few years he seems to have composed less than he did at Bonn, and his Piano Trios, op.1 were not published until 1795. From this point onward, he had mastered the 'Viennese style' (best known today from Haydn and Mozart) and was making the style his own. His works from 1795 to 1800 are larger in scale than was the norm (writing sonatas in four movements, not three, for instance); typically he uses a scherzo rather than a minuet and trio; and his music often includes dramatic, even sometimes over-the-top, uses of extreme dynamics and tempi and chromatic harmony. It was this that led Haydn to believe the third trio of Op.1 was too difficult for an audience to appreciate.\n\nHe also explored new directions and gradually expanded the scope and ambition of his work. Some important pieces from the early period are the first and second symphonies, the set of six string quartets Opus 18, the first two piano concertos, and the first dozen or so piano sonatas, including the famous \"Pathétique\" sonata, Op. 13.\n\nHis middle (heroic) period began shortly after the personal crisis brought on by his recognition of encroaching deafness. It includes large-scale works that express heroism and struggle. Middle-period works include six symphonies (Nos. 3–8), the last two piano concertos, the Triple Concerto and violin concerto, five string quartets (Nos. 7–11), several piano sonatas (including the \"Waldstein\" and \"Appassionata\" sonatas), the \"Kreutzer\" violin sonata and his only opera, \"Fidelio\".\n\nBeethoven's late period began around 1815. Works from this period are characterised by their intellectual depth, their formal innovations, and their intense, highly personal expression. The String Quartet, Op. 131 has seven linked movements, and the Ninth Symphony adds choral forces to the orchestra in the last movement. Other compositions from this period include the \"Missa solemnis\", the last five string quartets (including the massive \"Große Fuge\") and the last five piano sonatas.\n\nBeethoven's life was troubled by his encroaching loss of hearing and chronic abdominal pain since his twenties. He contemplated suicide as documented in his Heiligenstadt Testament. He was often irascible. Nevertheless, he had a close and devoted circle of friends all his life, thought to have been attracted by his strength of personality. Towards the end of his life, his friends competed in their efforts to help him cope with his incapacities.\n\nSources show his disdain for authority and for social rank. He stopped performing at the piano if the audience chatted amongst themselves, or afforded him less than their full attention. At soirées, he refused to perform if suddenly called upon to do so. Eventually, after many confrontations, the Archduke Rudolph decreed that the usual rules of court etiquette did not apply to Beethoven.\n\nHe was attracted to the ideals of the Age of Enlightenment. In 1804, when Napoleon's imperial ambitions became clear, Beethoven took hold of the title page of his Third Symphony and scratched the name Bonaparte out so violently that he made a hole in the paper. He later changed the work's title to \"Sinfonia Eroica, composta per festeggiare il sovvenire d'un grand'uom\" (\"Heroic Symphony, composed to celebrate the memory of a great man\"), and he rededicated it to his patron, Prince Joseph Franz von Lobkowitz, at whose palace it was first performed.\n\nThe fourth movement of his Ninth Symphony features an elaborate choral setting of Schiller's Ode \"An die Freude\" (\"Ode to Joy\"), an optimistic hymn championing the brotherhood of humanity. In \"Beethoven and Shakespeare: Ghosts and Heroes\", David Roberts writes about the similarities between Beethoven's personality and Shakespeare's personality. The two men are known to be artistic colleagues, though from different ages in history, for their belief that their own understanding and rethinking of output which their own works entail can never come to a satisfactory end. Both were characterized by invention and reinvention. The expansion of their imaginative journeys had a propensity for joining comedy and tragedy, doing cogitation between rightness and strangeness, as they transcended their own selves in art, whereby nature had clear influences on them and on their works.\n\nThe Beethoven Monument in Bonn was unveiled in August 1845, in honour of the 75th anniversary of his birth. It was the first statue of a composer created in Germany, and the music festival that accompanied the unveiling was the impetus for the very hasty construction of the original Beethovenhalle in Bonn (it was designed and built within less than a month, on the urging of Franz Liszt). A statue to Mozart had been unveiled in Salzburg, Austria, in 1842. Vienna did not honour Beethoven with a statue until 1880. His is the only name inscribed on one of the plaques that trim Symphony Hall, Boston; the others were left empty because it was felt that only Beethoven's popularity would endure.\n\nThere is a museum, the Beethoven House, the place of his birth, in central Bonn. The same city has hosted a musical festival, the Beethovenfest, since 1845. The festival was initially irregular but has been organised annually since 2007.\n\nThe Ira F. Brilliant Center for Beethoven Studies serves as a museum, research center, and host of lectures and performances devoted solely to this life and works.\n\nThe third largest crater on Mercury is named in his honour, as is the main-belt asteroid 1815 Beethoven.\n\nBULLET::::- Beethoven and his contemporaries\nBULLET::::- Beethoven in film\nBULLET::::- List of classical music composers by era\nBULLET::::- Death of Ludwig van Beethoven\n\nBULLET::::- Albrecht, Theodore, and Elaine Schwensen, \"More Than Just Peanuts: Evidence for December 16 as Beethoven's birthday\". \"The Beethoven Newsletter\" 3 (1988) 49, 60–63.\nBULLET::::- Bohle, Bruce, and Robert Sabin. \"The International Cyclopedia of Music and Musicians.\" London: J.M. Dent & Sons LTD., 1975. .\nBULLET::::- Davies, Peter J. \"The Character of a Genius: Beethoven in Perspective.\" Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 2002. .\nBULLET::::- Davies, Peter J. \"Beethoven in Person: His Deafness, Illnesses, and Death.\" Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 2001. .\nBULLET::::- DeNora, Tia. \"Beethoven and the Construction of Genius: Musical Politics in Vienna, 1792–1803\". Berkeley, California: University of California Press, 1995. .\nBULLET::::- Dorfmüller, Kurt; Norbert Gertsch; Julia Ronge (eds). \"Ludwig van Beethoven. Thematisch-bibliographisches Werkverzeichnis. Revidierte und wesentlich erweiterte Neuausgabe des Werkverzeichnisses von Georg Kinsky und Hans Halm\". 2 vols. Munich: Henle, 2014. .\nBULLET::::- Geck, Martin. \"Beethoven\". Translated by Anthea Bell. London: Haus, 2003. .\nBULLET::::- Kornyei, Alexius. \"Beethoven in Martonvasar\". Verlag, 1960.\nBULLET::::- Kropfinger, Klaus. \"Beethoven\". Verlage Bärenreiter/Metzler, 2001. .\nBULLET::::- Martin, Russell. \"Beethoven's Hair\". New York: Broadway Books, 2000. .\nBULLET::::- Rosen, Charles. \"The Classical Style: Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven.\" Expanded ed. New York: W.W. Norton, 1998. .\nBULLET::::- Solomon, Maynard. \"Late Beethoven: Music, Thought, Imagination.\" Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003. .\nBULLET::::- Sullivan, J.W.N., \"Beethoven: His Spiritual Development\" New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1927.\n\nBULLET::::- Beethoven-Haus Bonn\nBULLET::::- The Ira F. Brilliant Center for \"Beethoven\" Studies, The Beethoven Gateway (San José State University)\nBULLET::::- , Richard Kogan, M.D., Menninger Mindscape, 2015 (13 minutes)\n"}
{"id": "17915", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17915", "title": "Lleyton Hewitt", "text": "Lleyton Hewitt\n\nLleyton Glynn Hewitt (born 24 February 1981) is a retired Australian professional tennis player and former world No. 1. He is the last Australian to win a men's singles Grand Slam title.\n\nIn November 2001 Hewitt became the youngest male ever to be ranked No. 1 in the world in singles at the age of . He won 30 singles titles and 3 doubles titles, his highlights being the 2001 US Open and 2002 Wimbledon men's singles titles, the 2000 US Open men's doubles title, back-to-back Tennis Masters Cup titles in 2001 and 2002, and the Davis Cup with Australia in 1999 and 2003. Hewitt reached the final of the 2004 US Open, where he was defeated by Roger Federer in straight sets. Between 1997 and 2016, he contested twenty consecutive Australian Open men's singles tournaments, reaching the 2005 final where he was defeated by Marat Safin in four sets.\n\nHewitt was born in Adelaide, South Australia. His father, Glynn, is a former Australian Rules Football player, and his mother, Cherilyn, was a physical education teacher. His younger sister is Jaslyn Hewitt, a former tennis coach and bodybuilder and his brother-in-law (Jaslyn's husband) is Rob Shehadie. Hewitt also played Australian Football until the age of 13, when he decided to pursue a tennis career. His junior tennis club was Seaside Tennis Club in Henley Beach. He was also coached by Peter Smith at Denman Tennis Club in Mitcham.\n\nHewitt commenced his professional career in 1998. He became one of the youngest winners of an Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP) tournament when he won the 1998 Next Generation Adelaide International, defeating Jason Stoltenberg in the final, having defeated Andre Agassi in the semifinals. Both Aaron Krickstein winning Tel Aviv in 1983 and Michael Chang winning San Francisco in 1988 were younger than Hewitt when they claimed their first ATP title. Hewitt then left Immanuel College to concentrate on his tennis career. He was an Australian Institute of Sport scholarship holder.\nHe finished his professional tennis career on January 24, 2016 after 20 straight Australian Open appearances. His last professional singles match was against David Ferrer in the second round of the 2016 Australian Open at the Rod Laver Arena on January 21, 2016.\n\nAs a junior Hewitt posted a 44–19 record in singles and reached as high as No. 17 in the world in 1997 (and No. 13 in doubles).\n\n!Legend (Singles)\nGrand Slam (0)\nGrade A (0)\nGrade B (0)\nGrade 1–5 (1)\n\n!No.!!Date!!Tournament!!Surface!!Opponent!!Score\n1.\n8 April 1997\nManila, Philippines\nHard\n6–4, 6–3\n\nIn 2000, Hewitt reached his first Grand Slam final at the Wimbledon mixed doubles partnering Belgian Kim Clijsters, his then girlfriend. They lost the match, to Americans Kimberly Po and Donald Johnson. Hewitt later won his first Grand Slam title at the US Open when he along with Max Mirnyi claimed the men's doubles championship, thus becoming the youngest male (at 19 years, 6 months) to win a Grand Slam doubles crown in the open era. At the end of the year, Hewitt became the first teenager in ATP history to qualify for the year-end Tennis Masters Cup (ATP World Tour Finals).\n\nHewitt started off the 2001 season well by winning the Medibank International in Sydney, and went on to win tournaments in London (Queen's Club) and 's-Hertogenbosch. He captured his first Grand Slam singles title at the US Open in 2001, when he beat former world No. 1 Yevgeny Kafelnikov in the semifinals and defeated then-four-time champion Pete Sampras the next day in straight sets. This win made Hewitt the most recent male player to win a Grand Slam singles and doubles title during his career. The Australian went on to win the Tokyo Open and again qualify for the year-end Tennis Masters Cup held in Sydney. During the tournament, Hewitt won all matches in his group. He then went on to defeat Sébastien Grosjean in the final to take the title and gain the No. 1 ranking.\n\nHewitt won a total of six titles in 2001.\n\nThe year 2002 was once again a solid year for Hewitt, winning three titles in San Jose, Indian Wells and London (Queen's Club). He followed his 2001 US Open win by capturing the Wimbledon singles title. He defeated Jonas Björkman, Grégory Carraz, Julian Knowle, Mikhail Youzhny, Sjeng Schalken and home favourite Tim Henman before dominating first-time finalist David Nalbandian in straight sets; Hewitt lost only two sets (both to Schalken) throughout the championship. His victory reinforced the idea that, although the tournament had tended to be dominated by serve-and-volleyers, a baseliner could still triumph on grass (Hewitt was the first 'baseliner' to win the tournament since Agassi in 1992).\n\nFor his third straight year, he qualified for the year-end Tennis Masters Cup, held in Shanghai, and successfully defended his title by defeating Juan Carlos Ferrero in the final. Hewitt's win helped him finish the year ranked No. 1 for a second straight year.\n\nIn 2003, Hewitt defeated former No. 1 Gustavo Kuerten for the championship at Indian Wells. But at Wimbledon, as the defending champion, Hewitt lost in the first round to qualifier Ivo Karlović. Hewitt became the first defending Wimbledon men's champion in the open era to lose in the first round. Only once before in the tournament's 126-year history had a defending men's champion lost in the opening round, in 1967, when Manuel Santana was beaten by Charlie Pasarell. Hewitt was only the third defending Grand Slam champion in the open era to lose in the first round, after Boris Becker at the 1997 Australian Open and Patrick Rafter at the 1999 US Open. After Wimbledon in 2003, Hewitt lost in the final of the tournament in Los Angeles, the second round of the ATP Masters Series tournament in Montreal, and the first round of the ATP Masters Series tournament in Cincinnati. At the US Open, Hewitt lost in the quarterfinals to Juan Carlos Ferrero. Hewitt played only Davis Cup matches for the remainder of the year, recording five-set wins over Roger Federer and Juan Carlos Ferrero in the semifinals and final respectively, as Australia went on to win the Davis Cup. Hewitt used much of his spare time in late 2003 to bulk up, gaining 7 kg.\n\nIn 2004, Hewitt became the first man in history to lose in each Grand Slam singles tournament to the eventual champion. At the Australian Open, he was defeated in the fourth round by Swiss Roger Federer. At the French Open, he was defeated in a quarterfinal by Argentine Gastón Gaudio. At Wimbledon, he was defeated in a quarterfinal by Federer, and at the US Open, he was defeated in the final by Federer, losing two out of the three sets at love. At the year ending 2004 Tennis Masters Cup, Hewitt defeated Andy Roddick to advance to the final, but was yet again defeated by defending champion Federer.\n\nIn 2005, Hewitt won his only title at the Sydney Medibank International defeating little-known Czech player Ivo Minář. Hewitt spent much time in the late stages of 2004 working with his former coach and good friend, Roger Rasheed, on bulking up his physique. His hard work paid off during the Australian summer, when he defeated an in-form No. 2 Andy Roddick to reach his first Australian Open final in 2005. He was the first Australian player to reach the final since Pat Cash in 1988. In the final, he faced fourth seed, Marat Safin, who had defeated No. 1 and defending champion Roger Federer in the semifinals. After easily taking the first set, he was defeated by the Russian despite being up a break in the third set.\n\nAt Wimbledon, Hewitt reached the semifinals, but lost to eventual champion Federer. Two months later, Hewitt again lost to Federer in the US Open semifinal, although this time he was able to take one set from the Swiss. Hewitt had at this point lost to the eventual champion at seven consecutive Grand Slam tournaments he played, (he missed the 2005 French Open because of injury). Hewitt pulled out of the Tennis Masters Cup tournament in Shanghai in November 2005 so that he could be with his wife Bec, who was due to give birth.\n\nHewitt was defeated in the second round of the 2006 Australian Open by Juan Ignacio Chela of Argentina. He then reached the finals of the San Jose and Las Vegas tournaments, losing to British youngster Andy Murray and American James Blake, respectively. But he lost to Tim Henman in the second round of the Miami Masters, a player he had defeated eight times previously in as many matches. At the 2006 French Open, Hewitt reached the fourth round, where he lost to defending champion and eventual winner Rafael Nadal in four sets.\n\nHewitt won his first tournament of 2006 (after a 17-month hiatus from winning a tournament), when he beat Blake in the final of the Queen's Club Championships. This was his fourth title there, equalling the records of John McEnroe and Boris Becker. During the 2006 Wimbledon Championships, Hewitt survived a five-set match against South Korea's Hyung-Taik Lee that was played over two days. He then defeated Olivier Rochus and David Ferrer, before losing to Marcos Baghdatis in the quarterfinals. At the 2006 Legg Mason Tennis Classic in Washington, D.C., Hewitt was defeated by Arnaud Clément in the quarterfinals, after defeating Vincent Spadea in the second round and Denis Gremelmayr in the third round.\n\nHewitt participated at the 2006 US Open, despite having an injured knee. Hewitt won his first three matches in straight sets against, respectively, Albert Montañés, Jan Hernych, and Novak Djokovic. He defeated Richard Gasquet in five sets to advance to the quarterfinals for the seventh consecutive year. He then lost to Roddick.\n\nAt the 2007 Australian Open, Hewitt lost in the third round to tenth-seeded Chilean and eventual runner-up Fernando González. With his win in Las Vegas in March, Hewitt had won at least one ATP title annually for ten consecutive years. This was a record among active players at the time. Hewitt reached the 2007 Hamburg Masters semifinals, where he pushed eventual finalist Rafael Nadal to three sets. At the 2007 French Open, Hewitt, for the second straight time lost in the fourth round to Nadal. At the 2007 Wimbledon Championships, Hewitt won his first three matches, including a four-set third round victory over Guillermo Cañas. He then faced fourth seed Novak Djokovic in the fourth round, which he lost.\n\nAfter Wimbledon, it was announced that he had hired former Australian tennis pro Tony Roche to coach him during Grand Slam and Masters tournaments in 2007 and 2008. At the Masters tournaments in Montréal and Cincinnati Hewitt reached the quarterfinals and semifinals, respectively. In both cases, he lost to Roger Federer.\n\nHe was seeded 16th at the 2007 US Open, but for the first time in eight consecutive appearances at Flushing Meadows, he did not reach the quarterfinals or further. He lost in the second round to Argentine Agustín Calleri.\n\nAt the 2008 Australian Open, he advanced to the fourth round as the 19th seed, defeating 15th-seeded and 2006 Australian Open finalist Marcos Baghdatis in a thrilling third-round match. The 282-minute match started at 11:52 pm and ended at 4:34 am the following morning. It was a characteristically \"gutsy\" performance and cemented Hewitt's reputation as a tough competitor. Hewitt lost his fourth-round match in straight sets to third-seeded and eventual champion Novak Djokovic.\n\nA hip injury Hewitt acquired in March 2008 affected his preparation for the French Open and forced the loss of 300 rankings points as Hewitt was unable to defend his semifinal appearance at the Hamburg Masters, as well as compete in supplementary tournaments. However, Hewitt made the third round at Roland Garros, before losing a five-set thriller to fifth seed David Ferrer.\n\nDespite his ongoing hip problem, Hewitt was able to compete at the Queens Club Championship with moderate success, falling to second seed Novak Djokovic in the quarterfinals. His good form continued into Wimbledon, Hewitt making the fourth round for the second successive year, before losing to No. 1 and top seed Roger Federer.\n\nAfter Wimbledon, Hewitt elected to miss the Montreal and Cincinnati Masters in an effort to give his hip sufficient rest to enable him to play at the 2008 Beijing Olympics, where he defeated Jonas Björkman in the first round before losing to second seed Rafael Nadal. However, the more notable incident in the Olympics occurred in Hewitt's opening-round doubles match with Chris Guccione against Argentines Juan Mónaco and Agustín Calleri. The match went to an advantage third set with Hewitt and Guccione prevailing 18–16. After the Olympics, due to the further damage Hewitt's hip sustained at the Olympics, he was left with no option but to pull out of the US Open and skip the rest of the season to have hip surgery. 2008 was the first year since 1997 in which Hewitt did not win a title. \n\nAfter returning from hip surgery, Hewitt played his first match in 2009 at the Hopman Cup, where he defeated Nicolas Kiefer in three sets. Hewitt then participated in the Medibank International Sydney, winning his first two matches, but losing in the quarterfinals to David Nalbandian. Hewitt then went on to play in the 2009 Australian Open, where he was unseeded in a Grand Slam for the first time since 2000. He faced Fernando González in the first round and lost in five sets.\n\nAt the tournament in Memphis, he caused an upset in the first round by defeating James Blake in three sets. He then defeated fellow Australian Chris Guccione in the second round and Christophe Rochus in the quarterfinals. He faced Andy Roddick in the semifinals, but lost in a close match. Hewitt then lost in the first round of Delray Beach to Yen-Hsun Lu, the eighth seed. Hewitt also competed in the BNP Paribas Open in Indian Wells, California, and reached the second round, being defeated by Fernando González. At the Sony Ericsson Open in Miami, Hewitt played Israeli Dudi Sela in the first round. Hewitt lost the first set, before recovering to win the match. Hewitt was then defeated by seventh seed Gilles Simon of France in straight sets. \n\nAt the 2009 U.S. Men's Clay Court Championships, Hewitt defeated seventh seed Diego Junqueira. Hewitt advanced to the quarterfinals after defeating Sergio Roitman in just 57 minutes, and then Guillermo García-López to advance to the semifinals, where he defeated Evgeny Korolev. He defeated Wayne Odesnik in the final, for his first title since 2007 and his first clay-court title in a decade. Hewitt entered the Monte Carlo Masters as a wild card. He lost in the first round to Marat Safin. Hewitt admitted to running out of energy in the second set. \n\nAt the 2009 BMW Open, Hewitt recorded his 500th career win after defeating Philipp Petzschner in the first round, becoming one of only four active players to achieve this milestone; the others being Roger Federer and Carlos Moyá. Andy Roddick would later achieve this feat at the 2009 Legg Mason Tennis Classic Tournament in Washington, D.C. In the 2009 French Open, he defeated 26th seed Ivo Karlović in five sets in the first round, and then defeated Andrey Golubev in the second. He lost to No. 1 Rafael Nadal in the third round. His next tournament was the 2009 Aegon Championships in London. He was 15th seed and drew Eduardo Schwank in the first round, who he easily dispatched. In the second round, he went three sets against Portuguese Frederico Gil. Hewitt dropped the first set, but went on to win. Former rival Andy Roddick awaited Hewitt in the third round, and the match certainly did not disappoint. As they have many times in the past, the former No. 1 players battled through a tough and intense match, which Roddick won. \n\nIn the 2009 Wimbledon Championships, Hewitt faced the prospect of Rafael Nadal in the second round. However, Nadal withdrew due to injury, and his slot was replaced by No. 5 Juan Martín del Potro. Hewitt defeated American Robby Ginepri in the first round. Hewitt used his strong service game to advantage, losing only one service game the entire match. He upended del Potro in straight sets. The third round also produced a straight-set victory for Hewitt, as he defeated Philipp Petzschner. He reversed a two-set deficit to defeat Radek Štěpánek in the fourth round. It was another classic Hewitt fightback to thrill the many Australians on hand to witness the match. His Cinderella run ended in the quarterfinals against sixth seed Andy Roddick. It was a five-set thriller which featured two tiebreaks. Hewitt lost a heartbreaking 3–6, 7–6 (10), 6–7 (1), 6–4, 4–6 match. It was the first time Hewitt had reached the quarterfinals of a Major since the 2006 U.S. Open.\n\nAfter an extended break, Hewitt began working his way into the U.S Open series by playing in Washington at the Legg Mason Classic. There Hewitt made it into the third round, before losing in a three-set battle with Juan Martín del Potro. At the Montreal Masters, Hewitt lost in the first round to former No. 1 Juan Carlos Ferrero. Cincinnati saw Hewitt reach the quarterfinals for the sixth time, where he lost to Roger Federer in straight sets. During the first round of the tournament, Hewitt showed his trademark fighting abilities by saving two match points to win against an in-form Robin Söderling. At the U.S Open, Hewitt progressed into the third round, where he played Federer for the 23rd time of their decade-long rivalry. Hewitt managed to take the first set 6–4 from Federer, before the 15-time Grand Slam champion took control of the second. The third set was tight, and both players saved multiple break points. Federer eventually prevailed the match in four sets.\n\nIn late September, Hewitt travelled to Malaysia for his first time to take part in the inaugural Malaysian Open held in Kuala Lumpur. The new tournament was part of the ATP's new dedicated Asian swing. Hewitt lost in the first round to Swedish player Joachim Johansson. In Tokyo, Hewitt was drawn to once again meet del Potro in the quarterfinals, but was given a clear path when del Potro was knocked out by qualifier Édouard Roger-Vasselin in the first round. After defeating Fabrice Santoro in the second round, Hewitt downed Roger-Vasselin, to reach his first semifinals since winning the US Men's Clay Court Championships in April, but lost to Mikhail Youzhny. He then competed in the 2009 Shanghai ATP Masters 1000, where he won in the first round, defeating John Isner, before losing to Gaël Monfils.\n\nHewitt began his 2010 season partnering Samantha Stosur at the Hopman Cup. The Australians were the top seeds for the exhibition tournament. They, however, fared worse than expected, losing ties against Romania and Spain, and therefore failing to reach the final.\n\nHe was seeded fourth in the Medibank International and, like the previous year, reached the quarterfinals, losing to eventual champion Marcos Baghdatis. At the 2010 Australian Open, he lost to Roger Federer in the fourth round.\n\nA week after his exit from the Australian Open, Hewitt announced at a press conference at Melbourne Park that he underwent another hip operation similar to his left hip operation this time on his right hip on 28 January 2010 in Hobart.\n\nHewitt returned to the tour at the U.S. Men's Clay Court Championships as the singles defending champion. He won his first match since the Australian Open, partnering coach Nathan Healey in the doubles, defeating James Cerretani and Adil Shamasdin, but lost to top seeds the Bryan brothers in the semifinals. Hewitt received a first-round bye, as he was seeded fourth in singles. In his first match, against lucky loser Somdev Devvarman, Hewitt dropped the first set, before battling to win in three sets. He then lost to Juan Ignacio Chela. Hewitt's next tournament was scheduled to be the Monte-Carlo Rolex Masters. However, he withdrew due to a recurring injury.\n\nHewitt then reached the second round in Barcelona, before losing to Eduardo Schwank, and lost in the second round of the Internazionali BNL d'Italia to Guillermo García-López. Hewitt then travelled back to Australia to participate in a Davis Cup tie against Japan, winning his two singles matches.\n\nAt the French Open, Hewitt reached the third round, before losing to Rafael Nadal, who went on to win the title without dropping a set and take the No. 1 ranking.\n\nOn 13 June, Hewitt defeated Roger Federer in the final of the Gerry Weber Open in Halle, Germany, a grass-court tuneup for Wimbledon Championships. The win was Hewitt's first over Federer since 2003 and snapped a 15-match losing streak against the Swiss.\n\nAt Wimbledon, Hewitt was seeded 15th and lost to third seed, Novak Djokovic in the fourth round. After dropping the first two sets, Hewitt took advantage of a stomach illness had by Djokovic to take the third set. However, Hewitt could not mount a comeback, and ended up losing in four sets.\n\nAt the Atlanta Tennis Championship, Hewitt lost in the first round to Lukáš Lacko. After receiving a first-round bye at the Legg Mason Classic, Hewitt retired in the second round due to a leg injury. He pulled out of the Rogers Cup in Toronto in order to recover, and returned in Cincinnati. Hewitt defeated Yen-Hsun Lu in the opening round, before losing in three sets to fifth seed Robin Söderling.\n\nHewitt was 32nd seed at the US Open and lost his first-round match to Paul-Henri Mathieu in five sets. It was his earliest exit at the US Open. He withdrew from the Asian hard-court swing due to a wrist injury suffered during the Australian Davis Cup playoff loss to Belgium.\n\nHewitt began his 15th season on the ATP Tour at the Hopman Cup in Perth. He defeated his Belgian opponent Ruben Bemelmans and went on to win the tie for Australia with a three-set victory in the mixed doubles, partnering Alicia Molik. He next played No. 3 Novak Djokovic, but lost in straight sets. For his final singles match of the tournament, he played Kazakhstani Andrey Golubev, defeating him in straight sets.\n\nAfter the Hopman Cup, Hewitt competed in the AAMI Kooyong Classic, an exhibitional tournament in the build-up to the Australian Open. He started the tournament solidly, taking out third seed Mikhail Youzhny. In the second round, he defeated Russian Nikolay Davydenko. In the final, he defeated Frenchman Gaël Monfils. It was the first time that Hewitt had played in the tournament.\n\nAt the 2011 Australian Open, Hewitt was defeated in the first round in five sets by Argentina's David Nalbandian. Hewitt was up two sets to one and during the fourth set had the chance to finish off the match, when the scores were 3–1 and 0–40 in Hewitt's favour, but failed to capitalise on the situation. Furthermore, Hewitt had two match point opportunities in the final set to close out victory. However, one of these was met with an excellent drop shot from Nalbandian, and he went on to save the other, securing victory.\n\nAfter the Australian Open, Hewitt participated in the SAP Open, an ATP World Tour 250 event. He defeated his first-round opponent Björn Phau, and proceeded to the second round against Brian Dabul. Hewitt had some problems with Dabul, losing the first set, but managed to defeat him. In the quarterfinals, Hewitt played against former US Open champion Juan Martín del Potro, who was on a comeback from a wrist injury. In a weak performance, Hewitt lost.\n\nThe next tournament that Hewitt took part in was the Regions Morgan Keegan Championships and the Cellular South Cup, an ATP World Tour 500 event in Memphis, Tennessee. Hewitt played Lu Yen-Hsun in the opening round, which he won. He advanced to the second round against Adrian Mannarino. Despite losing the first set, Hewitt defeated Mannarino. In the quarterfinals, Hewitt played top seed Andy Roddick. Despite being a set up, Hewitt lost the match. \n\nHewitt then played in the 2011 BNP Paribas Open, an ATP World Tour Masters 1000 event. His first-round opponent was Chinese Taipei's Lu Yen-Hsun. This was the second time in a row the two had played each other in the first round, and he suffered a shock defeat. This was to be Hewitt's last event on the ATP Tour for over three months after he underwent surgery on his left foot. He made his comeback at the 2011 Gerry Weber Open in Halle, Germany, where he returned as defending champion. He was originally scheduled to face top seed Roger Federer in the opening round. However, the Swiss withdrew after reaching the final of the French Open. Hewitt therefore took on an alternate from Argentina, Leonardo Mayer and came through the match comfortably. In the second round, he played Andreas Seppi and defeated him. However, Hewitt's reign as champion of Halle came to an end at the hands of home favourite Philipp Kohlschreiber, when the Australian went down in straight sets. During this match, Hewitt turned his ankle when he came in to the net to try to reach a net cord ball. The following week, Hewitt had to retire during a first round match at the Aegon International against Olivier Rochus. This was a result of the niggling ankle injury he had picked up at Halle the week before.\n\nHewitt came into Wimbledon with doubts over his fitness and condition and was unseeded in the 2011 Wimbledon Championships draw. Hewitt faced Kei Nishikori of Japan in the first round and won in four close sets. In the second round, Hewitt faced fifth seed Robin Söderling. Hewitt won the first set in a tiebreak and the second set. Söderling fought back to take the match in five sets.\n\nHewitt's next tournament was the 2011 Atlanta Tennis Championships, an ATP World Tour 250 event and first event on the US hard-court swing. Hewitt won his first-round match against the American qualifier Phillip Simmonds in straight sets to advance to the second round. He went on to lose his second round encounter against the American qualifier Rajeev Ram. After this defeat, Hewitt who had been scheduled to play in Los Angeles the following week, opted not to take up the offer of a wildcard and withdrew from the event to recover from his foot injury. He then was offered a wild card to play at the 2011 US Open, but was unable to play due to foot injury which ended his season.\n\nHewitt began his 2012 season at the Hopman Cup. In the opening singles tie against Spain, Hewitt lost in singles to Fernando Verdasco. For the mixed doubles match, Hewitt partnered with Jarmila Gajdošová. They lost the match in three sets 6–3, 3–6, 9–11, despite being 5–1 up in the final set tie-breaker. In the second tie against France, Hewitt lost to Richard Gasquet in singles and in straight sets in mixed doubles. In the final tie against China, Hewitt defeated Wu Di in straight sets and won the mixed doubles match. His next tournament was the Apia International, where he lost in the first round against Serbian fifth seed Viktor Troicki.\n\nHis next tournament was the 2012 Australian Open. In doubles, partnering countryman Peter Luczak, the Aussies went until the 2nd round where they lost in straight sets to the Bryan Twins. In singles, where he was awarded a wildcard, Hewitt won his first round match defeating unseeded Cedrik-Marcel Stebe in almost four hours. Long-time rival Andy Roddick, who was seeded 15th, awaited Hewitt in the second round. After dropping the first set, Hewitt won the next two. Roddick then retired due to a groin injury and Hewitt advanced. In the third round, he faced the 23rd seed Milos Raonic of Canada. Playing at night in front of a boisterous Aussie crowd, Hewitt dispatched Raonic in 3 hours 6 minutes. In the 4th round, Hewitt faced returning champ and No. 1-ranked Novak Djokovic. Djokovic won the 1st two sets fairly easily, and was leading 3–0 in the 3rd set when Hewitt launched a spirited comeback, taking the set 6–4. Djokovic eventually prevailed however, winning the match in four sets, ending Hewitt's run. Hewitt's two next matches were in February at the Davis Cup, where he won one singles and one doubles match partnering Chris Guccione, what awarded Australia to go to the playoffs once more. After this Hewitt needed an operation to have a plate inserted in his toe.\n\nHewitt returned with a wildcard at the French Open where he lost in the first round to Blaž Kavčič. After this, Hewitt began his grass season at Queen's Club Championships. Unfortunately he lost in the 1st round to Croatian Ivo Karlović. Hewitt's next tournament was the 2012 Wimbledon Championships, where he was defeated in the first round by 5th seed Jo-Wilfried Tsonga. During this match, ITF released wild cards for the 2012 Olympics, and Hewitt's name was in the singles list, marking his third appearance at the Olympic Games (2000, 2008 and now). After his loss against Tsonga, Hewitt played doubles at Wimbledon partnering countryman Chris Guccione, where they made the 3rd round before losing in 4 sets.\n\nAfter Wimbledon, viewing to prepare for the Olympics, Hewitt was granted a wild card at Newport. In the opening round, he defeated Canadian Vasek Pospisil. In the 2nd round, he won in three sets, ousting American Tim Smyczek. In his next match, the Aussie won against Israeli Dudi Sela. With this win, Hewitt went on to the semifinal (his first since Halle 2010), where he was victorious over American Rajeev Ram. He lost to top seeded John Isner in the final.\n\nPlaying in the Olympics, Hewitt was drawn against Sergiy Stakhovsky and won. Marin Čilić, seeded 13th, awaited in the second round and Hewitt dispatched the Croat in two sets to advance to the third round. There, he met 2nd seed Novak Djokovic. After losing the first set, Djokovic overpowered Hewitt to take the final two sets and eliminate Hewitt from the tournament. In the mixed doubles, he and Sam Stosur reached the quarterfinals, where they lost two sets to one to Britain's Andy Murray and Laura Robson.\n\nBeginning the American hard court season, Hewitt received a WC to the Cincinnati Masters, where he won against Mikhail Youzhny in the 1st round before losing to Viktor Troicki in the 2nd round. The Aussie's next tournament was the US Open, where he received a WC, completing the \"Wild Card Slam\" (received wild cards in all of the four Grand Slams in 2012). In the 1st round, Hewitt met Tobias Kamke, winning his first match at Flushing Meadows since 2009. In the 2nd round, Hewitt won a marathon five sets match against Gilles Müller. In the 3rd round, Hewitt lost to 4th seed and No. 5-ranked David Ferrer, despite having set points in the 1st set.\n\nHewitt started off 2013 in Brisbane, where he lost in second round against Denis Istomin in straight sets. Prior to the Australian Open, Hewitt took part in the exhibition tournament AAMI Kooyong Classic, in which he defeated Milos Raonic, Tomáš Berdych, and Juan Martín del Potro en route to claim his second title. Due to his excellent result in the preparation event before the 2013 Australian Open, people had high expectations of Hewitt. However, he suffered his sixth first-round exit in his home slam to No. 9 Janko Tipsarević in straight sets. Hewitt then played in the Davis Cup against Taiwan and won in both singles and doubles.\n\nHe played the SAP Open next in San Jose, losing his second-round match to third-seeded American Sam Querrey in a three-set thriller. He also claimed a wild card to play in doubles with fellow Aussie Marinko Matosevic, beating the No. 1 American duo Mike Bryan and Bob Bryan in the quarterfinals, before losing to Xavier Malisse and Frank Moser in the final. With Hewitt's doubles run in the tournament, he surpassed the 100-wins mark in doubles. He next participated in the U.S. National Indoor Tennis Championships in Memphis. He faced Yen-Hsun Lu in the opening round, saving two match points to edge Lu in three sets. He lost to Denis Istomin, again in the second round.\n\nHewitt moved on to play the BNP Paribas Open in Indian Wells, ousting Lukáš Rosol and 15th seed John Isner, before losing to No. 18 Stanislas Wawrinka. Hewitt lost to Gilles Simon in the opening round at Roland Garros. After winning the first two sets, he succumbed in five. In his first match at the Aegon Championships Queen's Club, he beat Mike Russell in three sets. He followed this with victory over Grigor Dimitrov in straight sets. He then defeated Sam Querrey to book a place in the quarterfinals. In the quarterfinals, he defeated No. 8 Juan Martín del Potro in three sets, to progress to the semifinals. Hewitt played Marin Čilić in the semifinals, but was beaten in three sets. At Wimbledon, Hewitt beat top ten player Stanislas Wawrinka in the first round in straight sets. He was then defeated by German qualifier Dustin Brown in the second round in four sets.\n\nIn July 2013, he made it to his first final of the year at the Hall-of-Fame Championships, defeating Matthew Ebden, Prakash Amritraj, Jan Hernych, and John Isner on the way. He was beaten by Nicolas Mahut having served for the championship at 5–4 in the second set. His form continued at the Atlanta Open, defeating Édouard Roger-Vasselin 6–4, 6–4, Rhyne Williams 7–6, 6–4 and Ivan Dodig 1–6, 6–3, 6–0 in the quarterfinals. Hewitt played John Isner in the semifinals, but lost in three tough sets. His 2013 US Open run started well, beating Brian Baker in four sets and following up with a five-set epic upset against fellow former US Open champion Juan Martín del Potro, where Hewitt came back from two sets to one down against the No. 6, winning a fourth set tiebreak and sealing the match 6–1 in the fifth. He beat Evgeny Donskoy in the third round to set up a fourth round match with Mikhail Youzhny. Hewitt then lost to Youzhny 3–6, 6–3, 7–6, 4–6, 7–5, despite leading 4–1 in the fourth set and serving for the match at 5–3 in the fifth set. A measure of the success of Hewitt's 2013 season is the fact that he won the Newcombe medal as the most outstanding Australian tennis player in 2013, a year in which he returned to the world's top 100.\n\nHewitt kicked off the 2014 season as an unseeded entrant into the 2014 Brisbane International. He won his first round match against Thanasi Kokkinakis in straight sets. His second round match was against sixth seed Feliciano López, whom he defeated. His quarterfinal encounter against qualifier Marius Copil resulted in a straight-set victory. In the semifinals Hewitt faced second seed Kei Nishikori. Hewitt prevailed, thus setting the final match against seventeen–time Grand Slam winner Roger Federer. Federer held an 18–8 record head–to–head against Hewitt. Hewitt managed to turn the tide on Federer, winning 6–1, 4–6, 6–3 and capturing the title, which was his 29th and first since 2010. As a result, his rank increased from 60th to 43rd, becoming Australian number one again.\nAt AAMI Classic, he defeated Andy Murray in two tiebreaks.\n\nIn the 2014 Australian Open, Hewitt played both singles and doubles as an unseeded player. In his first round singles match, he lost to No. 24 seed Andreas Seppi. In doubles action, Hewitt partnered with retired and former Australian number one Patrick Rafter. However, the duo did not manage to win their first round match against Eric Butorac and Raven Klaasen, losing 4–6, 5–7. After the tournament, Hewitt's singles rank rose to No. 38, his highest position since late 2010. Hewitt battled for his 600th ATP win, becoming only the third active player to reach that milestone by beating Robin Haase in the 1st Round of the 2014 Sony Open Tennis.\n\nAfter the Australian Open, Hewitt played as part of the Australian representative team for the Davis Cup. He lost his match against Jo-Wilfried Tsonga 3–6, 2–6, 6–7 (2–7). He then competed in the 2014 U.S. National Indoor Tennis Championships in Memphis in the United States of America. With a bye in the Round of 32, he went on to defeat Marcos Baghdatis in three sets 1–6, 6–2, 6–0 before losing to Michael Russell 3–6, 6–7 (6–8). His next tournament was the Delray Beach Tournament where he beat Bradley Klahn in straight sets 6–3, 6–1. He then versed his compatriot Marinko Matosevic but was forced to retire after injuring his shoulder. The score was 6–7 (2–7).\n\nHewitt played at the BNP Paribas Open where he defeated Matthew Ebden 7–6(7–2), 3–6, 6–3. He then lost to Kevin Anderson 6–7(5–7), 4–6. Hewitt then played at the Sony Open Tennis where he defeated Robin Haase in the Round of 128, 3–6, 6–3, 6–3. He then subsequently lost to No. 1 Rafael Nadal. Hewitt then played at the U.S. Men's Clay Court Championships where he lost in Round of 16 to Sam Querrey.\n\nHewitt suffered three consecutive first round losses at the BMW Open by FWU AG to Albert Ramos-Vinolas 7–6(6), 1–6, 0–6, Mutua Madrid Open to Santiago Giraldo 5–7, 6–4, 2–6 and at the French Open Rolland Garros to Carlos Berlocq 6–3, 2–6, 1–6, 4–6. This ended Hewitt's clay court season.\n\nAt the Aegon Championships, Hewitt won in the first round against Daniel Gimeno-Traver in straight sets before losing to Feliciano Lopez in straight sets 3–6, 4–6. Following this tournament, Hewitt played at Wimbledon where he won in the first round against Michal Przysiezny, 6–2, 6–7 (14–16), 6–1, 6–4 before losing in the second round in five sets to Jerzy Janowicz, 5–7, 4–6, 7–6(7), 6–4, 3–6.\n\nHe next competed at the Newport Hall of Fame Tennis Championships where he was seeded third. Hewitt advanced to the final for the third consecutive year where he would face Ivo Karlovic. Hewitt slayed his Newport demons and defeated the big serving Croat in three sets: 6–3, 6–7(4), 7–6(3). It was his 30th career singles title. Hewitt went on to win the doubles title with countryman Chris Guccione later that same day.\n\nIn July 2014, the book \"Facing Hewitt\" was published by author Scoop Malinowski, the book contains over 50 interviews with ATP players about their experiences of playing Hewitt. Hewitt received a copy in Newport after his quarterfinal win vs. American Steve Johnson.\n\nOn 10 August 2014, Hewitt defeated Austria's Jürgen Melzer in three sets (3–6, 6–4, 6–4) at the Cincinnati Masters to reach 610 wins on the ATP Tour. That enabled him to rise to number 19 on the all-time wins list, topping Björn Borg and Yevgeny Kafelnikov in the process.\n\nHewitt began his 2015 season as the defending champion of the Brisbane International. In the first round he was defeated in straight sets (3–6, 2–6) by fellow Australian Sam Groth in 58 minutes. As a result, he dropped from rank No. 50 to No. 84 and lost his position of No. 1 Australian which he had held for many consecutive months. Hewitt played the first Fast4 short-form tennis exhibition match against Roger Federer but lost in five sets.\n\nHewitt then played his 19th consecutive Australian Open appearance which is the fourth longest streak at any Grand Slam. In the first round he beat wild card Zhang Ze in 4 sets. He then lost in five sets to his second round opponent Benjamin Becker despite winning the first two sets.\n\nAt a media conference, Hewitt mentioned plans to retire after the 2016 Australian Open to become the captain of the Australian Davis Cup team after Pat Rafter moved on from the position, becoming the seventh man to captain the team. \"I had thought long and hard and I plan to play the Australian Open next year and then finish,\" he said. \"At the moment, [the Davis Cup] is the main focus for us and then I will be looking towards the grass court season and finishing here in Melbourne, which would be special to play 20 Australian Opens\". It will be Australia's first time in the world group of the Davis Cup in six years. Rafter and John Newcombe are the only other two Australian men to have been ranked No. 1 since ranks were established in 1973.\n\nHewitt then played the Miami Open and lost in the first round to Thomaz Bellucci in three sets. He was then awarded a wildcard to the 2015 U.S. Men's Clay Court Championships where he also lost in the first round to Go Soeda.\n\nHewitt skipped the remainder of the clay court season including the 2015 French Open, instead opting to focus on the grass season and Wimbledon. He began his grass court season at the 2015 Topshelf Open where he lost to Nicolas Mahut in the first round. He also was awarded a wildcard into the Men's Doubles where he partnered compatriot Matt Reid. They upset the fourth seeds Draganja/Kontinen in the first round.\n\nAt Wimbledon, Hewitt was awarded a wildcard and was defeated by Jarkko Nieminen 6–3, 3–6, 6–4, 0–6, 9–11 in the first round of his eighteenth and final appearance at the tournament. It became his 44th five-set match of his grand slam career. Despite three straight breaks in the fifth set, Hewitt on serve faced and saved three match points at 4–5, and held serve each time until the 20th game of the fifth set. Afterwards both the crowd and Nieminen himself gave Hewitt a standing ovation. Partnering compatriot Thanasi Kokkinakis, the wild card duo reached the third round of the Wimbledon men's doubles with two five-set matches, including defeating the 15th seed, but they lost to the 4th seed. Hewitt played in the mixed doubles with compatriot Casey Dellacqua on a wild card and lost in the second round, seemingly ending his Wimbledon career.\n\nHewitt partnered Sam Groth to win Australia's Davis Cup quarterfinals doubles rubber against Kazakhstan in Darwin on 18 July. With their spectacular performance, Groth and Hewitt were selected to play the last two reverse-singles rubbers, replacing Kyrgios and Kokkinakis respectively. After Groth's win, Hewitt won the deciding fifth rubber against Nedovyesov to put Australia at 3–2 to reach the semifinals. It was Australia's first win from 0–2 down since 1939.\n\nHewitt, on a wild card, defeated compatriot John-Patrick Smith 6–3 6–4 at the Citi Open in Washington D.C. in August. He lost in the second round of the US Open to Tomic in five sets despite having two match points. Hewitt partnered with Sam Groth lost a tough Davis Cup semifinals doubles tie against the British Murray brothers in 5 sets. Todd Woodbridge hailed it as the \"Best [doubles] I've watched for years.\"\n\nHaving previously announced his intentions to retire after the 2016 Australian Open, Hewitt confirmed that his final season would consist of that, the Hopman Cup and the exhibition World Tennis Challenge.\n\nIn his 20th appearance at the Australian Open, he won his first round match against fellow Australian James Duckworth in straight sets. He then lost in the second round in 3 straight competitive sets to 8th seed David Ferrer, 2–6, 4–6, 4–6. Post-match he was remembered by players including Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal, Andy Murray and Nick Kyrgios as a man who was at the top of the game for years, and continually displayed the fighting spirit that he became synonymous with.\n\nHe was made a Member of the Order of Australia in the awards announced on Australia Day.\n\nIn March Hewitt came out of retirement to replace the injured Nick Kyrgios in the first round Davis Cup against the US at the Kooyong Lawn Tennis Club. He played doubles with John Peers against the Bryan brothers. The Australian duo came back from two sets to love but lost the fifth set.\n\nHewitt was the subject of a book titled \"Facing Hewitt\" which features fifty interviews with professional tennis players who competed against him.\n\nIn June it was announced that Hewitt would be taking a wildcard into the Wimbledon doubles competition, playing alongside young compatriot Jordan Thompson. In the first round, the pair saved eight match points to defeat Nicolás Almagro and David Marrero 19–17 in the deciding set. However, they lost to the eighth seeds in the second round.\n\nIn December 2017, it was announced that Hewitt would come out of retirement and accept a doubles wildcard with compatriot Sam Groth at the 2018 Australian Open.\n\nHewitt and Jordan Thompson accepted a wildcard to play Doubles at the 2018 Brisbane International. They lost in the first round to Grigor Dimitrov and Ryan Harrison 3–6, 6–1, [5–10].\n\nHewitt then played in the fast4 exhibition in Sydney where he lost to Grigor Dimitrov. Hewitt and Kyrgios then went on to win the doubles beating Alexander Zverev Jr. and Grigor Dimitrov. After that, he played the Tie Break Tens in Melbourne where he won his opening match against Novak Djokovic, before losing to world No. 1 Rafael Nadal.\n\nIn the Australian Open doubles, Hewitt and Groth made a run to the quarterfinals, including a win over third seeds Jean-Julien Rojer and Horia Tecău. This was his best doubles result at the Australian Open in his career.\n\nHewitt doubles comeback continued with Lleyton playing doubles at the 2018 Estoril Open with Alex de Minaur where they defeated second seeds Michael Venus and Raven Klaasen before losing in the quarterfinals.\n\nHewitt then reached the semifinals of the 2018 Fuzion 100 Surbiton Trophy – Men's Doubles with Alex Bolt before Venus and Klaasen gained revenge on Hewitt (this time with Alex Bolt) at the 2018 Rosmalen Grass Court Championships – Men's Doubles.\n\nHewitt then teamed up with another Aussie, Nick Kyrgios at the 2018 Queen's Club Championships – Doubles tournament where they defeated number 3 seeds Nicolas Mahut and Pierre-Hugues Herbert before losing in the quarterfinals.\n\nAt the 2018 Wimbledon Championships – Men's Doubles, Hewitt was again wildcard with Alex Bolt however the pair again lost in the first round to Venus and Klaasen. After this loss, Hewitt teamed up with Jordan Thompson and lost in the first round of the 2018 Hall of Fame Tennis Championships in Newport.\n\nHewitt's last professional match of 2018 was in the 2018 Davis Cup World Group Play-offs against Austria where Hewitt paired up with experienced doubles specialist John Peers to defeat the Austrian team of doubles specialist Oliver Marach and experienced clay-courier Juergen Melzer.\n\nHewitt and Jordan Thompson received a wildcard for playing at the Wimbledon Championships.\n\nHewitt made his Davis Cup debut for Australia in the 1999 Davis Cup quarterfinals at age 18 against the United States in Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts. In the first rubber of the tie Hewitt faced No. 8 and Wimbledon quarter finalist Todd Martin. Hewitt caused a major upset over Martin and would go on to win his second singles rubber against Alex O'Brien as well. The great start to his Davis Cup career would continue in the 1999 semifinals against Russia where he would record another two wins against Marat Safin and Yevgeny Kafelnikov. He would taste his first defeat in Davis Cup in the 1999 final against France but would become a Davis Cup champion anyway. In 2000 Hewitt and Australia would again make the Davis Cup final but fell to Spain in Barcelona.\n\nIn 2001 Hewitt would again be a part of the Australian team that would make the Davis Cup final but the Australians would lose the fifth rubber and hand France a 3–2 win. Determined to make amends for his last few finals, Hewitt led the Australian team to the 2003 Davis Cup final against Spain where he defeated Juan Carlos Ferrero in five sets. The team came away victorious 3–1 overall and Hewitt claimed his second Davis Cup title. By the age of 22, he had recorded more wins in Davis Cup singles than any other Australian player. Following the retirement of Pat Rafter and the semi-retirement of Mark Philippoussis, Hewitt would be forced to lead the Australian Davis Cup team with little success from his peers. In the 2006 quarterfinals in Melbourne, Hewitt defeated Belarusian Vladimir Voltchkov in just 91 minutes. Voltchkov said before the match that \"Hewitt has no weapons to hurt me.\" Hewitt responded, \"Voltchkov doesn't have a ranking [of 457] to hurt me.\" In the semifinals in Buenos Aires on clay, Hewitt lost to Argentine José Acasuso in five sets.\n\nDespite a world group semifinal appearance in 2006, Hewitt and Australia would be relegated to the Asia/Oceania region in 2008. Hewitt continued showed his commitment to the team by competing in the regional ties but the team fell in the playoff stages every year between 2008 and 2011. In the 2011 playoffs, he played against Roger Federer and Stanislas Wawrinka on a grass court in Sydney, losing both matches. In doubles, together with Chris Guccione, he was able to defeat Federer and Wawrinka, but this was not enough to take Australia to the World Group.\n\nIn 2012, Hewitt won his single and doubles match against China in February, which allowed Australia to return to the playoffs where they lost to Germany. After defeating Chinese Taipei and Uzbekistan, Australia earned the right to get to the playoffs again in 2013. They ended up routing Poland 4–1 on their soil including a convincing 6–1 6–3 6–2 win for Hewitt over recent Wimbledon quarterfinalist Łukasz Kubot. In 2014, Australia crashed out 5–0 in the World Group first round on the French clay of La Roche sur Yon. Jo-Wilfried Tsonga beat Hewitt both in singles and doubles. Perth's grass courts would then be hosting yet another playoff tie for Australia in September 2014. Hewitt won both his singles match (against Farrukh Dustov) and the subsequent doubles rubber (partnering Chris Guccione v. Dustov and Istomin) in straight sets while up and coming Nick Kyrgios won his encounter with Denis Istomin to give Australia an unassailable 3–0 lead over Uzbekistan, thus enabling their country to return to the World Group in 2015. Sam Groth and Nick Kyrgios wrapped up a 5–0 victory a day later. Australia will open their 2015 campaign in Czech Republic for a 6–8 March tie that is one of two worst-case scenarios for Australia.\n\nHewitt played the Davis Cup match against Great Britain in the semifinals of the 2015 Davis Cup. He played doubles with Sam Groth losing in five sets to brothers Andy and Jamie Murray.\n\nHe came out of retirement to play the first round match against the United States at the 2016 Davis Cup as a player-captain, where he and partner John Peers lost to the Bryan brothers in a five-setter.\n\nHe competed in the 2018 Davis Cup World Group Play-offs, again as a player-captain in doubles with Peers. They won the rubber against the Austrian duo Oliver Marach and Jürgen Melzer in four sets.\n\nHewitt is the sole holder of several Australian Davis Cup records, which include most wins, most singles wins, most ties played and most years played. His Davis Cup career has included wins over players who were top ten at the time, which include Todd Martin, Marat Safin, Yevgeny Kafelnikov, Roger Federer, Gustavo Kuerten, Sébastien Grosjean and Juan Carlos Ferrero.\n\nHewitt made his World Team Cup debut for Australia in 2000 at the age of 19. He recorded two singles victories over Albert Costa and Marcelo Ríos but fell to Yevgeny Kafelnikov in his last group stage match. Hewitt returned to the World Team Cup in 2001 and led Australia to the title by recording singles wins over Àlex Corretja, Magnus Norman, Tommy Haas in the group stages. In the final Hewitt defeated No. 2 Marat Safin.\n\nHewitt made his third appearance at the tournament in 2003 where he entered as the No. 1 singles player and went undefeated in his singles matches by recording wins over Jiří Novák, James Blake and Carlos Moyá but it was not enough to send Australia through to the final.\n\nFresh from their 2003 Davis Cup victory, Hewitt and Mark Philippoussis entered the 2004 World Team Cup with high hopes. In the group stages Hewitt recorded victories over Robby Ginepri and Martin Verkerk but fell to Gastón Gaudio in his last group singles match. Despite the loss, Australia still advanced to the final where Hewitt would lose to Fernando González and Australia would lose the final 2–1.\n\nAfter a six-year hiatus Hewitt returned to compete in the 2010 World Team Cup and won his first match against John Isner but fell to Nicolás Almagro in his last match.\n\nA 19-year-old Hewitt entered his first Olympics in 2000 and was given the fourth seeding in the draw. Hewitt was considered a strong favorite for a medal given his victory at the Sydney International earlier in the year but despite competing in his home nation Hewitt went out in the first round to Max Mirnyi 6–3 6–3. Hewitt elected not to compete in the 2004 Athens Olympic Games, deciding instead to focus on the 2004 US Open which would result in a runner-up showing. He would return for his second Olympic Games in Beijing for both the singles and doubles competitions. A first round 7–5 7–6 victory over Jonas Björkman would set up a second round clash with the number 2 seed Rafael Nadal. Nadal eliminated Hewitt in the second round 6–1 6–2 and would go on to win the singles gold medal. Pairing up with Chris Guccione in the doubles, the team would record victories over Agustín Calleri/Juan Mónaco and Rafael Nadal/Tommy Robredo before falling to the Bryan brothers in the quarterfinals.\n\nHewitt competed in his third olympics in London 2012 where he entered the men's singles event and defeated Ukrainian Sergiy Stakhovsky in the first round. He was the only Australian in any tennis event to progress past the first round. In the second round Hewitt took out 13th seeded Croatian Marin Čilić. In the third round Hewitt stunned the tennis world when he won the first set against the number 2 ranked Novak Djokovic, he would end up falling in three sets. He also sent an application to the International Olympic Committee to enter the men's doubles competition with Chris Guccione but the application was rejected. Following his men's doubles rejection, Hewitt decided to apply for a spot in the mixed doubles competition with Sam Stosur. The pair were granted entry and defeated Polish pair Marcin Matkowski and Agnieszka Radwańska in the first round. In the quarterfinals, Hewitt/Stosur faced British pair Andy Murray and Laura Robson, they would lose the encounter.\n\nPeter Smith, Darren Cahill, Jason Stoltenberg, Roger Rasheed, Scott Draper, Tony Roche, Nathan Healey and Brett Smith, Tony Roche and Peter Luczak are all former coaches of Hewitt.\n\nHewitt's coaches in his time on the ATP Tour:\nBULLET::::- Peter Smith (January 1997 – December 1998)\nBULLET::::- Darren Cahill (December 1998 – December 2001)\nBULLET::::- Jason Stoltenberg (December 2001 – June 2003)\nBULLET::::- Roger Rasheed (June 2003 – January 2007)\nBULLET::::- Scott Draper (January 2007)\nBULLET::::- Tony Roche (July 2007 – August 2009)\nBULLET::::- Nathan Healey (August 2009 – August 2010)\nBULLET::::- Brett Smith (August 2010 – November 2010)\nBULLET::::- Tony Roche (November 2010 – January 2016)\nBULLET::::- Peter Luczak (January 2013 – January 2016)\n\nHewitt and Roger Federer played each other on 27 occasions. Early in their careers, Hewitt dominated Federer, winning seven of their first nine meetings, including a victory from two sets down in the 2003 Davis Cup semifinal, which allowed Australia to defeat Switzerland. However, from 2004 onward, Federer dominated the rivalry, winning 16 of the last 18 meetings to finish with an 18–9 overall head-to-head record. This is Hewitt's longest rivalry as these two first played each other as juniors in 1996. They met in one Grand Slam final, the 2004 US Open final, where Federer won his first US Open title in a lopsided encounter in which Federer won the first and third sets 6–0 and the second set on a tiebreak. Federer met Hewitt at six of the Grand Slam tournaments in which he lifted the trophy, including all five of his triumphs between 2004 and 2005. Their last meeting was at the 2014 Brisbane International, where Hewitt triumphed over Federer in three sets, for his first title since 2010, when he also beat Federer to the Halle title.\n\nHewitt and Federer teamed up in the men's doubles at Wimbledon in 1999. They got to the third round before losing to Jonas Björkman and Pat Rafter.\n\nHewitt's second longest rivalry was against American Andy Roddick, in which the two played on 14 occasions. Early on, Hewitt dominated the rivalry, with six wins from their first seven meetings. One of those wins included a five-set victory at the 2001 US Open, the tournament in which Hewitt captured his first Singles Grand Slam title. In later years, Roddick began to dominate Hewitt, with the rivalry finishing at 7 wins each.\n\nA rivalry and feud between Hewitt and Argentinian tennis players began at the 2002 Wimbledon final where Hewitt defeated Argentina's David Nalbandian in straight sets. The rivalry would hit boiling point in 2005 over a series of matches spread between the 2005 Australian Open and the 2005 Davis Cup Quarterfinals between Australia and Argentina. In the third round of 2005 Australian Open Hewitt faced Argentinian Juan Ignacio Chela in which Hewitt fired up Chela with his over-zealous celebrations for Chela's unforced errors, causing the Argentinian to spit at Hewitt during a change of ends. Hewitt would then face David Nalbandian in the quarterfinals on Australia Day with Hewitt coming out victorious 10–8 in the fifth set. Later in 2005 Hewitt would face Guillermo Coria in the Davis Cup quarterfinals, where their rivalry would flare up, however, die down the following year in the 2006 Davis Cup semifinals, where Argentina came out victorious 5–0 over Hewitt and the Australians.\n\nHewitt is a defensive counterpuncher. He typically likes to stay back towards the baseline during a rally and will usually approach the net only to catch a short reply or drop shot from his opponent. Hewitt's lack of penetration in his groundstokes, most notably in his forehand, a typically dominant shot in most male players, forces him to rely on placement rather than simply \"dominating\" the point. At the 2004 Cincinnati Masters Final, commentator MaliVai Washington said that Hewitt was even more difficult to \"ace\" than Agassi because he gets more returns in play. Hewitt's tactics typically involve putting difficult service returns in play, consistently chasing down attempted winning shots from his opponent, and keeping the ball deep until he feels he can hit a winner.\n\nAlthough he is known primarily as a baseliner, Hewitt is a skilled volleyer and is known for having one of the best overhead smashes in the game. His signature shot, however, is the offensive topspin lob, a shot that he executes efficiently off both wings when his opponent approaches the net. US Davis Cup captain Patrick McEnroe, Jim Courier and Tim Henman have all described Hewitt's lob as being the best in the world (although Henman has since declared Andy Murray to have succeeded him). In Andre Agassi's book \"Open\", Hewitt is described as one of the best shot selectors in the history of Men's Tennis.\n\nBULLET::::- 2001 – ATP Player of the Year\nBULLET::::- 2001 – Most Popular South Australian\nBULLET::::- 2002 – ATP Player of the Year\nBULLET::::- 2002 – Australia's Male Athlete\nBULLET::::- 2002 – ESPY Best Male Tennis Player\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Young Australian of the Year\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Vogue Australia Sportsman of the Year\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Most Popular South Australian\nBULLET::::- 2011 – Newcombe Medal. Spirit of Tennis Award\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Newcombe Medal. Most outstanding Australian player in 2013\nBULLET::::- Davis Cup Commitment Award\nBULLET::::- 2016 – Member of the Order of Australia for significant service to tennis as a player at the national and international level, and to the community.\n\nIn July 2000, Hewitt signed a multiyear endorsement deal with Nike. He is currently sponsored by American athletic apparel company Athletic DNA and the Japanese sports manufacturer Yonex, with whom he signed a \"Head to Toe\" deal in late 2005. Hewitt has used Yonex racquets as early as 2000, having used the Yonex Super RD Tour 95. Yonex provides Hewitt's racquets, shoes and accessories. Hewitt's Yonex shoes (SHT-306) are inscribed with his nickname \"Rusty\" along with an image of an Australian flag. As of 7 August 2007, his first appearance with a new racquet at the Montreal Masters, Hewitt used to use the Yonex RQiS 1 Tour. He used to use the Yonex RDS tour 90 Model, but switched to the Yonex RDiS 100 mid in 2009. In 2011, he switched to Yonex VCORE 95 D, using a grip size of 4 3/8 (L3). Since mid-2011, he began alternating between Yonex, Nike, Adidas, Asics and Fila shoes.\n\nHewitt is a keen supporter of Australian rules football, having played the game earlier in his career, and is currently the joint No. 1 ticket holder for the Adelaide Crows, alongside MP Kate Ellis. He had once had a close friendship with Crows star Andrew McLeod, but this broke down amid much public controversy in 2005. Hewitt had produced a DVD titled \"Lleyton Hewitt: The Other Side\" which precipitated the falling out between him and McLeod over filming of certain Aboriginal sites.\n\nHewitt and Belgian tennis player Kim Clijsters started a relationship in January 2000, during the Australian Open. The two announced their engagement just before Christmas 2003, but separated in October 2004, cancelling a planned February 2005 wedding.\n\nOn 30 January 2005, shortly after losing the 2005 Australian Open final to Marat Safin, Hewitt proposed to Australian actress Bec Cartwright after they had been dating for six weeks. They married on 21 July 2005 at the Sydney Opera House and they have three children together.\n\nIn late 2008, to extend his tennis career and reduce the amount of tax he would otherwise have had to pay, Hewitt relocated his family for the European and North American season to their home in the Old Fort Bay estate, in Nassau, Bahamas.\n\nHewitt has a nickname, 'Rusty', which was given to him by Darren Cahill who at the time thought Hewitt resembled the character Rusty, from the National Lampoon film series. Hewitt has also been given the nickname 'Rocky' by fans, which originated from his shouts of \"C'mon Balboa\", in reference to the character Rocky Balboa from the Sylvester Stallone film \"Rocky\". Hewitt has also been compared to the character.\n\nHewitt has been involved in several public controversies. He was involved in a racism dispute while playing James Blake at the 2001 US Open. After being foot-faulted twice by a black linesman on crucial points in the third set, Hewitt was accused of dragging race into the situation by suggesting the similarity in skin colour of Blake and the official was playing a part in the decision to penalise him.\n\nAt the 2001 French Open Hewitt twice called the Chair Umpire and net judge \"spastics\" and was subsequently forced to apologise to the spastic community in Australia following a public backlash.\n\nHewitt's constant \"c'mons\" when he won a point or his opponents made an error have been remarked upon as poor sportsmanship by opponents and media commentators. Notably this behaviour particularly riled his 2005 Australian Open second-round opponent James Blake.\n\n!Tournament!!1997!!1998!!1999!!2000!!2001!!2002!!2003!!2004!!2005!!2006!!2007!!2008!!2009!!2010!!2011!!2012!!2013!!2014!!2015\n!2016!!!!!!Win%\nalign=leftAustralian Open\nbgcolor=afeeee1R\nbgcolor=afeeee1R\nbgcolor=afeeee2R\nbgcolor=afeeee4R\nbgcolor=afeeee3R\nbgcolor=afeeee1R\nbgcolor=afeeee4R\nbgcolor=afeeee4R\nbgcolor=afeeee2R\nbgcolor=afeeee3R\nbgcolor=afeeee4R\nbgcolor=afeeee1R\nbgcolor=afeeee4R\nbgcolor=afeeee1R\nbgcolor=afeeee4R\nbgcolor=afeeee1R\nbgcolor=afeeee1R\nbgcolor=afeeee2R\nbgcolor=afeeee2R\n0 / 20\n32–20\n62%\nalign=leftFrench Open\nA\nQ1\nbgcolor=afeeee1R\nbgcolor=afeeee4R\nbgcolor=ffebcdQF\nbgcolor=afeeee4R\nbgcolor=afeeee3R\nbgcolor=ffebcdQF\nA\nbgcolor=afeeee4R\nbgcolor=afeeee4R\nbgcolor=afeeee3R\nbgcolor=afeeee3R\nbgcolor=afeeee3R\nA\nbgcolor=afeeee1R\nbgcolor=afeeee1R\nbgcolor=afeeee1R\nA\nA\n0 / 14\n28–14\n67%\nalign=leftWimbledon\nA\nQ1\nbgcolor=afeeee3R\nbgcolor=afeeee1R\nbgcolor=afeeee4R\nbgcolor=limeW\nbgcolor=afeeee1R\nbgcolor=ffebcdQF\nbgcolor=ffebcdQF\nbgcolor=afeeee4R\nbgcolor=afeeee4R\nbgcolor=ffebcdQF\nbgcolor=afeeee4R\nbgcolor=afeeee2R\nbgcolor=afeeee1R\nbgcolor=afeeee2R\nbgcolor=afeeee2R\nbgcolor=afeeee1R\nA\n1 / 17\n41–16\n72%\nalign=leftUS Open\nA\nQ2\nbgcolor=afeeee3R\nbgcolor=limeW\nbgcolor=ffebcdQF\nbgcolor=ffebcdQF\nbgcolor=afeeee2R\nA\nbgcolor=afeeee3R\nbgcolor=afeeee1R\nA\nbgcolor=afeeee3R\nbgcolor=afeeee4R\nbgcolor=afeeee1R\nbgcolor=afeeee2R\nA\n1 / 15\n47–14\n77%\n!style=text-align:leftWin–loss\n!0–1\n!0–1\n!5–4\n!11–4\n!16–3\n!15–3\n!9–4\n!17–4\n!16–3\n!12–4\n!9–4\n!8–3\n!8–4\n!8–4\n!1–2\n!5–4\n!4–4\n!1–4\n!2–3\n!1–1\n!2 / 66\n!148–64\n!70%\nalign=leftATP Finals\ncolspan=3 style=color:#cccDid not qualify\nbgcolor=afeeeeRR\nbgcolor=limeW\nbgcolor=limeW\nstyle=color:#cccDNQ\nA\n!2 / 4\n!13–5\n!72%\n\n!Outcome!!Year!! style=\"width:160px;\"Championship!!Surface!! style=\"width:180px;\"Opponent!!width=220Score\nbgcolor=98FB98Winner2001US OpenHard Pete Sampras7–6, 6–1, 6–1\nbgcolor=98FB98Winner2002WimbledonGrass David Nalbandian6–1, 6–3, 6–2\nbgcolor=FFA07ARunner-up2004US OpenHard Roger Federer0–6, 6–7, 0–6\nbgcolor=FFA07ARunner-up2005Australian OpenHard Marat Safin6–1, 3–6, 4–6, 4–6\n\n!Outcome!!Year!! style=\"width:160px;\"Championship!!Surface!! style=\"width:180px;\"Partner!!width=180Opponent!!width=160Score\nbgcolor=98FB98Winner2000US OpenHard Max Mirnyi Ellis Ferreira Rick Leach6–4, 5–7, 7–6\n\n!Outcome!!Year!! style=\"width:160px;\"Championship!!Surface!! style=\"width:180px;\"Partner!!width=180Opponent!!width=160Score\nbgcolor=FFA07ARunner-up\n2000\nWimbledon\nGrass\n4–6, 6–7\n\n!Outcome!!Year!! style=\"width:160px;\"Championship!!Surface!! style=\"width:180px;\"Opponent!!width=220Score\nbgcolor=98FB98Winner2001SydneyHard (i) Sébastien Grosjean6–3, 6–3, 6–4\nbgcolor=98FB98Winner2002ShanghaiHard (i) Juan Carlos Ferrero7–5, 7–5, 2–6, 2–6, 6–4\nbgcolor=FFA07ARunner-up2004HoustonHard Roger Federer3–6, 2–6\n\n!Outcome!!Year!! style=\"width:160px;\"Championship!!Surface!! style=\"width:180px;\"Opponent!!width=220Score\nbgcolor=FFA07ARunner-up2000StuttgartHard (i) Wayne Ferreira6–7, 6–3, 7–6, 6–7, 2–6\nbgcolor=98FB98Winner2002Indian WellsHard Tim Henman6–1, 6–2\nbgcolor=FFA07ARunner-up2002CincinnatiHard Carlos Moyá5–7, 6–7\nbgcolor=FFA07ARunner-up2002ParisCarpet (i) Marat Safin6–7, 0–6, 4–6\nbgcolor=98FB98Winner2003Indian Wells (2)Hard Gustavo Kuerten6–1, 6–1\nbgcolor=FFA07ARunner-up2004Cincinnati (2)Hard Andre Agassi3–6, 6–3, 2–6\nbgcolor=FFA07ARunner-up2005Indian WellsHard Roger Federer2–6, 4–6, 4–6\n\nBULLET::::- These records were attained in the Open Era of tennis.\nBULLET::::- Records in bold indicate peer-less achievements.\n{class=wikitable\n\nBULLET::::- Lleyton Hewitt career statistics\nBULLET::::- Wimbledon champions (Men's Singles)\nBULLET::::- US Open champions (Men's Singles)\nBULLET::::- List of Grand Slam Men's Singles champions\nBULLET::::- Lleyton Hewitt profile at Tennis Australia\nBULLET::::- Official website\n"}
{"id": "17917", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17917", "title": "Lars von Trier", "text": "Lars von Trier\n\nLars von Trier (born Lars Trier; 30 April 1956) is a Danish film director and screenwriter with a prolific and controversial career spanning almost four decades. His work is known for its genre and technical innovation; confrontational examination of existential, social, and political issues; and his treatment of subjects such as mercy, sacrifice, and mental health.\n\nAmong his more than 100 awards and 200 nominations at film festivals worldwide, von Trier has received: the Palme d'Or (for \"Dancer in the Dark\"), the Grand Prix (for \"Breaking the Waves\"), the Prix du Jury (for \"Europa\"), and the Technical Grand Prize (for \"The Element of Crime\" and \"Europa\") at the Cannes Film Festival.\n\nVon Trier is the founder and shareholder of the international film production company Zentropa Films, which has sold more than 350million tickets and garnered seven Academy Award nominations over the past 25years.\n\nVon Trier was born in Kongens Lyngby, Denmark, north of Copenhagen, to Inger Høst and Fritz Michael Hartmann (the head of Denmark's Ministry of Social Affairs and a World War II resistance fighter). He received his surname from Høst's husband, Ulf Trier, whom he believed was his biological father until 1989.\n\nHe studied film theory at the University of Copenhagen and film direction at the National Film School of Denmark. At 25, he won two Best School Film awards at the Munich International Festival of Film Schools for \"Nocturne\" and \"Last Detail\". The same year, he added the German nobiliary particle \"von\" to his name, possibly as a satirical homage to the equally self-invented titles of directors Erich von Stroheim and Josef von Sternberg, and saw his graduation film \"Images of Liberation\" released as a theatrical feature.\n\nIn 1984, \"The Element of Crime\", von Trier's breakthrough film, received twelve awards at seven international festivals including the Technical Grand Prize at Cannes, and a nomination for the Palme d'Or. The film's slow, non-linear pace, innovative and multi-leveled plot design, and dark dreamlike visual effects combine to create an allegory for traumatic European historical events.\n\nHis next film, \"Epidemic\" (1987), was also shown at Cannes in the Un Certain Regard section. The film features two story lines that ultimately collide: the chronicle of two filmmakers (played by vonTrier and screenwriter Niels Vørse) in the midst of developing a new project, and a dark science fiction tale of a futuristic plaguethe very film von Trier and Vørsel are depicted making.\n\nVon Trier has occasionally referred to his films as falling into thematic and stylistic trilogies. This pattern began with \"The Element of Crime\" (1984), the first of the \"Europa\" trilogy, which illuminated traumatic periods in Europe both in the past and the future. It includes \"The Element of Crime\" (1984), \"Epidemic\" (1987), and \"Europa\" (1991).\n\nVon Trier directed \"Medea\" (1988) for television, which won him the Jean d'Arcy prize in France. It is based on a screenplay by Carl Th. Dreyer and stars Udo Kier. Trier completed the Europa trilogy in 1991 with \"Europa\" (released as \"Zentropa\" in the US), which won the Prix duJury at the 1991 Cannes Film Festival, and picked up awards at other major festivals. In 1990 he also directed the music video for the song \"Bakerman\" by Laid Back. This video was re-used in 2006 by the English DJ and artist Shaun Baker in his remake of the song.\n\nSeeking financial independence and creative control over their projects, in 1992 vonTrier and producer Peter Aalbæk Jensen founded the film production company Zentropa Entertainment. Named after a fictional railway company in \"Europa\", their most recent film at the time, Zentropa has produced many movies other than Trier's own, as well as several television series. It has also produced hardcore sex films: \"Constance\" (1998), \"Pink Prison\" (1999), \"HotMen CoolBoyz\" (2000), and \"All About Anna\" (2005). To make money for his newly founded company, vonTrier made \"The Kingdom\" (Danish title \"Riget\", 1994) and \"The KingdomII\" (\"RigetII\", 1997), a pair of miniseries recorded in the Danish national hospital, the name \"Riget\" being a colloquial name for the hospital known as Rigshospitalet (lit. The Kingdom's Hospital) in Danish. A projected third season of the series was derailed by the death in 1998 of Ernst-Hugo Järegård, who played Dr. Helmer, and that of Kirsten Rolffes, who played Mrs. Drusse, in 2000, two of the major characters.\n\n In 1995 von Trier and Thomas Vinterberg presented their manifesto for a new cinematic movement, which they called Dogme 95. The Dogme95 concept, which led to international interest in Danish film, inspired filmmakers all over the world. In 2008, together with their fellow Dogme directors Kristian Levring and Søren Kragh-Jacobsen, vonTrier and Thomas Vinterberg received the European film award for European Achievement in World Cinema.\n\nIn 1996 von Trier conducted an unusual theatrical experiment in Copenhagen involving 53 actors, which he titled \"Psychomobile1: The World Clock\". A documentary chronicling the project was directed by Jesper Jargil, and was released in 2000 with the title \"De Udstillede\" (The Exhibited).\n\nVon Trier achieved his greatest international success with his \"Golden Heart\" trilogy. Each film in the trilogy is about naive heroines who maintain their \"golden hearts\" despite the tragedies they experience. This trilogy consists of: \"Breaking the Waves\" (1996), \"The Idiots\" (1998), and \"Dancer in the Dark\" (2000). While all three films are sometimes associated with the Dogme 95 movement, only \"The Idiots\" is a certified Dogme95 film.\n\n\"Breaking the Waves\" (1996), the first film in his \"Golden Heart\" trilogy, won the Grand Prix at the Cannes Film Festival and featured Emily Watson, who was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress. Its grainy images, and hand-held photography, pointed towards Dogme95 but violated several of the manifesto's rules, and therefore does not qualify as a Dogme95 film.\n\nThe second film in the trilogy, \"The Idiots\" (1998), was nominated for a Palme d'Or, with which he was presented in person at the Cannes Film Festival despite his dislike of traveling.\n\nIn 2000 von Trier premiered a musical featuring Icelandic musician Björk, \"Dancer in the Dark\". The film won the Palme d'Or at Cannes. The song \"I've Seen It All\" (co-written by vonTrier) received an Academy Award nomination for Best Original Song.\n\n\"The Five Obstructions\" (2003), made by vonTrier and Jørgen Leth, is a documentary that incorporates lengthy sections of experimental films. The premise is that vonTrier challenges director Jørgen Leth, his friend and mentor, to remake his old experimental film \"The Perfect Human\" (1967) five times, each time with a different \"obstruction\" (or obstacle) specified by vonTrier.\n\nA proposed trilogy, von Trier's \"Land of Opportunities\" consists of \"Dogville\" (2003), \"Manderlay\" (2005), and \",\" which is yet to be made. \"Dogville\" and \"Manderlay\" were both shot with the same distinctive, extremely stylized approach, placing the actors on a bare sound stage with no set decoration and the buildings' walls marked by chalk lines on the floor, a style inspired by 1970s televised theatre. \"Dogville\" (2003) starred Nicole Kidman and \"Manderlay\" (2005) starred Bryce Dallas Howard in the same main role as Grace Margaret Mulligan. Both films have casts of major international actors, including Harriet Andersson, Lauren Bacall, James Caan, Danny Glover, and Willem Dafoe, and question various issues relating to American society, such as intolerance (in \"Dogville\") and slavery (in \"Manderlay\").\n\nIn 2006 von Trier released a Danish-language comedy film, \"The Boss of It All\". It was shot using an experimental process that he has called Automavision, which involves the director choosing the best possible fixed camera position and then allowing a computer to randomly choose when to tilt, pan, or zoom.\n\nFollowing \"The Boss of It All\", von Trier scripted an autobiographical film, \"\" in 2007, which went on to be directed by Jacob Thuesen. The film tells the story of vonTrier's years as a student at the National Film School of Denmark. It stars Jonatan Spang as vonTrier's alter ego, called \"Erik Nietzsche\", and is narrated by vonTrier himself. All the main characters in the film are based on real people from the Danish film industry, with thinly veiled portrayals including Jens Albinus as director Nils Malmros, Dejan Čukić as screenwriter Mogens Rukov, and Søren Pilmark.\n\nThe \"Depression\" trilogy consists of \"Antichrist\", \"Melancholia\", and \"Nymphomaniac\". The three films star Charlotte Gainsbourg, and deal with characters who suffer depression or grief in different ways. This trilogy is said to represent the depression that Trier himself experiences.\n\nVon Trier's next feature film was \"Antichrist\", a film about \"a grieving couple who retreat to their cabin in the woods, hoping a return to Eden will repair their broken hearts and troubled marriage; but nature takes its course and things go from bad to worse\". The film stars Willem Dafoe and Charlotte Gainsbourg. It premiered in competition at the 2009 Cannes Film Festival, where the festival's jury honoured the movie by giving the Best Actress award to Gainsbourg.\n\nIn 2011 vonTrier released \"Melancholia\", a psychological drama. The film was in competition at the 2011 Cannes Film Festival.\n\nKnown to be provocative in interviews, vonTrier's remarks during the press conference before the premiere of \"Melancholia\" in Cannes caused significant controversy in the media, leading the festival to declare him \"persona non grata\" and to ban him from the festival for one year (without, however, excluding \"Melancholia\" from that year's competition). Minutes before the end of the interview, Trier was asked by a journalist about his German roots and the Nazi aesthetic in response to the director's description of the film's genre as \"German romance\". The director, who was brought up with his Jewish father and only found out later in life that his biological father was a non-Jewish German, appeared offended by the connotation and responded by discussing his German identity. He joked that since he was no longer Jewish he now \"understands\" and \"sympathizes\" with Hitler, that he is not against the Jews except for Israel which is \"a pain in the ass\" and that he is a Nazi. These remarks caused a stir in the media which, for the most part, presented the incident as an antisemitic scandal. The director released a formal apology immediately after the controversial press conference and kept apologizing for his joke during all of the interviews he gave in the weeks following the incident, admitting that he was not sober, and saying that he did not need to explain that he is not a Nazi. The actors of \"Melancholia\" who were present during the incident – Dunst, Gainsbourg, Skarsgård – defended the director, pointing to his provocative sense of humor and his depression. The director of the Cannes festival later characterized the controversy as \"unfair\" and as \"stupid\" as vonTrier's bad joke, concluding that his films are welcome at the festival and that vonTrier is considered a \"friend\". In 2019, von Trier stated that he made this remark at the \"only press conference I ever had when I was sober.\"\n\nFollowing \"Melancholia\", von Trier began the production of \"Nymphomaniac\", a film about the sexual awakening of a woman played by Charlotte Gainsbourg.\n\nIn early December 2013, a four-hour version of the five-and-a-half-hour film was shown to the press in a private preview session. The cast also included Stellan Skarsgård (in his sixth film for von Trier), Shia LaBeouf, Willem Dafoe, Jamie Bell, Christian Slater, and Uma Thurman. In response to claims that he had merely created a \"porn film\", Skarsgård stated \"... if you look at this film, it's actually a really bad porn movie, even if you fast forward. And after a while you find you don't even react to the explicit scenes. They become as natural as seeing someone eating a bowl of cereal.\" VonTrier refused to attend the private screening due to the negative response to Nazi-related remarks he had made at the 2011 Cannes Film Festival, which had led to his expulsion from it. In the director's defense, Skarsgård stated at the screening, \"Everyone knows he's not a Nazi, and it was disgraceful the way the press had these headlines saying he was.\"\n\nFor its public release in the United Kingdom, the four-hour version of \"Nymphomaniac\" was divided into two \"volumes\"\"VolumeI\" and \"VolumeII\"and the film's British premiere was on 22February 2014. In interviews prior to the release date, Gainsbourg and co-star Stacy Martin revealed that prosthetic vaginas, body doubles, and special effects were used for the production of the film. Martin also stated that the film's characters were a reflection of the director himself and referred to the experience as an \"honour\" that she enjoyed.\n\nThe film was also released in two \"volumes\" for the Australian release on 20 March 2014, with an interval separating the back-to-back sections. In his review of the film for 3RRR's film criticism program, \"Plato's Cave\", presenter Josh Nelson stated that, since the production of \"Breaking the Waves\", the filmmaker von Trier is most akin to is Alfred Hitchcock, due to his portrayal of feminine issues. Nelson also mentioned filmmaker Andrei Tarkovsky as another influence whom Trier himself has also cited.\n\nIn February 2014, an uncensored version of \"Volume I\" was shown at the Berlin Film Festival, with no announcement of when or if the complete five-and-a-half-hour \"Nymphomaniac\" would be made available to the public. The complete version premiered at the 2014 Venice Film Festival and was shortly afterward released in a limited theatrical run worldwide that fall.\n\nIn 2015, von Trier started to work on a new feature film, \"The House That Jack Built\" (2018), which was originally planned as an eight-part television series. The story is about a serial killer, seen from the murderer's point of view. Shooting started in March 2017 in Sweden, with shooting moving to Copenhagen in May.\n\nIn February 2017, von Trier explained in his own words that \"The House That Jack Built\" \"celebrates the idea that life is evil and soulless, which is sadly proven by the recent rise of the \"\"Homo trumpus\" – the rat king\". The film premiered at the Cannes Film Festival.\n\nDespite more than 100 walkouts by audience members when initially screened at the Cannes Film Festival, the film still received a 10-minute standing ovation.\n\nVon Trier is heavily influenced by the work of Carl Theodor Dreyer and the film \"The Night Porter\". He was so inspired by the short film \"The Perfect Human\", directed by Jørgen Leth, that he challenged Leth to redo the short five times in the feature film \"The Five Obstructions\".\n\nVon Trier's writing style has been heavily influenced by his work with actors on set, as well as the Dogme 95 manifesto that he co-authored. In an interview with \"Creative Screenwriting\", von Trier described his process as \"writing a sketch and keep[ing] the story simple...then part of the script work is with the actors.\"\n\nWhile reflecting on the storytelling across his body of work, von Trier said, \"All the stories are about a realist who comes into conflict with life. I’m not crazy about real life, and real life is not crazy about me.\" He further described his process as dividing different parts of his personality into different characters.\n\nVon Trier has cited Danish filmmaker Carl Dreyer as a writing influence, pointing to Dreyer's method of overwriting his scripts then significantly cutting the length down.\n\nVon Trier has said that \"a film should be like a stone in your shoe\". To create original art he feels that filmmakers must distinguish themselves stylistically from other films, often by placing restrictions on the film making process. The most famous such restriction is the cinematic \"vow of chastity\" of the Dogme 95 movement with which he is associated. In \"Dancer in the Dark\", he used jump shots and dramatically-different color palettes and camera techniques for the \"real world\" and musical portions of the film, and in \"Dogville\" everything was filmed on a sound stage with no set, where the walls of the buildings in the fictional town were marked as lines on the floor.\n\nVon Trier often shoots digitally and operates the camera himself, preferring to continuously shoot the actors in-character without stopping between takes. In \"Dogville\" he let actors stay in character for hours, in the style of method acting. These techniques often put great strain on the actors, most famously with Björk during the filming of \"Dancer in the Dark\".\n\nVon Trier would later return to explicit images in \"Antichrist\" (2009), exploring darker themes, but he ran into problems when he tried once more with \"Nymphomaniac\", which had 90 minutes cut out (reducing it from five-and-one-half to four hours) for its international release in 2013 in order to be commercially viable, taking nearly a year to be shown complete anywhere in an uncensored director's cut.\n\nTrier also attributes most of his profound ideas to that of his previous mentor, Thomas Boguszewski. \"Thomas' genius is one I could never match,\" says von Trier, \"but it would be a shame not to try.\"\n\nIn a Skype interview for IndieWire, von Trier compared his approach to actors with \"how a chef would work with a potato or a piece of meat,\" clarifying that working with actors has differed on each film based on the production conditions.\n\nVon Trier has occasionally courted controversy by his treatment of his leading ladies. He and Björk famously fell out during the shooting of \"Dancer in the Dark\", to the point where Björk would abscond from filming for days at a time. She stated about Trier, who among other things shattered a monitor while it was next to her, \"...you can take quite sexist film directors like Woody Allen or Stanley Kubrick and still they are the one that provide the soul to their movies. In Lars von Trier’s case it is not so and he knows it. He needs a female to provide his work soul. And he envies them and hates them for it. So he has to destroy them during the filming. And hide the evidence.\" Despite this, other actresses such as Kirsten Dunst and Charlotte Gainsbourg have spoken out in defence of von Trier's approach. \"Nymphomaniac\" star Stacy Martin has stated that he never forced her to do anything that was outside her comfort zone. She said \"I don't think he's a misogynist. The fact that he sometimes depicts women as troubled or dangerous or dark or even evil; that doesn't automatically make him anti-feminist. It's a very dated argument. I think that Lars loves women.\"\n\nNicole Kidman, who starred in von Trier's \"Dogville\", said in an interview with ABC Radio National: \"I think I tried to quit the film three times because he said, 'I want to tie you up and whip you, and that's not to be kind.' I was, like, what do you mean? I've come all this way to rehearse with you, to work with you, and now you're telling me you want to tie me up and whip me? But that's Lars, and Lars takes his clothes off and stands there naked and you're like, 'Oh, put your clothes back on, Lars, please, let's just shoot the film.' But he's very, very raw and he's almost like a child in that he'll say and do anything. And we would have to eat dinner every night and most of the time that would end with me in tears because Lars would sit next to me and drink peach schnapps and get drunk and get abusive and I'd leave and...anyway, then we'd go to work the next morning.\"\n\nBjörk made a public statement regarding von Trier's sexual harassment during the production of \"Dancer in the Dark\", in which von Trier remains unnamed, though the \"Los Angeles Times\" has found corroboration identifying him. In the Facebook posting, Björk describes the difficulties in facing his retribution: \"It was extremely clear to me when I walked into the actresses profession that my humiliation and role as a lesser sexually harassed being was the norm and set in stone with the director and a staff of dozens who enabled it and encouraged it. I became aware of that it is a universal thing that a director can touch and harass his actresses at will and the institution of film allows it. When I turned the director down repeatedly he sulked and punished me and created for his team an impressive net of illusion where I was framed as the difficult one.\" She also stated, \"And in my opinion he had a more fair and meaningful relationship with his actresses after my confrontation so there is hope. Let's hope this statement supports the actresses and actors all over. Let's stop this. There is a wave of change in the world\". Von Trier has denied the accusations made against him, and Björk responded by detailing the sexual assault episodes.\n\nVon Trier has a known penchant for working with actors and production members more than once. His main crew members and producer team has remained intact since the film \"Europa\". The list of actors reappearing in his films, even for small parts or cameos, is also extensive. Many of them have repeatedly expressed their devotion to von Trier and willingness to return on set with him, even without payment. He uses the same regular group of actors in many of his films including Jean-Marc Barr, Udo Kier and Stellan Skarsgård who was cast in several Lars von Trier films: \"Breaking the Waves\", \"Dancer in the Dark\", \"Dogville\", and \"Nymphomaniac\".\n\n\"Note: This list shows only the actors who have collaborated with von Trier in three or more productions.\"\n\nIn 1989, von Trier's mother told him on her deathbed that the man vonTrier thought was his biological father was not, and that he was the result of a liaison she had with her former employer, Fritz Michael Hartmann (1909–2000), who was descended from a long line of German-speaking, Roman Catholic classical musicians. Hartmann's grandfather was Emil Hartmann, his great-grandfather J. P. E. Hartmann, his uncles included Niels Gade and Johan Ernst Hartmann, and Niels Viggo Bentzon was his cousin. She stated that she did this to give her son \"artistic genes\".\n\n\"Until that point I thought I had a Jewish background. But I'm really more of a Nazi. I believe that my biological father's German family went back two further generations. Before she died, my mother told me to be happy that I was the son of this other man. She said my foster father had had no goals and no strength. But he was a loving man. And I was very sad about this revelation. And you then feel manipulated when you really do turn out to be creative. If I'd known that my mother had this plan, I would have become something else. I would have shown her. The slut!\"\nDuring the German occupation of Denmark, vonTrier's biological father Fritz Michael Hartmann worked as a civil servant and joined a resistance group, \"Frit Danmark\", actively counteracting any pro-German and pro-Nazi colleagues in his department. Another member of this infiltrative resistance group was Hartmann's colleague Viggo Kampmann, who would later become prime minister of Denmark. After vonTrier had had four awkward meetings with his biological father, Hartmann refused further contact.\n\nVon Trier's mother considered herself a Communist, while his father was a Social Democrat. Both were committed nudists, and vonTrier went on several childhood holidays to nudist camps. His parents regarded the disciplining of children as reactionary. He has noted that he was brought up in an atheist family, and that although Ulf Trier was Jewish, he was not religious. His parents did not allow much room in their household for \"feelings, religion, or enjoyment,\" and also refused to make any rules for their children, with complex effects upon vonTrier's personality and development.\n\nIn a 2005 interview with \"Die Zeit\", vonTrier said, \"I don't know if I'm all that Catholic really. I'm probably not. Denmark is a very Protestant country. Perhaps I only turned Catholic to piss off a few of my countrymen.\"\n\nIn 2009, he said, \"I'm a very bad Catholic. In fact I'm becoming more and more of an atheist.\"\n\nVon Trier periodically suffers from depression, and also from various fears and phobias, including an intense fear of flying. This fear frequently places severe constraints on him and his crew, necessitating that virtually all of his films be shot in either Denmark or Sweden. As he quipped in an interview, \"\"Basically, I'm afraid of everything in life, except film making.\"\"\n\nOn numerous occasions, von Trier has also stated that he suffers from occasional depression which renders him incapable of performing his work and unable to fulfill social obligations.\n\n\nBULLET::::- Zentropa official website – von Trier's production company\nBULLET::::- Senses of Cinema: Great Directors Critical Database\n"}
{"id": "17920", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17920", "title": "Monty Python's Life of Brian", "text": "Monty Python's Life of Brian\n\nMonty Python's Life of Brian, also known as Life of Brian, is a 1979 British comedy film starring and written by the comedy group Monty Python (Graham Chapman, John Cleese, Terry Gilliam, Eric Idle, Terry Jones and Michael Palin). It was also directed by Jones. The film tells the story of Brian Cohen (played by Chapman), a young Jewish man who is born on the same day as—and next door to—Jesus Christ, and is subsequently mistaken for the Messiah.\n\nFollowing the withdrawal of funding by EMI Films just days before production was scheduled to begin, long-time Monty Python fan and former member of the Beatles, George Harrison, arranged financing for \"Life of Brian\" through the formation of his company HandMade Films.\n\nThe film contains themes of religious satire that were controversial at the time of its release, drawing accusations of blasphemy, and protests from some religious groups. Thirty-nine local authorities in the United Kingdom either imposed an outright ban, or imposed an X (18 years) certificate, effectively preventing the film from being shown, since the distributors said it could not be shown unless it was unedited and carried the original AA (14) certificate. Some countries, including Ireland and Norway, banned its showing, with a few of these bans lasting decades. The filmmakers used such notoriety to benefit their marketing campaign, with posters in Sweden reading, \"So funny, it was banned in Norway!\"\n\nThe film was a box office success, the fourth-highest-grossing film in the United Kingdom in 1979, and highest grossing of any British film in the United States that year. It has remained popular, receiving positive reviews. The film was named \"greatest comedy film of all time\" by several magazines and television networks, and it later received a 97% \"Fresh\" rating on Rotten Tomatoes with the consensus, \"One of the more cutting-edge films of the 1970s, this religious farce from the classic comedy troupe is as poignant as it is funny and satirical.\" In a 2006 Channel 4 poll, \"Life of Brian\" was ranked first on their list of the 50 Greatest Comedy Films.\n\nBrian Cohen is born in a stable next door to the one in which Jesus is born, which initially confuses the three wise men who come to praise the future King of the Jews. Brian later grows up an idealistic young man who resents the continuing Roman occupation of Judea. While attending Jesus's Sermon on the Mount, Brian becomes infatuated with an attractive young rebel, Judith. His desire for her and hatred for the Romans lead him to join the \"People's Front of Judea\", one of many fractious and bickering independence movements who spend more time fighting each other than the Romans.\n\nAfter several misadventures, and escaping from Pontius Pilate, Brian winds up in a line-up of would-be mystics and prophets who harangue the passing crowd in a plaza. Forced to come up with something plausible in order to blend in and keep the guards off his back, Brian repeats some of what he had heard Jesus say, and quickly attracts a small but intrigued audience. Once the guards have left, Brian tries to put the episode behind him, but he has unintentionally inspired a movement. He grows frantic when he finds that some people have started to follow him around, with even the slightest unusual occurrence being hailed as a miracle. Their responses grow in fervour and intensity, making it harder and harder for him to get away from them, yet because of the mob's excitement over the \"miracles\" they discover, they ultimately end up completely ignoring Brian himself. Judith is the only one who does not leave; Brian and Judith then spend the night together. In the morning, Brian, completely naked, opens the curtains to discover an enormous crowd, which proclaims him to be the Messiah, outside his mother's house. Brian's mother protests, telling the crowd that \"He's not the Messiah; he's a very naughty boy,\" and, \"There's no Messiah in here. There's a \"mess\", all right, but no Messiah.\" All of her attempts at dispersing the crowd are rebuffed. Furthermore, once Brian addresses them, he also finds that he is unable to change their minds. His followers are completely committed to their belief in Brian's divinity. They immediately seize upon everything he says and does as points of doctrine.\n\nThe hapless Brian is unable to escape his unwanted \"disciples\"; even his mother's house is surrounded by an enormous, enraptured crowd. They fling their afflicted bodies at him, demanding miracle cures and divine secrets. After sneaking out the back, Brian is then finally captured and scheduled to be crucified. Meanwhile, yet another huge crowd has assembled outside the palace. Pontius Pilate (together with the visiting Biggus Dickus) tries to quell the feeling of revolution by granting them the choice of one person to be pardoned. The crowd, however, shouts out names containing the letter \"r\", mocking Pilate's rhotacistic speech impediment. Eventually, Judith appears in the crowd and calls for the release of Brian, which the crowd echoes, since the name also contains an \"r\". Pilate agrees to \"welease Bwian\".\n\nHis order is eventually relayed to the guards, but in a scene that parodies the climax of the film \"Spartacus\", various crucified people all claim to be \"Brian of Nazareth\" so they can be free and the wrong man is accidentally released. Various other opportunities for a reprieve for Brian are denied as, one by one, his \"allies\" (including Judith) step forward to explain why they are leaving the \"noble freedom fighter\" hanging in the hot sun, while his mother expresses regret for having raised him at all. Hope is renewed when a crack suicide squad from the \"Judean People's Front\" (not to be confused with the People's Front of Judea) come charging towards the Romans, but rather than fighting to release Brian or the other prisoners, they commit mass suicide as a form of political protest. Condemned to a slow and painful death, Brian finds his spirits lifted by his fellow sufferers, who cheerfully start singing \"Always Look on the Bright Side of Life.\"\n\nBULLET::::- Graham Chapman as Brian, Biggus Dickus, 2nd wise man\nBULLET::::- John Cleese as Reg, High priest, Centurion of the Yard, Deadly Dirk, Arthur, 1st wise man\nBULLET::::- Terry Gilliam as Another person further forward (at Mount – \"Do you hear that? 'Blessed are the Greek'!\"), Blood and Thunder prophet, Geoffrey, Gaoler, Frank\nBULLET::::- Eric Idle as Mr Cheeky, Stan/Loretta, Harry the Haggler, Culprit woman who casts first stone, Intensely dull youth, Otto, Gaoler's assistant, Mr Frisbee III\nBULLET::::- Terry Jones as Brian Cohen's mother (Mandy), Colin, Simon the Holy Man, Saintly passer-by\nBULLET::::- Michael Palin as Mr Big-Nose, Francis, Mrs A, Ex-leper, Ben, Pontius Pilate, Boring Prophet, Eddie, Nisus Wettus, 3rd wise man\nBULLET::::- Terence Bayler as Mr. Gregory, 2nd Centurion\nBULLET::::- Carol Cleveland as Mrs. Gregory\nBULLET::::- Kenneth Colley as Jesus\nBULLET::::- Neil Innes as A Weedy Samaritan\nBULLET::::- John Young as Matthias\nBULLET::::- Gwen Taylor as Mrs. Big-Nose\nBULLET::::- Sue Jones-Davies as Judith Iscariot\nBULLET::::- George Harrison as Mr Papadopoulis (\"who's let us have the mount\")\nSeveral characters remained unnamed during the film but do have names that are used in the soundtrack album track listing and elsewhere. There is no mention in the film that Eric Idle's ever-cheerful joker is called \"Mr Cheeky\", or that the Roman guard played by Michael Palin is named \"Nisus Wettus\".\n\nThere are various stories about the origins of \"Life of Brian\". Shortly after the release of \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\" (1975), Eric Idle flippantly suggested that the title of the Pythons' forthcoming feature would be \"Jesus Christ – Lust for Glory\" (a play on the UK title for the 1970 American film \"Patton\"). This was after he had become frustrated at repeatedly being asked what it would be called, despite the troupe not having given the matter of a third film any consideration. However, they shared a distrust of organised religion, and, after witnessing the critically acclaimed \"Holy Grail\"s enormous financial turnover, confirming an appetite among the fans for more cinematic endeavours, they began to seriously consider a film lampooning the New Testament era in the same way that \"Holy Grail\" had lampooned Arthurian legend. All they needed was an idea for a plot. Eric Idle and Terry Gilliam, while promoting \"Holy Grail\" in Amsterdam, had come up with a sketch in which Jesus' cross is falling apart because of the idiotic carpenters who built it and he angrily tells them how to do it correctly. However, after an early brainstorming stage, and despite being non-believers, they agreed that Jesus was \"definitely a good guy\" and found nothing to mock in his actual teachings: \"He's not particularly funny, what he's saying isn't mockable, it's very decent stuff\", said Idle later. After settling on the name Brian for their new protagonist, one idea considered was that of \"the 13th disciple\". The focus eventually shifted to a separate individual born at a similar time and location who would be mistaken for the Messiah, but had no desire to be followed as such.\n\nThe first draft of the screenplay, provisionally titled \"The Gospel According to St. Brian\", was ready by Christmas 1976. The final pre-production draft was ready in January 1978, following \"a concentrated two-week writing and water-skiing period in Barbados\". The film would not have been made without Python fan former Beatle George Harrison, who set up HandMade Films to help fund it at a cost of £3 million. Harrison put up the money for it as he \"wanted to see the movie\"—later described by Terry Jones as the \"world's most expensive cinema ticket.\"\n\nThe original backers—EMI Films and, particularly, Bernard Delfont—had been scared off at the last minute by the subject matter. The very last words in the film are: \"I said to him, 'Bernie, they'll never make their money back on this one'\", teasing Delfont for his lack of faith in the project. Terry Gilliam later said, \"They pulled out on the Thursday. The crew was supposed to be leaving on the Saturday. Disastrous. It was because they read the script ... finally.\" As a reward for his help, Harrison appears in a cameo appearance as Mr. Papadopoulos, \"owner of the Mount\", who briefly shakes hands with Brian in a crowd scene (at 1:09 in the film). His one word of dialogue (a cheery but out of place Scouse \"'ullo\") had to be dubbed in later by Michael Palin.\n\nTerry Jones was solely responsible for directing, having amicably agreed with Gilliam (who co-directed \"Holy Grail\") to do so, with Gilliam concentrating on the look of the film. \"Holy Grail\"s production had often been stilted by their differences behind the camera. Gilliam again contributed two animated sequences (one being the opening credits) and took charge of set design. However, this did not put an absolute end to their feuding. On the DVD commentary, Gilliam expresses pride in one set in particular, the main hall of Pilate's fortress, which had been designed so that it looked like an ancient synagogue that the Romans had converted by dumping their structural artefacts (such as marble floors and columns) on top. He reveals his consternation at Jones for not paying enough attention to it in the cinematography. Gilliam also worked on the matte paintings, useful in particular for the very first shot of the three wise men against a star-scape and in giving the illusion of the whole of the outside of the fortress being covered in graffiti. Perhaps the most significant contribution from Gilliam was the scene in which Brian accidentally leaps off a high building and lands inside a starship about to engage in an interstellar war. This was done \"in camera\" using a hand-built model starship and miniature pyrotechnics, likely influenced by the recently released \"Star Wars\". Afterwards, George Lucas met Terry Gilliam in San Francisco and praised him for his work.\n\nThe film was shot on location in Monastir, Tunisia, which allowed the production to reuse sets from Franco Zeffirelli's \"Jesus of Nazareth\" (1977). The Tunisian shoot was documented by Iain Johnstone for his BBC film \"The Pythons\". Many locals were employed as extras on \"Life of Brian\". Director Jones noted, \"They were all very knowing because they'd all worked for Franco Zeffirelli on \"Jesus of Nazareth\", so I had these elderly Tunisians telling me, 'Well, Mr Zeffirelli wouldn't have done it like that, you know.'\" Further location shooting also took place in Tunisia, at Sousse (Jerusalem outer walls and gateway), Carthage (Roman theatre) and Matmata (Sermon on the Mount and Crucifixion).\n\nGraham Chapman, suffering from alcoholism, was so determined to play the lead role – at one point coveted by Cleese – that he dried out in time for filming, so much so that he also acted as the on-set doctor.\n\nFollowing shooting between 16 September and 12 November 1978, a two-hour rough cut of the film was put together for its first private showing in January 1979. Over the next few months \"Life of Brian\" was re-edited and re-screened a number of times for different preview audiences, losing a number of entire filmed sequences.\n\nA number of scenes were cut during the editing process. Five deleted scenes, a total of 13 minutes, including the controversial \"Otto\", were first made available in 1997 on the Criterion Collection Laserdisc. An unknown amount of raw footage was destroyed in 1998 by the company that bought Handmade Films. However, a number of them (of varying quality) were shown the following year on the Paramount Comedy Channel in the UK. The scenes shown included three shepherds discussing sheep and completely missing the arrival of the angel heralding Jesus's birth, which would have been at the very start of the film; a segment showing the attempted kidnap of Pilate's wife (a large woman played by John Case) whose escape results in a fistfight; a scene introducing hardline Zionist Otto, leader of the Judean People's Front (played by Eric Idle) and his men who practise a suicide run in the courtyard; and a brief scene in which Judith releases some birds into the air in an attempt to summon help. The shepherds' scene has badly distorted sound, and the kidnap scene has poor colour quality. The same scenes that were on the Criterion laserdisc can now be found on the Criterion Collection DVD.\n\nThe most controversial cuts were the scenes involving Otto, initially a recurring character, who had a thin Adolf Hitler moustache and spoke with a German accent, shouting accusations of \"racial impurity\" at people whose conceptions were similar to Brian's (Roman centurion rape of native Judean women), and other Nazi phrases. The logo of the Judean People's Front, designed by Terry Gilliam, was a Star of David with a small line added to each point so it resembled a swastika, most familiar in the West as the symbol of the anti-Semitic Nazi movement. The rest of this faction also all had the same thin moustaches, and wore a spike on their helmets, similar to those on Imperial German helmets. The official reason for the cutting was that Otto's dialogue slowed down the narrative. However, Gilliam, writing in \"The Pythons Autobiography by The Pythons\", said he thought it should have stayed, saying \"Listen, we've alienated the Christians, let's get the Jews now.\" Idle himself was said to have been uncomfortable with the character; \"It's essentially a pretty savage attack on rabid Zionism, suggesting it's rather akin to Nazism, which is a bit strong to take, but certainly a point of view.\" Michael Palin's personal journal entries from the period when various edits of \"Brian\" were being test-screened consistently reference the Pythons' and filmmakers' concerns that the Otto scenes were slowing the story down and thus were top of the list to be chopped from the final cut of the film. However, Oxford Brookes University historian David Nash says the removal of the scene represented \"a form of self-censorship\" and the Otto sequence \"which involved a character representative of extreme forms of Zionism\" was cut \"in the interests of smoothing the way for the film's distribution in America.\"\n\nThe only scene with Otto that remains in the film is during the crucifixion sequence. Otto arrives with his \"crack suicide squad\", sending the Roman soldiers fleeing in terror. Instead of doing anything useful, they \"attack\" by committing mass suicide in front of the cross (\"Zat showed 'em, huh?\" says the dying Otto, to which Brian despondently replies \"You silly sods!\"), ending Brian's hope of rescue (they do however show some signs of life during the famous rendition of \"Always Look on the Bright Side of Life\" when they are seen waving their toes in unison in time to the music). Terry Jones once mentioned that the only reason this excerpt was not cut too was due to continuity reasons, as their dead bodies were very prominently placed throughout the rest of the scene. He acknowledged that some of the humour of this sole remaining contribution was lost through the earlier edits, but felt they were necessary to the overall pacing.\n\nOtto's scenes, and those with Pilate's wife, were cut from the film after the script had gone to the publishers, and so they can be found in the published version of the script. Also present is a scene where, after Brian has led the Fifth Legion to the headquarters of the People's Front of Judea, Reg (John Cleese) says \"You cunt!! You stupid, bird-brained, flat-headed...\" The profanity was overdubbed to \"you klutz\" before the film was released. Cleese approved of this editing as he felt the reaction to the four-letter word would \"get in the way of the comedy.\"\n\nAn early listing of the sequence of sketches reprinted in \"Monty Python: The Case Against\" by Robert Hewison reveals that the film was to have begun with a set of sketches at an English public school. Much of this material was first printed in the \"Monty Python's The Life of Brian / Monty Python Scrapbook\" that accompanied the original script publication of \"The Life of Brian\" and then subsequently reused. The song \"All Things Dull and Ugly\" and the parody scripture reading \"Martyrdom of St. Victor\" were performed on \"Monty Python's Contractual Obligation Album\" (1980). The idea of a violent rugby match between school masters and small boys was filmed in \"Monty Python's The Meaning of Life\" (1983). A sketch about a boy who dies at school appeared on the unreleased \"The Hastily Cobbled Together for a Fast Buck Album\" (1981).\n\nAn album was also released by Monty Python in 1979 in conjunction with the film. In addition to the \"Brian Song\" and \"Always Look on the Bright Side of Life\", it contains scenes from the film with brief linking sections performed by Eric Idle and Graham Chapman. The album opens with a brief rendition of \"Hava Nagila\" on Scottish bagpipes. A CD version was released in 1997.\n\nAn album of the songs sung in \"Monty Python's Life of Brian\" was released on the Disky label. \"Always Look on the Bright Side of Life\" was later re-released with great success, after being sung by British football fans. Its popularity became truly evident in 1982 during the Falklands War when sailors aboard the destroyer HMS \"Sheffield\", severely damaged in an Argentinean Exocet missile attack on 4 May, started singing it while awaiting rescue. Many people have come to see the song as a life-affirming ode to optimism. One of its more famous renditions was by the dignitaries of Manchester's bid to host the 2000 Olympic Games, just after they were awarded to Sydney. Idle later performed the song as part of the 2012 Summer Olympics closing ceremony. \"Always Look on the Bright Side of Life\" is also featured in Eric Idle's \"Spamalot\", a Broadway musical based upon \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\", and was sung by the rest of the Monty Python group at Graham Chapman's memorial service and at the \"Monty Python Live At Aspen\" special. The song is a staple at Iron Maiden concerts, where the recording is played after the final encore.\n\nFor the original British and Australian releases, a spoof travelogue narrated by John Cleese, \"Away From It All\", was shown before the film itself. It consisted mostly of stock travelogue footage and featured arch comments from Cleese. For instance, a shot of Bulgarian girls in ceremonial dresses was accompanied by the comment \"Hard to believe, isn't it, that these simple happy folk are dedicated to the destruction of Western Civilisation as we know it!\", Communist Bulgaria being a member of the Warsaw Pact at the time. Not only was this a spoof of travelogues \"per se\", it was a protest against the then common practice in Britain of showing cheaply made banal short features before a main feature.\n\n\"Life of Brian\" opened on 17 August 1979 in five North American theatres and grossed US$140,034 ($28,007 per screen) in its opening weekend. Its total gross was $19,398,164. It was the highest grossing British film in North America that year. Released on 8 November 1979 in the UK, the film was the fourth highest-grossing film in Britain in 1979.\n\nOn 30 April 2004, \"Life of Brian\" was re-released on five North American screens to \"cash in\" (as Terry Jones put it) on the box office success of Mel Gibson's \"The Passion of the Christ\". It grossed $26,376 ($5,275 per screen) in its opening weekend. It ran until October 2004, playing at 28 screens at its widest point, eventually grossing $646,124 during its re-release. By comparison, a re-release of \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\" had earned $1.8 million three years earlier. A DVD of the film was also released that year.\n\nReviews from critics were mostly positive on its release. Vincent Canby of \"The New York Times\" called the film \"the foulest-spoken biblical epic ever made, as well as the best-humored—a nonstop orgy of assaults, not on anyone's virtue, but on the funny bone. It makes no difference that some of the routines fall flat because there are always others coming along immediately after that succeed.\" Roger Ebert gave the film three stars out of four, writing, \"What's endearing about the Pythons is their good cheer, their irreverence, their willingness to allow comic situations to develop through a gradual accumulation of small insanities.\" Gene Siskel of the \"Chicago Tribune\" gave the film three-and-a-half stars, calling it \"a gentle but very funny parody of the life of Jesus, as well as of biblical movies.\" Kevin Thomas of the \"Los Angeles Times\" declared, \"Even those of us who find Monty Python too hit-and-miss and gory must admit that its latest effort has numerous moments of hilarity.\" Clyde Jeavons of \"The Monthly Film Bulletin\" wrote that the script was \"occasionally over-raucous and crude,\" but found the second half of the film \"cumulatively hilarious,\" with \"a splendidly tasteless finale, which even Mel Brooks might envy.\" Gary Arnold of \"The Washington Post\" had a negative opinion of the film, writing that it was \"a cruel fiction to foster the delusion that 'Brian' is bristling with blasphemous nifties and throbbing with impious wit. If only it were! One might find it easier to keep from nodding off.\"\nOver time, \"Life of Brian\" has regularly been cited as a significant contender for the title \"greatest comedy film of all time\", and has been named as such in polls conducted by \"Total Film\" magazine in 2000, the British TV network Channel 4 where it topped the poll in the 50 Greatest Comedy Films, and \"The Guardian\" newspaper in 2007. Rotten Tomatoes lists it as one of the best reviewed comedies, with a 95% approval rating from 61 published reviews. A 2011 poll by \"Time Out\" magazine ranked it as the third greatest comedy film ever made, behind \"Airplane!\" and \"This is Spinal Tap\".\n\nThe BFI declared \"Life of Brian\" to be the 28th best British film of all time, in their equivalent of the original AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies list. It was the seventh highest ranking comedy on this list (four of the better placed efforts were classic Ealing Films). Another Channel 4 poll in 2001 named it the 23rd greatest film of all time (the only comedy that came higher was Billy Wilder's \"Some Like It Hot\", which was ranked 5th). In 2016, \"Empire\" magazine ranked \"Life of Brian\" 2nd in their list of the 100 best British films, with only David Lean’s \"Lawrence of Arabia\" ranking higher.\n\nVarious polls have voted the line, \"He's not the Messiah, he's a very naughty boy!\" (spoken by Brian's mother Mandy to the crowd assembled outside her house) the funniest in film history. Other famous lines from the film have featured in polls, such as, \"What have the Romans ever done for us?\" and \"I'm Brian and so's my wife\".\n\nRichard Webster comments in \"A Brief History of Blasphemy\" (1990) that \"internalised censorship played a significant role in the handling\" of \"Monty Python's Life of Brian\". In his view, \"As a satire on religion, this film might well be considered a rather slight production. As blasphemy it was, even in its original version, extremely mild. Yet the film was surrounded from its inception by intense anxiety, in some quarters of the Establishment, about the offence it might cause. As a result it gained a certificate for general release only after some cuts had been made. Perhaps more importantly still, the film was shunned by the BBC and ITV, who declined to show it for fear of offending Christians in the UK. Once again a blasphemy was restrained – or its circulation effectively curtailed – not by the force of law but by the internalisation of this law.\" On its initial release in the UK, the film was banned by several town councils – some of which had no cinemas within their boundaries, or had not even seen the film. A member of Harrogate council, one of those that banned the film, revealed during a television interview that the council had not seen the film, and had based their opinion on what they had been told by the Nationwide Festival of Light, a grouping with an evangelical Christian base, of which they knew nothing.\n\nIn New York (the film's release in the US preceded British distribution), screenings were picketed by both rabbis and nuns (\"Nuns with banners!\" observed Michael Palin). It was also banned for eight years in Ireland and for a year in Norway (it was marketed in Sweden as \"The film so funny that it was banned in Norway\"). During the film's theatrical run in Finland, a text explaining that the film was a parody of Hollywood historical epics was added to the opening credits.\n\nIn the UK, Mary Whitehouse, and other traditionalist Christians, pamphleteered and picketed locations where the local cinema was screening the film, a campaign that was felt to have boosted publicity. Leaflets arguing against the film's representation of the New Testament (for example, suggesting that the Wise Men would not have approached the wrong stable as they do in the opening of the film) were documented in Robert Hewison's book \"Monty Python: The Case Against\".\n\nOne of the most controversial scenes was the film's ending: Brian's crucifixion. Many Christian protesters said that it was mocking Jesus' suffering by turning it into a \"Jolly Boys Outing\" (such as when Mr Cheeky turns to Brian and says: \"See, not so bad once you're up!\"), capped by Brian's fellow sufferers suddenly bursting into song. This is reinforced by the fact that several characters throughout the film claim crucifixion is not as bad as it seems. For example, when Brian asks his cellmate in prison what will happen to him, he replies: \"Oh, you'll probably get away with crucifixion\". In another example, an old man who works with the People's Front of Judea dismisses crucifixion as \"a doddle\" and says being stabbed would be worse.\n\nThe director, Terry Jones, issued the following riposte to this criticism: \"Any religion that makes a form of torture into an icon that they worship seems to me a pretty sick sort of religion quite honestly.\" The Pythons also pointed out that crucifixion was a standard form of execution in ancient times and not just one especially reserved for Jesus.\n\nShortly after the film was released, Cleese and Palin engaged in a debate on the BBC2 discussion programme \"Friday Night, Saturday Morning\" with Malcolm Muggeridge and Mervyn Stockwood, the Bishop of Southwark, who put forward arguments against the film. Muggeridge and the Bishop, it was later claimed, had arrived 15 minutes late to see a screening of the picture prior to the debate, missing the establishing scenes demonstrating that Brian and Jesus were two different characters, and hence contended that it was a send-up of Christ himself. Both Pythons later felt that there had been a strange role reversal in the manner of the debate, with two young upstart comedians attempting to make serious, well-researched points, while the Establishment figures engaged in cheap jibes and point scoring. They also expressed disappointment in Muggeridge, whom all in Python had previously respected as a satirist (he had recently converted to Christianity after meeting Mother Teresa and experiencing what he described as a miracle). Cleese expressed that his reputation had \"plummeted\" in his eyes, while Palin commented, \"He was just being Muggeridge, preferring to have a very strong contrary opinion as opposed to none at all.\" Muggeridge's verdict on the film was that it was \"Such a tenth-rate film that it couldn't possibly destroy anyone's genuine faith.\" In a 2013 interview on BBC Radio 4, Cleese stated that having recently watched the discussion again he \"was astonished, first of all, at how stupid [the two members of the Church] were, and how boring the debate became\". He added: \"I think the sad thing was that there was absolutely no attempt at a proper discussion – no attempt to find any common ground.\"\nThe Pythons unanimously deny that they were ever out to destroy people's faith. On the DVD audio commentary, they contend that the film is heretical because it lampoons the practices of modern organised religion, but that it does not blasphemously lampoon the God that Christians and Jews worship. When Jesus does appear in the film (on the Mount, speaking the Beatitudes), he is played straight (by actor Kenneth Colley) and portrayed with respect. The music and lighting make it clear that there is a genuine aura around him. The comedy begins when members of the crowd mishear his statements of peace, love and tolerance (\"I think he said, 'blessed are the cheese makers'\"). Importantly, he is distinct from the character of Brian, which is also evident in the scene where an annoying and ungrateful ex-leper pesters Brian for money, while moaning that since Jesus cured him, he has lost his source of income in the begging trade (referring to Jesus as a \"bloody do-gooder\").\n\nJames Crossley, however, has argued that the film makes the distinction between Jesus and the character of Brian to make a contrast between the traditional Christ of both faith and cinema and the historical figure of Jesus in critical scholarship and how critical scholars have argued that ideas later got attributed to Jesus by his followers. Crossley points out that the film uses a number of potentially controversial scholarly theories about Jesus but now with reference to Brian, such as the Messianic Secret, the Jewishness of Jesus, Jesus the revolutionary, and having a single mother.\n\nNot all the Pythons agree on the definition of the movie's tone. There was a brief exchange that occurred when the surviving members reunited in Aspen, Colorado, in 1998. In the section where \"Life of Brian\" is discussed, Terry Jones says, \"I think the film is heretical, but it's not blasphemous.\" Eric Idle can be heard to concur, adding, \"It's a heresy.\" However, John Cleese, disagreeing, counters, \"I don’t think it's a heresy. It's making fun of the way that people misunderstand the teaching.\" Jones responds, \"Of course it's a heresy, John! It's attacking the Church! And that has to be heretical.\" Cleese replies, \"No, it's not attacking the Church, necessarily. It's about people who cannot agree with each other.\"\n\nIn a later interview, Jones said the film \"isn't blasphemous because it doesn’t touch on belief at all. It is heretical, because it touches on dogma and the interpretation of belief, rather than belief itself.\"\n\nThe film continues to cause controversy; in February 2007, the Church of St Thomas the Martyr in Newcastle upon Tyne held a public screening in the church itself, with song-sheets, organ accompaniment, stewards in costume and false beards for female members of the audience (alluding to an early scene where a group of women disguise themselves as men so that they are able to take part in a stoning). Although the screening was a sell-out, some Christian groups, notably the conservative Christian Voice, were highly critical of the decision to allow the screening to go ahead. Stephen Green, the head of Christian Voice, insisted that \"You don't promote Christ to the community by taking the mick out of him.\" The Reverend Jonathan Adams, one of the church's clergy, defended his taste in comedy, saying that it did not mock Jesus, and that it raised important issues about the hypocrisy and stupidity that can affect religion. Again on the film's DVD commentary, Cleese also spoke up for religious people who have come forward and congratulated him and his colleagues on the film's highlighting of double standards among purported followers of their own faith.\n\nSome bans continued into the 21st century. In 2008, Torbay Council finally permitted the film to be shown after it won an online vote for the English Riviera International Comedy Film Festival. In 2009, it was announced that a thirty-year-old ban of the film in the Welsh town of Aberystwyth had finally been lifted, and the subsequent showing was attended by Terry Jones and Michael Palin alongside mayor Sue Jones-Davies (who portrayed Judith Iscariot in the film). However, before the showing, an Aberystwyth University student discovered that a ban had only been discussed by the council and in fact that it had been shown (or scheduled to be shown) at a cinema in the town in 1981. In 2013, a German official in the state of North Rhine-Westphalia considered the film to be possibly offensive to Christians and hence subject to a local regulation prohibiting its public screening on Good Friday, despite protests by local atheists.\n\nThe film pokes fun at revolutionary groups and 1970s British left-wing politics. According to Roger Wilmut, \"What the film does do is place modern stereotypes in a historical setting, which enables it to indulge in a number of sharp digs, particularly at trade unionists and guerilla organisations\". The groups in the film all oppose the Roman occupation of Judea, but fall into the familiar pattern of intense competition among factions that appears, to an outsider, to be over ideological distinctions so small as to be invisible, thus portraying the phenomenon of the narcissism of small differences. Ironically, similar such disunity fatally beleaguered real-life Judean resistance against Roman rule. Michael Palin says that the various separatist movements were modelled on \"modern resistance groups, all with obscure acronyms which they can never remember and their conflicting agendas\".\n\nThe People's Front of Judea, composed of the Pythons' characters, harangue their \"rivals\" with cries of \"splitters\" and stand vehemently opposed to the Judean People's Front, the Campaign for a Free Galilee, and the Judean Popular People's Front (the last composed of a single old man, mocking the size of real revolutionary Trotskyist factions). The infighting among revolutionary organisations is demonstrated most dramatically when the PFJ attempts to kidnap Pontius Pilate's wife, but encounters agents of the Campaign for a Free Galilee, and the two factions begin a violent brawl over which of them conceived of the plan first. When Brian exhorts them to cease their fighting to struggle \"against the common enemy,\" the revolutionaries stop and cry in unison, \"the Judean People's Front!\" However, they soon resume their fighting and, with two Roman legionaries watching bemusedly, continue until Brian is left the only survivor, at which point he is captured.\n\nOther scenes have the freedom fighters wasting time in debate, with one of the debated items being that they should not waste their time debating so much. There is also a famous scene in which Reg gives a revolutionary speech asking, \"What have the Romans ever done for us?\" at which point the listeners outline all forms of positive aspects of the Roman occupation such as sanitation, medicine, education, wine, public order, irrigation, roads, a fresh water system, public health and peace, followed by \"what have the Romans ever done for us except sanitation, medicine, education...\". Python biographer George Perry notes, \"The People's Liberation Front of Judea conducts its meetings as though they have been convened by a group of shop stewards\".\n\nSpin-offs include a script-book \"The Life of Brian of Nazareth\", which was printed back-to-back with \"MONTYPYTHONSCRAPBOOK\" as a single book. The printing of this book also caused problems, due to rarely used laws in the United Kingdom against blasphemy, dictating what can and cannot be written about religion. The publisher refused to print both halves of the book, and original prints were by two companies.\n\nJulian Doyle, the film's editor, wrote \"The Life of Brian/Jesus\", a book which not only describes the filmmaking and editing process but argues that it is the most accurate Biblical film ever made. In October 2008, a memoir by Kim \"Howard\" Johnson titled \"Monty Python's Tunisian Holiday: My Life with Brian\" was released. Johnson became friendly with the Pythons during the filming of \"Life of Brian\" and his notes and memories of the behind-the-scenes filming and make-up.\n\nWith the success of Eric Idle's musical retelling of \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\", called \"Spamalot\", Idle announced that he would be giving \"Life of Brian\" a similar treatment. The oratorio, called \"Not the Messiah (He's a Very Naughty Boy)\", was commissioned to be part of the festival called Luminato in Toronto in June 2007, and was written/scored by Idle and John Du Prez, who also worked with Idle on \"Spamalot\". \"Not the Messiah\" is a spoof of Handel's \"Messiah\". It runs approximately 50 minutes, and was conducted at its world premiere by Toronto Symphony Orchestra music director Peter Oundjian, who is Idle's cousin. \"Not the Messiah\" received its US premiere at the Caramoor International Music Festival in Katonah, New York. Oundjian and Idle joined forces once again for a double performance of the oratorio in July 2007.\n\nIn October 2011, BBC Four premiered the made-for-television comedy film \"Holy Flying Circus\", written by Tony Roche and directed by Owen Harris. The \"Pythonesque\" film explores the events surrounding the 1979 television debate on talk show \"Friday Night, Saturday Morning\" between John Cleese and Michael Palin and Malcolm Muggeridge and Mervyn Stockwood, then Bishop of Southwark.\nIn a \"Not the Nine O'Clock News\" sketch, a bishop who has directed a scandalous film called \"The Life of Christ\" is hauled over the coals by a representative of the \"Church of Python\", claiming that the film is an attack on \"Our Lord, John Cleese\" and on the members of Python, who, in the sketch, are the objects of Britain's true religious faith. This was a parody of the infamous \"Friday Night, Saturday Morning\" programme, broadcast a week previously. The bishop (played by Rowan Atkinson) claims that the reaction to the film has surprised him, as he \"didn't expect the Spanish Inquisition.\"\n\nRadio host John Williams of Chicago's WGN 720 AM has used \"Always Look on the Bright Side of Life\" in a segment of his Friday shows. The segment is used to highlight good events from the past week in listeners' lives and what has made them smile. In the 1997 film \"As Good as It Gets\", the misanthropic character played by Jack Nicholson sings \"Always Look on the Bright Side of Life\" as evidence of the character's change in attitude.\n\nA BBC history series \"What the Romans Did for Us\", written and presented by Adam Hart-Davis and broadcast in 2000, takes its title from Cleese's rhetorical question \"What have the Romans ever done for us?\" in one of the film's scenes. (Cleese himself parodied this line in a 1986 BBC advert defending the Television Licence Fee: \"What has the BBC ever given us?\").\n\nFormer British Prime Minister Tony Blair in his Prime Minister's Questions of 3 May 2006 made a shorthand reference to the types of political groups, \"Judean People's Front\" or \"People's Front of Judea\", lampooned in \"Life of Brian\". This was in response to a question from the Labour MP David Clelland, asking \"What has the Labour government ever done for us?\" – itself a parody of John Cleese's \"What have the Romans ever done for us?\"\n\nOn New Year's Day 2007, and again on New Year's Eve, UK television station Channel 4 dedicated an entire evening to the Monty Python phenomenon, during which an hour-long documentary was broadcast called \"The Secret Life of Brian\" about the making of \"The Life of Brian\" and the controversy that was caused by its release. The Pythons featured in the documentary and reflected upon the events that surrounded the film. This was followed by a screening of the film itself. The documentary (in a slightly extended form) was one of the special features on the 2007 DVD re-release – the \"Immaculate Edition\", also the first Python release on Blu-ray.\n\nMost recently, in June 2014 King's College London hosted an academic conference on the film, in which internationally renowned Biblical scholars and historians discussed the film and its reception, looking both at how the Pythons had made use of scholarship and texts, and how the film can be used creatively within modern scholarship on the Historical Jesus. In a panel discussion, including Terry Jones and theologian Richard Burridge, John Cleese described the event as \"the most interesting thing to come out of Monty Python\". The papers from the conference have gone on to prompt the publication of a book, edited by Joan E. Taylor, the conference organiser, \"Jesus and Brian: Exploring the Historical Jesus and His Times via Monty Python's Life of Brian\", published by Bloomsbury in 2015.\n\nBULLET::::- List of films considered the best\n\nBULLET::::- This book chapter discusses the ancient sources which may have been used in the film and its critical take on theology.\nBULLET::::- Hewison, Robert. \"Monty Python: The Case Against\". New York: Grove, 1981. . This book discusses at length the censorship and controversy surrounding the film.\nBULLET::::- Vintaloro, Giordano. \"\"Non sono il Messia, lo giuro su Dio!\" – Messianismo e modernità in \"Life of Brian\" dei Monty Python\". Trieste: Battello Stampatore, 2008. . [Italian: \"\"I'm not the Messiah, honestly!\" – Messianism and modernity in Monty Python's \"Life of Brian\"\"]. This book analyses the film structure as an hypertext and Brian the Messiah as a modern leader figure.\nBULLET::::- Larsen, Darl. \"A Book about the Film\" Monty Python's Life of Brian. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2018. .\n\nBULLET::::- \"Monty Python's Life of Brian\" film script\nBULLET::::- Graffiti vandal strikes in Gloucester\nBULLET::::- – A 2007 documentary about the controversy surrounding the film.\nBULLET::::- \"Monty Python’s Life of Brian\" an essay by George Perry at the Criterion Collection\n"}
{"id": "17921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17921", "title": "Lomography", "text": "Lomography\n\nLomography is a commercial trademark of Lomographische AG, which their creators associate to a photographic image style and a film camera movement and community facilitated by The Lomographic Society International.\n\nThe Lomographic Society International was founded in 1992 by a group of Viennese students after they discovered the LCA, a camera created by LOMO PLC of Saint Petersburg, Russia. Lomography started as an art movement through which the students put on exhibitions of photos within Vienna; the art movement then developed into a commercial enterprise. Since 1995, Lomography has been the sole distributor of the LC-A camera outside the former Soviet Union, and has moved into producing their own range of analog cameras, films and accessories.\n\nThe lomography name is inspired by the former state-run optics manufacturer LOMO PLC of Saint Petersburg, Russia that created and produced the 35 mm LOMO LC-A Compact Automat camera, now central to lomography. This camera was loosely based upon the Cosina CX-1 and introduced in the early 1980s.\n\nLomography also represents the commercial trademark of Lomographische AG, an Austrian company that produces cameras and accessories. The society is headquartered in Vienna, Austria.\nIn 1991, a group of Viennese students discovered the LOMO LC-A and were inspired by its \"unique, colorful, and sometimes blurry\" images. The Lomographic Society International was subsequently founded in 1992. After a series of art exhibitions culminating in shows in New York City and Moscow, Lomography signed an exclusive distribution agreement with LOMO PLC in 1995 — becoming the sole distributor of all LOMO LC-A cameras outside of the former Soviet Union. The new company reached an agreement with the deputy mayor of St Petersburg, the future Russian Prime Minister and President, Vladimir Putin, to receive a tax break in order to keep the LOMO factory in the city open.\n\nSince the introduction of the original LOMO LC-A, Lomography has produced a line of their own film cameras. In 2005, production of the original LOMO LC-A was discontinued. Its replacement, the LOMO LC-A+, was introduced in 2006. The new camera, made in China rather than Russia, featured the original Russian lens manufactured by LOMO PLC. This changed as of mid-2007 with the lens now made in China as well. In 2012 the LC-A+ camera was re-released as a special edition.\n\nLomography has also released products catered to digital devices, such as the Smartphone Film Scanner; and the Achromat lens collection for SLR cameras with Canon EF, Nikon F or Pentax K mounts, inspired by 19th century Daguerreotype photography.\n\nIn 2013, together with Zenit, Lomography produced a new version of the Petzval Lens designed to work with Canon EF and Nikon F mount SLR cameras.\n\nCameras that have been marketed by Lomographische AG:\nBULLET::::- LOMO LC-A+\nBULLET::::- LC-A 120\nBULLET::::- Diana F+\nBULLET::::- Spinner 360°\nBULLET::::- Sprocket Rocket\nBULLET::::- Actionsampler\nBULLET::::- Pop-9\nBULLET::::- Oktomat\nBULLET::::- Fisheye\nBULLET::::- Fisheye 2\nBULLET::::- Colorsplash\nBULLET::::- Colorsplash Flash\nBULLET::::- SuperSampler\nBULLET::::- La Sardina\nBULLET::::- LomoKino – a 35 mm analog movie camera\nBULLET::::- Diana Baby – 110 film\nBULLET::::- Fisheye Baby – 110 film\nBULLET::::- Konstruktor – a build-it-yourself 35 mm SLR camera\nBULLET::::- Fritz the Blitz\n\nThe company produces several kinds of 35 mm, 120 and 110 film.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Holga: the World Through a Plastic Lens.\" Vienna: Lomographic Society International, 2006. By Adam Scott and Lomographic Society International. . Paperback edition.\n\nThe stated philosophy of Lomography is summarized in its motto, \"Don’t Think, Just Shoot.\" This motto is accompanied by The Ten Golden Rules which are supposed to encourage spontaneity and the taking of photographs anywhere, while minimizing considerations of formal technique. Typical Lomography cameras are deliberately low-fidelity and of simple construction. Some cameras make use of multiple lenses and rainbow-colored flashes; some exhibit extreme optical distortions and light leaks. The intention of the lomographic style is one of acceptance of such deficiencies in order to create images with a unique character. Most camera phone photo editor apps include a \"lomo\" filter, the exact mechanisms of which vary by app.\n\nTypical of lomography are images with high contrast and with unusual saturation and color that were created using the technique called cross processing in which film intended for developing in slide chemistry (E-6) is processed in photographic negative chemistry (C-41), and vice versa. This technique can be employed with any film camera and can be somewhat mimicked with photo-editing software such as GIMP or Photoshop.\n\nThe Lomographic Society International runs Lomography Gallery Stores and so-called \"embassies\" dedicated to the growth, support and public exposure of analogue photography. Customers interact through social events such as exhibits and workshops.\n\nAn example of the society's events showing peoples' lomography talents is the \"Lomokikuyu\" competition, which raises money for charity.\n\nThe organisation organises the Lomography World Congress, an international conference.\n\nThe Lomographic Society International maintains a community website featuring lomographic photographs.\n\n"}
{"id": "17922", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17922", "title": "Loglan", "text": "Loglan\n\nLoglan is a constructed language originally designed for linguistic research, particularly for investigating the Sapir–Whorf Hypothesis. The language was developed beginning in 1955 by Dr James Cooke Brown with the goal of making a language so different from natural languages that people learning it would think in a different way if the hypothesis were true. In 1960 \"Scientific American\" published an article introducing the language. Loglan is the first among, and the main inspiration for, the languages known as logical languages, which also includes Lojban.\n\nBrown founded The Loglan Institute (TLI) to develop the language and other applications of it. He always considered the language an incomplete research project, and although he released many papers about its design, he continued to claim legal restrictions on its use. Because of this, a group of his followers later formed the Logical Language Group to create the language Lojban along the same principles, but with the intention to make it freely available and encourage its use as a real language.\n\nSupporters of Lojban use the term \"Loglan\" as a generic term to refer to both their own language, and Brown's \"Loglan\", referred to as \"\"TLI Loglan\" when in need of disambiguation. Although the non-trademarkability of the term \"Loglan\" was eventually upheld by the United States Patent and Trademark Office, many supporters and members of The Loglan Institute find this usage offensive, and reserve \"Loglan\" for the TLI version of the language.\n\nLoglan (an abbreviation for \"logical language\") was created to investigate whether people speaking a \"logical language\" would in some way think more logically, as the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis might predict. The language's grammar is based on predicate logic. The grammar was intended to be small enough to be teachable and manageable, yet complex enough to allow people to think and converse in the language.\n\nBrown intended Loglan to be as culturally neutral as possible, and metaphysically parsimonious, which means that obligatory categories are kept to a minimum. An example of an obligatory category in English is the time-tense of verbs, as it is impossible to express a finite verb without also expressing a tense.\n\nBrown also intended the language to be completely regular and unambiguous. Each sentence can be parsed in only one way. Furthermore, the syllabic structure of words was designed so that a sequence of syllables can be separated into words in only one way, even if the word separation is not clear from pauses in speech. It has a small number of phonemes, so that regional \"accents\" are less likely to produce unintelligible speech. To make the vocabulary easier to learn, words were constructed to have elements in common with related words in the world's eight most widely spoken languages.\n\nThe alphabet of Loglan has two historical versions. In that of 1975 there were only 21 letters with their corresponding phonemes. In the final version of 1989 five more phonemes had been incorporated: letter H (/h/) was added to the alphabet in 1977 by popular demand; letter Y (/ə/) was added in 1982 to work as a kind of hyphen between the terms of a complex word; letters Q (/θ/), W (/y/) and X (/x/) were added in 1986 in order to allow the incorporation of the Linnaean vocabulary of biology, and they were useful to give more exact pronunciations to many borrowed names.\n\n! !!colspan=\"26\" Loglan Alphabet\n!Capital letters\nABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ\n!Lower case\nabcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz\n!IPA phonemes\na\nb\nʃ\nd\nɛ\nf\ng\nh\ni / j\nʒ\nk\nl\nm\nn\no\np\nθ\nr\ns\nt\nu / w\nv\ny\nx\nə\nz\n\n+ Loglan consonant phonemes\n! colspan=\"2\" \n! Labial\n! Dental\n! Alveolar\n! Palato-alveolar\n! Palatal\n! Velar\n! Glottal\n! colspan=\"2\"  Nasal\n! rowspan=\"2\"  Plosive\n! style=\"font-size: 80%;\"  voiceless\n! style=\"font-size: 80%;\"  voiced\n! rowspan=\"2\"  Fricative\n! style=\"font-size: 80%;\"  voiceless\n! style=\"font-size: 80%;\"  voiced\n! colspan=\"2\"  Approximant\n! colspan=\"2\"  Rhotic\n\n+ Loglan vowel phonemes\n! colspan=\"2\" \n! Front\n! Central\n! Back\n! rowspan=\"2\"  Close\n! style=\"font-size: 80%;\"  unrounded\n! style=\"font-size: 80%;\"  rounded\n! colspan=\"2\"  Mid\n! colspan=\"2\"  Open\nBULLET::::- The letters I and U when placed before vowels will represent the IPA sounds /j/ and /w/ respectively. For example: ie /je/ (\"\"what?\"\"), ue /we/ (\"\"what!\"\" as an expression of surprise or interest).\n\nLoglan has three types of words: \"predicates\" (also called \"content words\"), \"structure words\" (also called \"little words\"), and \"names\". The majority of words are predicates; these are words that carry meaning. Structure words are words that modify predicates or show how they are related to each other, like English conjunctions and prepositions. Names in Loglan are spelled in accordance with Loglan phonetics, so if the name comes from another language, the Loglan spelling may differ from the spelling in that language. A name in Loglan always ends with a consonant, which helps to distinguish names from other types of words, which always end in a vowel. If a name in its native language ends in a vowel, it is conventional to add an \"s\" to form the Loglan name; for example, the English name \"Mary\" is rendered in Loglan as \"Meris\" (pronounced /ˈmɛriːs/).\n\nLoglan makes no distinction between nouns, verbs, adjectives and adverbs. A predicate may act as any of these depending on its position in a sentence. Each predicate has its own argument structure with fixed positions for arguments. For example: \"vedma\" is the word for \"sell\". It takes four arguments, the seller, the item sold, the buyer and the price, in that order. When a predicate is used as a verb, the first argument appears before the predicate and any subsequent arguments appear after it. So \"S pa vedma T B P\" means \"S sold T to B for price P\". (The structure word \"pa\" is the past tense marker, discussed in more detail below.) Not all arguments need be present; for example \"S pa vedma T B\" means \"S sold T to B\", \"S pa vedma T\" means \"S sold T\", and \"S pa vedma\" simply means \"S sold (something)\".\n\nCertain structure words can be used to reorder the arguments of a predicate, to emphasize one of the arguments by putting it first. For example, \"nu\" swaps the first and second arguments of any predicate. So \"T pa nu vedma S\" means the same thing as \"S pa vedma T\" and might be translated \"T was sold by S\". Similarly, \"fu\" swaps the first and third argument, and \"ju\" swaps the first and fourth argument. Thus \"B pa fu vedma T S\" = \"B bought T from S\" and \"P pa ju vedma T B\" = \"P was paid to buy T by B\".\n\nThe structure word \"le\" makes a predicate behave as a noun, so that it can be used as an argument of another predicate. The three-place predicate \"matma\" means \"M is the mother of C by father F\", so \"le matma\" means \"the mother\". Thus \"le matma pa vedma\" means \"the mother sold (something)\", while \"le vedma pa matma\" means \"the seller was a mother (of someone)\".\n\nA name can be used as an argument by preceding it with the structure word \"la\". Thus \"la Adam vedma\" means \"Adam sells\". Unlike in English and many other languages, this structure word is required; an unadorned name cannot be used as an argument. (The sentence \"Adam vedma\" is an imperative meaning \"Adam, sell (something).\" In this case the name is used as a vocative, not as an argument.) \n\nA name, or any other word or phrase, can be explicitly quoted with the structure words \"li\" and \"lu\" to use the word itself, rather than the thing that word refers to, as an argument. Thus \"li Adam lu corta purda\" means \"\"Adam\" is a short word.\" Without the li/lu quotes, the sentence \"la Adam corta purda\" (\"Adam is a short word\") makes the unusual claim that Adam, the person himself, is a short word.\n\nAny predicate can be used as an adjective or adverb by placing the predicate before the expression that it modifies. The predicate \"sadji\" means \"X is wiser than Y about Z\". So \"le sadji matma pa vedma\" means \"the wise mother sold\" and \"le matma vedma pa sadji\" means \"the motherly seller was wise\". Predicates can be used adverbially to modify the main predicate in the sentence in the same way. So \"le matma pa sadji vedma\" means \"the mother wisely sold\". The structure word \"go\" can be used to invert the normal word order, so that the modifier follows the expression being modified. Thus \"le matma go sadji\" (the mother who is wise) means the same as \"le sadji matma\" (the wise mother).\n\nA string of more than two predicates is left associative. This grouping can be changed by using the structure word \"ge\" which groups what follows into a single unit. Thus Loglan can distinguish between the many possible meanings of the ambiguous English phrase \"the pretty little girls' school\", as in these examples:\nBULLET::::- \"le bilti cmalo nirli ckela\" = the ((pretty little) girls') schoolthe school for girls who are beautifully small\nBULLET::::- \"le bilti cmalo ge nirli ckela\" = the (pretty little) (girls' school)the school that is beautifully small for a girls' school\nBULLET::::- \"le bilti ge cmalo nirli ckela\" = the pretty ((little girls') school)the school that is beautiful for a small-girls' school\nBULLET::::- \"le bilti ge cmalo ge nirli ckela\" = the pretty (little (girls' school))the school that is beautiful for a small type of girls'-school\n\nPredicates can be modified to indicate the time at which something occurred (English tense) with the optional structure words \"na\" (present), \"pa\" (past) and \"fa\" (future). Thus \"le matma na vedma\" means \"the mother is (now) selling\", while \"le matma fa vedma\" means \"the mother will sell\". Marking the verb for tense is optional, so the word \"ga\" can be used when the time is not being specified. So \"le matma ga vedma\" means \"the mother sells (at some unspecified time in the past, present or future)\".\n\nA set of structure words called \"free variables\" are used like English pronouns, but are designed to avoid the ambiguity of pronouns in such sentences as \"Adam told Greg that he needed to leave.\" The free variable \"da\" refers to the most recently mentioned noun, \"de\" refers to the one mentioned prior to that, \"di\" to the one prior to that, and so on. Compare the sentences\nBULLET::::- \"la Adam pa vedma le negda la Greg i da gacpi\" = Adam sold the egg to Greg; he (Greg) was happy.\nBULLET::::- \"la Adam pa vedma le negda la Greg i di gacpi\" = Adam sold the egg to Greg; he (Adam) was happy.\nFree variables apply equally to people of any gender and inanimate objects; there is no distinction similar to that between English \"he\", \"she\" and \"it\". This explains why \"di\" rather than \"de\" was used in the second example. \"la Adam pa vedma le negda la Greg i de gacpi\" would mean \"Adam sold the egg to Greg; it (the egg) was happy.\"\n\nLoglan has several sets of conjunctions to express the fourteen possible logical connectives. One set is used to combine predicate expressions (\"e\" = and, \"a\" = or, \"o\" = if and only if), and another set is used to combine predicates to make more complex predicates (\"ce\", \"ca\", \"co\"). The sentence \"la Kim matma e sadji\" means \"Kim is a mother and is wise\", while \"la Kim matma ce sadji vedma\" means \"Kim is a motherly and wise seller\", or \"Kim sells in a motherly and wise manner\". In the latter sentence, \"ce\" is used to combine matma and sadji into one predicate which modifies vedma. The sentence \"la Kim matma e sadji vedma\" would mean \"Kim is a mother and wisely sells.\"\n\nA special conjunction \"ze\" is used to create a \"mixed\" predicate which may be true even if it is not necessarily true for either of the component predicates. For example, \"le negda ga nigro ze blabi\" means \"the egg is black-and-white\". This would be true if the egg were striped or speckled; in that case it would not be true that the egg is black nor that it is white. On the other hand, \"le negda ga nigro e blabi\" makes the unlikely claim that \"the egg is black and (it is also) white\".\n\nThere is a set of words used for expressing attitudes about what one is saying, which convey conviction, intention, obligation and emotion. These words follow what they modify, but when used at the start of a sentence they modify the entire sentence. For example:\nBULLET::::- \"io le matma pa sadji\" = Probably the mother was wise.\nBULLET::::- \"ae le matma pa sadji\" = Hopefully, the mother was wise.\nBULLET::::- \"ui le matma pa sadji\" = Happily, the mother was wise.\n\nLoglan was mentioned in a couple of science fiction works: Robert A. Heinlein's well-known books, including \"The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress\" and \"The Number of the Beast\", Robert Rimmer's utopian book \"Love Me Tomorrow\" (1978) and Stanisław Lem novel His Master's Voice.\n\nLoglan's inventor, James Cooke Brown, also wrote a utopian science fiction novel called \"The Troika Incident\" (1970) that uses Loglan phrases but calls the language a different name, \"Panlan\".\n\nLoglan is used as the official interspecies language in the roleplaying game \"\".\n\nArchival material related to the creation and teaching of Loglan, including flashcards and grammar explanations, can be found in the Faith Rich Papers, located at Chicago Public Library Special Collections, Chicago, Illinois.\n\nBULLET::::- Artificial language\nBULLET::::- Linguistics\nBULLET::::- Lojban\nBULLET::::- Comparison between Lojban and Loglan\nBULLET::::- Philosophy of language\nBULLET::::- Sapir–Whorf hypothesis\nBULLET::::- Faith Rich\n\nBULLET::::- The Loglan Institute homepage\nBULLET::::- The Lord's Prayer, sample text in Loglan\n"}
{"id": "17924", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17924", "title": "Leucippus", "text": "Leucippus\n\nLeucippus (; , \"Leúkippos\"; fl. 5th cent. BCE) is reported in some ancient sources to have been a philosopher who was the earliest Greek to develop the theory of atomism—the idea that everything is composed entirely of various imperishable, indivisible elements called atoms. Leucippus often appears as the master to his pupil Democritus, a philosopher also touted as the originator of the atomic theory.\n\n\"Aristotle and Theophrastos certainly made him [Leucippus] the originator of the atomic theory, and they can hardly have been mistaken on such a point.\" An authoritative quote by Burnet in the fourth edition of \"Early Greek Philosophy\" (1930), Chapter IX 'Leuikippos of Miletos', pg. 330.\n\nHowever, a brief notice in Diogenes Laërtius’s life of Epicurus says that on the testimony of Epicurus, Leucippus never existed. As the philosophical heir of Democritus, Epicurus's word has some weight, and indeed a controversy over this matter raged in German scholarship for many years at the close of the 19th century. Furthermore, in his \"Corpus Democriteum\", Thrasyllus of Alexandria, an astrologer and writer living under the emperor Tiberius (14–37 CE), compiled a list of writings on atomism that he attributed to Democritus to the exclusion of Leucippus. The present consensus among the world's historians of philosophy is that this Leucippus is historical. The matter must remain moot unless more information is forthcoming from the record.\n\nLeucippus was most likely born in Miletus, although Abdera and Elea are also mentioned as possible birthplaces.\n\nLeucippus was indeed a shadowy figure, as his dates are not recorded and he is often mentioned in conjunction with his more well-known pupil Democritus. It is therefore difficult to determine which contributions to an atomic theory come from Democritus and which come from Leucippus.\n\nThe Leucippus of record was an Ionian Greek (Ionia, being the Asiatic Greece or \"Asia Minor\", forms western Turkey today). And he was a contemporary of Zeno of Elea and Empedocles (Magna Graecia, now part of southern Italy). He belonged to the same Ionian School of naturalistic philosophy as Thales, Anaximander, and Anaximenes.\n\nAristotle and his student Theophrastus, however, explicitly credit Leucippus with the invention of Atomism. In Aristotelian terms Leucippus agreed with the Eleatic argument that \"true being does not admit of vacuum\" and there can be no movement in the absence of vacuum. Leucippus contended that since movement exists, there must be empty space. However, he concludes that vacuum is identified with nonbeing, since \"nothing\" cannot really be. According to Aristotle Leucippus differed from the Eleatics in not being encumbered by the \"conceptual intermingling\" of being and non-being, and Plato made the necessary distinction between \"grades of being and types of negation\".\n\nThe title most attributed to Leucippus' is the lost work \"Megas Diakosmos\" (\"Big World-System\", but this title was also attributed to Democritus whose companion work was \"Micros Diakosmos,\" (\"Little World-System\")).\n\nFragments and doxographical reports about Leucippus were collected by Hermann Diels (1848–1922), firstly in \"Doxographi Graeci\" (Berlin, 1879, reprint Berlin: de Gruyter, 1929) and then in \"Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker\", Berlin, 1903, 6th ed., rev. by Walther Kranz (Berlin: Weidmann, 1952; the editions after the 6th are mainly reprints with little or no change.) Diels was the leading proponent for a historical Leucippus.\n\nSome sources claim that around 440 or 430 BCE Leucippus founded a school at Abdera, with which his pupil, Democritus, was closely associated. And there is mention that a Leucippus founded the city of Metapontum, which honored this Leucippus with a coin.\n\nBULLET::::- Atomism\nBULLET::::- Democritus\nBULLET::::- Epicurus\nBULLET::::- Indeterminism\nBULLET::::- Kanada\n\nBULLET::::- A. A. Long (ed.), \"The Cambridge Companion to Early Greek Philosophy\" (pgs. xxiii, 185)\nBULLET::::- Diels-Kranz, \"Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker\" [I] 67A\n\nBULLET::::- Leucippus and Democritus Fragments at demonax.info\n"}
{"id": "17926", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17926", "title": "League of Nations", "text": "League of Nations\n\nThe League of Nations, abbreviated as LN or LoN, ( , abbreviated as \"SDN\" or \"SdN\" and meaning \"Society of Nations\") was the first worldwide intergovernmental organisation whose principal mission was to maintain world peace. It was founded on 10 January 1920 following the Paris Peace Conference that ended the First World War; in 1919 US President Woodrow Wilson was to win the Nobel Peace Prize for his role as the leading architect of the League.\n\nThe organisation's primary goals, as stated in its Covenant, included preventing wars through collective security and disarmament and settling international disputes through negotiation and arbitration. Other issues in this and related treaties included labour conditions, just treatment of native inhabitants, \nhuman and drug trafficking, the arms trade, global health, prisoners of war, and protection of minorities in Europe. The Covenant of the League of Nations was signed on 28 June 1919 as Part I of the Treaty of Versailles, and it became effective together with the rest of the Treaty on 10 January 1920. The first meeting of the Council of the League took place on 16 January 1920, and the first meeting of Assembly of the League took place on 15 November 1920.\n\nThe diplomatic philosophy behind the League represented a fundamental shift from the preceding hundred years. The League lacked its own armed force and depended on the victorious First World War Allies (France, the United Kingdom, Italy and Japan were the permanent members of the Executive Council) to enforce its resolutions, keep to its economic sanctions, or provide an army when needed. The Great Powers were often reluctant to do so. Sanctions could hurt League members, so they were reluctant to comply with them. During the Second Italo-Abyssinian War, when the League accused Italian soldiers of targeting Red Cross medical tents, Benito Mussolini responded that \"the League is very well when sparrows shout, but no good at all when eagles fall out.\"\n\nAt its greatest extent from 28 September 1934 to 23 February 1935, it had 58 members. After some notable successes and some early failures in the 1920s, the League ultimately proved incapable of preventing aggression by the Axis powers in the 1930s. The credibility of the organization was weakened by the fact that the United States never joined the League and the Soviet Union joined late and was soon expelled after invading Finland. Germany withdrew from the League, as did Japan, Italy, Spain and others. The onset of the Second World War showed that the League had failed its primary purpose, which was to prevent any future world war. The League lasted for 26 years; the United Nations (UN) replaced it after the end of the Second World War and inherited several agencies and organisations founded by the League.\n\nThe concept of a peaceful community of nations had been proposed as far back as 1795, when Immanuel Kant's \"\" outlined the idea of a league of nations to control conflict and promote peace between states. Kant argued for the establishment of a peaceful world community, not in a sense of a global government, but in the hope that each state would declare itself a free state that respects its citizens and welcomes foreign visitors as fellow rational beings, thus promoting peaceful society worldwide. International co-operation to promote collective security originated in the Concert of Europe that developed after the Napoleonic Wars in the 19th century in an attempt to maintain the \"status quo\" between European states and so avoid war. This period also saw the development of international law, with the first Geneva Conventions establishing laws dealing with humanitarian relief during wartime, and the international Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 governing rules of war and the peaceful settlement of international disputes. As historians William H. Harbaugh and Ronald E. Powaski point out, Theodore Roosevelt was the first American President to call for an international league. At the acceptance for his Nobel Prize, Roosevelt said: \"it would be a masterstroke if those great powers honestly bent on peace would form a League of Peace.\"\n\nThe forerunner of the League of Nations, the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU), was formed by the peace activists William Randal Cremer and Frédéric Passy in 1889 (and is currently still in existence as an international body with a focus on the various elected legislative bodies of the world.) The IPU was founded with an international scope, with a third of the members of parliaments (in the 24 countries that had parliaments) serving as members of the IPU by 1914. Its foundational aims were to encourage governments to solve international disputes by peaceful means. Annual conferences were established to help governments refine the process of international arbitration. Its structure was designed as a council headed by a president, which would later be reflected in the structure of the League.\n\nAt the start of the First World War, the first schemes for an international organisation to prevent future wars began to gain considerable public support, particularly in Great Britain and the United States. Goldsworthy Lowes Dickinson, a British political scientist, coined the term \"League of Nations\" in 1914 and drafted a scheme for its organisation. Together with Lord Bryce, he played a leading role in the founding of the group of internationalist pacifists known as the Bryce Group, later the League of Nations Union. The group became steadily more influential among the public and as a pressure group within the then governing Liberal Party. In Dickinson's 1915 pamphlet \"After the War\" he wrote of his \"League of Peace\" as being essentially an organisation for arbitration and conciliation. He felt that the secret diplomacy of the early twentieth century had brought about war and thus could write that, \"the impossibility of war, I believe, would be increased in proportion as the issues of foreign policy should be known to and controlled by public opinion.\" The ‘Proposals’ of the Bryce Group were circulated widely, both in England and the US, where they had a profound influence on the nascent international movement.\n\nWithin two weeks of the start of the war, feminists began to mobilise against the war. Having been barred from participating in prior peace organizations, American women formed a Women's Peace Parade Committee to plan a silent protest to the war. Led by chairwoman Fanny Garrison Villard, women from trade unions, feminist organizations, and social reform organizations, such as Kate Waller Barrett, Mary Ritter Beard, Carrie Chapman Catt, Rose Schneiderman, Lillian Wald, and others, organized 1500 women, who marched down Manhattan's Fifth Avenue on 29 August 1914. As a result of the parade, Jane Addams became interested in proposals by two European suffragists—Hungarian Rosika Schwimmer and British Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence—to hold a peace conference. On 9–10 January 1915, a peace conference directed by Addams was held in Washington, D. C., where the delegates adopted a platform calling for creation of international bodies with administrative and legislative powers to develop a \"permanent league of neutral nations\" to work for peace and disarmament.\n\nWithin months a call was made for an international women's conference to be held in The Hague. Coordinated by Mia Boissevain, Aletta Jacobs and Rosa Manus, the Congress, which opened on 28 April 1915 was attended by 1,136 participants from both neutral and non-belligerent nations, and resulted in the establishment of an organization which would become the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom (WILPF). At the close of the conference, two delegations of women were dispatched to meet European heads of state over the next several months. They secured agreement from reluctant Foreign Ministers, who overall felt that such a body would be ineffective, but agreed to participate or not impede creation of a neutral mediating body, if other nations agreed and if President Woodrow Wilson would initiate a body. In the midst of the War, Wilson refused.\n\nIn 1915, a similar body to the Bryce group proposals was set up in the United States by a group of like-minded individuals, including William Howard Taft. It was called the League to Enforce Peace and was substantially based on the proposals of the Bryce Group. It advocated the use of arbitration in conflict resolution and the imposition of sanctions on aggressive countries. None of these early organisations envisioned a continuously functioning body; with the exception of the Fabian Society in England, they maintained a legalistic approach that would limit the international body to a court of justice. The Fabians were the first to argue for a \"Council\" of states, necessarily the Great Powers, who would adjudicate world affairs, and for the creation of a permanent secretariat to enhance international co-operation across a range of activities.\n\nIn the course of the diplomatic efforts surrounding World War I, both sides had to clarify their long-term war aims. By 1916 in Britain, the leader of the Allies, and in the neutral United States, long-range thinkers had begun to design a unified international organisation to prevent future wars. Historian Peter Yearwood argues that when the new coalition government of David Lloyd George took power in December 1916, there was widespread discussion among intellectuals and diplomats of the desirability of establishing such an organisation. When Lloyd George was challenged by Wilson to state his position with an eye on the postwar situation, he endorsed such an organisation. Wilson himself included in his Fourteen Points in January 1918 a \"league of nations to ensure peace and justice.\" British foreign secretary, Arthur Balfour, argued that, as a condition of durable peace, \"behind international law, and behind all treaty arrangements for preventing or limiting hostilities, some form of international sanction should be devised which would give pause to the hardiest aggressor.\"\n\nThe war had had a profound impact, affecting the social, political and economic systems of Europe and inflicting psychological and physical damage. Several empires collapsed: first the Russian Empire in February 1917, followed by the German Empire, Austro-Hungarian Empire and Ottoman Empire. Anti-war sentiment rose across the world; the First World War was described as \"the war to end all wars\", and its possible causes were vigorously investigated. The causes identified included arms races, alliances, militaristic nationalism, secret diplomacy, and the freedom of sovereign states to enter into war for their own benefit. One proposed remedy was the creation of an international organisation whose aim was to prevent future war through disarmament, open diplomacy, international co-operation, restrictions on the right to wage war, and penalties that made war unattractive.\n\nIn London Balfour commissioned the first official report into the matter in early 1918, under the initiative of Lord Robert Cecil. The British committee was finally appointed in February 1918. It was led by Walter Phillimore (and became known as the Phillimore Committee), but also included Eyre Crowe, William Tyrrell, and Cecil Hurst. The recommendations of the so-called Phillimore Commission included the establishment of a \"Conference of Allied States\" that would arbitrate disputes and impose sanctions on offending states. The proposals were approved by the British government, and much of the commission's results were later incorporated into the Covenant of the League of Nations.\nThe French also drafted a much more far-reaching proposal in June 1918; they advocated annual meetings of a council to settle all disputes, as well as an \"international army\" to enforce its decisions.\n\nThe American President Woodrow Wilson instructed Edward M. House to draft a US plan which reflected Wilson's own idealistic views (first articulated in the Fourteen Points of January 1918), as well as the work of the Phillimore Commission. The outcome of House's work and Wilson's own first draft proposed the termination of \"unethical\" state behaviour, including forms of espionage and dishonesty. Methods of compulsion against recalcitrant states would include severe measures, such as \"blockading and closing the frontiers of that power to commerce or intercourse with any part of the world and to use any force that may be necessary...\"\n\nThe two principal drafters and architects of the covenant of the League of Nations were the British politician Lord Robert Cecil and the South African statesman Jan Smuts. Smuts' proposals included the creation of a Council of the great powers as permanent members and a non-permanent selection of the minor states. He also proposed the creation of a Mandate system for captured colonies of the Central Powers during the war. Cecil focused on the administrative side and proposed annual Council meetings and quadrennial meetings for the Assembly of all members. He also argued for a large and permanent secretariat to carry out the League's administrative duties.\n\nAt the Paris Peace Conference in 1919, Wilson, Cecil and Smuts all put forward their draft proposals. After lengthy negotiations between the delegates, the Hurst–Miller draft was finally produced as a basis for the Covenant. After more negotiation and compromise, the delegates finally approved of the proposal to create the League of Nations (, ) on 25 January 1919. The final Covenant of the League of Nations was drafted by a special commission, and the League was established by Part I of the Treaty of Versailles. On 28 June 1919, 44 states signed the Covenant, including 31 states which had taken part in the war on the side of the Triple Entente or joined it during the conflict.\n\nFrench women's rights advocates invited international feminists to participate in a parallel conference to the Paris Conference in hopes that they could gain permission to participate in the official conference. The Inter-Allied Women's Conference asked to be allowed to submit suggestions to the peace negotiations and commissions and were granted the right to sit on commissions dealing specifically with women and children. Though they asked for enfranchisement and full legal protection under the law equal with men, those rights were ignored. Women won the right to serve in all capacities, including as staff or delegates in the League of Nations organization. They also won a declaration that member nations should prevent trafficking of women and children and should equally support humane conditions for children, women and men labourers. At the Zürich Peace Conference held between 17–19 May 1919, the women of the WILPF condemned the terms of the Treaty of Versailles for both its punitive measures, as well as its failure to provide for condemnation of violence and exclusion of women from civil and political participation. Upon reading the Rules of Procedure for the League of Nations, Catherine Marshall, a British suffragist, discovered that the guidelines were completely undemocratic and they were modified based on her suggestion.\n\nThe League would be made up of a General Assembly (representing all member states), an Executive Council (with membership limited to major powers), and a permanent secretariat. Member states were expected to \"respect and preserve as against external aggression\" the territorial integrity of other members and to disarm \"to the lowest point consistent with domestic safety.\" All states were required to submit complaints for arbitration or judicial inquiry before going to war. The Executive Council would create a Permanent Court of International Justice to make judgements on the disputes.\nDespite Wilson's efforts to establish and promote the League, for which he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in October 1919, the United States never joined. Senate Republicans led by Henry Cabot Lodge wanted a League with the reservation that only Congress could take the U.S. into war. Lodge gained a majority of Senators. Wilson refused to allow a compromise and the needed 2/3 majority was lacking.\n\nThe League held its first council meeting in Paris on 16 January 1920, six days after the Versailles Treaty and the Covenant of the League of Nations came into force. On 1 November 1920, the headquarters of the League was moved from London to Geneva, where the first General Assembly was held on 15 November 1920. The Palais Wilson on Geneva's western lakeshore, named after US President Woodrow Wilson in recognition of his efforts towards the establishment of the League, was the League's first permanent home.\n\nThe official languages of the League of Nations were French and English.\n\nIn 1939, a semi-official emblem for the League of Nations emerged: two five-pointed stars within a blue pentagon. They symbolised the Earth's five continents and \"five races.\" A bow at the top displayed the English name (\"League of Nations\"), while another at the bottom showed the French (\"\"Société des Nations\"\").\n\nThe main constitutional organs of the League were the Assembly, the Council, and the Permanent Secretariat. It also had two essential wings: the Permanent Court of International Justice and the International Labour Organization. In addition, there were several auxiliary agencies and commissions. Each organ's budget was allocated by the Assembly (the League was supported financially by its member states).\n\nThe relations between the Assembly and the Council and the competencies of each were for the most part not explicitly defined. Each body could deal with any matter within the sphere of competence of the League or affecting peace in the world. Particular questions or tasks might be referred to either.\n\nUnanimity was required for the decisions of both the Assembly and the Council, except in matters of procedure and some other specific cases such as the admission of new members. This requirement was a reflection of the League's belief in the sovereignty of its component nations; the League sought a solution by consent, not by dictation. In case of a dispute, the consent of the parties to the dispute was not required for unanimity.\n\nThe Permanent Secretariat, established at the seat of the League at Geneva, comprised a body of experts in various spheres under the direction of the general secretary. Its principal sections were Political, Financial and Economics, Transit, Minorities and Administration (administering the Saar and Danzig), Mandates, Disarmament, Health, Social (Opium and Traffic in Women and Children), Intellectual Cooperation and International Bureaux, Legal, and Information. The staff of the Secretariat was responsible for preparing the agenda for the Council and the Assembly and publishing reports of the meetings and other routine matters, effectively acting as the League's civil service. In 1931 the staff numbered 707.\n\nThe Assembly consisted of representatives of all members of the League, with each state allowed up to three representatives and one vote. It met in Geneva and, after its initial sessions in 1920, it convened once a year in September. The special functions of the Assembly included the admission of new members, the periodical election of non-permanent members to the Council, the election with the Council of the judges of the Permanent Court, and control of the budget. In practice, the Assembly was the general directing force of League activities.\n\nThe League Council acted as a type of executive body directing the Assembly's business. It began with four permanent members (Great Britain, France, Italy, and Japan) and four non-permanent members that were elected by the Assembly for a three-year term. The first non-permanent members were Belgium, Brazil, Greece, and Spain.\n\nThe composition of the Council was changed several times. The number of non-permanent members was first increased to six on 22 September 1922 and to nine on 8 September 1926. Werner Dankwort of Germany pushed for his country to join the League; joining in 1926, Germany became the fifth permanent member of the Council. Later, after Germany and Japan both left the League, the number of non-permanent seats was increased from nine to eleven, and the Soviet Union was made a permanent member giving the Council a total of fifteen members. The Council met, on average, five times a year and in extraordinary sessions when required. In total, 107 sessions were held between 1920 and 1939.\n\nThe League oversaw the Permanent Court of International Justice and several other agencies and commissions created to deal with pressing international problems. These included the Disarmament Commission, the International Labour Organization (ILO), the Mandates Commission, the International Commission on Intellectual Cooperation (precursor to UNESCO), the Permanent Central Opium Board, the Commission for Refugees, and the Slavery Commission. Three of these institutions were transferred to the United Nations after the Second World War: the International Labour Organization, the Permanent Court of International Justice (as the International Court of Justice), and the Health Organisation (restructured as the World Health Organization).\n\nThe Permanent Court of International Justice was provided for by the Covenant, but not established by it. The Council and the Assembly established its constitution. Its judges were elected by the Council and the Assembly, and its budget was provided by the latter. The Court was to hear and decide any international dispute which the parties concerned submitted to it. It might also give an advisory opinion on any dispute or question referred to it by the Council or the Assembly. The Court was open to all the nations of the world under certain broad conditions.\n\nThe International Labour Organization was created in 1919 on the basis of Part XIII of the Treaty of Versailles. The ILO, although having the same members as the League and being subject to the budget control of the Assembly, was an autonomous organisation with its own Governing Body, its own General Conference and its own Secretariat. Its constitution differed from that of the League: representation had been accorded not only to governments but also to representatives of employers' and workers' organisations. Albert Thomas was its first director.\nThe ILO successfully restricted the addition of lead to paint, and convinced several countries to adopt an eight-hour work day and forty-eight-hour working week. It also campaigned to end child labour, increase the rights of women in the workplace, and make shipowners liable for accidents involving seamen. After the demise of the League, the ILO became an agency of the United Nations in 1946.\n\nThe League's health organisation had three bodies: the Health Bureau, containing permanent officials of the League; the General Advisory Council or Conference, an executive section consisting of medical experts; and the Health Committee. The Committee's purpose was to conduct inquiries, oversee the operation of the League's health work, and prepare work to be presented to the Council. This body focused on ending leprosy, malaria, and yellow fever, the latter two by starting an international campaign to exterminate mosquitoes. The Health Organisation also worked successfully with the government of the Soviet Union to prevent typhus epidemics, including organising a large education campaign.\n\nThe League of Nations had devoted serious attention to the question of international intellectual co-operation since its creation. The First Assembly in December 1920 recommended that the Council take action aiming at the international organisation of intellectual work, which it did by adopting a report presented by the Fifth Committee of the Second Assembly and inviting a Committee on Intellectual Cooperation to meet in Geneva in August 1922. The French philosopher Henri Bergson became the first chairman of the committee. The work of the committee included: inquiry into the conditions of intellectual life, assistance to countries where intellectual life was endangered, creation of national committees for intellectual co-operation, co-operation with international intellectual organisations, protection of intellectual property, inter-university co-operation, co-ordination of bibliographical work and international interchange of publications, and international co-operation in archaeological research.\n\nIntroduced by the second International Opium Convention, the Permanent Central Opium Board had to supervise the statistical reports on trade in opium, morphine, cocaine and heroin. The board also established a system of import certificates and export authorisations for the legal international trade in narcotics.\n\nThe Slavery Commission sought to eradicate slavery and slave trading across the world, and fought forced prostitution. Its main success was through pressing the governments who administered mandated countries to end slavery in those countries. The League secured a commitment from Ethiopia to end slavery as a condition of membership in 1923, and worked with Liberia to abolish forced labour and intertribal slavery. The United Kingdom had not supported Ethiopian membership of the League on the grounds that \"Ethiopia had not reached a state of civilisation and internal security sufficient to warrant her admission.\"\n\nThe League also succeeded in reducing the death rate of workers constructing the Tanganyika railway from 55 to 4 percent. Records were kept to control slavery, prostitution, and the trafficking of women and children. Partly as a result of pressure brought by the League of Nations, Afghanistan abolished slavery in 1923, Iraq in 1924, Nepal in 1926, Transjordan and Persia in 1929, Bahrain in 1937, and Ethiopia in 1942.\nLed by Fridtjof Nansen, the Commission for Refugees was established on 27 June 1921 to look after the interests of refugees, including overseeing their repatriation and, when necessary, resettlement. At the end of the First World War, there were two to three million ex-prisoners of war from various nations dispersed throughout Russia; within two years of the commission's foundation, it had helped 425,000 of them return home. It established camps in Turkey in 1922 to aid the country with an ongoing refugee crisis, helping to prevent the spread of cholera, smallpox and dysentery as well as feeding the refugees in the camps. It also established the Nansen passport as a means of identification for stateless people.\n\nThe Committee for the Study of the Legal Status of Women sought to inquire into the status of women all over the world. It was formed in 1937, and later became part of the United Nations as the Commission on the Status of Women.\n\nThe Covenant of the League said little about economics. Nonetheless, in 1920 the Council of the League called for a financial conference. The First Assembly at Geneva provided for the appointment of an Economic and Financial Advisory Committee to provide information to the conference. In 1923, a permanent economic and financial Organization came into being.\n\nOf the League's 42 founding members, 23 (24 counting Free France) remained members until it was dissolved in 1946. In the founding year, six other states joined, only two of which remained members throughout the League's existence. Under the Weimar Republic, Germany (in fact the \"Deutsches Reich\" or German Empire) was admitted to the League of Nations through a resolution passed on 8 September 1926.\n\nAn additional 15 countries joined later. The largest number of member states was 58, between 28 September 1934 (when Ecuador joined) and 23 February 1935 (when Paraguay withdrew).\n\nOn 26 May 1937, Egypt became the last state to join the League. The first member to withdraw permanently from the League was Costa Rica on 22 January 1925; having joined on 16 December 1920, this also makes it the member to have most quickly withdrawn. Brazil was the first founding member to withdraw (14 June 1926), and Haiti the last (April 1942). Iraq, which joined in 1932, was the first member that had previously been a League of Nations mandate.\n\nThe Soviet Union became a member on 18 September 1934, and was expelled on 14 December 1939 for invading Finland. In expelling the Soviet Union, the League broke its own rule: only 7 of 15 members of the Council voted for expulsion (United Kingdom, France, Belgium, Bolivia, Egypt, South Africa, and the Dominican Republic), short of the majority required by the Covenant. Three of these members had been made Council members the day before the vote (South Africa, Bolivia, and Egypt). This was one of the League's final acts before it practically ceased functioning due to the Second World War.\n\nAlthough the United States government never joined the League of Nations, American individuals and organizations did participate in some aspects of its work. Philanthropies—notably the Rockefeller Foundation—made contributions to the headquarters in Geneva, the health unit, and the economic section. Americans sat on League committees and followed the social and technical work that was prominent in the 1930s.\n\nAt the end of the First World War, the Allied powers were confronted with the question of the disposal of the former German colonies in Africa and the Pacific, and the several Arabic-speaking provinces of the Ottoman Empire. The Peace Conference adopted the principle that these territories should be administered by different governments on behalf of the League – a system of national responsibility subject to international supervision. This plan, defined as the mandate system, was adopted by the \"Council of Ten\" (the heads of government and foreign ministers of the main Allied powers: Britain, France, the United States, Italy, and Japan) on 30 January 1919 and transmitted to the League of Nations.\n\nLeague of Nations mandates were established under Article 22 of the Covenant of the League of Nations. The Permanent Mandates Commission supervised League of Nations mandates, and also organised plebiscites in disputed territories so that residents could decide which country they would join. There were three mandate classifications: A, B and C.\n\nThe A mandates (applied to parts of the old Ottoman Empire) were \"certain communities\" that had \n\nThe B mandates were applied to the former German colonies that the League took responsibility for after the First World War. These were described as \"peoples\" that the League said were \n\nSouth West Africa and certain South Pacific Islands were administered by League members under C mandates. These were classified as \"territories\" \n\nThe territories were governed by mandatory powers, such as the United Kingdom in the case of the Mandate of Palestine, and the Union of South Africa in the case of South-West Africa, until the territories were deemed capable of self-government. Fourteen mandate territories were divided up among seven mandatory powers: the United Kingdom, the Union of South Africa, France, Belgium, New Zealand, Australia and Japan. With the exception of the Kingdom of Iraq, which joined the League on 3 October 1932, these territories did not begin to gain their independence until after the Second World War, in a process that did not end until 1990. Following the demise of the League, most of the remaining mandates became United Nations Trust Territories.\n\nIn addition to the mandates, the League itself governed the Territory of the Saar Basin for 15 years, before it was returned to Germany following a plebiscite, and the Free City of Danzig (now Gdańsk, Poland) from 15 November 1920 to 1 September 1939.\n\nThe aftermath of the First World War left many issues to be settled, including the exact position of national boundaries and which country particular regions would join. Most of these questions were handled by the victorious Allied powers in bodies such as the Allied Supreme Council. The Allies tended to refer only particularly difficult matters to the League. This meant that, during the early interwar period, the League played little part in resolving the turmoil resulting from the war. The questions the League considered in its early years included those designated by the Paris Peace treaties.\n\nAs the League developed, its role expanded, and by the middle of the 1920s it had become the centre of international activity. This change can be seen in the relationship between the League and non-members. The United States and Russia, for example, increasingly worked with the League. During the second half of the 1920s, France, Britain and Germany were all using the League of Nations as the focus of their diplomatic activity, and each of their foreign secretaries attended League meetings at Geneva during this period. They also used the League's machinery to try to improve relations and settle their differences.\n\nÅland is a collection of around 6,500 islands in the Baltic Sea, midway between Sweden and Finland. The islands are almost exclusively Swedish-speaking, but in 1809, the Åland Islands, along with Finland, were taken by Imperial Russia. In December 1917, during the turmoil of the Russian October Revolution, Finland declared its independence, but most of the Ålanders wished to rejoin Sweden. The Finnish government considered the islands to be a part of their new nation, as the Russians had included Åland in the Grand Duchy of Finland, formed in 1809. By 1920, the dispute had escalated to the point that there was danger of war. The British government referred the problem to the League's Council, but Finland would not let the League intervene, as they considered it an internal matter. The League created a small panel to decide if it should investigate the matter and, with an affirmative response, a neutral commission was created. In June 1921, the League announced its decision: the islands were to remain a part of Finland, but with guaranteed protection of the islanders, including demilitarisation. With Sweden's reluctant agreement, this became the first European international agreement concluded directly through the League.\n\nThe Allied powers referred the problem of Upper Silesia to the League after they had been unable to resolve the territorial dispute. After the First World War, Poland laid claim to Upper Silesia, which had been part of Prussia. The Treaty of Versailles had recommended a plebiscite in Upper Silesia to determine whether the territory should become part of Germany or Poland. Complaints about the attitude of the German authorities led to rioting and eventually to the first two Silesian Uprisings (1919 and 1920). A plebiscite took place on 20 March 1921, with 59.6 per cent (around 500,000) of the votes cast in favour of joining Germany, but Poland claimed the conditions surrounding it had been unfair. This result led to the Third Silesian Uprising in 1921.\n\nOn 12 August 1921, the League was asked to settle the matter; the Council created a commission with representatives from Belgium, Brazil, China and Spain to study the situation. The committee recommended that Upper Silesia be divided between Poland and Germany according to the preferences shown in the plebiscite and that the two sides should decide the details of the interaction between the two areas – for example, whether goods should pass freely over the border due to the economic and industrial interdependence of the two areas. In November 1921, a conference was held in Geneva to negotiate a convention between Germany and Poland. A final settlement was reached, after five meetings, in which most of the area was given to Germany, but with the Polish section containing the majority of the region's mineral resources and much of its industry. When this agreement became public in May 1922, bitter resentment was expressed in Germany, but the treaty was still ratified by both countries. The settlement produced peace in the area until the beginning of the Second World War.\n\nThe frontiers of the Principality of Albania had not been set during the Paris Peace Conference in 1919, as they were left for the League to decide; they had not yet been determined by September 1921, creating an unstable situation. Greek troops conducted military operations in the south of Albania. Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (Yugoslav) forces became engaged, after clashes with Albanian tribesmen, in the northern part of the country. The League sent a commission of representatives from various powers to the region. In November 1921, the League decided that the frontiers of Albania should be the same as they had been in 1913, with three minor changes that favoured Yugoslavia. Yugoslav forces withdrew a few weeks later, albeit under protest.\n\nThe borders of Albania again became the cause of international conflict when Italian General Enrico Tellini and four of his assistants were ambushed and killed on 24 August 1923 while marking out the newly decided border between Greece and Albania. Italian leader Benito Mussolini was incensed and demanded that a commission investigate the incident within five days. Whatever the results of the investigation, Mussolini insisted that the Greek government pay Italy fifty million lire in reparations. The Greeks said they would not pay unless it was proved that the crime was committed by Greeks.\n\nMussolini sent a warship to shell the Greek island of Corfu, and Italian forces occupied the island on 31 August 1923. This contravened the League's covenant, so Greece appealed to the League to deal with the situation. The Allies agreed (at Mussolini's insistence) that the Conference of Ambassadors should be responsible for resolving the dispute because it was the conference that had appointed General Tellini. The League Council examined the dispute, but then passed on their findings to the Conference of Ambassadors to make the final decision. The conference accepted most of the League's recommendations, forcing Greece to pay fifty million lire to Italy, even though those who committed the crime were never discovered. Italian forces then withdrew from Corfu.\n\nThe port city of Memel (now Klaipėda) and the surrounding area, with a predominantly German population, was under provisional Entente control according to Article 99 of the Treaty of Versailles. The French and Polish governments favoured turning Memel into an international city, while Lithuania wanted to annex the area. By 1923, the fate of the area had still not been decided, prompting Lithuanian forces to invade in January 1923 and seize the port. After the Allies failed to reach an agreement with Lithuania, they referred the matter to the League of Nations. In December 1923, the League Council appointed a Commission of Inquiry. The commission chose to cede Memel to Lithuania and give the area autonomous rights. The Klaipėda Convention was approved by the League Council on 14 March 1924, and then by the Allied powers and Lithuania. In 1939 Germany retook the region following the rise of the Nazis and an ultimatum to Lithuania, demanding the return of the region under threat of war. The League of Nations failed to prevent the secession of the Memel region to Germany.\n\nWith League oversight, the Sanjak of Alexandretta in the French Mandate of Syria was given autonomy in 1937. Renamed Hatay, its parliament declared independence as the Republic of Hatay in September 1938, after elections the previous month. It was annexed by Turkey with French consent in mid-1939.\n\nThe League resolved a dispute between the Kingdom of Iraq and the Republic of Turkey over control of the former Ottoman province of Mosul in 1926. According to the British, who had been awarded a League of Nations mandate over Iraq in 1920 and therefore represented Iraq in its foreign affairs, Mosul belonged to Iraq; on the other hand, the new Turkish republic claimed the province as part of its historic heartland. A League of Nations Commission of Inquiry, with Belgian, Hungarian and Swedish members, was sent to the region in 1924; it found that the people of Mosul did not want to be part of either Turkey or Iraq, but if they had to choose, they would pick Iraq. In 1925, the commission recommended that the region stay part of Iraq, under the condition that the British hold the mandate over Iraq for another 25 years, to ensure the autonomous rights of the Kurdish population. The League Council adopted the recommendation and decided on 16 December 1925 to award Mosul to Iraq. Although Turkey had accepted the League of Nations' arbitration in the Treaty of Lausanne (1923), it rejected the decision, questioning the Council's authority. The matter was referred to the Permanent Court of International Justice, which ruled that, when the Council made a unanimous decision, it must be accepted. Nonetheless, Britain, Iraq and Turkey ratified a separate treaty on 5 June 1926 that mostly followed the decision of the League Council and also assigned Mosul to Iraq. It was agreed that Iraq could still apply for League membership within 25 years and that the mandate would end upon its admission.\n\nAfter the First World War, Poland and Lithuania both regained their independence but soon became immersed in territorial disputes. During the Polish–Soviet War, Lithuania signed the Moscow Peace Treaty with the Soviet Union that laid out Lithuania's frontiers. This agreement gave Lithuanians control of the city of Vilnius (, ), the old Lithuanian capital, but a city with a majority Polish population. This heightened tension between Lithuania and Poland and led to fears that they would resume the Polish–Lithuanian War, and on 7 October 1920, the League negotiated the Suwałki Agreement establishing a cease-fire and a demarcation line between the two nations. On 9 October 1920, General Lucjan Żeligowski, commanding a Polish military force in contravention of the Suwałki Agreement, took the city and established the Republic of Central Lithuania.\n\nAfter a request for assistance from Lithuania, the League Council called for Poland's withdrawal from the area. The Polish government indicated they would comply, but instead reinforced the city with more Polish troops. This prompted the League to decide that the future of Vilnius should be determined by its residents in a plebiscite and that the Polish forces should withdraw and be replaced by an international force organised by the League. The plan was met with resistance in Poland, Lithuania, and the Soviet Union, which opposed any international force in Lithuania. In March 1921, the League abandoned plans for the plebiscite. After unsuccessful proposals by Paul Hymans to create a federation between Poland and Lithuania, which was intended as a reincarnation of the former union which both Poland and Lithuania had once shared before losing its independence, Vilnius and the surrounding area was formally annexed by Poland in March 1922. After Lithuania took over the Klaipėda Region, the Allied Conference set the frontier between Lithuania and Poland, leaving Vilnius within Poland, on 14 March 1923. Lithuanian authorities refused to accept the decision, and officially remained in a state of war with Poland until 1927. It was not until the 1938 Polish ultimatum that Lithuania restored diplomatic relations with Poland and thus \"de facto\" accepted the borders.\n\nThere were several border conflicts between Colombia and Peru in the early part of the 20th century, and in 1922, their governments signed the Salomón-Lozano Treaty in an attempt to resolve them. As part of this treaty, the border town of Leticia and its surrounding area was ceded from Peru to Colombia, giving Colombia access to the Amazon River. On 1 September 1932, business leaders from Peruvian rubber and sugar industries who had lost land, as a result, organised an armed takeover of Leticia. At first, the Peruvian government did not recognise the military takeover, but President of Peru Luis Sánchez Cerro decided to resist a Colombian re-occupation. The Peruvian Army occupied Leticia, leading to an armed conflict between the two nations. After months of diplomatic negotiations, the governments accepted mediation by the League of Nations, and their representatives presented their cases before the Council. A provisional peace agreement, signed by both parties in May 1933, provided for the League to assume control of the disputed territory while bilateral negotiations proceeded. In May 1934, a final peace agreement was signed, resulting in the return of Leticia to Colombia, a formal apology from Peru for the 1932 invasion, demilitarisation of the area around Leticia, free navigation on the Amazon and Putumayo Rivers, and a pledge of non-aggression.\n\nSaar was a province formed from parts of Prussia and the Rhenish Palatinate and placed under League control by the Treaty of Versailles. A plebiscite was to be held after fifteen years of League rule to determine whether the province should belong to Germany or France. When the referendum was held in 1935, 90.3 per cent of voters supported becoming part of Germany, which was quickly approved by the League Council.\n\nIn addition to territorial disputes, the League also tried to intervene in other conflicts between and within nations. Among its successes were its fight against the international trade in opium and sexual slavery, and its work to alleviate the plight of refugees, particularly in Turkey in the period up to 1926. One of its innovations in this latter area was the 1922 introduction of the Nansen passport, which was the first internationally recognised identity card for stateless refugees.\n\nAfter an incident involving sentries on the Greek-Bulgarian border in October 1925, fighting began between the two countries. Three days after the initial incident, Greek troops invaded Bulgaria. The Bulgarian government ordered its troops to make only token resistance, and evacuated between ten thousand and fifteen thousand people from the border region, trusting the League to settle the dispute. The League condemned the Greek invasion, and called for both Greek withdrawal and compensation to Bulgaria.\n\nFollowing accusations of forced labour on the large American-owned Firestone rubber plantation and American accusations of slave trading, the Liberian government asked the League to launch an investigation. The resulting commission was jointly appointed by the League, the United States, and Liberia. In 1930, a League report confirmed the presence of slavery and forced labour. The report implicated many government officials in the selling of contract labour and recommended that they be replaced by Europeans or Americans, which generated anger within Liberia and led to the resignation of President Charles D. B. King and his vice-president. The Liberian government outlawed forced labour and slavery and asked for American help in social reforms.\n\nThe Mukden Incident, also known as the \"Manchurian Incident\" was a decisive setback that weakened The League because its major members refused to tackle Japanese aggression. Japan itself withdrew.\n\nUnder the agreed terms of the Twenty-One Demands with China, the Japanese government had the right to station its troops in the area around the South Manchurian Railway, a major trade route between the two countries, in the Chinese region of Manchuria. In September 1931, a section of the railway was lightly damaged by the Japanese Kwantung Army as a pretext for an invasion of Manchuria. The Japanese army claimed that Chinese soldiers had sabotaged the railway and in apparent retaliation (acting contrary to orders from Tokyo, ) occupied all of Manchuria. They renamed the area Manchukuo, and on 9 March 1932 set up a puppet government, with Pu Yi, the former emperor of China, as its executive head. This new entity was recognised only by the governments of Italy, Spain and Nazi Germany; the rest of the world still considered Manchuria legally part of China.\n\nThe League of Nations sent observers. The Lytton Report appeared a year later (October 1932). It declared Japan to be the aggressor and demanded Manchuria be returned to China. The report passed 42–1 in the Assembly in 1933 (only Japan voting against), but instead of removing its troops from China, Japan withdrew from the League. In the end, as British historian Charles Mowat argued, collective security was dead:\n\nThe League failed to prevent the 1932 war between Bolivia and Paraguay over the arid Gran Chaco region. Although the region was sparsely populated, it contained the Paraguay River, which would have given either landlocked country access to the Atlantic Ocean, and there was also speculation, later proved incorrect, that the Chaco would be a rich source of petroleum. Border skirmishes throughout the late 1920s culminated in an all-out war in 1932 when the Bolivian army attacked the Paraguayans at Fort Carlos Antonio López at Lake Pitiantuta. Paraguay appealed to the League of Nations, but the League did not take action when the Pan-American Conference offered to mediate instead. The war was a disaster for both sides, causing 57,000 casualties for Bolivia, whose population was around three million, and 36,000 dead for Paraguay, whose population was approximately one million. It also brought both countries to the brink of economic disaster. By the time a ceasefire was negotiated on 12 June 1935, Paraguay had seized control of most of the region, as was later recognised by the 1938 truce.\n\nIn October 1935, Italian dictator Benito Mussolini sent 400,000 troops to invade Abyssinia (Ethiopia). Marshal Pietro Badoglio led the campaign from November 1935, ordering bombing, the use of chemical weapons such as mustard gas, and the poisoning of water supplies, against targets which included undefended villages and medical facilities. The modern Italian Army defeated the poorly armed Abyssinians and captured Addis Ababa in May 1936, forcing Emperor of Ethiopia Haile Selassie to flee.\n\nThe League of Nations condemned Italy's aggression and imposed economic sanctions in November 1935, but the sanctions were largely ineffective since they did not ban the sale of oil or close the Suez Canal (controlled by Britain). As Stanley Baldwin, the British Prime Minister, later observed, this was ultimately because no one had the military forces on hand to withstand an Italian attack. In October 1935, the US President, Franklin D. Roosevelt, invoked the recently passed Neutrality Acts and placed an embargo on arms and munitions to both sides, but extended a further \"moral embargo\" to the belligerent Italians, including other trade items. On 5 October and later on 29 February 1936, the United States endeavoured, with limited success, to limit its exports of oil and other materials to normal peacetime levels. The League sanctions were lifted on 4 July 1936, but by that point, Italy had already gained control of the urban areas of Abyssinia.\n\nThe Hoare–Laval Pact of December 1935 was an attempt by the British Foreign Secretary Samuel Hoare and the French Prime Minister Pierre Laval to end the conflict in Abyssinia by proposing to partition the country into an Italian sector and an Abyssinian sector. Mussolini was prepared to agree to the pact, but news of the deal leaked out. Both the British and French public vehemently protested against it, describing it as a sell-out of Abyssinia. Hoare and Laval were forced to resign, and the British and French governments dissociated themselves from the two men. In June 1936, although there was no precedent for a head of state addressing the Assembly of the League of Nations in person, Haile Selassie spoke to the Assembly, appealing for its help in protecting his country.\n\nThe Abyssinian crisis showed how the League could be influenced by the self-interest of its members; one of the reasons why the sanctions were not very harsh was that both Britain and France feared the prospect of driving Mussolini and Adolf Hitler into an alliance.\n\nOn 17 July 1936, the Spanish Army launched a coup d'état, leading to a prolonged armed conflict between Spanish Republicans (the elected leftist national government) and the Nationalists (conservative, anti-communist rebels who included most officers of the Spanish Army). Julio Álvarez del Vayo, the Spanish Minister of Foreign Affairs, appealed to the League in September 1936 for arms to defend Spain's territorial integrity and political independence. The League members would not intervene in the Spanish Civil War nor prevent foreign intervention in the conflict. Adolf Hitler and Mussolini continued to aid General Francisco Franco's Nationalists, while the Soviet Union helped the Spanish Republic. In February 1937, the League did ban foreign volunteers, but this was in practice a symbolic move.\n\nFollowing a long record of instigating localised conflicts throughout the 1930s, Japan began a full-scale invasion of China on 7 July 1937. On 12 September, the Chinese representative, Wellington Koo, appealed to the League for international intervention. Western countries were sympathetic to the Chinese in their struggle, particularly in their stubborn defence of Shanghai, a city with a substantial number of foreigners. The League was unable to provide any practical measures; on 4 October, it turned the case over to the Nine Power Treaty Conference.\n\nArticle 8 of the Covenant gave the League the task of reducing \"armaments to the lowest point consistent with national safety and the enforcement by common action of international obligations\". A significant amount of the League's time and energy was devoted to this goal, even though many member governments were uncertain that such extensive disarmament could be achieved or was even desirable. The Allied powers were also under obligation by the Treaty of Versailles to attempt to disarm, and the armament restrictions imposed on the defeated countries had been described as the first step toward worldwide disarmament. The League Covenant assigned the League the task of creating a disarmament plan for each state, but the Council devolved this responsibility to a special commission set up in 1926 to prepare for the 1932–1934 World Disarmament Conference. Members of the League held different views towards the issue. The French were reluctant to reduce their armaments without a guarantee of military help if they were attacked; Poland and Czechoslovakia felt vulnerable to attack from the west and wanted the League's response to aggression against its members to be strengthened before they disarmed. Without this guarantee, they would not reduce armaments because they felt the risk of attack from Germany was too great. Fear of attack increased as Germany regained its strength after the First World War, especially after Adolf Hitler gained power and became German Chancellor in 1933. In particular, Germany's attempts to overturn the Treaty of Versailles and the reconstruction of the German military made France increasingly unwilling to disarm.\n\nThe World Disarmament Conference was convened by the League of Nations in Geneva in 1932, with representatives from 60 states. It was a failure. A one-year moratorium on the expansion of armaments, later extended by a few months, was proposed at the start of the conference. The Disarmament Commission obtained initial agreement from France, Italy, Spain, Japan, and Britain to limit the size of their navies but no final agreement was reached. Ultimately, the Commission failed to halt the military build-up by Germany, Italy, Spain and Japan during the 1930s.\n\nThe League was mostly silent in the face of major events leading to the Second World War, such as Hitler's remilitarisation of the Rhineland, occupation of the Sudetenland and \"Anschluss\" of Austria, which had been forbidden by the Treaty of Versailles. In fact, League members themselves re-armed. In 1933, Japan simply withdrew from the League rather than submit to its judgement, as did Germany the same year (using the failure of the World Disarmament Conference to agree to arms parity between France and Germany as a pretext), Italy and Spain in 1937. The final significant act of the League was to expel the Soviet Union in December 1939 after it invaded Finland.\n\nThe onset of the Second World War demonstrated that the League had failed in its primary purpose, the prevention of another world war. There were a variety of reasons for this failure, many connected to general weaknesses within the organisation. Additionally, the power of the League was limited by the United States' refusal to join.\n\nThe origins of the League as an organisation created by the Allied powers as part of the peace settlement to end the First World War led to it being viewed as a \"League of Victors\". The League's neutrality tended to manifest itself as indecision. It required a unanimous vote of nine, later fifteen, Council members to enact a resolution; hence, conclusive and effective action was difficult, if not impossible. It was also slow in coming to its decisions, as certain ones required the unanimous consent of the entire Assembly. This problem mainly stemmed from the fact that the primary members of the League of Nations were not willing to accept the possibility of their fate being decided by other countries, and by enforcing unanimous voting had effectively given themselves veto power.\n\nRepresentation at the League was often a problem. Though it was intended to encompass all nations, many never joined, or their period of membership was short. The most conspicuous absentee was the United States. President Woodrow Wilson had been a driving force behind the League's formation and strongly influenced the form it took, but the US Senate voted not to join on 19 November 1919. Ruth Henig has suggested that, had the United States become a member, it would have also provided support to France and Britain, possibly making France feel more secure, and so encouraging France and Britain to co-operate more fully regarding Germany, thus making the rise to power of the Nazi Party less likely. Conversely, Henig acknowledges that if the US had been a member, its reluctance to engage in war with European states or to enact economic sanctions might have hampered the ability of the League to deal with international incidents. The structure of the US federal government might also have made its membership problematic, as its representatives at the League could not have made decisions on behalf of the executive branch without having the prior approval of the legislative branch.\n\nIn January 1920, when the League was born, Germany was not permitted to join because it was seen as having been the aggressor in the First World War. Soviet Russia was also initially excluded because Communist regimes were not welcomed and membership would have been initially dubious due to the Russian Civil War in which both sides claimed to be the legitimate government of the country. The League was further weakened when major powers left in the 1930s. Japan began as a permanent member of the Council since the country was an Allied Power in the First World War, but withdrew in 1933 after the League voiced opposition to its occupation of Manchuria. Italy began as a permanent member of the Council but withdrew in 1937 after roughly a year following the end of the Second Italo-Ethiopian War. Spain also began as a permanent member of the Council, but withdrew in 1939 after the Spanish Civil War ended in a victory for the Nationalists. The League had accepted Germany, also as a permanent member of the Council, in 1926, deeming it a \"peace-loving country\", but Adolf Hitler pulled Germany out when he came to power in 1933.\n\nAnother important weakness grew from the contradiction between the idea of collective security that formed the basis of the League and international relations between individual states. The League's collective security system required nations to act, if necessary, against states they considered friendly, and in a way that might endanger their national interests, to support states for which they had no normal affinity. This weakness was exposed during the Abyssinia Crisis, when Britain and France had to balance maintaining the security they had attempted to create for themselves in Europe \"to defend against the enemies of internal order\", in which Italy's support played a pivotal role, with their obligations to Abyssinia as a member of the League.\n\nOn 23 June 1936, in the wake of the collapse of League efforts to restrain Italy's war against Abyssinia, the British Prime Minister, Stanley Baldwin, told the House of Commons that collective security had \n\nUltimately, Britain and France both abandoned the concept of collective security in favour of appeasement in the face of growing German militarism under Hitler.\nIn this context, the League of Nations was also the institution where the first international debate on terrorism took place following the 1934 assassination of King Alexander I of Yugoslavia in Marseille, France, showing its conspiratorial features, many of which are detectable in the discourse of terrorism among states after 9/11.\n\nAmerican diplomatic historian Samuel Flagg Bemis originally supported the League, but after two decades changed his mind:\n\nThe League of Nations lacked an armed force of its own and depended on the Great Powers to enforce its resolutions, which they were very unwilling to do. Its two most important members, Britain and France, were reluctant to use sanctions and even more reluctant to resort to military action on behalf of the League. Immediately after the First World War, pacifism became a strong force among both the people and governments of the two countries. The British Conservatives were especially tepid to the League and preferred, when in government, to negotiate treaties without the involvement of that organisation. Moreover, the League's advocacy of disarmament for Britain, France, and its other members, while at the same time advocating collective security, meant that the League was depriving itself of the only forceful means by which it could uphold its authority.\n\nWhen the British cabinet discussed the concept of the League during the First World War, Maurice Hankey, the Cabinet Secretary, circulated a memorandum on the subject. He started by saying, \"Generally it appears to me that any such scheme is dangerous to us because it will create a sense of security which is wholly fictitious\". He attacked the British pre-war faith in the sanctity of treaties as delusional and concluded by claiming:\n\nThe Foreign Office civil servant Sir Eyre Crowe also wrote a memorandum to the British cabinet claiming that \"a solemn league and covenant\" would just be \"a treaty, like other treaties\". \"What is there to ensure that it will not, like other treaties, be broken?\" Crowe went on to express scepticism of the planned \"pledge of common action\" against aggressors because he believed the actions of individual states would still be determined by national interests and the balance of power. He also criticised the proposal for League economic sanctions because it would be ineffectual and that \"It is all a question of real military preponderance\". Universal disarmament was a practical impossibility, Crowe warned.\n\nAs the situation in Europe escalated into war, the Assembly transferred enough power to the Secretary General on 30 September 1938 and 14 December 1939 to allow the League to continue to exist legally and carry on reduced operations. The headquarters of the League, the Palace of Nations, remained unoccupied for nearly six years until the Second World War ended.\n\nAt the 1943 Tehran Conference, the Allied powers agreed to create a new body to replace the League: the United Nations. Many League bodies, such as the International Labour Organization, continued to function and eventually became affiliated with the UN. The designers of the structures of the United Nations intended to make it more effective than the League.\n\nThe final meeting of the League of Nations took place on 18 April 1946 in Geneva. Delegates from 34 nations attended the assembly. This session concerned itself with liquidating the League: it transferred assets worth approximately $22,000,000 (U.S.) in 1946 (including the Palace of Nations and the League's archives) to the UN, returned reserve funds to the nations that had supplied them, and settled the debts of the League. Robert Cecil, addressing the final session, said:\nThe Assembly passed a resolution that \"With effect from the day following the close of the present session of the Assembly [i.e., April 19], the League of Nations shall cease to exist except for the sole purpose of the liquidation of its affairs as provided in the present resolution.\" A Board of Liquidation consisting of nine persons from different countries spent the next 15 months overseeing the transfer of the League's assets and functions to the United Nations or specialised bodies, finally dissolving itself on 31 July 1947.\n\nThe archive of the League of Nations was transferred to the United Nations Office at Geneva and is now an entry in the UNESCO Memory of the World Register.\n\nIn the past few decades, by research using the League Archives at Geneva, historians have reviewed the legacy of the League of Nations as the United Nations has faced similar troubles to those of the interwar period. Current consensus views that, even though the League failed to achieve its ultimate goal of world peace, it did manage to build new roads towards expanding the rule of law across the globe; strengthened the concept of collective security, giving a voice to smaller nations; helped to raise awareness to problems like epidemics, slavery, child labour, colonial tyranny, refugee crises and general working conditions through its numerous commissions and committees; and paved the way for new forms of statehood, as the mandate system put the colonial powers under international observation.\n\nProfessor David Kennedy portrays the League as a unique moment when international affairs were \"institutionalised\", as opposed to the pre–First World War methods of law and politics.\n\nThe principal Allies in the Second World War (the UK, the USSR, France, the U.S., and the Republic of China) became permanent members of the United Nations Security Council in 1946; in 1971, the People's Republic of China replaced the Republic of China (then only in control of Taiwan) as permanent member of the UN Security Council, and in 1991 the Russian Federation assumed the seat of the dissolved USSR.\n\nDecisions of the Security Council are binding on all members of the UN, and unanimous decisions are not required, unlike in the League Council. Permanent members of the Security Council can wield a veto to protect their vital interests.\n\nBULLET::::- Atlantic Charter\nBULLET::::- Latin America and the League of Nations\nBULLET::::- League against Imperialism\nBULLET::::- Ligue internationale de la paix\nBULLET::::- North Atlantic Treaty Organization, NATO\n\nBULLET::::- Brierly, J. L. and P. A. Reynolds. \"The League of Nations\" \"The New Cambridge Modern History, Vol. XII, The Shifting Balance of World Forces\" (2nd ed. 1968) Chapter IX, .\nBULLET::::- online free\n\nBULLET::::- Pedersen, Susan \"Back to the League of Nations.\" \"American Historical Review\" 112.4 (2007): 1091–1117. in JSTOR\nBULLET::::- Aufricht, Hans \"Guide to League of Nations Publications\" (1951).\nBULLET::::- Juntke, Fritz; Sveistrup, Hans: \"Das deutsche Schrifttum über den Völkerbund\" (1927).\n\nBULLET::::- Akami, T. \"Imperial polities, intercolonialism and shaping of global governing norms: public health expert networks in Asia and the League of Nations Health Organization, 1908–37,\" \"Journal of Global History\" 12#1 (2017): 4–25.\nBULLET::::- Barros, James. \"The Corfu incident of 1923: Mussolini and the League of Nations\" (Princeton UP, 2015).\nBULLET::::- Bendiner, Elmer. \"A Time of Angels: The Tragi-comic History of the League of Nations\" (1975).\nBULLET::::- Borowy, Iris. \"Coming to terms with world health: the League of Nations Health Organisation 1921–1946\" (Peter Lang, 2009).\nBULLET::::- Burkman, Thomas W. \"Japan and the League of Nations: Empire and world order, 1914–1938\" (U of Hawaii Press, 2008).\nBULLET::::- Clavin, Patricia. \"Securing the world economy: the reinvention of the League of Nations, 1920–1946\" (Oxford UP, 2013).\nBULLET::::- Cooper, John Milton. \"Breaking the Heart of the World: Woodrow Wilson and the Fight for the League of Nations\" (2001) 454pp excerpt and text search\nBULLET::::- Ditrych, Ondrej. \"“International terrorism” in the League of Nations and the contemporary terrorism dispositif.\" \"Critical Studies on Terrorism\" 6#2 (2013): 225–240.\nBULLET::::- Dykmann, Klaas. \"How International was the Secretariat of the League of Nations?.\" \"International History Review\" 37#4 (2015): 721–744.\nBULLET::::- Ginneken, Anique H.M. van. \"Historical Dictionary of the League of Nations\" (2006) excerpt and text search\nBULLET::::- Jenne, Erin K. \"Nested Security: Lessons in Conflict Management from the League of Nations and the European Union\" (Cornell UP, 2015).\nBULLET::::- Lloyd, Lorna. \"“(O) n the side of justice and peace”: Canada on the League of Nations Council 1927–1930.\" \"Diplomacy & Statecraft\" 24#2 (2013): 171–191.\nBULLET::::- McCarthy, Helen. \"The British People and the League of Nations: Democracy, citizenship and internationalism, c. 1918–45\" (Oxford UP, 2011). online review\nBULLET::::- Swart, William J. \"The League of Nations and the Irish Question.\" \"Sociological Quarterly\" 36.3 (1995): 465–481.\nBULLET::::- Yearwood, Peter J. \"Guarantee of Peace: The League of Nations in British Policy 1914–1925\" (Oxford UP, 2009).\n\nBULLET::::- Temperley, A.C. \"The Whispering Gallery Of Europe\" (1938), highly influential account of League esp disarmament conference of 1932-34. online\n\nBULLET::::- \"The League of Nations.\", Boston: Old Colony Trust Company, 1919. A collection of charters, speeches, etc. on the topic.\nBULLET::::- League of Nations Photo archive, Indiana.edu\nBULLET::::- League of Nations chronology\nBULLET::::- League of Nations timeline, worldatwar.net\nBULLET::::- History of the League of Nations, University of Oxford-led project\nBULLET::::- Wilson's Final Address in Support of the League of Nations Speech made 25 September 1919\nBULLET::::- History (1919–1946) from the United Nations Office at Geneva\nBULLET::::- League of Nations Archives from the United Nations Office at Geneva\nBULLET::::- Table of Assemblies Dates of each annual assembly, links to list of members of each country's delegation\nBULLET::::- LONSEA – League of Nations Search Engine, Cluster of Excellence \"Asia and Europe in a Global Context\", Universität Heidelberg\n"}
{"id": "17927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17927", "title": "Logic programming", "text": "Logic programming\n\nLogic programming is a type of programming paradigm which is largely based on formal logic. Any program written in a logic programming language is a set of sentences in logical form, expressing facts and rules about some problem domain. Major logic programming language families include Prolog, answer set programming (ASP) and Datalog. In all of these languages, rules are written in the form of \"clauses\":\n\nand are read declaratively as logical implications:\n\nH is called the \"head\" of the rule and B, ..., B is called the \"body\". Facts are rules that have no body, and are written in the simplified form:\n\nIn the simplest case in which H, B, ..., B are all atomic formulae, these clauses are called definite clauses or Horn clauses. However, there exist many extensions of this simple case, the most important one being the case in which conditions in the body of a clause can also be negations of atomic formulae. Logic programming languages that include this extension have the knowledge representation capabilities of a non-monotonic logic.\n\nIn ASP and Datalog, logic programs have only a declarative reading, and their execution is performed by means of a proof procedure or model generator whose behaviour is not meant to be under the control of the programmer. However, in the Prolog family of languages, logic programs also have a procedural interpretation as goal-reduction procedures:\n\nConsider, for example, the following clause:\n\nbased on an example used by Terry Winograd to illustrate the programming language Planner. As a clause in a logic program, it can be used both as a procedure to test whether X is fallible by testing whether X is human, and as a procedure to find an X that is fallible by finding an X that is human. Even facts have a procedural interpretation. For example, the clause:\n\ncan be used both as a procedure to show that socrates is human, and as a procedure to find an X that is human by \"assigning\" socrates to X.\n\nThe declarative reading of logic programs can be used by a programmer to verify their correctness. Moreover, logic-based program transformation techniques can also be used to transform logic programs into logically equivalent programs that are more efficient. In the Prolog family of logic programming languages, the programmer can also use the known problem-solving behaviour of the execution mechanism to improve the efficiency of programs.\n\nThe use of mathematical logic to represent and execute computer programs is also a feature of the lambda calculus, developed by Alonzo Church in the 1930s. However, the first proposal to use the clausal form of logic for representing computer programs was made by Cordell Green. This used an axiomatization of a subset of LISP, together with a representation of an input-output relation, to compute the relation by simulating the execution of the program in LISP. Foster and Elcock's Absys, on the other hand, employed a combination of equations and lambda calculus in an assertional programming language which places no constraints on the order in which operations are performed.\n\nLogic programming in its present form can be traced back to debates in the late 1960s and early 1970s about declarative versus procedural representations of knowledge in artificial intelligence. Advocates of declarative representations were notably working at Stanford, associated with John McCarthy, Bertram Raphael and Cordell Green, and in Edinburgh, with John Alan Robinson (an academic visitor from Syracuse University), Pat Hayes, and Robert Kowalski. Advocates of procedural representations were mainly centered at MIT, under the leadership of Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert.\n\nAlthough it was based on the proof methods of logic, Planner, developed at MIT, was the first language to emerge within this proceduralist paradigm. Planner featured pattern-directed invocation of procedural plans from goals (i.e. goal-reduction or backward chaining) and from assertions (i.e. forward chaining). The most influential implementation of Planner was the subset of Planner, called Micro-Planner, implemented by Gerry Sussman, Eugene Charniak and Terry Winograd. It was used to implement Winograd's natural-language understanding program SHRDLU, which was a landmark at that time. To cope with the very limited memory systems at the time, Planner used a backtracking control structure so that only one possible computation path had to be stored at a time. Planner gave rise to the programming languages QA-4, Popler, Conniver, QLISP, and the concurrent language Ether.\n\nHayes and Kowalski in Edinburgh tried to reconcile the logic-based declarative approach to knowledge representation with Planner's procedural approach. Hayes (1973) developed an equational language, Golux, in which different procedures could be obtained by altering the behavior of the theorem prover. Kowalski, on the other hand, developed SLD resolution, a variant of SL-resolution, and showed how it treats implications as goal-reduction procedures. Kowalski collaborated with Colmerauer in Marseille, who developed these ideas in the design and implementation of the programming language Prolog.\n\nThe Association for Logic Programming was founded to promote Logic Programming in 1986.\n\nProlog gave rise to the programming languages ALF, Fril, Gödel, Mercury, Oz, Ciao, Visual Prolog, XSB, and λProlog, as well as a variety of concurrent logic programming languages, constraint logic programming languages and Datalog.\n\nLogic programming can be viewed as controlled deduction. An important concept in logic programming is the separation of programs into their logic component and their control component. With pure logic programming languages, the logic component alone determines the solutions produced. The control component can be varied to provide alternative ways of executing a logic program. This notion is captured by the slogan\n\nwhere \"Logic\" represents a logic program and \"Control\" represents different theorem-proving strategies.\n\nIn the simplified, propositional case in which a logic program and a top-level atomic goal contain no variables, backward reasoning determines an and-or tree, which constitutes the search space for solving the goal. The top-level goal is the root of the tree. Given any node in the tree and any clause whose head matches the node, there exists a set of child nodes corresponding to the sub-goals in the body of the clause. These child nodes are grouped together by an \"and\". The alternative sets of children corresponding to alternative ways of solving the node are grouped together by an \"or\".\n\nAny search strategy can be used to search this space. Prolog uses a sequential, last-in-first-out, backtracking strategy, in which only one alternative and one sub-goal is considered at a time. Other search strategies, such as parallel search, intelligent backtracking, or best-first search to find an optimal solution, are also possible.\n\nIn the more general case, where sub-goals share variables, other strategies can be used, such as choosing the subgoal that is most highly instantiated or that is sufficiently instantiated so that only one procedure applies. Such strategies are used, for example, in concurrent logic programming.\n\nFor most practical applications, as well as for applications that require non-monotonic reasoning in artificial intelligence, Horn clause logic programs need to be extended to normal logic programs, with negative conditions. A \"clause\" in a normal logic program has the form:\n\nand is read declaratively as a logical implication:\n\nwhere H and all the A and B are atomic formulas. The negation in the negative literals not B is commonly referred to as \"negation as failure\", because in most implementations, a negative condition not B is shown to hold by showing that the positive condition B fails to hold. For example:\n\nGiven the goal of finding something that can fly:\n\nthere are two candidate solutions, which solve the first subgoal bird(X), namely X = john and X = mary. The second subgoal not abnormal(john) of the first candidate solution fails, because wounded(john) succeeds and therefore abnormal(john) succeeds. However, The second subgoal not abnormal(mary) of the second candidate solution succeeds, because wounded(mary) fails and therefore abnormal(mary) fails. Therefore, X = mary is the only solution of the goal.\n\nMicro-Planner had a construct, called \"thnot\", which when applied to an expression returns the value true if (and only if) the evaluation of the expression fails. An equivalent operator is normally built-in in modern Prolog's implementations. It is normally written as codice_1 or codice_2, where codice_3 is some goal (proposition) to be proved by the program. This operator differs from negation in first-order logic: a negation such as codice_4 fails when the variable codice_5 has been bound to the atom codice_6, but it succeeds in all other cases, including when codice_5 is unbound. This makes Prolog's reasoning non-monotonic: codice_8 always fails, while codice_9 can succeed, binding codice_5 to codice_6, depending on whether codice_5 was initially bound (note that standard Prolog executes goals in left-to-right order).\n\nThe logical status of negation as failure was unresolved until Keith Clark [1978] showed that, under certain natural conditions, it is a correct (and sometimes complete) implementation of classical negation with respect to the completion of the program. Completion amounts roughly to regarding the set of all the program clauses with the same predicate on the left hand side, say\n\nas a definition of the predicate\n\nwhere \"iff\" means \"if and only if\". Writing the completion also requires explicit use of the equality predicate and the inclusion of a set of appropriate axioms for equality. However, the implementation of negation by failure needs only the if-halves of the definitions without the axioms of equality.\n\nFor example, the completion of the program above is:\n\nThe notion of completion is closely related to McCarthy's circumscription semantics for default reasoning, and to the closed world assumption.\n\nAs an alternative to the completion semantics, negation as failure can also be interpreted epistemically, as in the stable model semantics of answer set programming. In this interpretation not(B) means literally that B is not known or not believed. The epistemic interpretation has the advantage that it can be combined very simply with classical negation, as in \"extended logic programming\", to formalise such phrases as \"the contrary can not be shown\", where \"contrary\" is classical negation and \"can not be shown\" is the epistemic interpretation of negation as failure.\n\nThe fact that Horn clauses can be given a procedural interpretation and, vice versa, that goal-reduction procedures can be understood as Horn clauses + backward reasoning means that logic programs combine declarative and procedural representations of knowledge. The inclusion of negation as failure means that logic programming is a kind of non-monotonic logic.\n\nDespite its simplicity compared with classical logic, this combination of Horn clauses and negation as failure has proved to be surprisingly expressive. For example, it provides a natural representation for the common-sense laws of cause and effect, as formalised by both the situation calculus and event calculus. It has also been shown to correspond quite naturally to the semi-formal language of legislation. In particular, Prakken and Sartor credit the representation of the British Nationality Act as a logic program with being \"hugely influential for the development of computational representations of legislation, showing how logic programming enables intuitively appealing representations that can be directly deployed to generate automatic inferences\".\n\nThe programming language Prolog was developed in 1972 by Alain Colmerauer. It emerged from a collaboration between Colmerauer in Marseille and Robert Kowalski in Edinburgh. Colmerauer was working on natural language understanding, using logic to represent semantics and using resolution for question-answering. During the summer of 1971, Colmerauer and Kowalski discovered that the clausal form of logic could be used to represent formal grammars and that resolution theorem provers could be used for parsing. They observed that some theorem provers, like hyper-resolution, behave as bottom-up parsers and others, like SL-resolution (1971), behave as top-down parsers.\n\nIt was in the following summer of 1972, that Kowalski, again working with Colmerauer, developed the procedural interpretation of implications. This dual declarative/procedural interpretation later became formalised in the Prolog notation\n\nwhich can be read (and used) both declaratively and procedurally. It also became clear that such clauses could be restricted to definite clauses or Horn clauses, where H, B, ..., B are all atomic predicate logic formulae, and that SL-resolution could be restricted (and generalised) to LUSH or SLD-resolution. Kowalski's procedural interpretation and LUSH were described in a 1973 memo, published in 1974.\n\nColmerauer, with Philippe Roussel, used this dual interpretation of clauses as the basis of Prolog, which was implemented in the summer and autumn of 1972. The first Prolog program, also written in 1972 and implemented in Marseille, was a French question-answering system. The use of Prolog as a practical programming language was given great momentum by the development of a compiler by David Warren in Edinburgh in 1977. Experiments demonstrated that Edinburgh Prolog could compete with the processing speed of other symbolic programming languages such as Lisp. Edinburgh Prolog became the \"de facto\" standard and strongly influenced the definition of ISO standard Prolog.\n\nAbductive logic programming is an extension of normal Logic Programming that allows some predicates, declared as abducible predicates, to be \"open\" or undefined. A clause in an abductive logic program has the form:\n\nwhere H is an atomic formula that is not abducible, all the B are literals whose predicates are not abducible, and the A are atomic formulas whose predicates are abducible. The abducible predicates can be constrained by integrity constraints, which can have the form:\n\nwhere the L are arbitrary literals (defined or abducible, and atomic or negated). For example:\n\nwhere the predicate normal is abducible.\n\nProblem solving is achieved by deriving hypotheses expressed in terms of the abducible predicates as solutions of problems to be solved. These problems can be either observations that need to be explained (as in classical abductive reasoning) or goals to be solved (as in normal logic programming). For example, the hypothesis normal(mary) explains the observation canfly(mary). Moreover, the same hypothesis entails the only solution X = mary of the goal of finding something that can fly:\n\nAbductive logic programming has been used for fault diagnosis, planning, natural language processing and machine learning. It has also been used to interpret Negation as Failure as a form of abductive reasoning.\n\nBecause mathematical logic has a long tradition of distinguishing between object language and metalanguage, logic programming also allows metalevel programming. The simplest metalogic program is the so-called \"vanilla\" meta-interpreter:\n\nwhere true represents an empty conjunction, and clause(A,B) means there is an object-level clause of the form A :- B.\n\nMetalogic programming allows object-level and metalevel representations to be combined, as in natural language. It can also be used to implement any logic that is specified by means of inference rules. Metalogic is used in logic programming to implement metaprograms, which manipulate other programs, databases, knowledge bases or axiomatic theories as data.\n\nConstraint logic programming combines Horn clause logic programming with constraint solving. It extends Horn clauses by allowing some predicates, declared as constraint predicates, to occur as literals in the body of clauses. A constraint logic program is a set of clauses of the form:\n\nwhere H and all the B are atomic formulas, and the C are constraints. Declaratively, such clauses are read as ordinary logical implications:\n\nHowever, whereas the predicates in the heads of clauses are defined by the constraint logic program, the predicates in the constraints are predefined by some domain-specific model-theoretic structure or theory.\n\nProcedurally, subgoals whose predicates are defined by the program are solved by goal-reduction, as in ordinary logic programming, but constraints are checked for satisfiability by a domain-specific constraint-solver, which implements the semantics of the constraint predicates. An initial problem is solved by reducing it to a satisfiable conjunction of constraints.\n\nThe following constraint logic program represents a toy temporal database of john's history as a teacher:\n\nHere ≤ and < are constraint predicates, with their usual intended semantics. The following goal clause queries the database to find out when john both taught logic and was a professor:\n\nThe solution is 2010 ≤ T, T ≤ 2012.\n\nConstraint logic programming has been used to solve problems in such fields as civil engineering, mechanical engineering, digital circuit verification, automated timetabling, air traffic control, and finance. It is closely related to abductive logic programming.\n\nConcurrent logic programming integrates concepts of logic programming with concurrent programming. Its development was given a big impetus in the 1980s by its choice for the systems programming language of the Japanese Fifth Generation Project (FGCS).\n\nA concurrent logic program is a set of guarded Horn clauses of the form:\n\nThe conjunction G, ... , G is called the guard of the clause, and  is the commitment operator. Declaratively, guarded Horn clauses are read as ordinary logical implications:\n\nHowever, procedurally, when there are several clauses whose heads H match a given goal, then all of the clauses are executed in parallel, checking whether their guards G, ... , G hold. If the guards of more than one clause hold, then a committed choice is made to one of the clauses, and execution proceeds with the subgoals B, ..., B of the chosen clause. These subgoals can also be executed in parallel. Thus concurrent logic programming implements a form of \"don't care nondeterminism\", rather than \"don't know nondeterminism\".\n\nFor example, the following concurrent logic program defines a predicate shuffle(Left, Right, Merge) , which can be used to shuffle two lists Left and Right, combining them into a single list Merge that preserves the ordering of the two lists Left and Right:\n\nHere, [] represents the empty list, and [Head  Tail] represents a list with first element Head followed by list Tail, as in Prolog. (Notice that the first occurrence of  in the second and third clauses is the list constructor, whereas the second occurrence of  is the commitment operator.) The program can be used, for example, to shuffle the lists [ace, queen, king] and [1, 4, 2] by invoking the goal clause:\n\nThe program will non-deterministically generate a single solution, for example Merge = [ace, queen, 1, king, 4, 2].\n\nArguably, concurrent logic programming is based on message passing and consequently is subject to the same indeterminacy as other concurrent message-passing systems, such as Actors (see Indeterminacy in concurrent computation). Carl Hewitt has argued that, concurrent logic programming is not based on logic in his sense that computational steps cannot be logically deduced. However, in concurrent logic programming, any result of a terminating computation is a logical consequence of the program, and any partial result of a partial computation is a logical consequence of the program and the residual goal (process network). Consequently, the indeterminacy of computations implies that not all logical consequences of the program can be deduced.\n\nConcurrent constraint logic programming combines concurrent logic programming and constraint logic programming, using constraints to control concurrency. A clause can contain a guard, which is a set of constraints that may block the applicability of the clause. When the guards of several clauses are satisfied, concurrent constraint logic programming makes a committed choice to the use of only one.\n\nInductive logic programming is concerned with generalizing positive and negative examples in the context of background knowledge: machine learning of logic programs. Recent work in this area, combining logic programming, learning and probability, has given rise to the new field of statistical relational learning and probabilistic inductive logic programming.\n\nSeveral researchers have extended logic programming with higher-order programming features derived from higher-order logic, such as predicate variables. Such languages include the Prolog extensions HiLog and λProlog.\n\nBasing logic programming within linear logic has resulted in the design of logic programming languages that are considerably more expressive than those based on classical logic. Horn clause programs can only represent state change by the change in arguments to predicates. In linear logic programming, one can use the ambient linear logic to support state change. Some early designs of logic programming languages based on linear logic include LO [Andreoli & Pareschi, 1991], Lolli, ACL, and Forum [Miller, 1996]. Forum provides a goal-directed interpretation of all of linear logic.\n\nF-logic extends logic programming with objects and the frame syntax.\n\nLogtalk extends the Prolog programming language with support for objects, protocols, and other OOP concepts. Highly portable, it supports most standard-compliant Prolog systems as backend compilers.\n\nTransaction logic is an extension of logic programming with a logical theory of state-modifying updates. It has both a model-theoretic semantics and a procedural one. An implementation of a subset of Transaction logic is available in the Flora-2 system. Other prototypes are also available.\n\nBULLET::::- Automated theorem proving\nBULLET::::- Boolean satisfiability problem\nBULLET::::- Constraint logic programming\nBULLET::::- Datalog\nBULLET::::- Fril\nBULLET::::- Functional programming\nBULLET::::- Fuzzy logic\nBULLET::::- Inductive logic programming\nBULLET::::- Logic in computer science (includes Formal methods)\nBULLET::::- Programming paradigm\nBULLET::::- R++\nBULLET::::- Reasoning system\nBULLET::::- Rule-based machine learning\nBULLET::::- Satisfiability\nBULLET::::- Linear logic\n\nBULLET::::- Robert Kowalski. The Early Years of Logic Programming\n\nBULLET::::- John McCarthy. Programs with common sense Symposium on Mechanization of Thought Processes. National Physical Laboratory. Teddington, England. 1958.\nBULLET::::- Ehud Shapiro (Editor). Concurrent Prolog MIT Press. 1987.\nBULLET::::- James Slagle. Experiments with a Deductive Question-Answering Program CACM. December 1965.\n\nBULLET::::- Carl Hewitt. Procedural Embedding of Knowledge In Planner IJCAI 1971.\nBULLET::::- Carl Hewitt. The repeated demise of logic programming and why it will be reincarnated\nBULLET::::- Evgeny Dantsin, Thomas , Georg Gottlob, Andrei Voronkov: Complexity and expressive power of logic programming. ACM Comput. Surv. 33(3): 374–425 (2001)\nBULLET::::- Ulf Nilsson and Jan Maluszynski, Logic, Programming and Prolog\n\nBULLET::::- \"Logic Programming\" Virtual Library entry\nBULLET::::- Bibliographies on Logic Programming\nBULLET::::- Association for Logic Programming (ALP)\nBULLET::::- Theory and Practice of Logic Programming journal\nBULLET::::- Logic programming in C++ with Castor\nBULLET::::- Logic programming in Oz\nBULLET::::- Prolog Development Center\nBULLET::::- Racklog: Logic Programming in Racket\n"}
{"id": "17928", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17928", "title": "Lake Tana", "text": "Lake Tana\n\nLake Tana (also spelled T'ana, , ', '; an older variant is Tsana, Ge'ez: ጻና \"Ṣānā\"; sometimes called \"Dembiya\" after the region to the north of the lake) is the source of the Blue Nile and is the largest lake in Ethiopia. Located in Amhara Region in the north-western Ethiopian Highlands, the lake is approximately long and wide, with a maximum depth of , and an elevation of . Lake Tana is fed by the Lesser Abay, Reb and Gumara rivers. Its surface area ranges from , depending on season and rainfall. The lake level has been regulated since the construction of the control weir where the lake discharges into the Blue Nile. This controls the flow to the Blue Nile Falls (Tis Abbai) and hydro-power station.\n\nIn 2015, the Lake Tana region was nominated as a UNESCO Biosphere Reserve recognizing its national and international natural and cultural importance.\n\nLake Tana was formed by volcanic activity, blocking the course of inflowing rivers in the early Pleistocene epoch, about 5 million years ago.\n\nThe lake was originally much larger than it is today. Seven large permanent rivers feed the lake as well as 40 small seasonal rivers. The main tributaries to the lake are Gilgel Abbay (Little Nile River), and the Megech, Gumara, and Rib rivers. \n\nLake Tana has a number of islands, whose number varies depending on the level of the lake. It has fallen about in the last 400 years. According to Manoel de Almeida (a Portuguese missionary in the early 17th century), there were 21 islands, seven to eight of which had monasteries on them \"formerly large, but now much diminished.\" When James Bruce visited the area in the later 18th century, he noted that the locals counted 45 inhabited islands, but stated he believed that \"the number may be about eleven.\" A 20th-century geographer named 37 islands, of which he believed 19 have or had monasteries or churches on them.\n\nRemains of ancient Ethiopian emperors and treasures of the Ethiopian Church are kept in the isolated island monasteries (including Kebran Gabriel, Ura Kidane Mehret, Narga Selassie, Daga Estifanos, Medhane Alem of Rema, Kota Maryam, and Mertola Maryam). On the island of Tana Qirqos is a rock shown to Paul B. Henze, on which he was told the Virgin Mary had rested on her journey back from Egypt; he was also told that Frumentius, who introduced Christianity to Ethiopia, is \"allegedly buried on Tana Cherqos.\" The body of Yekuno Amlak is interred in the monastery of St. Stephen on Daga Island. Emperors whose tombs are also on Daga include Dawit I, Zara Yaqob, Za Dengel, and Fasilides. Other important islands in Lake Tana include Dek, Mitraha, Gelila Zakarias, Halimun and Briguida.\n\nThe monasteries are believed to have been built over earlier religious sites. They include the fourteenth-century Debre Maryam, and the eighteenth-century Narga Selassie, Tana Qirqos (said to have housed the Ark of the Covenant before it was moved to Axum), and Ura Kidane Mehret, known for its regalia. A ferry service links Bahir Dar with Gorgora via Dek Island and various lakeshore villages.\n\nThere is also Zege Peninsula on the southwest portion of the lake. Zege is the site of the Azwa Maryam monastery.\n\nCompared to other tropical lakes, the waters in Lake Tana are relatively cold, typically ranging from about . The water has a pH that is neutral to somewhat alkaline and its transparency is quite low.\n\nBecause of the large seasonal variations in the inflow of its tributaries, rain and evaporation, the water levels of Lake Tana typically vary by in a year, peaking in September–October just after the main wet season. When the water levels are high, the plains around the lake often are flooded and other permanent swamps in the region become connected to the lake.\n\nSince there are no inflows that link the lake to other large waterways and the main outflow, the Blue Nile, is obstructed by the Blue Nile Falls, the lake supports a highly distinctive aquatic fauna, which generally is related to species from the Nile Basin. The lake's nutrient levels are low.\n\nThere are 27 fish species in Lake Tana and 20 of these are endemic. This includes one of only two known cyprinid species flocks (the other, from Lake Lanao in the Philippines, has been decimated by introduced species). It consists of 15 relatively large, up to long, \"Labeobarbus\" barbs that formerly were included in \"Barbus\" instead. Among these, \"L. acutirostris\", \"L. longissimus\", \"L. megastoma\" and \"L. truttiformis\" are strictly piscivorous, and \"L. dainellii\", \"L. gorguari\", \"L. macrophtalmus\" and \"L. platydorsus\" are mostly piscivorous. Their most important prey are the small \"Enteromius\" and \"Garra\" species. The remaining \"Labeobarbus\" in Lake Tana have other specialized feeding habits: \"L. beso\" (non-endemic and not closely related to the others) feeds on algae, \"L. surkis\" mostly on macrophytes, \"L. gorgorensis\" on macrophytes and molluscs, \"L. brevicephalus\" on zooplankton (however, juveniles of all members of the species flock feed on zooplankton), \"L. osseensis\" on macrophytes and adults insects, and \"L. crassibarbis\", \"L. intermedius\" (non-endemic but closely related to the others), \"L. nedgia\" and \"L. tsanensis\" on benthic invertebrates like chironomid larvae. Among the endemic \"Labeobarbus\", eight species spawn in the lake's wetlands and the remaining move seasonally into its tributaries where they spawn.\n\nIn addition to the \"Labeobarbus\" species flock, the endemic species are \"Enteromius pleurogramma\", \"E. tanapelagius\", \"Garra regressus\", \"G. regressus\" and \"Afronemacheilus abyssinicus\" (one of only two African stone loaches). The remaining non-endemic species are Nile tilapia (widespread in Africa, but with the endemic subspecies \"tana\" in the lake), \"E. humilis\", \"G. dembecha\", \"G. dembeensis\" and the large African sharptooth catfish.\n\nLake Tana supports a large fishing industry, mainly based on the \"Labeobarbus\" barbs, Nile tilapia and sharptooth catfish. According to the Ethiopian Department of Fisheries and Aquaculture, 1,454 tons of fish were landed in 2011 at Bahir Dar, which the department estimated was 15% of its sustainable amount. Nevertheless, in a review that compared catches in 2001 to those ten years earlier, it was found that typical sizes of both the tilapia and the catfish had significantly decreased, and populations of the \"Labeobarbus\" barbs that breed in the tributaries had significantly declined. Among the endemic fish, most are considered threatened (endangered or vulnerable) or data deficient (available data insufficient for evaluating a status) by the IUCN. In the early 2000s, the local government for the first time introduced a fisheries legislation and it is hoped this will have a positive effect on the fish populations.\n\nOther serious threats are habitat destruction and pollution. Bahir Dar has become a large city and it is rapidly growing; its wastewater is generally released directly into the lake. The vegetation in the lake's wetlands, which are an important nursery for the \"Labeobarbus\" and other fish, are being cleared at a fast pace. A potentially serious threat to the unique ecosystem would be an introduction of a large and efficient predatory species like the Nile perch, which has been implicated in numerous extinctions in Lake Victoria. The piscivorous \"Labeobarbus\" of Lake Tana are relatively inefficient predators that only can take fish up to about 15% of the length of the predator itself.\n\nAmong other fauna, the lake supports relatively few invertebrates: There are fifteen species of molluscs, including one endemic, and also an endemic freshwater sponge.\n\nAbout 230 species of birds, including more than 80 wetland birds such as the great white pelican, African darter, hamerkop, storks, African spoonbill, ibis, ducks, kingfishers and African fish eagle, are known from Lake Tana. It is an important resting and feeding ground for many Palearctic migrant waterbirds.\n\nThere are no crocodiles, but the African softshell turtle has been recorded near the Blue Nile outflow from the lake. Hippos are present, mostly near the Blue Nile outflow.\n\nBULLET::::- Homepage of Lake Tana Biosphere Reserve\nBULLET::::- Lake Tana project webpage of The Nature and Biodiversity Conservation Union (NABU e.V.)\nBULLET::::- Lake Tana project at Aberystwyth University\nBULLET::::- Photographs of the lake\nBULLET::::- Unesco plan for Lake T'ana\nBULLET::::- LakeNet Profile\nBULLET::::- Pictures from Lake Tana and the Monasteries\n"}
{"id": "17931", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17931", "title": "Lola Graham", "text": "Lola Graham\n\nLola Glenn Graham (23 September 19182 January 1992). She first came to public attention after winning a musical competition at age six by playing the piano. She attended Shelford Church of England Girls' Grammar School and passed her music examinations in December 1933. In October 1936 her piano teacher, Sheila MacFie, organised a recital for Graham and fellow student, Eda Ashton, at the British Music Society's rooms, Melbourne. In April 1942 Graham and Ashton were pianists for a radio broadcast on 3LO on the Australian Broadcasting Commission's network. In May of the following year her chamber music piano work was described by \"The Argus\" reporter, \"Graham showed virtuosity in her playing of Albanesi's Sonata in C Major.\"\n\nShe worked in radio for most of her career. In October 1946 she performed a duo piano recital with Mamie Reid on national radio. She worked in live musical theatre both as a band member and accompanist. Graham married Fred Menhennitt on 23 February 1957 and the couple had two sons. She was a backing musician for Barry Humphries, and in 1962, she provided piano on his album, \"A Nice Night's Entertainment\". She died, aged 73, after being diagnosed with cancer.\n"}
{"id": "17932", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17932", "title": "Liquid-crystal display", "text": "Liquid-crystal display\n\nA liquid-crystal display (LCD) is a flat-panel display or other electronically modulated optical device that uses the light-modulating properties of liquid crystals combined with polarizers. Liquid crystals do not emit light directly, instead using a backlight or reflector to produce images in color or monochrome. LCDs are available to display arbitrary images (as in a general-purpose computer display) or fixed images with low information content, which can be displayed or hidden, such as preset words, digits, and seven-segment displays, as in a digital clock. They use the same basic technology, except that arbitrary images are made from a matrix of small pixels, while other displays have larger elements. LCDs can either be normally on (positive) or off (negative), depending on the polarizer arrangement. For example, a character positive LCD with a backlight will have black lettering on a background that is the color of the backlight, and a character negative LCD will have a black background with the letters being of the same color as the backlight. Optical filters are added to white on blue LCDs to give them their characteristic appearance.\n\nLCDs are used in a wide range of applications, including LCD televisions, computer monitors, instrument panels, aircraft cockpit displays, and indoor and outdoor signage. Small LCD screens are common in portable consumer devices such as digital cameras, watches, calculators, and mobile telephones, including smartphones. LCD screens are also used on consumer electronics products such as DVD players, video game devices and clocks. LCD screens have replaced heavy, bulky cathode ray tube (CRT) displays in nearly all applications. LCD screens are available in a wider range of screen sizes than CRT and plasma displays, with LCD screens available in sizes ranging from tiny digital watches to very large television receivers. LCDs are slowly being replaced by OLEDs, which can be easily made into different shapes, and have a lower response time, wider color gamut, virtually infinite color contrast and viewing angles, lower weight for a given display size and a slimmer profile (because OLEDs use a single glass or plastic panel whereas LCDs use two glass panels; the thickness of the panels increases with size but the increase is more noticeable on LCDs) and potentially lower power consumption (as the display is only \"on\" where needed and there is no backlight). OLEDs, however, are more expensive for a given display size due to the very expensive electroluminescent materials or phosphors that they use. Also due to the use of phosphors, OLEDs suffer from screen burn-in and there is currently no way to recycle OLED displays, whereas LCD panels can be recycled, although the technology required to recycle LCDs is not yet widespread. Attempts to increase the lifespan of LCDs are quantum dot displays, which offer similar performance as an OLED display, but the Quantum dot sheet that gives these displays their characteristics can not yet be recycled.\n\nSince LCD screens do not use phosphors, they rarely suffer image burn-in when a static image is displayed on a screen for a long time, e.g., the table frame for an airline flight schedule on an indoor sign. LCDs are, however, susceptible to image persistence. The LCD screen is more energy-efficient and can be disposed of more safely than a CRT can. Its low electrical power consumption enables it to be used in battery-powered electronic equipment more efficiently than CRTs can be. By 2008, annual sales of televisions with LCD screens exceeded sales of CRT units worldwide, and the CRT became obsolete for most purposes.\n\nEach pixel of an LCD typically consists of a layer of molecules aligned between two transparent electrodes, and two polarizing filters (parallel and perpendicular), the axes of transmission of which are (in most of the cases) perpendicular to each other. Without the liquid crystal between the polarizing filters, light passing through the first filter would be blocked by the second (crossed) polarizer. Before an electric field is applied, the orientation of the liquid-crystal molecules is determined by the alignment at the surfaces of electrodes. In a twisted nematic (TN) device, the surface alignment directions at the two electrodes are perpendicular to each other, and so the molecules arrange themselves in a helical structure, or twist. This induces the rotation of the polarization of the incident light, and the device appears gray. If the applied voltage is large enough, the liquid crystal molecules in the center of the layer are almost completely untwisted and the polarization of the incident light is not rotated as it passes through the liquid crystal layer. This light will then be mainly polarized perpendicular to the second filter, and thus be blocked and the pixel will appear black. By controlling the voltage applied across the liquid crystal layer in each pixel, light can be allowed to pass through in varying amounts thus constituting different levels of gray. Color LCD systems use the same technique, with color filters used to generate red, green, and blue pixels.\nThe optical effect of a TN device in the voltage-on state is far less dependent on variations in the device thickness than that in the voltage-off state. Because of this, TN displays with low information content and no backlighting are usually operated between crossed polarizers such that they appear bright with no voltage (the eye is much more sensitive to variations in the dark state than the bright state). As most of 2010-era LCDs are used in television sets, monitors and smartphones, they have high-resolution matrix arrays of pixels to display arbitrary images using backlighting with a dark background. When no image is displayed, different arrangements are used. For this purpose, TN LCDs are operated between parallel polarizers, whereas IPS LCDs feature crossed polarizers. In many applications IPS LCDs have replaced TN LCDs, in particular in smartphones such as iPhones. Both the liquid crystal material and the alignment layer material contain ionic compounds. If an electric field of one particular polarity is applied for a long period of time, this ionic material is attracted to the surfaces and degrades the device performance. This is avoided either by applying an alternating current or by reversing the polarity of the electric field as the device is addressed (the response of the liquid crystal layer is identical, regardless of the polarity of the applied field).\nDisplays for a small number of individual digits or fixed symbols (as in digital watches and pocket calculators) can be implemented with independent electrodes for each segment. In contrast, full alphanumeric or variable graphics displays are usually implemented with pixels arranged as a matrix consisting of electrically connected rows on one side of the LC layer and columns on the other side, which makes it possible to address each pixel at the intersections. The general method of matrix addressing consists of sequentially addressing one side of the matrix, for example by selecting the rows one-by-one and applying the picture information on the other side at the columns row-by-row. \"For details on the various matrix addressing schemes see\" passive-matrix and active-matrix addressed LCDs.\n\nLCDs, along with OLED displays, are manufactured in large sheets of glass whose size has increased over time. Several displays are manufactured at the same time, and then cut from the sheet of glass, also known as the mother glass. The increase in size allows more displays or larger displays to be made, just like with increasing wafer sizes in semiconductor manufacturing. The glass sizes are as follows:\n\n! Generation  Length [mm]  Height [mm]  Year of introduction  References\n\nUntil Gen 8, manufacturers would not agree on a single mother glass size and as a result, different manufacturers would use slightly different glass sizes for the same generation. The thickness of the mother glass also increases with each generation, so larger mother glass sizes are better suited for larger displays. An LCD Module (LCM) is a ready-to-use LCD. Thus, a factory that makes LCD Modules does not necessarily make LCDs, it may only assemble them into the modules.\n\nThe origins and the complex history of liquid-crystal displays from the perspective of an insider during the early days were described by Joseph A. Castellano in \"Liquid Gold: The Story of Liquid Crystal Displays and the Creation of an Industry\".\nAnother report on the origins and history of LCD from a different perspective until 1991 has been published by Hiroshi Kawamoto, available at the IEEE History Center.\nA description of Swiss contributions to LCD developments, written by Peter J. Wild, can be found at the \"Engineering and Technology History Wiki\".\n\nIn 1888, Friedrich Reinitzer (1858–1927) discovered the liquid crystalline nature of cholesterol extracted from carrots (that is, two melting points and generation of colors) and published his findings at a meeting of the Vienna Chemical Society on May 3, 1888 (F. Reinitzer: \"Beiträge zur Kenntniss des Cholesterins, Monatshefte für Chemie (Wien) 9, 421–441 (1888)\"). In 1904, Otto Lehmann published his work \"\"Flüssige Kristalle\"\" (Liquid Crystals). In 1911, Charles Mauguin first experimented with liquid crystals confined between plates in thin layers.\n\nIn 1922, Georges Friedel described the structure and properties of liquid crystals and classified them in 3 types (nematics, smectics and cholesterics). In 1927, Vsevolod Frederiks devised the electrically switched light valve, called the Fréedericksz transition, the essential effect of all LCD technology. In 1936, the Marconi Wireless Telegraph company patented the first practical application of the technology, \"\"The Liquid Crystal Light Valve\"\". In 1962, the first major English language publication on the subject \"\"Molecular Structure and Properties of Liquid Crystals\"\", by Dr. George W. Gray. In 1962, Richard Williams of RCA found that liquid crystals had some interesting electro-optic characteristics and he realized an electro-optical effect by generating stripe-patterns in a thin layer of liquid crystal material by the application of a voltage. This effect is based on an electro-hydrodynamic instability forming what are now called \"Williams domains\" inside the liquid crystal.\n\nThe MOSFET (metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor) was invented by Mohamed M. Atalla and Dawon Kahng at Bell Labs in 1959, and presented in 1960. Building on their work with MOSFETs, Paul K. Weimer at RCA developed the thin-film transistor (TFT) in 1962. It was a type of MOSFET distinct from the standard bulk MOSFET.\n\nIn the late 1960s, pioneering work on liquid crystals was undertaken by the UK's Royal Radar Establishment at Malvern, England. The team at RRE supported ongoing work by George William Gray and his team at the University of Hull who ultimately discovered the cyanobiphenyl liquid crystals, which had correct stability and temperature properties for application in LCDs.\n\nIn 1964, George H. Heilmeier, then working at the RCA laboratories on the effect discovered by Williams achieved the switching of colors by field-induced realignment of dichroic dyes in a homeotropically oriented liquid crystal. Practical problems with this new electro-optical effect made Heilmeier continue to work on scattering effects in liquid crystals and finally the achievement of the first operational liquid-crystal display based on what he called the \"dynamic scattering mode\" (DSM). Application of a voltage to a DSM display switches the initially clear transparent liquid crystal layer into a milky turbid state. DSM displays could be operated in transmissive and in reflective mode but they required a considerable current to flow for their operation. George H. Heilmeier was inducted in the National Inventors Hall of Fame and credited with the invention of LCDs. Heilmeier's work is an IEEE Milestone.\n\nThe idea of a TFT-based liquid-crystal display (LCD) was conceived by Bernard Lechner of RCA Laboratories in 1968. Lechner, F.J. Marlowe, E.O. Nester and J. Tults demonstrated the concept in 1968 with an 18x2 matrix dynamic scattering mode (DSM) LCD that used standard discrete MOSFETs.\n\nOn December 4, 1970, the twisted nematic field effect (TN) in liquid crystals was filed for patent by Hoffmann-LaRoche in Switzerland, (Swiss patent No. 532 261) with Wolfgang Helfrich and Martin Schadt (then working for the Central Research Laboratories) listed as inventors. Hoffmann-La Roche then licensed the invention to the Swiss manufacturer Brown, Boveri & Cie which produced TN displays for wristwatches and other applications during the 1970s for the international markets including the Japanese electronics industry, which soon produced the first digital quartz wristwatches with TN-LCDs and numerous other products. James Fergason, while working with Sardari Arora and Alfred Saupe at Kent State University Liquid Crystal Institute, filed an identical patent in the United States on April 22, 1971. In 1971, the company of Fergason, ILIXCO (now LXD Incorporated), produced LCDs based on the TN-effect, which soon superseded the poor-quality DSM types due to improvements of lower operating voltages and lower power consumption. Tetsuro Hama and Izuhiko Nishimura of Seiko received a US patent dated February 1971, for an electronic wristwatch incorporating a TN-LCD. In 1972, the first wristwatch with TN-LCD was launched on the market: The Gruen Teletime which was a four digit display watch.\n\nIn 1972, the concept of the active-matrix thin-film transistor (TFT) liquid-crystal display panel was prototyped in the United States by T. Peter Brody's team at Westinghouse, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. In 1973, Brody, J. A. Asars and G. D. Dixon at Westinghouse Research Laboratories demonstrated the first thin-film-transistor liquid-crystal display (TFT LCD). , all modern high-resolution and high-quality electronic visual display devices use TFT-based active matrix displays. Brody and Fang-Chen Luo demonstrated the first flat active-matrix liquid-crystal display (AM LCD) in 1974, and then Brody coined the term \"active matrix\" in 1975.\n\nIn 1972 North American Rockwell Microelectronics Corp introduced the use of DSM LCD displays for calculators for marketing by Lloyds Electronics Inc, though these required an internal light source for illumination. Sharp Corporation followed with DSM LCD displays for pocket-sized calculators in 1973 and then mass-produced TN LCD displays for watches in 1975. Other Japanese companies soon took a leading position in the wristwatch market, like Seiko and its first 6-digit TN-LCD quartz wristwatch. A particular type of color LCD was invented by Japan's Sharp Corporation in the 1970s, receiving patents for their inventions, such as a patent by Shinji Kato and Takaaki Miyazaki in May 1975, and then improved by Fumiaki Funada and Masataka Matsuura in December 1975. TFT LCDs similar to the prototypes developed by a Westinghouse team in 1972 were patented in 1976 by a team at Sharp consisting of Fumiaki Funada, Masataka Matsuura, and Tomio Wada, then improved in 1977 by a Sharp team consisting of Kohei Kishi, Hirosaku Nonomura, Keiichiro Shimizu, and Tomio Wada. However, these TFT-LCDs were not yet ready for use in products, as problems with the materials for the TFTs were not yet solved.\n\nIn 1983, researchers at Brown, Boveri & Cie (BBC) Research Center, Switzerland, invented the \"super-twisted nematic (STN) structure\" for passive matrix-addressed LCDs. H. Amstutz et al. were listed as inventors in the corresponding patent applications filed in Switzerland on July 7, 1983, and October 28, 1983. Patents were granted in Switzerland CH 665491, Europe EP 0131216, and many more countries. In 1980, Brown Boveri started a 50/50 joint venture with the Dutch Philips company, called Videlec. Philips had the required know-how to design and build integrated circuits for the control of large LCD panels. In addition, Philips had better access to markets for electronic components and intended to use LCDs in new product generations of hi-fi, video equipment and telephones. In 1984, Philips researchers Theodorus Welzen and Adrianus de Vaan invented a video speed-drive scheme that solved the slow response time of STN-LCDs, enabling high-resolution, high-quality, and smooth-moving video images on STN-LCDs. In 1985, Philips inventors Theodorus Welzen and Adrianus de Vaan solved the problem of driving high-resolution STN-LCDs using low-voltage (CMOS-based) drive electronics, allowing the application of high-quality (high resolution and video speed) LCD panels in battery-operated portable products like notebook computers and mobile phones. In 1985, Philips acquired 100% of the Videlec AG company based in Switzerland. Afterwards, Philips moved the Videlec production lines to the Netherlands. Years later, Philips successfully produced and marketed complete modules (consisting of the LCD screen, microphone, speakers etc.) in high-volume production for the booming mobile phone industry.\n\nThe first color LCD televisions were developed as handheld televisions in Japan. In 1980, Hattori Seiko's R&D group began development on color LCD pocket televisions. In 1982, Seiko Epson released the first LCD television, the Epson TV Watch, a wristwatch equipped with a small active-matrix LCD television. Sharp Corporation introduced dot matrix TN-LCD in 1983. In 1984, Epson released the ET-10, the first full-color, pocket LCD television. The same year, Citizen Watch, introduced the Citizen Pocket TV, a 2.7-inch color LCD TV, with the first commercial TFT LCD display. In 1988, Sharp demonstrated a 14-inch, active-matrix, full-color, full-motion TFT-LCD. This led to Japan launching an LCD industry, which developed large-size LCDs, including TFT computer monitors and LCD televisions. Epson developed the 3LCD projection technology in the 1980s, and licensed it for use in projectors in 1988. Epson's VPJ-700, released in January 1989, was the world's first compact, full-color LCD projector.\n\nIn 1990, under different titles, inventors conceived electro optical effects as alternatives to \"twisted nematic field effect LCDs\" (TN- and STN- LCDs). One approach was to use interdigital electrodes on one glass substrate only to produce an electric field essentially parallel to the glass substrates. To take full advantage of the properties of this \"In Plane Switching (IPS) technology\" further work was needed. After thorough analysis, details of advantageous embodiments are filed in Germany by Guenter Baur \"et al.\" and patented in various countries. The Fraunhofer Institute in Freiburg, where the inventors worked, assigns these patents to Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, a supplier of LC substances. In 1992, shortly thereafter, engineers at Hitachi work out various practical details of the IPS technology to interconnect the thin-film transistor array as a matrix and to avoid undesirable stray fields in between pixels. Hitachi also improved the viewing angle dependence further by optimizing the shape of the electrodes (\"Super IPS\"). NEC and Hitachi become early manufacturers of active-matrix addressed LCDs based on the IPS technology. This is a milestone for implementing large-screen LCDs having acceptable visual performance for flat-panel computer monitors and television screens. In 1996, Samsung developed the optical patterning technique that enables multi-domain LCD. Multi-domain and In Plane Switching subsequently remain the dominant LCD designs through 2006. In the late 1990s, the LCD industry began shifting away from Japan, towards South Korea and Taiwan.\n\nIn 2007 the image quality of LCD televisions surpassed the image quality of cathode-ray-tube-based (CRT) TVs. In the fourth quarter of 2007, LCD televisions surpassed CRT TVs in worldwide sales for the first time. LCD TVs were projected to account 50% of the 200 million TVs to be shipped globally in 2006, according to Displaybank. In October 2011, Toshiba announced 2560 × 1600 pixels on a 6.1-inch (155 mm) LCD panel, suitable for use in a tablet computer, especially for Chinese character display.\n\nSince LCDs produce no light of their own, they require external light to produce a visible image. In a transmissive type of LCD, the light source is provided at the back of the glass stack and is called a backlight. Active-matrix LCDs are almost always backlit. Passive LCDs may be backlit but many use a reflector at the back of the glass stack to utilize ambient light. Transflective LCDs combine the features of a backlit transmissive display and a reflective display.\n\nThe common implementations of LCD backlight technology are:\nBULLET::::- CCFL: The LCD panel is lit either by two cold cathode fluorescent lamps placed at opposite edges of the display or an array of parallel CCFLs behind larger displays. A diffuser then spreads the light out evenly across the whole display. For many years, this technology had been used almost exclusively. Unlike white LEDs, most CCFLs have an even-white spectral output resulting in better color gamut for the display. However, CCFLs are less energy efficient than LEDs and require a somewhat costly inverter to convert whatever DC voltage the device uses (usually 5 or 12 V) to ≈1000 V needed to light a CCFL. The thickness of the inverter transformers also limits how thin the display can be made.\nBULLET::::- EL-WLED: The LCD panel is lit by a row of white LEDs placed at one or more edges of the screen. A light diffuser is then used to spread the light evenly across the whole display. As of 2012, this design is the most popular one in desktop computer monitors. It allows for the thinnest displays. Some LCD monitors using this technology have a feature called dynamic contrast, invented by Philips researchers Douglas Stanton, Martinus Stroomer and Adrianus de Vaan Using PWM (pulse-width modulation, a technology where the intensity of the LEDs are kept constant, but the brightness adjustment is achieved by varying a time interval of flashing these constant light intensity light sources), the backlight is dimmed to the brightest color that appears on the screen while simultaneously boosting the LCD contrast to the maximum achievable levels, allowing the 1000:1 contrast ratio of the LCD panel to be scaled to different light intensities, resulting in the \"30000:1\" contrast ratios seen in the advertising on some of these monitors. Since computer screen images usually have full white somewhere in the image, the backlight will usually be at full intensity, making this \"feature\" mostly a marketing gimmick for computer monitors, however for TV screens it drastically increases the perceived contrast ratio and dynamic range, improves the viewing angle dependency and drastically reducing the power consumption of conventional LCD televisions.\nBULLET::::- WLED array: The LCD panel is lit by a full array of white LEDs placed behind a diffuser behind the panel. LCDs that use this implementation will usually have the ability to dim the LEDs in the dark areas of the image being displayed, effectively increasing the contrast ratio of the display. As of 2012, this design gets most of its use from upscale, larger-screen LCD televisions.\nBULLET::::- RGB-LED array: Similar to the WLED array, except the panel is lit by a full array of RGB LEDs. While displays lit with white LEDs usually have a poorer color gamut than CCFL lit displays, panels lit with RGB LEDs have very wide color gamuts. This implementation is most popular on professional graphics editing LCDs. As of 2012, LCDs in this category usually cost more than $1000. As of 2016 the cost of this category has drastically reduced and such LCD televisions obtained same price levels as the former 28\" (71 cm) CRT based categories.\nBULLET::::- Monochrome LEDs: These are used for the small passive monochrome LCDs typically used in clocks, watches and small appliances.\n\nToday, most LCD screens are being designed with an LED backlight instead of the traditional CCFL backlight, while that backlight is dynamically controlled with the video information (dynamic backlight control). The combination with the dynamic backlight control, invented by Philips researchers Douglas Stanton, Martinus Stroomer and Adrianus de Vaan, simultaneously increases the dynamic range of the display system (also marketed as \"HDR, high dynamic range television\" or called \"Full-area Local Area Dimming (FLAD)\"\n\nBULLET::::- Mini-LED: Backlighting with Mini-LEDs can support over a thousand of Full-area Local Area Dimming (FLAD) zones. This allows deeper blacks and higher contract ratio. (Not to be confused with MicroLED.)\n\nThe LCD backlight systems are made highly efficient by applying optical films such as prismatic structure to gain the light into the desired viewer directions and reflective polarizing films that recycle the polarized light that was formerly absorbed by the first polarizer of the LCD (invented by Philips researchers Adrianus de Vaan and Paulus Schaareman), generally achieved using so called DBEF films manufactured and supplied by 3M. These polarizers consist of a large stack of uniaxial oriented birefringent films that reflect the former absorbed polarization mode of the light. Such reflective polarizers using uniaxial oriented polymerized liquid crystals (birefringent polymers or birefringent glue) are invented in 1989 by Philips researchers Dirk Broer, Adrianus de Vaan and Joerg Brambring. The combination of such reflective polarizers, and LED dynamic backlight control make today's LCD televisions far more efficient than the CRT-based sets, leading to a worldwide energy saving of 600 TWh (2017), equal to 10% of the electricity consumption of all households worldwide or equal to 2 times the energy production of all solar cells in the world.\n\nDue to the LCD layer that generates the desired high resolution images at flashing video speeds using very low power electronics in combination with LED based backlight technologies, LCD technology has become the dominant display technology for products such as televisions, desktop monitors, notebooks, tablets, smartphones and mobile phones. Although competing OLED technology is pushed to the market, such OLED displays do not feature the HDR capabilities like LCDs in combination with 2D LED backlight technologies have, reason why the annual market of such LCD-based products is still growing faster (in volume) than OLED-based products while the efficiency of LCDs (and products like portable computers, mobile phones and televisions) may even be further improved by preventing the light to be absorbed in the colour filters of the LCD. Although until today such reflective colour filter solutions are not yet implemented by the LCD industry and did not made it further than laboratory prototypes, such reflective colour filter solutions still likely will be implemented by the LCD industry to increase the performance gap with OLED technologies).\n\nA standard television receiver screen, an LCD panel today in 2017, has over six million pixels, and they are all individually powered by a wire network embedded in the screen. The fine wires, or pathways, form a grid with vertical wires across the whole screen on one side of the screen and horizontal wires across the whole screen on the other side of the screen. To this grid each pixel has a positive connection on one side and a negative connection on the other side. So the total amount of wires needed for a 1080p display is 3 x 1920 going vertically and 1080 going horizontally for a total of 6840 wires horizontally and vertically. That's three for red, green and blue and 1920 columns of pixels for each color for a total of 5760 wires going vertically and 1080 rows of wires going horizontally. For a panel that is 28.8 inches (73 centimeters) wide, that means a wire density of 200 wires per inch along the horizontal edge. The LCD panel is powered by LCD drivers that are carefully matched up with the edge of the LCD panel at the factory level. These same principles apply also for smart phone screens that are so much smaller than TV screens. LCD panels typically use thinly-coated metallic conductive pathways on a glass substrate to form the cell circuitry to operate the panel. It is usually not possible to use soldering techniques to directly connect the panel to a separate copper-etched circuit board. Instead, interfacing is accomplished using anisotropic conductive film or, for lower densities, elastomeric connectors.\n\nMonochrome and later color passive-matrix LCDs were standard in most early laptops (although a few used plasma displays) and the original Nintendo Game Boy until the mid-1990s, when color active-matrix became standard on all laptops. The commercially unsuccessful Macintosh Portable (released in 1989) was one of the first to use an active-matrix display (though still monochrome). Passive-matrix LCDs are still used in the 2010s for applications less demanding than laptop computers and TVs, such as inexpensive calculators. In particular, these are used on portable devices where less information content needs to be displayed, lowest power consumption (no backlight) and low cost are desired or readability in direct sunlight is needed.\n\nDisplays having a passive-matrix structure are employing \"super-twisted nematic\" STN (invented by Brown Boveri Research Center, Baden, Switzerland, in 1983; scientific details were published) or double-layer STN (DSTN) technology (the latter of which addresses a color-shifting problem with the former), and color-STN (CSTN) in which color is added by using an internal filter. STN LCDs have been optimized for passive-matrix addressing. They exhibit a sharper threshold of the contrast-vs-voltage characteristic than the original TN LCDs. This is important, because pixels are subjected to partial voltages even while not selected. Crosstalk between activated and non-activated pixels has to be handled properly by keeping the RMS voltage of non-activated pixels below the threshold voltage, while activated pixels are subjected to voltages above threshold (the voltages according to the \"Alt & Pleshko\" drive scheme) Driving such STN displays according to the Alt & Pleshko drive scheme require very high line addressing voltages. Welzen and de Vaan invented an alternative drive scheme (a non \"Alt & Pleshko\" drive scheme) requiring much lower voltages, such that the STN display could be driven using low voltage CMOS technologies. STN LCDs have to be continuously refreshed by alternating pulsed voltages of one polarity during one frame and pulses of opposite polarity during the next frame. Individual pixels are addressed by the corresponding row and column circuits. This type of display is called \"passive-matrix addressed\", because the pixel must retain its state between refreshes without the benefit of a steady electrical charge. As the number of pixels (and, correspondingly, columns and rows) increases, this type of display becomes less feasible. Slow response times and poor contrast are typical of passive-matrix addressed LCDs with too many pixels and driven according to the \"Alt & Pleshko\" drive scheme. Welzen and de Vaan also invented a non RMS drive scheme enabling to drive STN displays with video rates and enabling to show smooth moving video images on an STN display. Citizen, amongst others, licensed these patents and successfully introduced several STN based LCD pocket televisions on the market\n\nBistable LCDs do not require continuous refreshing. Rewriting is only required for picture information changes. In 1984 HA van Sprang and AJSM de Vaan invented an STN type display that could be operated in a bistable mode, enabling extreme high resolution images up to 4000 lines or more using only low voltages. Since a pixel however may be either in an on-state or in an off state at the moment new information needs to be written to that particular pixel, the addressing method of these bistable displays is rather complex, reason why these displays did not made it to the market. That changed when in the 2010 \"zero-power\" (bistable) LCDs became available. Potentially, passive-matrix addressing can be used with devices if their write/erase characteristics are suitable, which was the case for ebooks showing still pictures only. After a page is written to the display, the display may be cut from the power while that information remains readable. This has the advantage that such ebooks may be operated long time on just a small battery only. High-resolution color displays, such as modern LCD computer monitors and televisions, use an active-matrix structure. A matrix of thin-film transistors (TFTs) is added to the electrodes in contact with the LC layer. Each pixel has its own dedicated transistor, allowing each column line to access one pixel. When a row line is selected, all of the column lines are connected to a row of pixels and voltages corresponding to the picture information are driven onto all of the column lines. The row line is then deactivated and the next row line is selected. All of the row lines are selected in sequence during a refresh operation. Active-matrix addressed displays look brighter and sharper than passive-matrix addressed displays of the same size, and generally have quicker response times, producing much better images.\n\nTwisted nematic displays contain liquid crystals that twist and untwist at varying degrees to allow light to pass through. When no voltage is applied to a TN liquid crystal cell, polarized light passes through the 90-degrees twisted LC layer. In proportion to the voltage applied, the liquid crystals untwist changing the polarization and blocking the light's path. By properly adjusting the level of the voltage almost any gray level or transmission can be achieved.\n\nIn-plane switching is an LCD technology that aligns the liquid crystals in a plane parallel to the glass substrates. In this method, the electrical field is applied through opposite electrodes on the same glass substrate, so that the liquid crystals can be reoriented (switched) essentially in the same plane, although fringe fields inhibit a homogeneous reorientation. This requires two transistors for each pixel instead of the single transistor needed for a standard thin-film transistor (TFT) display. Before LG Enhanced IPS was introduced in 2009, the additional transistors resulted in blocking more transmission area, thus requiring a brighter backlight and consuming more power, making this type of display less desirable for notebook computers. Currently Panasonic is using an enhanced version eIPS for their large size LCD-TV products as well as Hewlett-Packard in its WebOS based TouchPad tablet and their Chromebook 11.\n\nIn 2011, LG claimed the smartphone LG Optimus Black (IPS LCD (LCD NOVA)) has the brightness up to 700 nits, while the competitor has only IPS LCD with 518 nits and double an active-matrix OLED (AMOLED) display with 305 nits. LG also claimed the NOVA display to be 50 percent more efficient than regular LCDs and to consume only 50 percent of the power of AMOLED displays when producing white on screen. When it comes to contrast ratio, AMOLED display still performs best due to its underlying technology, where the black levels are displayed as pitch black and not as dark gray. On August 24, 2011, Nokia announced the Nokia 701 and also made the claim of the world's brightest display at 1000 nits. The screen also had Nokia's Clearblack layer, improving the contrast ratio and bringing it closer to that of the AMOLED screens.\n\nSuper-IPS was later introduced after in-plane switching with even better response times and color reproduction.\n\nKnown as fringe field switching (FFS) until 2003,\nadvanced fringe field switching is similar to IPS or S-IPS offering superior performance and color gamut with high luminosity. AFFS was developed by Hydis Technologies Co., Ltd, Korea (formally Hyundai Electronics, LCD Task Force). AFFS-applied notebook applications minimize color distortion while maintaining a wider viewing angle for a professional display. Color shift and deviation caused by light leakage is corrected by optimizing the white gamut which also enhances white/gray reproduction. In 2004, Hydis Technologies Co., Ltd licensed AFFS to Japan's Hitachi Displays. Hitachi is using AFFS to manufacture high-end panels. In 2006, HYDIS licensed AFFS to Sanyo Epson Imaging Devices Corporation. Shortly thereafter, Hydis introduced a high-transmittance evolution of the AFFS display, called HFFS (FFS+). Hydis introduced AFFS+ with improved outdoor readability in 2007. AFFS panels are mostly utilized in the cockpits of latest commercial aircraft displays. However, it is no longer produced as of February 2015.\n\nVertical-alignment displays are a form of LCDs in which the liquid crystals naturally align vertically to the glass substrates. When no voltage is applied, the liquid crystals remain perpendicular to the substrate, creating a black display between crossed polarizers. When voltage is applied, the liquid crystals shift to a tilted position, allowing light to pass through and create a gray-scale display depending on the amount of tilt generated by the electric field. It has a deeper-black background, a higher contrast ratio, a wider viewing angle, and better image quality at extreme temperatures than traditional twisted-nematic displays.\n\nBlue phase mode LCDs have been shown as engineering samples early in 2008, but they are not in mass-production. The physics of blue phase mode LCDs suggest that very short switching times (≈1 ms) can be achieved, so time sequential color control can possibly be realized and expensive color filters would be obsolete.\n\nSome LCD panels have defective transistors, causing permanently lit or unlit pixels which are commonly referred to as stuck pixels or dead pixels respectively. Unlike integrated circuits (ICs), LCD panels with a few defective transistors are usually still usable. Manufacturers' policies for the acceptable number of defective pixels vary greatly. At one point, Samsung held a zero-tolerance policy for LCD monitors sold in Korea. As of 2005, though, Samsung adheres to the less restrictive ISO 13406-2 standard. Other companies have been known to tolerate as many as 11 dead pixels in their policies.\n\nDead pixel policies are often hotly debated between manufacturers and customers. To regulate the acceptability of defects and to protect the end user, ISO released the ISO 13406-2 standard, which was made obsolete in 2008 with the release of ISO 9241, specifically ISO-9241-302, 303, 305, 307:2008 pixel defects. However, not every LCD manufacturer conforms to the ISO standard and the ISO standard is quite often interpreted in different ways. LCD panels are more likely to have defects than most ICs due to their larger size. For example, a 300 mm SVGA LCD has 8 defects and a 150 mm wafer has only 3 defects. However, 134 of the 137 dies on the wafer will be acceptable, whereas rejection of the whole LCD panel would be a 0% yield. In recent years, quality control has been improved. An SVGA LCD panel with 4 defective pixels is usually considered defective and customers can request an exchange for a new one. Some manufacturers, notably in South Korea where some of the largest LCD panel manufacturers, such as LG, are located, now have a zero-defective-pixel guarantee, which is an extra screening process which can then determine \"A\"- and \"B\"-grade panels. Many manufacturers would replace a product even with one defective pixel. Even where such guarantees do not exist, the location of defective pixels is important. A display with only a few defective pixels may be unacceptable if the defective pixels are near each other. LCD panels also have defects known as \"clouding\" (or less commonly \"mura\"), which describes the uneven patches of changes in luminance. It is most visible in dark or black areas of displayed scenes. As of 2010, most premium branded computer LCD panel manufacturers specify their products as having zero defects.\n\nThe zenithal bistable device (ZBD), developed by Qinetiq (formerly DERA), can retain an image without power. The crystals may exist in one of two stable orientations (\"black\" and \"white\") and power is only required to change the image. ZBD Displays is a spin-off company from QinetiQ who manufactured both grayscale and color ZBD devices. Kent Displays has also developed a \"no-power\" display that uses polymer stabilized cholesteric liquid crystal (ChLCD). In 2009 Kent demonstrated the use of a ChLCD to cover the entire surface of a mobile phone, allowing it to change colors, and keep that color even when power is removed.\nIn 2004 researchers at the University of Oxford demonstrated two new types of zero-power bistable LCDs based on Zenithal bistable techniques. Several bistable technologies, like the 360° BTN and the bistable cholesteric, depend mainly on the bulk properties of the liquid crystal (LC) and use standard strong anchoring, with alignment films and LC mixtures similar to the traditional monostable materials. Other bistable technologies, \"e.g.\", BiNem technology, are based mainly on the surface properties and need specific weak anchoring materials.\n\nBULLET::::- Resolution The resolution of an LCD is expressed by the number of columns and rows of pixels (e.g., 1024×768). Each pixel is usually composed 3 sub-pixels, a red, a green, and a blue one. This had been one of the few features of LCD performance that remained uniform among different designs. However, there are newer designs that share sub-pixels among pixels and add Quattron which attempt to efficiently increase the perceived resolution of a display without increasing the actual resolution, to mixed results.\nBULLET::::- Spatial performance: For a computer monitor or some other display that is being viewed from a very close distance, resolution is often expressed in terms of dot pitch or pixels per inch, which is consistent with the printing industry. Display density varies per application, with televisions generally having a low density for long-distance viewing and portable devices having a high density for close-range detail. The Viewing Angle of an LCD may be important depending on the display and its usage, the limitations of certain display technologies mean the display only displays accurately at certain angles.\nBULLET::::- Temporal performance: the temporal resolution of an LCD is how well it can display changing images, or the accuracy and the number of times per second the display draws the data it is being given. LCD pixels do not flash on/off between frames, so LCD monitors exhibit no refresh-induced flicker no matter how low the refresh rate. But a lower refresh rate can mean visual artefacts like ghosting or smearing, especially with fast moving images. Individual pixel response time is also important, as all displays have some inherent latency in displaying an image which can be large enough to create visual artifacts if the displayed image changes rapidly.\nBULLET::::- Color performance: There are multiple terms to describe different aspects of color performance of a display. Color gamut is the range of colors that can be displayed, and color depth, which is the fineness with which the color range is divided. Color gamut is a relatively straight forward feature, but it is rarely discussed in marketing materials except at the professional level. Having a color range that exceeds the content being shown on the screen has no benefits, so displays are only made to perform within or below the range of a certain specification. There are additional aspects to LCD color and color management, such as white point and gamma correction, which describe what color white is and how the other colors are displayed relative to white.\nBULLET::::- Brightness and contrast ratio: Contrast ratio is the ratio of the brightness of a full-on pixel to a full-off pixel. The LCD itself is only a light valve and does not generate light; the light comes from a backlight that is either fluorescent or a set of LEDs. Brightness is usually stated as the maximum light output of the LCD, which can vary greatly based on the transparency of the LCD and the brightness of the backlight. In general, brighter is better, but there is always a trade-off between brightness and power consumption.\n\nSome of these issues relate to full-screen displays, others to small displays as on watches, etc. Many of the comparisons are with CRT displays.\nBULLET::::- Very compact, thin and light, especially in comparison with bulky, heavy CRT displays.\nBULLET::::- Low power consumption. Depending on the set display brightness and content being displayed, the older CCFT backlit models typically use less than half of the power a CRT monitor of the same size viewing area would use, and the modern LED backlit models typically use 10–25% of the power a CRT monitor would use.\nBULLET::::- Little heat emitted during operation, due to low power consumption.\nBULLET::::- No geometric distortion.\nBULLET::::- The possible ability to have little or no flicker depending on backlight technology.\nBULLET::::- Usually no refresh-rate flicker, because the LCD pixels hold their state between refreshes (which are usually done at 200 Hz or faster, regardless of the input refresh rate).\nBULLET::::- Sharp image with no bleeding or smearing when operated at native resolution.\nBULLET::::- Emits almost no undesirable electromagnetic radiation (in the extremely low frequency range), unlike a CRT monitor.\nBULLET::::- Can be made in almost any size or shape.\nBULLET::::- No theoretical resolution limit. When multiple LCD panels are used together to create a single canvas, each additional panel increases the total resolution of the display, which is commonly called stacked resolution.\nBULLET::::- Can be made in large sizes of over 80-inch (2 m) diagonal.\nBULLET::::- Masking effect: the LCD grid can mask the effects of spatial and grayscale quantization, creating the illusion of higher image quality.\nBULLET::::- Unaffected by magnetic fields, including the Earth's.\nBULLET::::- As an inherently digital device, the LCD can natively display digital data from a DVI or HDMI connection without requiring conversion to analog. Some LCD panels have native fiber optic inputs in addition to DVI and HDMI.\nBULLET::::- Many LCD monitors are powered by a 12 V power supply, and if built into a computer can be powered by its 12 V power supply.\nBULLET::::- Can be made with very narrow frame borders, allowing multiple LCD screens to be arrayed side-by-side to make up what looks like one big screen.\n\nBULLET::::- Limited viewing angle in some older or cheaper monitors, causing color, saturation, contrast and brightness to vary with user position, even within the intended viewing angle.\nBULLET::::- Uneven backlighting in some monitors (more common in IPS-types and older TNs), causing brightness distortion, especially toward the edges (\"backlight bleed\").\nBULLET::::- Black levels may not be as dark as required because individual liquid crystals cannot completely block all of the backlight from passing through.\nBULLET::::- Display motion blur on moving objects caused by slow response times (>8 ms) and eye-tracking on a sample-and-hold display, unless a strobing backlight is used. However, this strobing can cause eye strain, as is noted next:\nBULLET::::- As of 2012, most implementations of LCD backlighting use pulse-width modulation (PWM) to dim the display, which makes the screen flicker more acutely (this does not mean visibly) than a CRT monitor at 85 Hz refresh rate would (this is because the entire screen is strobing on and off rather than a CRT's phosphor sustained dot which continually scans across the display, leaving some part of the display always lit), causing severe eye-strain for some people. Unfortunately, many of these people don't know that their eye-strain is being caused by the invisible strobe effect of PWM. This problem is worse on many LED-backlit monitors, because the LEDs switch on and off faster than a CCFL lamp.\nBULLET::::- Only one native resolution. Displaying any other resolution either requires a video scaler, causing blurriness and jagged edges, or running the display at native resolution using , causing the image either not to fill the screen (letterboxed display), or to run off the lower or right edges of the screen.\nBULLET::::- Fixed bit depth (also called color depth). Many cheaper LCDs are only able to display 262144 (2) colors. 8-bit S-IPS panels can display 16 million (2) colors and have significantly better black level, but are expensive and have slower response time.\nBULLET::::- Input lag, because the LCD's A/D converter waits for each frame to be completely been output before drawing it to the LCD panel. Many LCD monitors do post-processing before displaying the image in an attempt to compensate for poor color fidelity, which adds an additional lag. Further, a video scaler must be used when displaying non-native resolutions, which adds yet more time lag. Scaling and post processing are usually done in a single chip on modern monitors, but each function that chip performs adds some delay. Some displays have a video gaming mode which disables all or most processing to reduce perceivable input lag.\nBULLET::::- Dead or stuck pixels may occur during manufacturing or after a period of use. A stuck pixel will glow with color even on an all-black screen, while a dead one will always remain black.\nBULLET::::- Subject to burn-in effect, although the cause differs from CRT and the effect may not be permanent, a static image can cause burn-in in a matter of hours in badly designed displays.\nBULLET::::- In a constant-on situation, thermalization may occur in case of bad thermal management, in which part of the screen has overheated and looks discolored compared to the rest of the screen.\nBULLET::::- Loss of brightness and much slower response times in low temperature environments. In sub-zero environments, LCD screens may cease to function without the use of supplemental heating.\nBULLET::::- Loss of contrast in high temperature environments.\n\nSeveral different families of liquid crystals are used in liquid crystals. The molecules used have to be anisotropic, and to exhibit mutual attraction. Polarizable rod-shaped molecules (biphenyls, terphenyls, etc.) are common. A common form is a pair of aromatic benzene rings, with a nonpolar moiety (pentyl, heptyl, octyl, or alkyl oxy group) on one end and polar (nitrile, halogen) on the other. Sometimes the benzene rings are separated with an acetylene group, ethylene, CH=N, CH=NO, N=N, N=NO, or ester group. In practice, eutectic mixtures of several chemicals are used, to achieve wider temperature operating range (-10..+60 °C for low-end and -20..+100 °C for high-performance displays). For example, the E7 mixture is composed of three biphenyls and one terphenyl: 39 wt.% of 4'-pentyl[1,1'-biphenyl]-4-carbonitrile (nematic range 24..35 °C), 36 wt.% of 4'-heptyl[1,1'-biphenyl]-4-carbonitrile (nematic range 30..43 °C), 16 wt.% of 4'-octoxy[1,1'-biphenyl]-4-carbonitrile (nematic range 54..80 °C), and 9 wt.% of 4\"-pentyl[1,1':4',1\"-terphenyl]-4-carbonitrile (nematic range 131..240 °C).\n\nThe production of LCD screens uses nitrogen trifluoride (NF) as an etching fluid during the production of the thin-film components. NF is a potent greenhouse gas, and its relatively long half-life may make it a potentially harmful contributor to global warming. A report in \"Geophysical Research Letters\" suggested that its effects were theoretically much greater than better-known sources of greenhouse gasses like carbon dioxide. As NF was not in widespread use at the time, it was not made part of the Kyoto Protocols and has been deemed \"the missing greenhouse gas\".\n\nCritics of the report point out that it assumes that all of the NF produced would be released to the atmosphere. In reality, the vast majority of NF is broken down during the cleaning processes; two earlier studies found that only 2 to 3% of the gas escapes destruction after its use. Furthermore, the report failed to compare NF's effects with what it replaced, perfluorocarbon, another powerful greenhouse gas, of which anywhere from 30 to 70% escapes to the atmosphere in typical use.\n\nBULLET::::- Transflective liquid-crystal display\nBULLET::::- Flat-panel display\nBULLET::::- FPD-Link\nBULLET::::- LCD classification\nBULLET::::- LCD projector\nBULLET::::- LCD television\nBULLET::::- List of liquid-crystal-display manufacturers\n\nBULLET::::- History and Physical Properties of Liquid Crystals by Nobelprize.org\nBULLET::::- Definitions of basic terms relating to low-molar-mass and polymer liquid crystals (IUPAC Recommendations 2001)\nBULLET::::- An intelligible introduction to liquid crystals from Case Western Reserve University\nBULLET::::- Liquid Crystal Physics tutorial from the Liquid Crystals Group, University of Colorado\nBULLET::::- Molecular Crystals and Liquid Crystals a journal by Taylor and Francis\n\nBULLET::::- Development of Liquid Crystal Displays: Interview with George Gray, Hull University, 2004 – Video by the Vega Science Trust.\nBULLET::::- Timothy J. Sluckin History of Liquid Crystals, a presentation and extracts from the book \"Crystals that Flow: Classic papers from the history of liquid crystals\".\nBULLET::::- David Dunmur & Tim Sluckin (2011) \"Soap, Science, and Flat-screen TVs: a history of liquid crystals\", Oxford University Press .\nBULLET::::- Overview of 3LCD technology, Presentation Technology\nBULLET::::- LCD Phase and Clock Adjustment, Techmind offers a free test screen to get a better LCD picture quality than the LCD's auto-tune function.\nBULLET::::- Interfacing Alphanumeric LCD to Microcontroller\nBULLET::::- Animations explaining operation of LCD panels\nBULLET::::- Liquid crystals are made mainly by Merck Group (DE), Chisso (JP), DIC Corporation (JP), PriChem (CN) and Yancheng Smiling (CN).\n"}
{"id": "17933", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17933", "title": "Latency (engineering)", "text": "Latency (engineering)\n\nLatency is a time interval between the stimulation and response, or, from a more general point of view, a time delay between the cause and the effect of some physical change in the system being observed. Latency is physically a consequence of the limited velocity with which any physical interaction can propagate. The magnitude of this velocity is always less than or equal to the speed of light. Therefore, every physical system with any physical separation (distance) between cause and effect will experience some sort of latency, regardless of the nature of stimulation that it has been exposed to.\n\nThe precise definition of latency depends on the system being observed and the nature of stimulation. In communications, the lower limit of latency is determined by the medium being used for communications. In reliable two-way communication systems, latency limits the maximum rate that information can be transmitted, as there is often a limit on the amount of information that is \"in-flight\" at any one moment. In the field of human–machine interaction, perceptible latency has a strong effect on user satisfaction and usability.\n\nOnline games are sensitive to latency (or \"lag\"), since fast response times to new events occurring during a game session are rewarded while slow response times may carry penalties. Due to a delay in transmission of game events, a player with a high latency internet connection may show slow responses in spite of appropriate reaction time. This gives players with low latency connections a technical advantage.\n\nMinimizing latency is of interest in the capital markets, particularly where algorithmic trading is used to process market updates and turn around orders within milliseconds. Low-latency trading occurs on the networks used by financial institutions to connect to stock exchanges and electronic communication networks (ECNs) to execute financial transactions. Joel Hasbrouck and Gideon Saar (2011) measure latency based on three components: the time it takes for information to reach the trader, execution of the trader’s algorithms to analyze the information and decide a course of action, and the generated action to reach the exchange and get implemented. Hasbrouck and Saar contrast this with the way in which latencies are measured by many trading venues who use much more narrow definitions, such as, the processing delay measured from the entry of the order (at the vendor’s computer) to the transmission of an acknowledgement (from the vendor’s computer). Electronic trading now makes up 60% to 70% of the daily volume on the New York Stock Exchange and algorithmic trading close to 35%. Trading using computers has developed to the point where millisecond improvements in network speeds offer a competitive advantage for financial institutions.\n\nNetwork latency in a packet-switched network is measured as either one-way (the time from the source sending a packet to the destination receiving it), or round-trip delay time (the one-way latency from source to destination plus the one-way latency from the destination back to the source). Round-trip latency is more often quoted, because it can be measured from a single point. Note that round trip latency excludes the amount of time that a destination system spends processing the packet. Many software platforms provide a service called ping that can be used to measure round-trip latency. Ping uses the Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) \"echo request\" which causes the recipient to send the received packet as an immediate response, thus it provides a rough way of measuring round-trip delay time. Ping cannot perform accurate measurements, principally because ICMP is intended only for diagnostic or control purposes, and differs from real communication protocols such as TCP. Furthermore, routers and internet service providers might apply different traffic shaping policies to different protocols. For more accurate measurements it is better to use specific software, for example: hping, Netperf or Iperf.\n\nHowever, in a non-trivial network, a typical packet will be forwarded over multiple links and gateways, each of which will not begin to forward the packet until it has been completely received. In such a network, the minimal latency is the sum of the transmission delay of each link, plus the forwarding latency of each gateway. In practice, minimal latency also includes queuing and processing delays. Queuing delay occurs when a gateway receives multiple packets from different sources heading towards the same destination. Since typically only one packet can be transmitted at a time, some of the packets must queue for transmission, incurring additional delay. Processing delays are incurred while a gateway determines what to do with a newly received packet. Bufferbloat can also cause increased latency that is an order of magnitude or more. The combination of propagation, serialization, queuing, and processing delays often produces a complex and variable network latency profile.\n\nLatency limits total throughput in reliable two-way communication systems as described by the bandwidth-delay product.\n\nLatency in fiber optics is largely a function of the speed of light, which is 299,792,458 meters/second in vacuum. This would equate to a latency of 3.33 µs for every kilometer of path length. The index of refraction of most fiber optic cables is about 1.5, meaning that light travels about 1.5 times as fast in a vacuum as it does in the cable. This works out to about 5.0 µs of latency for every kilometer. In shorter metro networks, higher latency can be experienced due to extra distance in building risers and cross-connects. To calculate latency of a connection, one has to know the distance traveled by the fiber, which is rarely a straight line, since it has to traverse geographic contours and obstacles, such as roads and railway tracks, as well as other rights-of-way. \n\nDue to imperfections in the fiber, light degrades as it is transmitted through it. For distances of greater than 100 kilometers, amplifiers or regenerators are deployed. Latency introduced by these components needs to be taken into account.\n\nSatellites in geostationary orbits are far enough away from Earth that communication latency becomes significant — about a quarter of a second for a trip from one ground-based transmitter to the satellite and back to another ground-based transmitter; close to half a second for two-way communication from one Earth station to another and then back to the first. Low Earth orbit is sometimes used to cut this delay, at the expense of more complicated satellite tracking on the ground and requiring more satellites in the satellite constellation to ensure continuous coverage.\n\nAudio latency is the delay between when an audio signal enters and when it emerges from a system. Potential contributors to latency in an audio system include analog-to-digital conversion, buffering, digital signal processing, transmission time, digital-to-analog conversion and the speed of sound in air.\n\nAny individual workflow within a system of workflows can be subject to some type of operational latency. It may even be the case that an individual system may have more than one type of latency, depending on the type of participant or goal-seeking behavior. This is best illustrated by the following two examples involving air travel.\n\nFrom the point of view of a passenger, latency can be described as follows. Suppose John Doe flies from London to New York. The latency of his trip is the time it takes him to go from his house in England to the hotel he is staying at in New York. This is independent of the throughput of the London-New York air link – whether there were 100 passengers a day making the trip or 10000, the latency of the trip would remain the same.\n\nFrom the point of view of flight operations personnel, latency can be entirely different. Consider the staff at the London and New York airports. Only a limited number of planes are able to make the transatlantic journey, so when one lands they must prepare it for the return trip as quickly as possible. It might take, for example:\nBULLET::::- 35 minutes to clean a plane\nBULLET::::- 15 minutes to refuel a plane\nBULLET::::- 10 minutes to load the passengers\nBULLET::::- 30 minutes to load the cargo\n\nAssuming the above are done consecutively, minimum plane turnaround time is:\n\nHowever, cleaning, refueling and loading the cargo can be done at the same time. Passengers can be loaded after cleaning is complete. The reduced latency, then, is:\n\nThe people involved in the turnaround are interested only in the time it takes for their individual tasks. When all of the tasks are done at the same time, however, it is possible to reduce the latency to the length of the longest task. If some steps have prerequisites, it becomes more difficult to perform all steps in parallel. In the example above, the requirement to clean the plane before loading passengers results in a minimum latency longer than any single task.\n\nAny mechanical process encounters limitations modeled by Newtonian physics. The behavior of disk drives provides an example of mechanical latency. Here, it is the time seek time for the actuator arm to be positioned above the appropriate track and then rotational latency for the data encoded on a platter to rotate from its current position to a position under the disk read-and-write head.\n\nComputers run instructions in the context of a process. In the context of computer multitasking, the execution of the process can be postponed if other processes are also executing. In addition, the operating system can schedule when to perform the action that the process is commanding. For example, suppose a process commands that a computer card's voltage output be set high-low-high-low and so on at a rate of 1000 Hz. The operating system schedules the process for each transition (high-low or low-high) based on a hardware clock such as the High Precision Event Timer. The latency is the delay between the events generated by the hardware clock and the actual transitions of voltage from high to low or low to high.\n\nMany desktop operating systems have performance limitations which create additional latency. The problem may be mitigated with real-time extensions and patches such as PREEMPT_RT.\n\nOn embedded systems, the real-time execution of instructions is often supported by a real-time operating system.\n\nIn simulation applications, 'latency' refers to the time delay, normally measured in milliseconds (1/1,000 sec), between initial input and an output clearly discernible to the simulator trainee or simulator subject. Latency is sometimes also called transport delay.\n\nBULLET::::- Some authorities distinguish between latency and transport delay by using the term 'latency' in the sense of the extra time delay of a system over and above the reaction time of the vehicle being simulated, but this requires a detailed knowledge of the vehicle dynamics and can be controversial.\nBULLET::::- Importance of Motion and Visual Latencies. In simulators with both visual and motion systems, it is particularly important that the latency of the motion system not be greater than of the visual system, or symptoms of simulator sickness may result. This is because in the real world, motion cues are those of acceleration and are quickly transmitted to the brain, typically in less than 50 milliseconds; this is followed some milliseconds later by a perception of change in the visual scene. The visual scene change is essentially one of change of perspective and/or displacement of objects such as the horizon, which takes some time to build up to discernible amounts after the initial acceleration which caused the displacement. A simulator should therefore reflect the real-world situation by ensuring that the motion latency is equal to or less than that of the visual system and not the other way round.\n\nBULLET::::- Comparison of latency and bandwidth\nBULLET::::- Feedback\nBULLET::::- Interrupt latency\nBULLET::::- Jitter\nBULLET::::- Lagometer\nBULLET::::- Lead time\nBULLET::::- Memory latency\nBULLET::::- Performance engineering\nBULLET::::- Response time (technology)\nBULLET::::- Responsiveness\nBULLET::::- Throughput\n\nBULLET::::- Simulating network link latency under Linux\n"}
{"id": "17937", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17937", "title": "History of public transport authorities in London", "text": "History of public transport authorities in London\n\nThe history of public transport authorities in London details the various organisations that have been responsible for the public transport network in and around London, England from 1933 until 2000 and have used the London Transport brand. Their responsibilities have encompassed the buses, coaches, trams and the London Underground. The period began with the creation of the London Passenger Transport Board, which covered the County of London and adjacent counties within a 30-mile (48-km) radius. This area later came under the control of the London Transport Executive and then the London Transport Board. The area of responsibility was reduced to that of the Greater London administrative area in 1970 when the Greater London Council, and then London Regional Transport took over responsibility. Since 2000, the Greater London Authority has been the transport authority and the executive agency has been called Transport for London; ending the 67-year use of the \"London Transport\" name.\n\nPrior to 1933, the ownership and management of the transport system in London was distributed among a large number of independent and separate organisations. The Underground railway system had been developed and was owned by the Underground Electric Railways Company of London (UERL) and the Metropolitan Railway. Tram and Trolleybus networks were owned by various local authorities and public companies and buses were owned by numerous companies. Many of these services were in competition with one another leading to wasteful duplication. The London County Council managed tram operations within the County of London, but its responsibility did not extend to the bus or tram routes that ran outside its area; or to the railways, which also extended into neighbouring counties. A Royal Commission on London Government in the 1920s did not permit the London County Council to extend its area of responsibility and an ad hoc London Traffic Area was created to regulate motor traffic in the wider London region. In the 1930s another ad hoc solution was sought to improve the control and coordination of public transport.\n\nThe London Passenger Transport Board (LPTB) was the transport authority from 1 July 1933 to 31 December 1947. It unified services in the London area for the first time. The London Passenger Transport Act 1933 removed responsibility for of tram route from the London County Council, three county boroughs and a number of other local authorities in the Greater London area. It brought the UERL lines under the same control, and took over supervision of buses from the Metropolitan Police. The area of responsibility of the LPTB was far greater than the current Greater London boundaries and was known as the London Passenger Transport Area. The period saw massive expansion of the tube network and was directly responsible for the expansion of the suburbs. The extensive New Works Programme was halted by World War II, with some projects abandoned and others completed after the end of hostilities. The 'roundel symbol' designed in 1918 was adopted by London Passenger Transport Board and the London Transport brand and architectural style was perfected during this period. The iconic tube map designed in 1931, was published in 1933.\n\nThe London Transport Executive (LTE) was the transport authority from 1 January 1948 to 31 December 1962. London Transport was taken into public ownership and became part of the British Transport Commission, which brought London Transport and British Railways under the same control for the first and last time. The period saw the start of direct recruitment from the Caribbean and the repair and replacement of stock and stations damaged during the war as well as completion of delayed projects such as the Central line eastern extension. The AEC Routemaster bus was introduced in 1956. Trams were withdrawn in 1952 and trolleybuses in 1962.\n\nThe London Transport Board was the transport authority from 1 January 1963 to 31 December 1969 It reported directly to the Minister of Transport, ending its direct association with the management of British Railways. During this period many of Britain’s unprofitable railways were closed down, as most routes in the capital were widely used the Beeching Axe had little effect. However, during this period there was little investment in public transport and the motor car increased in popularity. During this period, the Victoria line was opened - although work had started in the early 1960s - and the AEC Merlin single-deck bus was introduced.\n\nThe Greater London Council was the transport authority from 1 January 1970 to 28 June 1984 and the executive agency was called the London Transport Executive. The legislation creating the Greater London Council (GLC) was already passed in 1963 when the London Transport Board was created. However, control did not pass to the new authority until 1 January 1970. The GLC broadly controlled only those services within the boundaries of Greater London. The (green painted) country buses and Green Line Coaches had been passed in 1969 to a new company, London Country Bus Services, which in 1970 became part of the National Bus Company. The period is perhaps the most controversial in London's transport history and there was a severe lack of funding from central government and staff shortages.\n\nThe inter-modal zonal ticketing system currently used by Transport for London originated in this period. Following the Greater London Council election in 1981, the incoming Labour administration simplified fares in Greater London by introducing four new bus fare zones and two central London Underground zones, named \"City\" and \"West End\", where flat fares applied for the first time. This was accompanied by a cut in prices of about a third and was marketed as the \"Fares Fair\" campaign. Following successful legal action against it, on 21 March 1982 London Buses fares were subsequently doubled and London Underground fares increased by 91%. The two central area zones were retained and the fares to all other stations were restructured to be graduated at three-mile intervals. In 1983, a third revision of fares was undertaken, and a new inter-modal Travelcard season ticket was launched covering five new numbered zones; representing an overall cut in prices of around 25%. The \"One Day Travelcard\" was launched in 1984 and on weekdays was only sold for travel after 09.30.\n\nLondon Regional Transport was the transport authority from 29 June 1984 to 2 July 2000. The GLC was abolished in 1986 with responsibility for public transport removed two years earlier in 1984. The new authority, London Regional Transport (LRT), again came under direct state control, reporting to the Secretary of State for Transport. The London Regional Transport Act contained provision for setting up subsidiary companies to run the Underground and bus services and in 1985 London Underground Limited (LUL), a wholly owned subsidiary of London Regional Transport, was set up to manage the tube network. In 1988 ten individual line business units were created to manage the network. London Buses Limited was constituted to progress the privatisation of London bus services. London Transport was converted to a route operating contract tendering authority, and the former bus operating interests and assets of London Transport were split into 12 business units under the banner \"London Buses\". The 12 units competed for contracts with private operators from 1984, and were all sold off by 1994/5 becoming private operators themselves.\n\nFurther amendments to the fare system were made during this period, including inclusion of the separately managed British Rail services. In January 1985 the \"Capitalcard\" season ticket was launched, offering validity on British Rail as well as London Underground and London Buses. It was priced around 10-15% higher than the Travelcard. In June 1986 the \"One Day Capitalcard\" was launched. The Capitalcard brand ended in January 1989 when the Travelcard gained validity on British Rail. In January 1991 Zone 5 was split to create a new Zone 6. The Docklands Light Railway was opened on 31 August 1987 and was included in the zonal Travelcard ticketing scheme.\n\nThe Greater London Authority, a replacement authority for the GLC, was set up in 2000 with a transport executive called Transport for London (TfL) that took control from 3 July 2000. It is the first London transport authority since 1933 not to be commonly called \"London Transport\". The London Underground did not pass to TfL until after a Private Finance Initiative (PFI) agreement for maintenance was completed in 2003.\n\nBULLET::::- List of heads of public transport authorities in London\nBULLET::::- Transport in London\n\nBULLET::::- Notes\n\nBULLET::::- Bibliography\n\nBULLET::::- Transport for London\nBULLET::::- TfL Group Archives and Records Management\nBULLET::::- London Transport Museum\nBULLET::::- London Transport Museum Photographic Collection\n"}
{"id": "17939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17939", "title": "Light", "text": "Light\n\nLight or visible light is electromagnetic radiation within the portion of the electromagnetic spectrum that can be perceived by the human eye. Visible light is usually defined as having wavelengths in the range of 400–700 nanometers (nm), or 4.00 × 10 to 7.00 × 10 m, between the infrared (with longer wavelengths) and the ultraviolet (with shorter wavelengths). This wavelength means a frequency range of roughly 430–750 terahertz (THz).\nThe main source of light on Earth is the Sun. Sunlight provides the energy that green plants use to create sugars mostly in the form of starches, which release energy into the living things that digest them. This process of photosynthesis provides virtually all the energy used by living things. Historically, another important source of light for humans has been fire, from ancient campfires to modern kerosene lamps. With the development of electric lights and power systems, electric lighting has effectively replaced firelight. Some species of animals generate their own light, a process called bioluminescence. For example, fireflies use light to locate mates, and vampire squids use it to hide themselves from prey.\n\nThe primary properties of visible light are intensity, propagation direction, frequency or wavelength spectrum, and polarization, while its speed in a vacuum, 299,792,458 meters per second, is one of the fundamental constants of nature. Visible light, as with all types of electromagnetic radiation (EMR), is experimentally found to always move at this speed in a vacuum.\n\nIn physics, the term \"light\" sometimes refers to electromagnetic radiation of any wavelength, whether visible or not. In this sense, gamma rays, X-rays, microwaves and radio waves are also light. Like all types of EM radiation, visible light propagates as waves. However, the energy imparted by the waves is absorbed at single locations the way particles are absorbed. The absorbed energy of the EM waves is called a photon, and represents the quanta of light. When a wave of light is transformed and absorbed as a photon, the energy of the wave instantly collapses to a single location, and this location is where the photon \"arrives.\" This is what is called the wave function collapse. This dual wave-like and particle-like nature of light is known as the wave–particle duality. The study of light, known as optics, is an important research area in modern physics.\n\nGenerally, EM radiation (the designation \"radiation\" excludes static electric, magnetic, and near fields), or EMR, is classified by wavelength into radio waves, microwaves, infrared, the visible spectrum that we perceive as light, ultraviolet, X-rays, and gamma rays.\n\nThe behavior of EMR depends on its wavelength. Higher frequencies have shorter wavelengths, and lower frequencies have longer wavelengths. When EMR interacts with single atoms and molecules, its behavior depends on the amount of energy per quantum it carries.\n\nEMR in the visible light region consists of quanta (called photons) that are at the lower end of the energies that are capable of causing electronic excitation within molecules, which leads to changes in the bonding or chemistry of the molecule. At the lower end of the visible light spectrum, EMR becomes invisible to humans (infrared) because its photons no longer have enough individual energy to cause a lasting molecular change (a change in conformation) in the visual molecule retinal in the human retina, which change triggers the sensation of vision.\n\nThere exist animals that are sensitive to various types of infrared, but not by means of quantum-absorption. Infrared sensing in snakes depends on a kind of natural thermal imaging, in which tiny packets of cellular water are raised in temperature by the infrared radiation. EMR in this range causes molecular vibration and heating effects, which is how these animals detect it.\n\nAbove the range of visible light, ultraviolet light becomes invisible to humans, mostly because it is absorbed by the cornea below 360 nm and the internal lens below 400 nm. Furthermore, the rods and cones located in the retina of the human eye cannot detect the very short (below 360 nm) ultraviolet wavelengths and are in fact damaged by ultraviolet. Many animals with eyes that do not require lenses (such as insects and shrimp) are able to detect ultraviolet, by quantum photon-absorption mechanisms, in much the same chemical way that humans detect visible light.\n\nVarious sources define visible light as narrowly as 420–680 nm to as broadly as 380–800 nm. Under ideal laboratory conditions, people can see infrared up to at least 1050 nm; children and young adults may perceive ultraviolet wavelengths down to about 310–313 nm.\n\nPlant growth is also affected by the color spectrum of light, a process known as photomorphogenesis.\n\nThe speed of light in a vacuum is defined to be exactly 299,792,458 m/s (approx. 186,282 miles per second). The fixed value of the speed of light in SI units results from the fact that the meter is now defined in terms of the speed of light. All forms of electromagnetic radiation move at exactly this same speed in vacuum.\n\nDifferent physicists have attempted to measure the speed of light throughout history. Galileo attempted to measure the speed of light in the seventeenth century. An early experiment to measure the speed of light was conducted by Ole Rømer, a Danish physicist, in 1676. Using a telescope, Rømer observed the motions of Jupiter and one of its moons, Io. Noting discrepancies in the apparent period of Io's orbit, he calculated that light takes about 22 minutes to traverse the diameter of Earth's orbit. However, its size was not known at that time. If Rømer had known the diameter of the Earth's orbit, he would have calculated a speed of 227,000,000 m/s.\n\nAnother more accurate measurement of the speed of light was performed in Europe by Hippolyte Fizeau in 1849. Fizeau directed a beam of light at a mirror several kilometers away. A rotating cog wheel was placed in the path of the light beam as it traveled from the source, to the mirror and then returned to its origin. Fizeau found that at a certain rate of rotation, the beam would pass through one gap in the wheel on the way out and the next gap on the way back. Knowing the distance to the mirror, the number of teeth on the wheel, and the rate of rotation, Fizeau was able to calculate the speed of light as 313,000,000 m/s.\n\nLéon Foucault carried out an experiment which used rotating mirrors to obtain a value of 298,000,000 m/s in 1862. Albert A. Michelson conducted experiments on the speed of light from 1877 until his death in 1931. He refined Foucault's methods in 1926 using improved rotating mirrors to measure the time it took light to make a round trip from Mount Wilson to Mount San Antonio in California. The precise measurements yielded a speed of 299,796,000 m/s.\n\nThe effective velocity of light in various transparent substances containing ordinary matter, is less than in vacuum. For example, the speed of light in water is about 3/4 of that in vacuum.\n\nTwo independent teams of physicists were said to bring light to a \"complete standstill\" by passing it through a Bose–Einstein condensate of the element rubidium, one team at Harvard University and the Rowland Institute for Science in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and the other at the Harvard–Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, also in Cambridge. However, the popular description of light being \"stopped\" in these experiments refers only to light being stored in the excited states of atoms, then re-emitted at an arbitrary later time, as stimulated by a second laser pulse. During the time it had \"stopped\" it had ceased to be light.\n\nThe study of light and the interaction of light and matter is termed optics. The observation and study of optical phenomena such as rainbows and the aurora borealis offer many clues as to the nature of light.\n\nRefraction is the bending of light rays when passing through a surface between one transparent material and another. It is described by Snell's Law:\n\nwhere θ is the angle between the ray and the surface normal in the first medium, θ is the angle between the ray and the surface normal in the second medium, and n and n are the indices of refraction, \"n\" = 1 in a vacuum and \"n\" > 1 in a transparent substance.\n\nWhen a beam of light crosses the boundary between a vacuum and another medium, or between two different media, the wavelength of the light changes, but the frequency remains constant. If the beam of light is not orthogonal (or rather normal) to the boundary, the change in wavelength results in a change in the direction of the beam. This change of direction is known as refraction.\n\nThe refractive quality of lenses is frequently used to manipulate light in order to change the apparent size of images. Magnifying glasses, spectacles, contact lenses, microscopes and refracting telescopes are all examples of this manipulation.\n\nThere are many sources of light. A body at a given temperature emits a characteristic spectrum of black-body radiation. A simple thermal source is sunlight, the radiation emitted by the chromosphere of the Sun at around peaks in the visible region of the electromagnetic spectrum when plotted in wavelength units and roughly 44% of sunlight energy that reaches the ground is visible. Another example is incandescent light bulbs, which emit only around 10% of their energy as visible light and the remainder as infrared. A common thermal light source in history is the glowing solid particles in flames, but these also emit most of their radiation in the infrared, and only a fraction in the visible spectrum.\n\nThe peak of the black-body spectrum is in the deep infrared, at about 10 micrometer wavelength, for relatively cool objects like human beings. As the temperature increases, the peak shifts to shorter wavelengths, producing first a red glow, then a white one, and finally a blue-white color as the peak moves out of the visible part of the spectrum and into the ultraviolet. These colors can be seen when metal is heated to \"red hot\" or \"white hot\". Blue-white thermal emission is not often seen, except in stars (the commonly seen pure-blue color in a gas flame or a welder's torch is in fact due to molecular emission, notably by CH radicals (emitting a wavelength band around 425 nm, and is not seen in stars or pure thermal radiation).\n\nAtoms emit and absorb light at characteristic energies. This produces \"emission lines\" in the spectrum of each atom. Emission can be spontaneous, as in light-emitting diodes, gas discharge lamps (such as neon lamps and neon signs, mercury-vapor lamps, etc.), and flames (light from the hot gas itself—so, for example, sodium in a gas flame emits characteristic yellow light). Emission can also be stimulated, as in a laser or a microwave maser.\n\nDeceleration of a free charged particle, such as an electron, can produce visible radiation: cyclotron radiation, synchrotron radiation, and bremsstrahlung radiation are all examples of this. Particles moving through a medium faster than the speed of light in that medium can produce visible Cherenkov radiation. Certain chemicals produce visible radiation by chemoluminescence. In living things, this process is called bioluminescence. For example, fireflies produce light by this means, and boats moving through water can disturb plankton which produce a glowing wake.\n\nCertain substances produce light when they are illuminated by more energetic radiation, a process known as fluorescence. Some substances emit light slowly after excitation by more energetic radiation. This is known as phosphorescence. Phosphorescent materials can also be excited by bombarding them with subatomic particles. Cathodoluminescence is one example. This mechanism is used in cathode ray tube television sets and computer monitors.\n\nCertain other mechanisms can produce light:\nBULLET::::- Bioluminescence\nBULLET::::- Cherenkov radiation\nBULLET::::- Electroluminescence\nBULLET::::- Scintillation\nBULLET::::- Sonoluminescence\nBULLET::::- Triboluminescence\n\nWhen the concept of light is intended to include very-high-energy photons (gamma rays), additional generation mechanisms include:\nBULLET::::- Particle–antiparticle annihilation\nBULLET::::- Radioactive decay\n\nLight is measured with two main alternative sets of units: radiometry consists of measurements of light power at all wavelengths, while photometry measures light with wavelength weighted with respect to a standardized model of human brightness perception. Photometry is useful, for example, to quantify Illumination (lighting) intended for human use. The SI units for both systems are summarized in the following tables.\n\nThe photometry units are different from most systems of physical units in that they take into account how the human eye responds to light. The cone cells in the human eye are of three types which respond differently across the visible spectrum, and the cumulative response peaks at a wavelength of around 555 nm. Therefore, two sources of light which produce the same intensity (W/m) of visible light do not necessarily appear equally bright. The photometry units are designed to take this into account, and therefore are a better representation of how \"bright\" a light appears to be than raw intensity. They relate to raw power by a quantity called luminous efficacy, and are used for purposes like determining how to best achieve sufficient illumination for various tasks in indoor and outdoor settings. The illumination measured by a photocell sensor does not necessarily correspond to what is perceived by the human eye, and without filters which may be costly, photocells and charge-coupled devices (CCD) tend to respond to some infrared, ultraviolet or both.\n\nLight exerts physical pressure on objects in its path, a phenomenon which can be deduced by Maxwell's equations, but can be more easily explained by the particle nature of light: photons strike and transfer their momentum. Light pressure is equal to the power of the light beam divided by \"c\", the speed of light. Due to the magnitude of \"c\", the effect of light pressure is negligible for everyday objects. For example, a one-milliwatt laser pointer exerts a force of about 3.3 piconewtons on the object being illuminated; thus, one could lift a U.S. penny with laser pointers, but doing so would require about 30 billion 1-mW laser pointers. However, in nanometre-scale applications such as nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS), the effect of light pressure is more significant, and exploiting light pressure to drive NEMS mechanisms and to flip nanometre-scale physical switches in integrated circuits is an active area of research. At larger scales, light pressure can cause asteroids to spin faster, acting on their irregular shapes as on the vanes of a windmill. The possibility of making solar sails that would accelerate spaceships in space is also under investigation.\n\nAlthough the motion of the Crookes radiometer was originally attributed to light pressure, this interpretation is incorrect; the characteristic Crookes rotation is the result of a partial vacuum. This should not be confused with the Nichols radiometer, in which the (slight) motion caused by torque (though not enough for full rotation against friction) \"is\" directly caused by light pressure.\nAs a consequence of light pressure, Einstein in 1909 predicted the existence of \"radiation friction\" which would oppose the movement of matter. He wrote, \"radiation will exert pressure on both sides of the plate. The forces of pressure exerted on the two sides are equal if the plate is at rest. However, if it is in motion, more radiation will be reflected on the surface that is ahead during the motion (front surface) than on the back surface. The backwardacting force of pressure exerted on the front surface is thus larger than the force of pressure acting on the back. Hence, as the resultant of the two forces, there remains a force that counteracts the motion of the plate and that increases with the velocity of the plate. We will call this resultant 'radiation friction' in brief.\"\n\nUsually light momentum is aligned with its direction of motion. However, for example in evanescent waves momentum is transverse to direction of propagation.\n\nIn the fifth century BC, Empedocles postulated that everything was composed of four elements; fire, air, earth and water. He believed that Aphrodite made the human eye out of the four elements and that she lit the fire in the eye which shone out from the eye making sight possible. If this were true, then one could see during the night just as well as during the day, so Empedocles postulated an interaction between rays from the eyes and rays from a source such as the sun.\n\nIn about 300 BC, Euclid wrote \"Optica\", in which he studied the properties of light. Euclid postulated that light travelled in straight lines and he described the laws of reflection and studied them mathematically. He questioned that sight is the result of a beam from the eye, for he asks how one sees the stars immediately, if one closes one's eyes, then opens them at night. If the beam from the eye travels infinitely fast this is not a problem.\n\nIn 55 BC, Lucretius, a Roman who carried on the ideas of earlier Greek atomists, wrote that \"The light & heat of the sun; these are composed of minute atoms which, when they are shoved off, lose no time in shooting right across the interspace of air in the direction imparted by the shove.\" (from \"On the nature of the Universe\"). Despite being similar to later particle theories, Lucretius's views were not generally accepted. Ptolemy (c. 2nd century) wrote about the refraction of light in his book \"Optics\".\n\nIn ancient India, the Hindu schools of Samkhya and Vaisheshika, from around the early centuries AD developed theories on light. According to the Samkhya school, light is one of the five fundamental \"subtle\" elements (\"tanmatra\") out of which emerge the gross elements. The atomicity of these elements is not specifically mentioned and it appears that they were actually taken to be continuous.\nOn the other hand, the Vaisheshika school gives an atomic theory of the physical world on the non-atomic ground of ether, space and time. (See \"Indian atomism\".) The basic atoms are those of earth (\"prthivi\"), water (\"pani\"), fire (\"agni\"), and air (\"vayu\") Light rays are taken to be a stream of high velocity of \"tejas\" (fire) atoms. The particles of light can exhibit different characteristics depending on the speed and the arrangements of the \"tejas\" atoms.\nThe \"Vishnu Purana\" refers to sunlight as \"the seven rays of the sun\".\n\nThe Indian Buddhists, such as Dignāga in the 5th century and Dharmakirti in the 7th century, developed a type of atomism that is a philosophy about reality being composed of atomic entities that are momentary flashes of light or energy. They viewed light as being an atomic entity equivalent to energy.\n\nRené Descartes (1596–1650) held that light was a mechanical property of the luminous body, rejecting the \"forms\" of Ibn al-Haytham and Witelo as well as the \"species\" of Bacon, Grosseteste, and Kepler. In 1637 he published a theory of the refraction of light that assumed, incorrectly, that light travelled faster in a denser medium than in a less dense medium. Descartes arrived at this conclusion by analogy with the behaviour of sound waves. Although Descartes was incorrect about the relative speeds, he was correct in assuming that light behaved like a wave and in concluding that refraction could be explained by the speed of light in different media.\n\nDescartes is not the first to use the mechanical analogies but because he clearly asserts that light is only a mechanical property of the luminous body and the transmitting medium, Descartes' theory of light is regarded as the start of modern physical optics.\n\nPierre Gassendi (1592–1655), an atomist, proposed a particle theory of light which was published posthumously in the 1660s. Isaac Newton studied Gassendi's work at an early age, and preferred his view to Descartes' theory of the \"plenum\". He stated in his \"Hypothesis of Light\" of 1675 that light was composed of corpuscles (particles of matter) which were emitted in all directions from a source. One of Newton's arguments against the wave nature of light was that waves were known to bend around obstacles, while light travelled only in straight lines. He did, however, explain the phenomenon of the diffraction of light (which had been observed by Francesco Grimaldi) by allowing that a light particle could create a localised wave in the aether.\n\nNewton's theory could be used to predict the reflection of light, but could only explain refraction by incorrectly assuming that light accelerated upon entering a denser medium because the gravitational pull was greater. Newton published the final version of his theory in his \"Opticks\" of 1704. His reputation helped the particle theory of light to hold sway during the 18th century. The particle theory of light led Laplace to argue that a body could be so massive that light could not escape from it. In other words, it would become what is now called a black hole. Laplace withdrew his suggestion later, after a wave theory of light became firmly established as the model for light (as has been explained, neither a particle or wave theory is fully correct). A translation of Newton's essay on light appears in \"The large scale structure of space-time\", by Stephen Hawking and George F. R. Ellis.\n\nThe fact that light could be polarized was for the first time qualitatively explained by Newton using the particle theory. Étienne-Louis Malus in 1810 created a mathematical particle theory of polarization. Jean-Baptiste Biot in 1812 showed that this theory explained all known phenomena of light polarization. At that time the polarization was considered as the proof of the particle theory.\n\nTo explain the origin of colors, Robert Hooke (1635–1703) developed a \"pulse theory\" and compared the spreading of light to that of waves in water in his 1665 work \"Micrographia\" (\"Observation IX\"). In 1672 Hooke suggested that light's vibrations could be perpendicular to the direction of propagation. Christiaan Huygens (1629–1695) worked out a mathematical wave theory of light in 1678, and published it in his \"Treatise on light\" in 1690. He proposed that light was emitted in all directions as a series of waves in a medium called the \"Luminiferous ether\". As waves are not affected by gravity, it was assumed that they slowed down upon entering a denser medium.\n\nThe wave theory predicted that light waves could interfere with each other like sound waves (as noted around 1800 by Thomas Young). Young showed by means of a diffraction experiment that light behaved as waves. He also proposed that different colors were caused by different wavelengths of light, and explained color vision in terms of three-colored receptors in the eye. Another supporter of the wave theory was Leonhard Euler. He argued in \"Nova theoria lucis et colorum\" (1746) that diffraction could more easily be explained by a wave theory. In 1816 André-Marie Ampère gave Augustin-Jean Fresnel an idea that the polarization of light can be explained by the wave theory if light were a transverse wave.\n\nLater, Fresnel independently worked out his own wave theory of light, and presented it to the Académie des Sciences in 1817. Siméon Denis Poisson added to Fresnel's mathematical work to produce a convincing argument in favor of the wave theory, helping to overturn Newton's corpuscular theory. By the year 1821, Fresnel was able to show via mathematical methods that polarization could be explained by the wave theory of light if and only if light was entirely transverse, with no longitudinal vibration whatsoever.\n\nThe weakness of the wave theory was that light waves, like sound waves, would need a medium for transmission. The existence of the hypothetical substance \"luminiferous aether\" proposed by Huygens in 1678 was cast into strong doubt in the late nineteenth century by the Michelson–Morley experiment.\n\nNewton's corpuscular theory implied that light would travel faster in a denser medium, while the wave theory of Huygens and others implied the opposite. At that time, the speed of light could not be measured accurately enough to decide which theory was correct. The first to make a sufficiently accurate measurement was Léon Foucault, in 1850. His result supported the wave theory, and the classical particle theory was finally abandoned, only to partly re-emerge in the 20th century.\n\nIn 1845, Michael Faraday discovered that the plane of polarization of linearly polarized light is rotated when the light rays travel along the magnetic field direction in the presence of a transparent dielectric, an effect now known as Faraday rotation. This was the first evidence that light was related to electromagnetism. In 1846 he speculated that light might be some form of disturbance propagating along magnetic field lines. Faraday proposed in 1847 that light was a high-frequency electromagnetic vibration, which could propagate even in the absence of a medium such as the ether.\n\nFaraday's work inspired James Clerk Maxwell to study electromagnetic radiation and light. Maxwell discovered that self-propagating electromagnetic waves would travel through space at a constant speed, which happened to be equal to the previously measured speed of light. From this, Maxwell concluded that light was a form of electromagnetic radiation: he first stated this result in 1862 in \"On Physical Lines of Force\". In 1873, he published \"A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism\", which contained a full mathematical description of the behavior of electric and magnetic fields, still known as Maxwell's equations. Soon after, Heinrich Hertz confirmed Maxwell's theory experimentally by generating and detecting radio waves in the laboratory, and demonstrating that these waves behaved exactly like visible light, exhibiting properties such as reflection, refraction, diffraction, and interference. Maxwell's theory and Hertz's experiments led directly to the development of modern radio, radar, television, electromagnetic imaging, and wireless communications.\n\nIn the quantum theory, photons are seen as wave packets of the waves described in the classical theory of Maxwell. The quantum theory was needed to explain effects even with visual light that Maxwell's classical theory could not (such as spectral lines).\n\nIn 1900 Max Planck, attempting to explain black-body radiation suggested that although light was a wave, these waves could gain or lose energy only in finite amounts related to their frequency. Planck called these \"lumps\" of light energy \"quanta\" (from a Latin word for \"how much\"). In 1905, Albert Einstein used the idea of light quanta to explain the photoelectric effect, and suggested that these light quanta had a \"real\" existence. In 1923 Arthur Holly Compton showed that the wavelength shift seen when low intensity X-rays scattered from electrons (so called Compton scattering) could be explained by a particle-theory of X-rays, but not a wave theory. In 1926 Gilbert N. Lewis named these light quanta particles photons.\n\nEventually the modern theory of quantum mechanics came to picture light as (in some sense) \"both\" a particle and a wave, and (in another sense), as a phenomenon which is \"neither\" a particle nor a wave (which actually are macroscopic phenomena, such as baseballs or ocean waves). Instead, modern physics sees light as something that can be described sometimes with mathematics appropriate to one type of macroscopic metaphor (particles), and sometimes another macroscopic metaphor (water waves), but is actually something that cannot be fully imagined. As in the case for radio waves and the X-rays involved in Compton scattering, physicists have noted that electromagnetic radiation tends to behave more like a classical wave at lower frequencies, but more like a classical particle at higher frequencies, but never completely loses all qualities of one or the other. Visible light, which occupies a middle ground in frequency, can easily be shown in experiments to be describable using either a wave or particle model, or sometimes both.\n\nIn February 2018, scientists reported, for the first time, the discovery of a new form of light, which may involve polaritons, that could be useful in the development of quantum computers.\n\nBULLET::::- Automotive lighting\nBULLET::::- Ballistic photon\nBULLET::::- Black-body radiation\nBULLET::::- Color temperature\nBULLET::::- Fermat's principle\nBULLET::::- Huygens' principle\nBULLET::::- Incandescent light bulb\nBULLET::::- International Commission on Illumination\nBULLET::::- \"Journal of Luminescence\"\nBULLET::::- Light art\nBULLET::::- Light beam – in particular about light beams visible from the side\nBULLET::::- Light Fantastic (TV series)\nBULLET::::- Light mill\nBULLET::::- Light painting\nBULLET::::- Light pollution\nBULLET::::- Light therapy\nBULLET::::- Lighting\nBULLET::::- List of light sources\nBULLET::::- Photic sneeze reflex\nBULLET::::- Photometry\nBULLET::::- Photon\nBULLET::::- Right to light\nBULLET::::- Risks and benefits of sun exposure\nBULLET::::- Spectroscopy\nBULLET::::- Visible spectrum\nBULLET::::- Wave–particle duality\n"}
{"id": "17940", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17940", "title": "Lipid", "text": "Lipid\n\nIn biology and biochemistry, a lipid is a biomolecule that is soluble in nonpolar solvents. Non-polar solvents are typically hydrocarbons used to dissolve other naturally occurring hydrocarbon lipid molecules that do not (or do not easily) dissolve in water, including fatty acids, waxes, sterols, fat-soluble vitamins (such as vitamins A, D, E, and K), monoglycerides, diglycerides, triglycerides, and phospholipids.\n\nThe functions of lipids include storing energy, signaling, and acting as structural components of cell membranes. Lipids have applications in the cosmetic and food industries as well as in nanotechnology.\n\nScientists sometimes define lipids as hydrophobic or amphiphilic small molecules; the amphiphilic nature of some lipids allows them to form structures such as vesicles, multilamellar/unilamellar liposomes, or membranes in an aqueous environment. Biological lipids originate entirely or in part from two distinct types of biochemical subunits or \"building-blocks\": ketoacyl and isoprene groups. Using this approach, lipids may be divided into eight categories: fatty acids, glycerolipids, glycerophospholipids, sphingolipids, saccharolipids, and polyketides (derived from condensation of ketoacyl subunits); and sterol lipids and prenol lipids (derived from condensation of isoprene subunits).\n\nAlthough the term \"lipid\" is sometimes used as a synonym for fats, fats are a subgroup of lipids called triglycerides. Lipids also encompass molecules such as fatty acids and their derivatives (including tri-, di-, monoglycerides, and phospholipids), as well as other sterol-containing metabolites such as cholesterol. Although humans and other mammals use various biosynthetic pathways both to break down and to synthesize lipids, some essential lipids can't be made this way and must be obtained from the diet.\n\n\"Lipid may be regarded as organic substances relatively insoluble in water, soluble in organic solvents(alcohol, ether etc.) actually or potentially related to fatty acid and utilized by the living cells.\"\n\nIn 1815, Henry Braconnot classified lipids (\"graisses\") in two categories, \"suifs\" (solid greases or tallow) and \"huiles\" (fluid oils). In 1823, Michel Eugène Chevreul developed a more detailed classification, including oils, greases, tallow, waxes, resins, balsams and volatile oils (or essential oils).\n\nThe first successful synthesis of a triglyceride molecule was by Théophile-Jules Pelouze in 1844, when he produced tributyrin by reacting butyric acid with glycerin in the presence of concentrated sulfuric acid. Several years later, Marcellin Berthelot, one of Pelouze's students, synthesized tristearin and tripalmitin by reaction of the analogous fatty acids with glycerin in the presence of ggaseous hydrogen chloride at high temperature.\n\nIn 1827, William Prout recognized fat (\"oily\" alimentary matters), along with protein (\"albuminous\") and carbohydrate (\"saccharine\"), as an important nutrient for humans and animals.\n\nFor a century, chemists regarded \"fats\" as only simple lipids made of fatty acids and glycerol (glycerides), but new forms were described later. Theodore Gobley (1847) discovered phospholipids in mammalian brain and hen egg, called by him as \"lecithins\". Thudichum discovered in human brain some phospholipids (cephalin), glycolipids (cerebroside) and sphingolipids (sphingomyelin).\n\nThe terms lipoid, lipin, lipide and lipid have been used with varied meanings from author to author. In 1912, Rosenbloom and Gies proposed the substitution of \"lipoid\" by \"lipin\". In 1920, Bloor introduced a new classification for \"lipoids\": simple lipoids (greases and waxes), compound lipoids (phospholipoids and glycolipoids), and the derived lipoids (fatty acids, alcohols, sterols).\n\nThe word \"lipid\", which stems etymologically from the Greek \"lipos\" (fat), was introduced in 1923 by Gabriel Bertrand. Bertrands included in the concept not only the traditional fats (glycerides), but also the \"lipoids\", with a complex constitution.\n\nIn 1947, divided lipids into \"simple lipids\", with greases and waxes (true waxes, sterols, alcohols).\n\nFatty acids, or fatty acid residues when they are part of a lipid, are a diverse group of molecules synthesized by chain-elongation of an acetyl-CoA primer with malonyl-CoA or methylmalonyl-CoA groups in a process called fatty acid synthesis. They are made of a hydrocarbon chain that terminates with a carboxylic acid group; this arrangement confers the molecule with a polar, hydrophilic end, and a nonpolar, hydrophobic end that is insoluble in water. The fatty acid structure is one of the most fundamental categories of biological lipids, and is commonly used as a building-block of more structurally complex lipids. The carbon chain, typically between four and 24 carbons long, may be saturated or unsaturated, and may be attached to functional groups containing oxygen, halogens, nitrogen, and sulfur. If a fatty acid contains a double bond, there is the possibility of either a \"cis\" or \"trans\" geometric isomerism, which significantly affects the molecule's configuration. \"Cis\"-double bonds cause the fatty acid chain to bend, an effect that is compounded with more double bonds in the chain. Three double bonds in 18-carbon \"linolenic acid\", the most abundant fatty-acyl chains of plant \"thylakoid membranes\", render these membranes highly \"fluid\" despite environmental low-temperatures, and also makes linolenic acid give dominating sharp peaks in high resolution 13-C NMR spectra of chloroplasts. This in turn plays an important role in the structure and function of cell membranes. Most naturally occurring fatty acids are of the \"cis\" configuration, although the \"trans\" form does exist in some natural and partially hydrogenated fats and oils.\n\nExamples of biologically important fatty acids include the eicosanoids, derived primarily from arachidonic acid and eicosapentaenoic acid, that include prostaglandins, leukotrienes, and thromboxanes. Docosahexaenoic acid is also important in biological systems, particularly with respect to sight. Other major lipid classes in the fatty acid category are the fatty esters and fatty amides. Fatty esters include important biochemical intermediates such as wax esters, fatty acid thioester coenzyme A derivatives, fatty acid thioester ACP derivatives and fatty acid carnitines. The fatty amides include N-acyl ethanolamines, such as the cannabinoid neurotransmitter anandamide.\n\nGlycerolipids are composed of mono-, di-, and tri-substituted glycerols, the best-known being the fatty acid triesters of glycerol, called triglycerides. The word \"triacylglycerol\" is sometimes used synonymously with \"triglyceride\". In these compounds, the three hydroxyl groups of glycerol are each esterified, typically by different fatty acids. Because they function as an energy store, these lipids comprise the bulk of storage fat in animal tissues. The hydrolysis of the ester bonds of triglycerides and the release of glycerol and fatty acids from adipose tissue are the initial steps in metabolizing fat.\n\nAdditional subclasses of glycerolipids are represented by glycosylglycerols, which are characterized by the presence of one or more sugar residues attached to glycerol via a glycosidic linkage. Examples of structures in this category are the digalactosyldiacylglycerols found in plant membranes and seminolipid from mammalian sperm cells.\n\nGlycerophospholipids, usually referred to as phospholipids (though sphingomyelins are also classified as phospholipids), are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and cell signaling. Neural tissue (including the brain) contains relatively high amounts of glycerophospholipids, and alterations in their composition has been implicated in various neurological disorders. Glycerophospholipids may be subdivided into distinct classes, based on the nature of the polar headgroup at the \"sn\"-3 position of the glycerol backbone in eukaryotes and eubacteria, or the \"sn\"-1 position in the case of archaebacteria.\n\nExamples of glycerophospholipids found in biological membranes are phosphatidylcholine (also known as PC, GPCho or lecithin), phosphatidylethanolamine (PE or GPEtn) and phosphatidylserine (PS or GPSer). In addition to serving as a primary component of cellular membranes and binding sites for intra- and intercellular proteins, some glycerophospholipids in eukaryotic cells, such as phosphatidylinositols and phosphatidic acids are either precursors of or, themselves, membrane-derived second messengers. Typically, one or both of these hydroxyl groups are acylated with long-chain fatty acids, but there are also alkyl-linked and 1Z-alkenyl-linked (plasmalogen) glycerophospholipids, as well as dialkylether variants in archaebacteria.\n\nSphingolipids are a complicated family of compounds that share a common structural feature, a sphingoid base backbone that is synthesized \"de novo\" from the amino acid serine and a long-chain fatty acyl CoA, then converted into ceramides, phosphosphingolipids, glycosphingolipids and other compounds. The major sphingoid base of mammals is commonly referred to as sphingosine. Ceramides (N-acyl-sphingoid bases) are a major subclass of sphingoid base derivatives with an amide-linked fatty acid. The fatty acids are typically saturated or mono-unsaturated with chain lengths from 16 to 26 carbon atoms.\n\nThe major phosphosphingolipids of mammals are sphingomyelins (ceramide phosphocholines), whereas insects contain mainly ceramide phosphoethanolamines and fungi have phytoceramide phosphoinositols and mannose-containing headgroups. The glycosphingolipids are a diverse family of molecules composed of one or more sugar residues linked via a glycosidic bond to the sphingoid base. Examples of these are the simple and complex glycosphingolipids such as cerebrosides and gangliosides.\n\nSterols, such as cholesterol and its derivatives, are an important component of membrane lipids, along with the glycerophospholipids and sphingomyelins. Other examples of sterols are the bile acids and their conjugates, which in mammals are oxidized derivatives of cholesterol and are synthesized in the liver. The plant equivalents are the phytosterols, such as β-sitosterol, stigmasterol, and brassicasterol; the latter compound is also used as a biomarker for algal growth. The predominant sterol in fungal cell membranes is ergosterol.\n\nSterols are steroids in which one of the hydrogen atoms is substituted with a hydroxyl group, at position 3 in the carbon chain. They have in common with steroids the same fused four-ring core structure. Steroids have different biological roles as hormones and signaling molecules. The eighteen-carbon (C18) steroids include the estrogen family whereas the C19 steroids comprise the androgens such as testosterone and androsterone. The C21 subclass includes the progestogens as well as the glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids. The secosteroids, comprising various forms of vitamin D, are characterized by cleavage of the B ring of the core structure.\n\nPrenol lipids are synthesized from the five-carbon-unit precursors isopentenyl diphosphate and dimethylallyl diphosphate that are produced mainly via the mevalonic acid (MVA) pathway. The simple isoprenoids (linear alcohols, diphosphates, etc.) are formed by the successive addition of C5 units, and are classified according to number of these terpene units. Structures containing greater than 40 carbons are known as polyterpenes. Carotenoids are important simple isoprenoids that function as antioxidants and as precursors of vitamin A. Another biologically important class of molecules is exemplified by the quinones and hydroquinones, which contain an isoprenoid tail attached to a quinonoid core of non-isoprenoid origin. Vitamin E and vitamin K, as well as the ubiquinones, are examples of this class. Prokaryotes synthesize polyprenols (called bactoprenols) in which the terminal isoprenoid unit attached to oxygen remains unsaturated, whereas in animal polyprenols (dolichols) the terminal isoprenoid is reduced.\n\nSaccharolipids describe compounds in which fatty acids are linked directly to a sugar backbone, forming structures that are compatible with membrane bilayers. In the saccharolipids, a monosaccharide substitutes for the glycerol backbone present in glycerolipids and glycerophospholipids. The most familiar saccharolipids are the acylated glucosamine precursors of the Lipid A component of the lipopolysaccharides in Gram-negative bacteria. Typical lipid A molecules are disaccharides of glucosamine, which are derivatized with as many as seven fatty-acyl chains. The minimal lipopolysaccharide required for growth in \"E. coli\" is Kdo-Lipid A, a hexa-acylated disaccharide of glucosamine that is glycosylated with two 3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonic acid (Kdo) residues.\n\nPolyketides are synthesized by polymerization of acetyl and propionyl subunits by classic enzymes as well as iterative and multimodular enzymes that share mechanistic features with the fatty acid synthases. They comprise many secondary metabolites and natural products from animal, plant, bacterial, fungal and marine sources, and have great structural diversity. Many polyketides are cyclic molecules whose backbones are often further modified by glycosylation, methylation, hydroxylation, oxidation, or other processes. Many commonly used anti-microbial, anti-parasitic, and anti-cancer agents are polyketides or polyketide derivatives, such as erythromycins, tetracyclines, avermectins, and antitumor epothilones.\n\nEukaryotic cells feature the compartmentalized membrane-bound organelles that carry out different biological functions. The glycerophospholipids are the main structural component of biological membranes, as the cellular plasma membrane and the intracellular membranes of organelles; in animal cells, the plasma membrane physically separates the intracellular components from the extracellular environment. The glycerophospholipids are amphipathic molecules (containing both hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions) that contain a glycerol core linked to two fatty acid-derived \"tails\" by ester linkages and to one \"head\" group by a phosphate ester linkage. While glycerophospholipids are the major component of biological membranes, other non-glyceride lipid components such as sphingomyelin and sterols (mainly cholesterol in animal cell membranes) are also found in biological membranes. In plants and algae, the galactosyldiacylglycerols, and sulfoquinovosyldiacylglycerol, which lack a phosphate group, are important components of membranes of chloroplasts and related organelles and are the most abundant lipids in photosynthetic tissues, including those of higher plants, algae and certain bacteria.\n\nPlant thylakoid membranes have the largest lipid component of a non-bilayer forming monogalactosyl diglyceride (MGDG), and little phospholipids; despite this unique lipid composition, chloroplast thylakoid membranes have been shown to contain a dynamic lipid-bilayer matrix as revealed by magnetic resonance and electron microscope studies.\n\nA biological membrane is a form of lamellar phase lipid bilayer. The formation of lipid bilayers is an energetically preferred process when the glycerophospholipids described above are in an aqueous environment. This is known as the hydrophobic effect. In an aqueous system, the polar heads of lipids align towards the polar, aqueous environment, while the hydrophobic tails minimize their contact with water and tend to cluster together, forming a vesicle; depending on the concentration of the lipid, this biophysical interaction may result in the formation of micelles, liposomes, or lipid bilayers. Other aggregations are also observed and form part of the polymorphism of amphiphile (lipid) behavior. Phase behavior is an area of study within biophysics and is the subject of current academic research. Micelles and bilayers form in the polar medium by a process known as the hydrophobic effect. When dissolving a lipophilic or amphiphilic substance in a polar environment, the polar molecules (i.e., water in an aqueous solution) become more ordered around the dissolved lipophilic substance, since the polar molecules cannot form hydrogen bonds to the lipophilic areas of the amphiphile. So in an aqueous environment, the water molecules form an ordered \"clathrate\" cage around the dissolved lipophilic molecule.\n\nThe formation of lipids into protocell membranes represents a key step in models of abiogenesis, the origin of life.\n\nTriglycerides, stored in adipose tissue, are a major form of energy storage both in animals and plants. They are a major source of energy because carbohydrates are fully reduced structures. In comparison to glycogen which would contribute only half of the energy per its pure mass, triglyceride carbons are all bonded to hydrogens, unlike in carbohydrates. The adipocyte, or fat cell, is designed for continuous synthesis and breakdown of triglycerides in animals, with breakdown controlled mainly by the activation of hormone-sensitive enzyme lipase. The complete oxidation of fatty acids provides high caloric content, about 38 kJ/g (9 kcal/g), compared with 17 kJ/g (4 kcal/g) for the breakdown of carbohydrates and proteins. Migratory birds that must fly long distances without eating use stored energy of triglycerides to fuel their flights.\n\nIn recent years, evidence has emerged showing that lipid signaling is a vital part of the cell signaling. Lipid signaling may occur via activation of G protein-coupled or nuclear receptors, and members of several different lipid categories have been identified as signaling molecules and cellular messengers. These include sphingosine-1-phosphate, a sphingolipid derived from ceramide that is a potent messenger molecule involved in regulating calcium mobilization, cell growth, and apoptosis; diacylglycerol (DAG) and the phosphatidylinositol phosphates (PIPs), involved in calcium-mediated activation of protein kinase C; the prostaglandins, which are one type of fatty-acid derived eicosanoid involved in inflammation and immunity; the steroid hormones such as estrogen, testosterone and cortisol, which modulate a host of functions such as reproduction, metabolism and blood pressure; and the oxysterols such as 25-hydroxy-cholesterol that are liver X receptor agonists. Phosphatidylserine lipids are known to be involved in signaling for the phagocytosis of apoptotic cells or pieces of cells. They accomplish this by being exposed to the extracellular face of the cell membrane after the inactivation of flippases which place them exclusively on the cytosolic side and the activation of scramblases, which scramble the orientation of the phospholipids. After this occurs, other cells recognize the phosphatidylserines and phagocytosize the cells or cell fragments exposing them.\n\nThe \"fat-soluble\" vitamins (A, D, E and K) – which are isoprene-based lipids – are essential nutrients stored in the liver and fatty tissues, with a diverse range of functions. Acyl-carnitines are involved in the transport and metabolism of fatty acids in and out of mitochondria, where they undergo beta oxidation. Polyprenols and their phosphorylated derivatives also play important transport roles, in this case the transport of oligosaccharides across membranes. Polyprenol phosphate sugars and polyprenol diphosphate sugars function in extra-cytoplasmic glycosylation reactions, in extracellular polysaccharide biosynthesis (for instance, peptidoglycan polymerization in bacteria), and in eukaryotic protein N-glycosylation. Cardiolipins are a subclass of glycerophospholipids containing four acyl chains and three glycerol groups that are particularly abundant in the inner mitochondrial membrane. They are believed to activate enzymes involved with oxidative phosphorylation. Lipids also form the basis of steroid hormones.\n\nThe major dietary lipids for humans and other animals are animal and plant triglycerides, sterols, and membrane phospholipids. The process of lipid metabolism synthesizes and degrades the lipid stores and produces the structural and functional lipids characteristic of individual tissues.\n\nIn animals, when there is an oversupply of dietary carbohydrate, the excess carbohydrate is converted to triglycerides. This involves the synthesis of fatty acids from acetyl-CoA and the esterification of fatty acids in the production of triglycerides, a process called lipogenesis. Fatty acids are made by fatty acid synthases that polymerize and then reduce acetyl-CoA units. The acyl chains in the fatty acids are extended by a cycle of reactions that add the acetyl group, reduce it to an alcohol, dehydrate it to an alkene group and then reduce it again to an alkane group. The enzymes of fatty acid biosynthesis are divided into two groups, in animals and fungi all these fatty acid synthase reactions are carried out by a single multifunctional protein, while in plant plastids and bacteria separate enzymes perform each step in the pathway. The fatty acids may be subsequently converted to triglycerides that are packaged in lipoproteins and secreted from the liver.\n\nThe synthesis of unsaturated fatty acids involves a desaturation reaction, whereby a double bond is introduced into the fatty acyl chain. For example, in humans, the desaturation of stearic acid by stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 produces oleic acid. The doubly unsaturated fatty acid linoleic acid as well as the triply unsaturated α-linolenic acid cannot be synthesized in mammalian tissues, and are therefore essential fatty acids and must be obtained from the diet.\n\nTriglyceride synthesis takes place in the endoplasmic reticulum by metabolic pathways in which acyl groups in fatty acyl-CoAs are transferred to the hydroxyl groups of glycerol-3-phosphate and diacylglycerol.\n\nTerpenes and isoprenoids, including the carotenoids, are made by the assembly and modification of isoprene units donated from the reactive precursors isopentenyl pyrophosphate and dimethylallyl pyrophosphate. These precursors can be made in different ways. In animals and archaea, the mevalonate pathway produces these compounds from acetyl-CoA, while in plants and bacteria the non-mevalonate pathway uses pyruvate and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate as substrates. One important reaction that uses these activated isoprene donors is steroid biosynthesis. Here, the isoprene units are joined together to make squalene and then folded up and formed into a set of rings to make lanosterol. Lanosterol can then be converted into other steroids such as cholesterol and ergosterol.\n\nBeta oxidation is the metabolic process by which fatty acids are broken down in the mitochondria or in peroxisomes to generate acetyl-CoA. For the most part, fatty acids are oxidized by a mechanism that is similar to, but not identical with, a reversal of the process of fatty acid synthesis. That is, two-carbon fragments are removed sequentially from the carboxyl end of the acid after steps of dehydrogenation, hydration, and oxidation to form a beta-keto acid, which is split by thiolysis. The acetyl-CoA is then ultimately converted into ATP, CO, and HO using the citric acid cycle and the electron transport chain. Hence the citric acid cycle can start at acetyl-CoA when fat is being broken down for energy if there is little or no glucose available. The energy yield of the complete oxidation of the fatty acid palmitate is 106 ATP. Unsaturated and odd-chain fatty acids require additional enzymatic steps for degradation.\n\nMost of the fat found in food is in the form of triglycerides, cholesterol, and phospholipids. Some dietary fat is necessary to facilitate absorption of fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, and K) and carotenoids. Humans and other mammals have a dietary requirement for certain essential fatty acids, such as linoleic acid (an omega-6 fatty acid) and alpha-linolenic acid (an omega-3 fatty acid) because they cannot be synthesized from simple precursors in the diet. Both of these fatty acids are 18-carbon polyunsaturated fatty acids differing in the number and position of the double bonds. Most vegetable oils are rich in linoleic acid (safflower, sunflower, and corn oils). Alpha-linolenic acid is found in the green leaves of plants, and in selected seeds, nuts, and legumes (in particular flax, rapeseed, walnut, and soy). Fish oils are particularly rich in the longer-chain omega-3 fatty acids eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA). Many studies have shown positive health benefits associated with consumption of omega-3 fatty acids on infant development, cancer, cardiovascular diseases, and various mental illnesses, such as depression, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, and dementia. In contrast, it is now well-established that consumption of trans fats, such as those present in partially hydrogenated vegetable oils, are a risk factor for cardiovascular disease. Fats that are good for you can be turned into trans fats by overcooking.\n\nA few studies have suggested that total dietary fat intake is linked to an increased risk of obesity and diabetes. However, a number of very large studies, including the Women's Health Initiative Dietary Modification Trial, an eight-year study of 49,000 women, the Nurses' Health Study and the Health Professionals Follow-up Study, revealed no such links. None of these studies suggested any connection between percentage of calories from fat and risk of cancer, heart disease, or weight gain. The Nutrition Source, a website maintained by the Department of Nutrition at the Harvard School of Public Health, summarizes the current evidence on the impact of dietary fat: \"Detailed research—much of it done at Harvard—shows that the total amount of fat in the diet isn't really linked with weight or disease.\"\n\nBULLET::::- , a class of natural products composed of long aliphatic chains and phenolic rings that occur in plants, fungi and bacteria\n\n\nIntroductory\nBULLET::::- List of lipid-related web sites\nBULLET::::- Nature Lipidomics Gateway – Round-up and summaries of recent lipid research\nBULLET::::- Lipid Library – General reference on lipid chemistry and biochemistry\nBULLET::::- Cyberlipid.org – Resources and history for lipids.\nBULLET::::- Molecular Computer Simulations – Modeling of Lipid Membranes\nBULLET::::- Lipids, Membranes and Vesicle Trafficking – The Virtual Library of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology\n\nNomenclature\nBULLET::::- IUPAC nomenclature of lipids\nBULLET::::- IUPAC glossary entry for the lipid class of molecules\n\nDatabases\nBULLET::::- LIPID MAPS – Comprehensive lipid and lipid-associated gene/protein databases.\nBULLET::::- LipidBank – Japanese database of lipids and related properties, spectral data and references.\n\nGeneral\nBULLET::::- ApolloLipids – Provides dyslipidemia and cardiovascular disease prevention and treatment information as well as continuing medical education programs\nBULLET::::- National Lipid Association – Professional medical education organization for health care professionals who seek to prevent morbidity and mortality stemming from dyslipidemias and other cholesterol-related disorders.\n"}
{"id": "17944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17944", "title": "Lie algebra", "text": "Lie algebra\n\nIn mathematics, a Lie algebra (pronounced \"Lee\") is a vector space formula_1 together with a non-associative operation called the Lie bracket, an alternating bilinear map formula_2, satisfying the Jacobi identity.\n\nLie algebras are closely related to Lie groups, which are groups that are also smooth manifolds: any Lie group gives rise to a Lie algebra, which is its tangent space at the identity. Conversely, to any finite-dimensional Lie algebra over real or complex numbers, there is a corresponding connected Lie group unique up to finite coverings (Lie's third theorem). This correspondence allows one to study the structure and classification of Lie groups in terms of Lie algebras.\n\nIn physics, Lie groups appear as symmetry groups of physical systems, and their Lie algebras (tangent vectors near the identity) may be thought of as infinitesimal symmetry motions. Thus Lie algebras and their representations are used extensively in physics, notably in quantum mechanics and particle physics.\n\nAn elementary example is the space of three dimensional vectors formula_3 with the bracket operation defined by the cross product formula_4 This is skew-symmetric since formula_5, and instead of associativity it satisfies the Jacobi identity: formula_6This is the Lie algebra of the Lie group of rotations of space, and each vector formula_7 may be pictured as an infinitesimal rotation around the axis \"v\", with velocity equal to the magnitude of \"v\". The Lie bracket is a measure of the non-commutativity between two rotations: since a rotation commutes with itself, we have the alternating property formula_8.\n\nLie algebras were introduced to study the concept of infinitesimal transformations by Marius Sophus Lie in the 1870s, and independently discovered by Wilhelm Killing in the 1880s. The name \"Lie algebra\" was given by Hermann Weyl in the 1930s; in older texts, the term \"infinitesimal group\" is used.\n\nA Lie algebra is a vector space formula_9 over some field formula_10 together with a binary operation formula_11 called the Lie bracket satisfying the following axioms:\n\nBULLET::::- Bilinearity,\n\nBULLET::::- Alternativity,\n\nBULLET::::- The Jacobi identity,\n\nUsing bilinearity to expand the Lie bracket formula_19 and using alternativity shows that formula_20 for all elements \"x\", \"y\" in formula_14, showing that bilinearity and alternativity together imply \nBULLET::::- Anticommutativity,\n\nIt is customary to denote a Lie algebra by a lower-case fraktur letter such as formula_24. If a Lie algebra is associated with a Lie group, then the algebra is denoted by the fraktur version of the group: for example the Lie algebra of SU(\"n\") is formula_25.\n\nElements of a Lie algebra formula_14 are said to generate it if the smallest subalgebra containing these elements is formula_14 itself. The \"dimension\" of a Lie algebra is its dimension as a vector space over \"F\". The cardinality of a minimal generating set of a Lie algebra is always less than or equal to its dimension.\n\nSee the classification of low-dimensional real Lie algebras for other small examples.\n\nThe Lie bracket is not associative, meaning that formula_28 need not equal formula_29. (However, it is \"flexible\".) Nonetheless, much of the terminology of associative rings and algebras is commonly applied to Lie algebras. A \"Lie subalgebra\" is a subspace formula_30 which is closed under the Lie bracket. An \"ideal\" formula_31 is a subalgebra satisfying the stronger condition:\n\nA Lie algebra \"homomorphism\" is a linear map compatible with the respective Lie brackets:\n\nAs for associative rings, ideals are precisely the kernels of homomorphisms; given a Lie algebra formula_14 and an ideal formula_35 in it, one constructs the \"factor algebra\" or \"quotient algebra\" formula_36, and the first isomorphism theorem holds for Lie algebras.\n\nSince the Lie bracket is a kind of infinitesimal commutator of the corresponding Lie group, we say that two elements formula_37 \"commute\" if their bracket vanishes: formula_38. \n\nThe centralizer subalgebra of a subset formula_39 is the set of elements commuting with \"S\": that is, formula_40. The centralizer of formula_14 itself is the \"center\" formula_42. Similarly, for a subspace \"S\", the normalizer subalgebra of \"S\" is formula_43. Equivalently, if \"S\" is a Lie subalgebra, formula_44 is the largest subalgebra such that formula_45 is an ideal of formula_44.\n\nFor two Lie algebras formula_47 and formula_48, their direct sum Lie algebra is the vector space\nformula_49consisting of all pairs formula_50, with the operation\n\nso that the copies of formula_52 commute with each other: formula_53 Let formula_14 be a Lie algebra and formula_55 an ideal of formula_14. If the canonical map formula_57 splits (i.e., admits a section), then formula_14 is said to be a semidirect product of formula_55 and formula_60, formula_61. See also semidirect sum of Lie algebras.\n\nLevi's theorem says that a finite-dimensional Lie algebra is a semidirect product of its radical and the complementary subalgebra (Levi subalgebra).\n\nA \"derivation\" on the Lie algebra formula_14 (or on any non-associative algebra) is a linear map formula_63 that obeys the Leibniz law, that is,\n\nfor all formula_37. The \"inner derivation\" associated to any formula_66 is the adjoint mapping formula_67 defined by formula_68. (This is a derivation as a consequence of the Jacobi identity.) If formula_14 is semisimple, every derivation is inner.\n\nThe derivations form a vector space formula_70, which is a Lie algebra under the commutator bracket formula_71, where formula_72denotes composition of mappings. The inner derivations form a Lie subalgebra of formula_70.\n\nLet \"V\" be a finite-dimensional vector space over a field \"F\", formula_74 the Lie algebra of linear transformations and formula_75 a Lie subalgebra. Then formula_14 is said to be split if the roots of the characteristic polynomials of all linear transformations in formula_14 are in the base field \"F\". More generally, a finite-dimensional Lie algebra formula_14 is said to be split if it has a Cartan subalgebra whose image under the adjoint representation formula_79 is a split Lie algebra. A split form of a complex semisimple Lie algebra (cf. #Real form and complexification) is an example. See also split Lie algebra for further information.\n\nAny vector space formula_80 endowed with the identically zero Lie bracket becomes a Lie algebra. Such Lie algebras are called abelian, cf. below. Any one-dimensional Lie algebra over a field is abelian, by the alternating property of the Lie bracket.\nBULLET::::- On an associative algebra formula_81 over a field formula_82 with multiplication formula_83, a Lie bracket may be defined by the commutator formula_84. With this bracket, formula_81 is a Lie algebra. The associative algebra \"A\" is called an \"enveloping algebra\" of the Lie algebra formula_86. Every Lie algebra can be embedded into one that arises from an associative algebra in this fashion; see universal enveloping algebra.\nBULLET::::- The associative algebra of endomorphisms of an \"F\"-vector space formula_87 with the above Lie bracket is denoted formula_88.\nBULLET::::- For a finite dimensional vector space formula_89, the previous example becomes the Lie algebra of \"n\" × \"n\" matrices, denoted formula_90 or formula_91, with the bracket formula_92, where formula_93 denotes matrix multiplication. This is the Lie algebra of the general linear group, consisting of invertible matrices.\n\nTwo important subalgebras of formula_91 are:\n\nBULLET::::- The matrices of trace zero form the special linear Lie algebra formula_95, the Lie algebra of the special linear group formula_96.\nBULLET::::- The skew-hermitian matrices form the unitary Lie algebra formula_97, the Lie algebra of the unitary group \"U\"(\"n\").\n\nA complex matrix group is a Lie group consisting of matrices, formula_98, where the multiplication of \"G\" is matrix multiplication. The corresponding Lie algebra formula_1 is the space of matrices which are tangent vectors to \"G\" inside the linear space formula_100: this consists of derivatives of smooth curves in \"G\" at the identity: formula_101The Lie bracket of formula_14 is given by the commutator of matrices, formula_103. Given the Lie algebra, one can recover the Lie group as the image of the matrix exponential mapping formula_104 defined by formula_105, which converges for every matrix formula_106: that is, formula_107. \nThe following are examples of Lie algebras of matrix Lie groups:\n\nBULLET::::- The special linear group formula_108, consisting of all \"n\" × \"n\" matrices with determinant 1. Its Lie algebra formula_109consists of all \"n\" × \"n\" matrices with real entries and trace 0. Similarly, one can define the corresponding real Lie group formula_110 and its Lie algebra formula_111.\nBULLET::::- The unitary group formula_112 consists of \"n\" × \"n\" unitary matrices (satisfying formula_113). Its Lie algebra formula_114 consists of skew-self-adjoint matrices (formula_115).\nBULLET::::- The special orthogonal group formula_116, consisting of real determinant-one orthogonal matrices (formula_117). Its Lie algebra formula_118 consists of real skew-symmetric matrices (formula_119). The full orthogonal group formula_120, without the determinant-one condition, consists of formula_116 and a separate connected component, so it has the \"same\" Lie algebra as formula_116. Similarly, one can define a complex version of this group and algebra, simply by allowing complex matrix entries.\n\nBULLET::::- On any field formula_82 there is, up to isomorphism, a single two-dimensional nonabelian Lie algebra. With generators \"x, y,\" its bracket is defined as formula_124. It generates the affine group in one dimension.\n\nSince\nfor any natural number formula_127 and any formula_128, one sees that the resulting Lie group elements are upper triangular 2×2 matrices with unit lower diagonal:\n\nBULLET::::- The Heisenberg algebra formula_130 is a three-dimensional Lie algebra generated by elements , and with Lie brackets\n\nBULLET::::- The Lie algebra formula_134 of the group SO(3) is spanned by the three matrices\n\nBULLET::::- An important class of infinite-dimensional real Lie algebras arises in differential topology. The space of smooth vector fields on a differentiable manifold \"M\" forms a Lie algebra, where the Lie bracket is defined to be the commutator of vector fields. One way of expressing the Lie bracket is through the formalism of Lie derivatives, which identifies a vector field \"X\" with a first order partial differential operator \"L\" acting on smooth functions by letting \"L\"(\"f\") be the directional derivative of the function \"f\" in the direction of \"X\". The Lie bracket [\"X\",\"Y\"] of two vector fields is the vector field defined through its action on functions by the formula:\n\nBULLET::::- Kac–Moody algebras are a large class of infinite-dimensional Lie algebras whose structure is very similar to the finite-dimensional cases above.\nBULLET::::- The Moyal algebra is an infinite-dimensional Lie algebra that contains all classical Lie algebras as subalgebras.\nBULLET::::- The Virasoro algebra is of paramount importance in string theory.\n\nGiven a vector space \"V\", let formula_74 denote the Lie algebra consisting of all linear endomorphisms of \"V\", with bracket given by formula_103. A \"representation\" of a Lie algebra formula_14 on \"V\" is a Lie algebra homomorphism\n\nA representation is said to be \"faithful\" if its kernel is zero. Ado's theorem states that every finite-dimensional Lie algebra has a faithful representation on a finite-dimensional vector space.\n\nFor any Lie algebra formula_14, we can define a representation\ngiven by formula_148; it is a representation on the vector space formula_14 called the adjoint representation.\n\nOne important aspect of the study of Lie algebras (especially semisimple Lie algebras) is the study of their representations. (Indeed, most of the books listed in the references section devote a substantial fraction of their pages to representation theory.) Although Ado's theorem is an important result, the primary goal of representation theory is not to find a faithful representation of a given Lie algebra formula_14. Indeed, in the semisimple case, the adjoint representation is already faithful. Rather the goal is to understand \"all\" possible representation of formula_14, up to the natural notion of equivalence. In the semisimple case, Weyl's theorem says that every finite-dimensional representation is a direct sum of irreducible representations (those with no nontrivial invariant subspaces). The irreducible representations, in turn, are classified by a theorem of the highest weight.\n\nThe representation theory of Lie algebras plays an important role in various parts of theoretical physics. There, one considers operators on the space of states that satisfy certain natural commutation relations. These commutation relations typically come from a symmetry of the problem—specifically, they are the relations of the Lie algebra of the relevant symmetry group. An example would be the angular momentum operators, whose commutation relations are those of the Lie algebra formula_134 of the rotation group SO(3). Typically, the space of states is very far from being irreducible under the pertinent operators, but one can attempt to decompose it into irreducible pieces. In doing so, one needs to know the irreducible representations of the given Lie algebra. In the study of the quantum hydrogen atom, for example, quantum mechanics textbooks give (without calling it that) a classification of the irreducible representations of the Lie algebra formula_134.\n\nLie algebras can be classified to some extent. In particular, this has an application to the classification of Lie groups.\n\nAnalogously to abelian, nilpotent, and solvable groups, defined in terms of the derived subgroups, one can define abelian, nilpotent, and solvable Lie algebras.\n\nA Lie algebra formula_14 is \"abelian\" if the Lie bracket vanishes, i.e. [\"x\",\"y\"] = 0, for all \"x\" and \"y\" in formula_14. Abelian Lie algebras correspond to commutative (or abelian) connected Lie groups such as vector spaces formula_156 or tori formula_157, and are all of the form formula_158 meaning an \"n\"-dimensional vector space with the trivial Lie bracket.\n\nA more general class of Lie algebras is defined by the vanishing of all commutators of given length. A Lie algebra formula_14 is \"nilpotent\" if the lower central series\n\nBULLET::::- For all \"x\" in \"L\":\n\nLie rings need not be Lie groups under addition. Any Lie algebra is an example of a Lie ring. Any associative ring can be made into a Lie ring by defining a bracket operator formula_84. Conversely to any Lie algebra there is a corresponding ring, called the universal enveloping algebra.\n\nLie rings are used in the study of finite p-groups through the \"Lazard correspondence. The lower central factors of a \"p\"-group are finite abelian \"p\"-groups, so modules over Z/\"p\"Z\"'. The direct sum of the lower central factors is given the structure of a Lie ring by defining the bracket to be the commutator of two coset representatives. The Lie ring structure is enriched with another module homomorphism, the \"p\"th power map, making the associated Lie ring a so-called restricted Lie ring.\n\nLie rings are also useful in the definition of a p-adic analytic groups and their endomorphisms by studying Lie algebras over rings of integers such as the p-adic integers. The definition of finite groups of Lie type due to Chevalley involves restricting from a Lie algebra over the complex numbers to a Lie algebra over the integers, and the reducing modulo \"p\" to get a Lie algebra over a finite field.\n\nBULLET::::- Any Lie algebra over a general ring instead of a field is an example of a Lie ring. Lie rings are \"not\" Lie groups under addition, despite the name.\nBULLET::::- Any associative ring can be made into a Lie ring by defining a bracket operator\nBULLET::::- For an example of a Lie ring arising from the study of groups, let formula_164 be a group with formula_165 the commutator operation, and let formula_166 be a central series in formula_164 — that is the commutator subgroup formula_168 is contained in formula_169 for any formula_170. Then\n\nBULLET::::- Adjoint representation of a Lie algebra\nBULLET::::- Anyonic Lie algebra\nBULLET::::- Chiral Lie algebra\nBULLET::::- Free Lie algebra\nBULLET::::- Index of a Lie algebra\nBULLET::::- Lie algebra cohomology\nBULLET::::- Lie algebra extension\nBULLET::::- Lie algebra representation\nBULLET::::- Lie bialgebra\nBULLET::::- Lie coalgebra\nBULLET::::- Lie operad\nBULLET::::- Particle physics and representation theory\nBULLET::::- Lie superalgebra\nBULLET::::- Poisson algebra\nBULLET::::- Pre-Lie algebra\nBULLET::::- Quantum groups\nBULLET::::- Moyal algebra\nBULLET::::- Quasi-Frobenius Lie algebra\nBULLET::::- Quasi-Lie algebra\nBULLET::::- Restricted Lie algebra\nBULLET::::- Serre relations\nBULLET::::- Symmetric Lie algebra\nBULLET::::- Erdmann, Karin & Wildon, Mark. \"Introduction to Lie Algebras\", 1st edition, Springer, 2006.\n\nBULLET::::- McKenzie, Douglas, (2015), \"An Elementary Introduction to Lie Algebras for Physicists\"\n"}
{"id": "17945", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17945", "title": "Lie group", "text": "Lie group\n\nIn mathematics, a Lie group (pronounced \"Lee\") is a group whose elements are organized continuously and smoothly, as opposed to discrete groups, where the elements are separated—this makes Lie groups differentiable manifolds. Lie groups are named after Norwegian mathematician Sophus Lie, who laid the foundations of the theory of continuous transformation groups.\n\nIn rough terms, a Lie group is a continuous group, that is, one whose elements are described by several real parameters. As such, Lie groups provide a natural model for the concept of continuous symmetry, such as rotational symmetry in three dimensions. Lie groups are widely used in many parts of modern mathematics and physics. Lie's original motivation for introducing Lie groups was to model the continuous symmetries of differential equations, in much the same way that finite groups are used in Galois theory to model the discrete symmetries of algebraic equations.\n\nLie groups are smooth differentiable manifolds and as such can be studied using differential calculus, in contrast with the case of more general topological groups. One of the key ideas in the theory of Lie groups is to replace the \"global\" object, the group, with its \"local\" or linearized version, which Lie himself called its \"infinitesimal group\" and which has since become known as its Lie algebra.\n\nLie groups play an enormous role in modern geometry, on several different levels. Felix Klein argued in his Erlangen program that one can consider various \"geometries\" by specifying an appropriate transformation group that leaves certain geometric properties invariant. Thus Euclidean geometry corresponds to the choice of the group E(3) of distance-preserving transformations of the Euclidean space R, conformal geometry corresponds to enlarging the group to the conformal group, whereas in projective geometry one is interested in the properties invariant under the projective group. This idea later led to the notion of a G-structure, where \"G\" is a Lie group of \"local\" symmetries of a manifold.\n\nLie groups (and their associated Lie algebras) play a major role in modern physics, with the Lie group typically playing the role of a symmetry of a physical system. Here, the representations of the Lie group (or of its Lie algebra) are especially important. Representation theory is used extensively in particle physics. Groups whose representations are of particular importance include the rotation group SO(3) (or its double cover SU(2)), the special unitary group SU(3) and the Poincaré group.\n\nOn a \"global\" level, whenever a Lie group acts on a geometric object, such as a Riemannian or a symplectic manifold, this action provides a measure of rigidity and yields a rich algebraic structure. The presence of continuous symmetries expressed via a Lie group action on a manifold places strong constraints on its geometry and facilitates analysis on the manifold. Linear actions of Lie groups are especially important, and are studied in representation theory.\n\nIn the 1940s–1950s, Ellis Kolchin, Armand Borel, and Claude Chevalley realised that many foundational results concerning Lie groups can be developed completely algebraically, giving rise to the theory of algebraic groups defined over an arbitrary field. This insight opened new possibilities in pure algebra, by providing a uniform construction for most finite simple groups, as well as in algebraic geometry. The theory of automorphic forms, an important branch of modern number theory, deals extensively with analogues of Lie groups over adele rings; \"p\"-adic Lie groups play an important role, via their connections with Galois representations in number theory.\n\nA real Lie group is a group that is also a finite-dimensional real smooth manifold, in which the group operations of multiplication and inversion are smooth maps. Smoothness of the group multiplication\n\nmeans that \"μ\" is a smooth mapping of the product manifold into \"G\". These two requirements can be combined to the single requirement that the mapping\nbe a smooth mapping of the product manifold into \"G\".\n\nBULLET::::- The 2×2 real invertible matrices form a group under multiplication, denoted by or by GL(R):\n\nBULLET::::- The rotation matrices form a subgroup of , denoted by . It is a Lie group in its own right: specifically, a one-dimensional compact connected Lie group which is diffeomorphic to the circle. Using the rotation angle formula_5 as a parameter, this group can be parametrized as follows:\n\nBULLET::::- The affine group of one dimension is a two-dimensional matrix Lie group, consisting of formula_7 real, upper-triangular matrices, with the first diagonal entry being positive and the second diagonal entry being 1. Thus, the group consists of matrices of the form\n\nWe now present an example of a group with an uncountable number of elements that is not a Lie group under a certain topology. The group given by \n\nwith formula_10 a \"fixed\" irrational number, is a subgroup of the torus formula_11 that is not a Lie group when given the subspace topology. If we take any small neighborhood formula_12 of a point formula_13 in formula_14, for example, the portion of formula_14 in formula_12 is disconnected. The group formula_14 winds repeatedly around the torus without ever reaching a previous point of the spiral and thus forms a dense subgroup of formula_11.\n\nThe group formula_14 can, however, be given a different topology, in which the distance between two points formula_20 is defined as the length of the shortest path \"in the group \" formula_14 joining formula_22 to formula_23. In this topology, formula_14 is identified homeomorphically with the real line by identifying each element with the number formula_25 in the definition of formula_14. With this topology, formula_14 is just the group of real numbers under addition and is therefore a Lie group.\n\nThe group formula_14 is an example of a \"Lie subgroup\" of a Lie group that is not closed. See the discussion below of Lie subgroups in the section on basic concepts.\n\nLet denote the group of invertible matrices with entries in C. Any closed subgroup of is a Lie group; Lie groups of this sort are called matrix Lie groups. Since most of the interesting examples of Lie groups can be realized as matrix Lie groups, some textbooks restrict attention to this class, including those of Hall and Rossmann. Restricting attention to matrix Lie groups simplifies the definition of the Lie algebra and the exponential map. The following are standard examples of matrix Lie groups.\nBULLET::::- The special linear groups over R and C, and , consisting of matrices with determinant one and entries in R or C\nBULLET::::- The unitary groups and special unitary groups, U(\"n\") and SU(\"n\"), consisting of complex matrices satisfying formula_29 (and also formula_30 in the case of SU(\"n\"))\nBULLET::::- The orthogonal groups and special orthogonal groups, O(\"n\") and SO(\"n\"), consisting of real matrices satisfying formula_31 (and also formula_32 in the case of SO(\"n\"))\nAll of the preceding examples fall under the heading of the classical groups.\n\nA complex Lie group is defined in the same way using complex manifolds rather than real ones (example: ), and similarly, using an alternate metric completion of Q, one can define a \"p\"-adic Lie group over the \"p\"-adic numbers, a topological group in which each point has a \"p\"-adic neighborhood. Hilbert's fifth problem asked whether replacing differentiable manifolds with topological or analytic ones can yield new examples. The answer to this question turned out to be negative: in 1952, Gleason, Montgomery and Zippin showed that if \"G\" is a topological manifold with continuous group operations, then there exists exactly one analytic structure on \"G\" which turns it into a Lie group (see also Hilbert–Smith conjecture). If the underlying manifold is allowed to be infinite-dimensional (for example, a Hilbert manifold), then one arrives at the notion of an infinite-dimensional Lie group. It is possible to define analogues of many Lie groups over finite fields, and these give most of the examples of finite simple groups.\n\nThe language of category theory provides a concise definition for Lie groups: a Lie group is a group object in the category of smooth manifolds. This is important, because it allows generalization of the notion of a Lie group to Lie supergroups.\n\nA Lie group can be defined as a (Hausdorff) topological group that, near the identity element, looks like a transformation group, with no reference to differentiable manifolds. First, we define an immersely linear Lie group to be a subgroup \"G\" of the general linear group formula_33 such that\nBULLET::::1. for some neighborhood \"V\" of the identity element \"e\" in \"G\", the topology on \"V\" is the subspace topology of formula_33 and \"V\" is closed in formula_33.\nBULLET::::2. \"G\" has at most countably many connected components.\n(For example, a closed subgroup of formula_33; that is, a matrix Lie group satisfies the above conditions.)\n\nThen a \"Lie group\" is defined as a topological group that (1) is locally isomorphic near the identities to an immersely linear Lie group and (2) has at most countably many connected components. Showing the topological definition is equivalent to the usual one is technical (and the beginning readers should skip the following) but is done roughly as follows:\nBULLET::::1. Given a Lie group \"G\" in the usual manifold sense, the Lie group–Lie algebra correspondence (or a version of Lie's third theorem) constructs an immersed Lie subgroup formula_37 such that formula_38 share the same Lie algebra; thus, they are locally isomorphic. Hence, \"G\" satisfies the above topological definition.\nBULLET::::2. Conversely, let \"G\" be a topological group that is a Lie group in the above topological sense and choose an immersely linear Lie group formula_39 that is locally isomorphic to \"G\". Then, by a version of the closed subgroup theorem, formula_39 is a real-analytic manifold and then, through the local isomorphism, \"G\" acquires a structure of a manifold near the identity element. One then shows that the group law on \"G\" can be given by formal power series; so the group operations are real-analytic and \"G\" itself is a real-analytic manifold.\n\nThe topological definition implies the statement that if two Lie groups are isomorphic as topological groups, then they are isomorphic as Lie groups. In fact, it states the general principle that, to a large extent, \"the topology of a Lie group\" together with the group law determines the geometry of the group.\n\nLie groups occur in abundance throughout mathematics and physics. Matrix groups or algebraic groups are (roughly) groups of matrices (for example, orthogonal and symplectic groups), and these give most of the more common examples of Lie groups.\n\nThe only connected Lie groups with dimension one are the real line formula_41 (with the group operation being addition) and the circle group formula_42 of complex numbers with absolute value one (with the group operation being multiplication). The formula_42 group is often denoted as formula_44, the group of formula_45 unitary matrices.\n\nIn two dimensions, if we restrict attention to simply connected groups, then they are classified by their Lie algebras. There are (up to isomorphism) only two Lie algebras of dimension two. The associated simply connected Lie groups are formula_46 (with the group operation being vector addition) and the affine group in dimension one, described in the previous subsection under \"first examples.\"\n\nBULLET::::- The group SU(2) is the group of formula_7 unitary matrices with determinant 1. Topologically, SU(2) is the 3-sphere formula_48; as a group, it may be identified with the group of unit quaternions.\nBULLET::::- The Heisenberg group is a connected nilpotent Lie group of dimension 3, playing a key role in quantum mechanics.\nBULLET::::- The Lorentz group is a 6-dimensional Lie group of linear isometries of the Minkowski space.\nBULLET::::- The Poincaré group is a 10-dimensional Lie group of affine isometries of the Minkowski space.\nBULLET::::- The exceptional Lie groups of types \"G\", \"F\", \"E\", \"E\", \"E\" have dimensions 14, 52, 78, 133, and 248. Along with the A-B-C-D series of simple Lie groups, the exceptional groups complete the list of simple Lie groups.\nBULLET::::- The symplectic group Sp(2\"n\", R) consists of all 2\"n\" × 2\"n\" matrices preserving a \"symplectic form\" on R. It is a connected Lie group of dimension 2\"n\" + \"n\".\n\nThere are several standard ways to form new Lie groups from old ones:\nBULLET::::- The product of two Lie groups is a Lie group.\nBULLET::::- Any topologically closed subgroup of a Lie group is a Lie group. This is known as the Closed subgroup theorem or Cartan's theorem.\nBULLET::::- The quotient of a Lie group by a closed normal subgroup is a Lie group.\nBULLET::::- The universal cover of a connected Lie group is a Lie group. For example, the group R is the universal cover of the circle group S. In fact any covering of a differentiable manifold is also a differentiable manifold, but by specifying \"universal\" cover, one guarantees a group structure (compatible with its other structures).\n\nSome examples of groups that are \"not\" Lie groups (except in the trivial sense that any group having at most countably many elements can be viewed as a 0-dimensional Lie group, with the discrete topology), are:\n\nBULLET::::- Infinite-dimensional groups, such as the additive group of an infinite-dimensional real vector space. These are not Lie groups as they are not \"finite-dimensional\" manifolds.\nBULLET::::- Some totally disconnected groups, such as the Galois group of an infinite extension of fields, or the additive group of the \"p\"-adic numbers. These are not Lie groups because their underlying spaces are not real manifolds. (Some of these groups are \"\"p\"-adic Lie groups\".) In general, only topological groups having similar local properties to R for some positive integer \"n\" can be Lie groups (of course they must also have a differentiable structure).\n\nTo every Lie group we can associate a Lie algebra whose underlying vector space is the tangent space of the Lie group at the identity element and which completely captures the local structure of the group. Informally we can think of elements of the Lie algebra as elements of the group that are \"infinitesimally close\" to the identity, and the Lie bracket of the Lie algebra is related to the commutator of two such infinitesimal elements. Before giving the abstract definition we give a few examples:\nBULLET::::- The Lie algebra of the vector space R is just R with the Lie bracket given by     [\"A\", \"B\"] = 0. (In general the Lie bracket of a connected Lie group is always 0 if and only if the Lie group is abelian.)\nBULLET::::- The Lie algebra of the general linear group GL(\"n\", C) of invertible matrices is the vector space M(\"n\", C) of square matrices with the Lie bracket given by     [\"A\", \"B\"] = \"AB\" − \"BA\".\nBULLET::::- If \"G\" is a closed subgroup of GL(\"n\", C) then the Lie algebra of \"G\" can be thought of informally as the matrices \"m\" of M(\"n\", R) such that 1 + ε\"m\" is in \"G\", where ε is an infinitesimal positive number with ε = 0 (of course, no such real number ε exists). For example, the orthogonal group O(\"n\", R) consists of matrices \"A\" with \"AA\" = 1, so the Lie algebra consists of the matrices \"m\" with (1 + ε\"m\")(1 + ε\"m\") = 1, which is equivalent to \"m\" + \"m\" = 0 because ε = 0.\nBULLET::::- The preceding description can be made more rigorous as follows. The Lie algebra of a closed subgroup \"G\" of GL(\"n\", C), may be computed as\n\nThe concrete definition given above for matrix groups is easy to work with, but has some minor problems: to use it we first need to represent a Lie group as a group of matrices, but not all Lie groups can be represented in this way, and even it is not obvious that the Lie algebra is independent of the representation we use. To get around these problems we give \nthe general definition of the Lie algebra of a Lie group (in 4 steps):\nBULLET::::1. Vector fields on any smooth manifold \"M\" can be thought of as derivations \"X\" of the ring of smooth functions on the manifold, and therefore form a Lie algebra under the Lie bracket [\"X\", \"Y\"] = \"XY\" − \"YX\", because the Lie bracket of any two derivations is a derivation.\nBULLET::::2. If \"G\" is any group acting smoothly on the manifold \"M\", then it acts on the vector fields, and the vector space of vector fields fixed by the group is closed under the Lie bracket and therefore also forms a Lie algebra.\nBULLET::::3. We apply this construction to the case when the manifold \"M\" is the underlying space of a Lie group \"G\", with \"G\" acting on \"G\" = \"M\" by left translations \"L\"(\"h\") = \"gh\". This shows that the space of left invariant vector fields (vector fields satisfying \"L\"\"X\" = \"X\" for every \"h\" in \"G\", where \"L\" denotes the differential of \"L\") on a Lie group is a Lie algebra under the Lie bracket of vector fields.\nBULLET::::4. Any tangent vector at the identity of a Lie group can be extended to a left invariant vector field by left translating the tangent vector to other points of the manifold. Specifically, the left invariant extension of an element \"v\" of the tangent space at the identity is the vector field defined by \"v\"^ = \"L\"\"v\". This identifies the tangent space \"TG\" at the identity with the space of left invariant vector fields, and therefore makes the tangent space at the identity into a Lie algebra, called the Lie algebra of \"G\", usually denoted by a Fraktur formula_51 Thus the Lie bracket on formula_52 is given explicitly by [\"v\", \"w\"] = [\"v\"^, \"w\"^].\n\nThis Lie algebra formula_52 is finite-dimensional and it has the same dimension as the manifold \"G\". The Lie algebra of \"G\" determines \"G\" up to \"local isomorphism\", where two Lie groups are called locally isomorphic if they look the same near the identity element.\nProblems about Lie groups are often solved by first solving the corresponding problem for the Lie algebras, and the result for groups then usually follows easily. \nFor example, simple Lie groups are usually classified by first classifying the corresponding Lie algebras.\n\nWe could also define a Lie algebra structure on \"T\" using right invariant vector fields instead of left invariant vector fields. This leads to the same Lie algebra, because the inverse map on \"G\" can be used to identify left invariant vector fields with right invariant vector fields, and acts as −1 on the tangent space \"T\".\n\nThe Lie algebra structure on \"T\" can also be described as follows:\nthe commutator operation\n\non \"G\" × \"G\" sends (\"e\", \"e\") to \"e\", so its derivative yields a bilinear operation on \"TG\". This bilinear operation is actually the zero map, but the second derivative, under the proper identification of tangent spaces, yields an operation that satisfies the axioms of a Lie bracket, and it is equal to twice the one defined through left-invariant vector fields.\n\nIf \"G\" and \"H\" are Lie groups, then a Lie group homomorphism \"f\" : \"G\" → \"H\" is a smooth group homomorphism. In the case of complex Lie groups, such a homomorphism is required to be a holomorphic map. However, these requirements are a bit stringent; every continuous homomorphism between real Lie groups turns out to be (real) analytic.\n\nThe composition of two Lie homomorphisms is again a homomorphism, and the class of all Lie groups, together with these morphisms, forms a category. Moreover, every Lie group homomorphism induces a homomorphism between the corresponding Lie algebras. Let formula_54 be a Lie group homomorphism and let formula_55 be its derivative at the identity. If we identify the Lie algebras of \"G\" and \"H\" with their tangent spaces at the identity elements then formula_55 is a map between the corresponding Lie algebras:\nOne can show that formula_55 is actually a Lie algebra homomorphism (meaning that it is a linear map which preserves the Lie bracket). In the language of category theory, we then have a covariant functor from the category of Lie groups to the category of Lie algebras which sends a Lie group to its Lie algebra and a Lie group homomorphism to its derivative at the identity.\n\nTwo Lie groups are called \"isomorphic\" if there exists a bijective homomorphism between them whose inverse is also a Lie group homomorphism. Equivalently, it is a diffeomorphism which is also a group homomorphism.\n\nIsomorphic Lie groups necessarily have isomorphic Lie algebras; it is then reasonable to ask how isomorphism classes of Lie groups relate to isomorphism classes of Lie algebras.\n\nThe first result in this direction is Lie's third theorem, which states that every finite-dimensional, real Lie algebra is the Lie algebra of some (linear) Lie group. One way to prove Lie's third theorem is to use Ado's theorem, which says every finite-dimensional real Lie algebra is isomorphic to a matrix Lie algebra. Meanwhile, for every finite-dimensional matrix Lie algebra, there is a linear group (matrix Lie group) with this algebra as its Lie algebra.\n\nOn the other hand, Lie groups with isomorphic Lie algebras need not be isomorphic. Furthermore, this result remains true even if we assume the groups are connected. To put it differently, the \"global\" structure of a Lie group is not determined by its Lie algebra; for example, if \"Z\" is any discrete subgroup of the center of \"G\" then \"G\" and \"G\"/\"Z\" have the same Lie algebra (see the table of Lie groups for examples). An example of importance in physics are the groups SU(2) and SO(3). These two groups have isomorphic Lie algebras, but the groups themselves are not isomorphic, because SU(2) is simply connected but SO(3) is not.\n\nOn the other hand, if we require that the Lie group be simply connected, then the global structure is determined by its Lie algebra: two simply connected Lie groups with isomorphic Lie algebras are isomorphic. (See the next subsection for more information about simply connected Lie groups.) In light of Lie's third theorem, we may therefore say that there is a one-to-one correspondence between isomorphism classes of finite-dimensional real Lie algebras and isomorphism classes of simply connected Lie groups.\n\nA Lie group formula_59 is said to be simply connected if every loop in formula_59 can be shrunk continuously to a point in formula_59. This notion is important because of the following result that has simple connectedness as a hypothesis:\nLie's third theorem says that every finite-dimensional real Lie algebra is the Lie algebra of a Lie group. It follows from Lie's third theorem and the preceding result that every finite-dimensional real Lie algebra is the Lie algebra of a \"unique\" simply connected Lie group.\n\nAn example of a simply connected group is the special unitary group SU(2), which as a manifold is the 3-sphere. The rotation group SO(3), on the other hand, is not simply connected. (See Topology of SO(3).) The failure of SO(3) to be simply connected is intimately connected to the distinction between integer spin and half-integer spin in quantum mechanics. Other examples of simply connected Lie groups include the special unitary group SU(n), the spin group (double cover of rotation group) Spin(n) for formula_72, and the compact symplectic group Sp(n).\n\nMethods for determining whether a Lie group is simply connected or not are discussed in the article on fundamental groups of Lie groups.\n\nThe exponential map from the Lie algebra formula_73 of the general linear group formula_74 to formula_74 is defined by the matrix exponential, given by the usual power series:\n\nfor matrices formula_77. If formula_59 is a closed subgroup of formula_74, then the exponential map takes the Lie algebra of formula_59 into formula_59; thus, we have an exponential map for all matrix groups. Every element of formula_59 that is sufficiently close to the identity is the exponential of a matrix in the Lie algebra.\n\nThe definition above is easy to use, but it is not defined for Lie groups that are not matrix groups, and it is not clear that the exponential map of a Lie group does not depend on its representation as a matrix group. We can solve both problems using a more abstract definition of the exponential map that works for all Lie groups, as follows.\n\nFor each vector formula_77 in the Lie algebra formula_52 of formula_59 (i.e., the tangent space to formula_59 at the identity), one proves that there is a unique one-parameter subgroup formula_87 such that formula_88. Saying that formula_89 is a one-parameter subgroup means simply that formula_89 is a smooth map into formula_59 and that \n\nfor all formula_93 and formula_94. The operation on the right hand side is the group multiplication in formula_59. The formal similarity of this formula with the one valid for the exponential function justifies the definition\n\nThis is called the exponential map, and it maps the Lie algebra formula_52 into the Lie group formula_59 It provides a diffeomorphism between a neighborhood of 0 in formula_52 and a neighborhood of formula_100 in formula_59. This exponential map is a generalization of the exponential function for real numbers (because formula_41 is the Lie algebra of the Lie group of positive real numbers with multiplication), for complex numbers (because formula_103 is the Lie algebra of the Lie group of non-zero complex numbers with multiplication) and for matrices (because formula_104 with the regular commutator is the Lie algebra of the Lie group formula_105 of all invertible matrices).\n\nBecause the exponential map is surjective on some neighbourhood formula_106 of formula_100, it is common to call elements of the Lie algebra infinitesimal generators of the group formula_59. The subgroup of formula_59 generated by formula_106 is the identity component of formula_59.\n\nThe exponential map and the Lie algebra determine the \"local group structure\" of every connected Lie group, because of the Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula: there exists a neighborhood formula_12 of the zero element of formula_52, such that for formula_114 we have\n\nwhere the omitted terms are known and involve Lie brackets of four or more elements. In case formula_77 and formula_117 commute, this formula reduces to the familiar exponential law formula_118\n\nThe exponential map relates Lie group homomorphisms. That is, if formula_119 is a Lie group homomorphism and formula_120 the induced map on the corresponding Lie algebras, then for all formula_121 we have\nIn other words, the following diagram commutes,\n\nThe exponential map from the Lie algebra to the Lie group is not always onto, even if the group is connected (though it does map onto the Lie group for connected groups that are either compact or nilpotent). For example, the exponential map of SL(2, R) is not surjective. Also, the exponential map is neither surjective nor injective for infinite-dimensional (see below) Lie groups modelled on \"C\" Fréchet space, even from arbitrary small neighborhood of 0 to corresponding neighborhood of 1.\n\nA Lie subgroup formula_14 of a Lie group formula_59 is a Lie group that is a subset of formula_59 and such that the inclusion map from formula_14 to formula_59 is an injective immersion and group homomorphism. According to Cartan's theorem, a closed subgroup of formula_59 admits a unique smooth structure which makes it an embedded Lie subgroup of formula_59—i.e. a Lie subgroup such that the inclusion map is a smooth embedding.\n\nExamples of non-closed subgroups are plentiful; for example take formula_59 to be a torus of dimension 2 or greater, and let formula_14 be a one-parameter subgroup of \"irrational slope\", i.e. one that winds around in \"G\". Then there is a Lie group homomorphism formula_132 with formula_133. The closure of formula_14 will be a sub-torus in formula_59.\n\nThe exponential map gives a one-to-one correspondence between the connected Lie subgroups of a connected Lie group formula_59 and the subalgebras of the Lie algebra of formula_59. Typically, the subgroup corresponding to a subalgebra is not a closed subgroup. There is no criterion solely based on the structure of formula_59 which determines which subalgebras correspond to closed subgroups.\n\nOne important aspect of the study of Lie groups is their representations, that is, the way they can act (linearly) on vector spaces. In physics, Lie groups often encode the symmetries of a physical system. The way one makes use of this symmetry to help analyze the system is often through representation theory. Consider, for example, the time-independent Schrödinger equation in quantum mechanics, formula_139. Assume the system in question has the rotation group SO(3) as a symmetry, meaning that the Hamiltonian operator formula_140 commutes with the action of SO(3) on the wave function formula_141. (One important example of such a system is the Hydrogen atom.) This assumption does not necessarily mean that the solutions formula_141 are rotationally invariant functions. Rather, it means that the \"space\" of solutions to formula_139 is invariant under rotations (for each fixed value of formula_144). This space, therefore, constitutes a representation of SO(3). These representations have been and the classification leads to a substantial simplification of the problem, essentially converting a three-dimensional partial differential equation to a one-dimensional ordinary differential equation.\n\nThe case of a connected compact Lie group \"K\" (including the just-mentioned case of SO(3)) is particularly tractable. In that case, every finite-dimensional representation of \"K\" decomposes as a direct sum of irreducible representations. The irreducible representations, in turn, were classified by Hermann Weyl. The classification is in terms of the \"highest weight\" of the representation. The classification is closely related to the classification of representations of a semisimple Lie algebra.\n\nOne can also study (in general infinite-dimensional) unitary representations of an arbitrary Lie group (not necessarily compact). For example, it is possible to give a relatively simple explicit description of the representations of the group SL(2,R) and the representations of the Poincaré group.\n\nAccording to the most authoritative source on the early history of Lie groups (Hawkins, p. 1), Sophus Lie himself considered the winter of 1873–1874 as the birth date of his theory of continuous groups. Hawkins, however, suggests that it was \"Lie's prodigious research activity during the four-year period from the fall of 1869 to the fall of 1873\" that led to the theory's creation (\"ibid\"). Some of Lie's early ideas were developed in close collaboration with Felix Klein. Lie met with Klein every day from October 1869 through 1872: in Berlin from the end of October 1869 to the end of February 1870, and in Paris, Göttingen and Erlangen in the subsequent two years (\"ibid\", p. 2). Lie stated that all of the principal results were obtained by 1884. But during the 1870s all his papers (except the very first note) were published in Norwegian journals, which impeded recognition of the work throughout the rest of Europe (\"ibid\", p. 76). In 1884 a young German mathematician, Friedrich Engel, came to work with Lie on a systematic treatise to expose his theory of continuous groups. From this effort resulted the three-volume \"Theorie der Transformationsgruppen\", published in 1888, 1890, and 1893. The term \"groupes de Lie\" first appeared in French in 1893 in the thesis of Lie's student Arthur Tresse.\n\nLie's ideas did not stand in isolation from the rest of mathematics. In fact, his interest in the geometry of differential equations was first motivated by the work of Carl Gustav Jacobi, on the theory of partial differential equations of first order and on the equations of classical mechanics. Much of Jacobi's work was published posthumously in the 1860s, generating enormous interest in France and Germany (Hawkins, p. 43). Lie's \"idée fixe\" was to develop a theory of symmetries of differential equations that would accomplish for them what Évariste Galois had done for algebraic equations: namely, to classify them in terms of group theory. Lie and other mathematicians showed that the most important equations for special functions and orthogonal polynomials tend to arise from group theoretical symmetries. In Lie's early work, the idea was to construct a theory of \"continuous groups\", to complement the theory of discrete groups that had developed in the theory of modular forms, in the hands of Felix Klein and Henri Poincaré. The initial application that Lie had in mind was to the theory of differential equations. On the model of Galois theory and polynomial equations, the driving conception was of a theory capable of unifying, by the study of symmetry, the whole area of ordinary differential equations. However, the hope that Lie Theory would unify the entire field of ordinary differential equations was not fulfilled. Symmetry methods for ODEs continue to be studied, but do not dominate the subject. There is a differential Galois theory, but it was developed by others, such as Picard and Vessiot, and it provides a theory of quadratures, the indefinite integrals required to express solutions.\n\nAdditional impetus to consider continuous groups came from ideas of Bernhard Riemann, on the foundations of geometry, and their further development in the hands of Klein. Thus three major themes in 19th century mathematics were combined by Lie in creating his new theory: the idea of symmetry, as exemplified by Galois through the algebraic notion of a group; geometric theory and the explicit solutions of differential equations of mechanics, worked out by Poisson and Jacobi; and the new understanding of geometry that emerged in the works of Plücker, Möbius, Grassmann and others, and culminated in Riemann's revolutionary vision of the subject.\n\nAlthough today Sophus Lie is rightfully recognized as the creator of the theory of continuous groups, a major stride in the development of their structure theory, which was to have a profound influence on subsequent development of mathematics, was made by Wilhelm Killing, who in 1888 published the first paper in a series entitled \"Die Zusammensetzung der stetigen endlichen Transformationsgruppen\" (\"The composition of continuous finite transformation groups\") (Hawkins, p. 100). The work of Killing, later refined and generalized by Élie Cartan, led to classification of semisimple Lie algebras, Cartan's theory of symmetric spaces, and Hermann Weyl's description of representations of compact and semisimple Lie groups using highest weights.\n\nIn 1900 David Hilbert challenged Lie theorists with his Fifth Problem presented at the International Congress of Mathematicians in Paris.\n\nWeyl brought the early period of the development of the theory of Lie groups to fruition, for not only did he classify irreducible representations of semisimple Lie groups and connect the theory of groups with quantum mechanics, but he also put Lie's theory itself on firmer footing by clearly enunciating the distinction between Lie's \"infinitesimal groups\" (i.e., Lie algebras) and the Lie groups proper, and began investigations of topology of Lie groups. The theory of Lie groups was systematically reworked in modern mathematical language in a monograph by Claude Chevalley.\nLie groups may be thought of as smoothly varying families of symmetries. Examples of symmetries include rotation about an axis. What must be understood is the nature of 'small' transformations, for example, rotations through tiny angles, that link nearby transformations. The mathematical object capturing this structure is called a Lie algebra (Lie himself called them \"infinitesimal groups\"). It can be defined because Lie groups are smooth manifolds, so have tangent spaces at each point.\n\nThe Lie algebra of any compact Lie group (very roughly: one for which the symmetries form a bounded set) can be decomposed as a direct sum of an abelian Lie algebra and some number of simple ones. The structure of an abelian Lie algebra is mathematically uninteresting (since the Lie bracket is identically zero); the interest is in the simple summands. Hence the question arises: what are the simple Lie algebras of compact groups? It turns out that they mostly fall into four infinite families, the \"classical Lie algebras\" A, B, C and D, which have simple descriptions in terms of symmetries of Euclidean space. But there are also just five \"exceptional Lie algebras\" that do not fall into any of these families. E is the largest of these.\n\nLie groups are classified according to their algebraic properties (simple, semisimple, solvable, nilpotent, abelian), their connectedness (connected or simply connected) and their compactness.\n\nA first key result is the Levi decomposition, which says that every simply connected Lie group is the semidirect product of a solvable normal subgroup and a semisimple subgroup. \n\nBULLET::::- Connected compact Lie groups are all known: they are finite central quotients of a product of copies of the circle group S and simple compact Lie groups (which correspond to connected Dynkin diagrams).\nBULLET::::- Any simply connected solvable Lie group is isomorphic to a closed subgroup of the group of invertible upper triangular matrices of some rank, and any finite-dimensional irreducible representation of such a group is 1-dimensional. Solvable groups are too messy to classify except in a few small dimensions.\nBULLET::::- Any simply connected nilpotent Lie group is isomorphic to a closed subgroup of the group of invertible upper triangular matrices with 1's on the diagonal of some rank, and any finite-dimensional irreducible representation of such a group is 1-dimensional. Like solvable groups, nilpotent groups are too messy to classify except in a few small dimensions.\nBULLET::::- Simple Lie groups are sometimes defined to be those that are simple as abstract groups, and sometimes defined to be connected Lie groups with a simple Lie algebra. For example, SL(2, R) is simple according to the second definition but not according to the first. They have all been classified (for either definition).\nBULLET::::- Semisimple Lie groups are Lie groups whose Lie algebra is a product of simple Lie algebras. They are central extensions of products of simple Lie groups.\n\nThe identity component of any Lie group is an open normal subgroup, and the quotient group is a discrete group. The universal cover of any connected Lie group is a simply connected Lie group, and conversely any connected Lie group is a quotient of a simply connected Lie group by a discrete normal subgroup of the center. Any Lie group \"G\" can be decomposed into discrete, simple, and abelian groups in a canonical way as follows. Write \nso that we have a sequence of normal subgroups\nThen\n\nThis can be used to reduce some problems about Lie groups (such as finding their unitary representations) to the same problems for connected simple groups and nilpotent and solvable subgroups of smaller dimension.\n\nBULLET::::- The diffeomorphism group of a Lie group acts transitively on the Lie group\nBULLET::::- Every Lie group is parallelizable, and hence an orientable manifold (there is a bundle isomorphism between its tangent bundle and the product of itself with the tangent space at the identity)\n\nLie groups are often defined to be finite-dimensional, but there are many groups that resemble Lie groups, except for being infinite-dimensional. The simplest way to define infinite-dimensional Lie groups is to model them locally on Banach spaces (as opposed to Euclidean space in the finite-dimensional case), and in this case much of the basic theory is similar to that of finite-dimensional Lie groups. However this is inadequate for many applications, because many natural examples of infinite-dimensional Lie groups are not Banach manifolds. Instead one needs to define Lie groups modeled on more general locally convex topological vector spaces. In this case the relation between the Lie algebra and the Lie group becomes rather subtle, and several results about finite-dimensional Lie groups no longer hold.\n\nThe literature is not entirely uniform in its terminology as to exactly which properties of infinite-dimensional groups qualify the group for the prefix \"Lie\" in \"Lie group\". On the Lie algebra side of affairs, things are simpler since the qualifying criteria for the prefix \"Lie\" in \"Lie algebra\" are purely algebraic. For example, an infinite-dimensional Lie algebra may or may not have a corresponding Lie group. That is, there may be a group corresponding to the Lie algebra, but it might not be nice enough to be called a Lie group, or the connection between the group and the Lie algebra might not be nice enough (for example, failure of the exponential map to be onto a neighborhood of the identity). It is the \"nice enough\" that is not universally defined.\n\nSome of the examples that have been studied include:\nBULLET::::- The group of diffeomorphisms of a manifold. Quite a lot is known about the group of diffeomorphisms of the circle. Its Lie algebra is (more or less) the Witt algebra, whose central extension the Virasoro algebra (see Virasoro algebra from Witt algebra for a derivation of this fact) is the symmetry algebra of two-dimensional conformal field theory. Diffeomorphism groups of compact manifolds of larger dimension are regular Fréchet Lie groups; very little about their structure is known.\nThe diffeomorphism group of spacetime sometimes appears in attempts to quantize gravity.\nBULLET::::- The group of smooth maps from a manifold to a finite-dimensional Lie group is an example of a gauge group (with operation of pointwise multiplication), and is used in quantum field theory and Donaldson theory. If the manifold is a circle these are called loop groups, and have central extensions whose Lie algebras are (more or less) Kac–Moody algebras.\nBULLET::::- There are infinite-dimensional analogues of general linear groups, orthogonal groups, and so on. One important aspect is that these may have \"simpler\" topological properties: see for example Kuiper's theorem. In M-theory, for example, a 10 dimensional SU(N) gauge theory becomes an 11 dimensional theory when N becomes infinite.\n\nBULLET::::- Adjoint representation of a Lie group\nBULLET::::- Compact group\nBULLET::::- Haar measure\nBULLET::::- Homogeneous space\nBULLET::::- Lie algebra\nBULLET::::- List of Lie group topics\nBULLET::::- Representations of Lie groups\nBULLET::::- Symmetry in quantum mechanics\n\nBULLET::::- . Chapters 1–3 , Chapters 4–6 , Chapters 7–9\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- P. M. Cohn (1957) \"Lie Groups\", Cambridge Tracts in Mathematical Physics.\nBULLET::::- J. L. Coolidge (1940) \"A History of Geometrical Methods\", pp 304–17, Oxford University Press (Dover Publications 2003).\nBULLET::::- Robert Gilmore (2008) \"Lie groups, physics, and geometry: an introduction for physicists, engineers and chemists\", Cambridge University Press .\nBULLET::::- F. Reese Harvey (1990) \"Spinors and calibrations\", Academic Press, .\nBULLET::::- Borel's review\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- T. Kobayashi and T. Oshima, Lie groups and Lie algebras I, Iwanami, 1999 (in Japanese)\nBULLET::::- . The 2003 reprint corrects several typographical mistakes.\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- Heldermann Verlag Journal of Lie Theory\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- Lie Groups. Representation Theory and Symmetric Spaces Wolfgang Ziller, Vorlesung 2010\n"}
{"id": "17946", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17946", "title": "Lake Erie", "text": "Lake Erie\n\nLake Erie is the fourth-largest lake (by surface area) of the five Great Lakes in North America, and the eleventh-largest globally if measured in terms of surface area. It is the southernmost, shallowest, and smallest by volume of the Great Lakes and therefore also has the shortest average water residence time. At its deepest point Lake Erie is deep.\n\nSituated on the International Boundary between Canada and the United States, Lake Erie's northern shore is the Canadian province of Ontario, specifically the Ontario Peninsula, with the U.S. states of Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and New York on its western, southern, and eastern shores. These jurisdictions divide the surface area of the lake with water boundaries.\n\nThe lake was named by the Erie people, a Native American people who lived along its southern shore. The tribal name \"erie\" is a shortened form of the Iroquoian word \"erielhonan\", meaning \"long tail\".\n\nSituated below Lake Huron, Erie's primary inlet is the Detroit River. The main natural outflow from the lake is via the Niagara River, which provides hydroelectric power to Canada and the U.S. as it spins huge turbines near Niagara Falls at Lewiston, New York and Queenston, Ontario. Some outflow occurs via the Welland Canal, part of the St. Lawrence Seaway, which diverts water for ship passages from Port Colborne, Ontario on Lake Erie, to St. Catharines on Lake Ontario, an elevation difference of . Lake Erie's environmental health has been an ongoing concern for decades, with issues such as overfishing, pollution, algae blooms, and eutrophication generating headlines.\n\nLake Erie (42.2° N, 81.2W) has a mean elevation of above sea level. It has a surface area of with a length of and breadth of at its widest points.\n\nIt is the shallowest of the Great Lakes with an average depth of 10 fathoms 3 feet ( and a maximum depth of For comparison, Lake Superior has an average depth of 80 fathoms 3 feet (, a volume of and shoreline of 2,726 statute miles (4,385 km). Because it is the shallowest, it is also the warmest of the Great Lakes, and in 1999 this almost became a problem for two nuclear power plants which require cool lake water to keep their reactors cool. The warm summer of 1999 caused lake temperatures to come close to the limit necessary to keep the plants cool. Also because of its shallowness, and in spite of being the warmest lake in the summer, it is also the first to freeze in the winter. The shallowest section of Lake Erie is the western basin where depths average only ; as a result, \"the slightest breeze can kick up lively waves,\" also known as seiches. The \"waves build very quickly\", according to other accounts. Sometimes fierce waves springing up unexpectedly have led to dramatic rescues; in one instance, a Cleveland resident trying to measure the dock near his house became trapped but was rescued by a fire department diver from Avon Lake, Ohio:\n\nThis area is also known as the \"thunderstorm capital of Canada\" with \"breathtaking\" lightning displays. Lake Erie is primarily fed by the Detroit River (from Lake Huron and Lake St. Clair) and drains via the Niagara River and Niagara Falls into Lake Ontario. Navigation downstream is provided by the Welland Canal, part of the Saint Lawrence Seaway. Other major contributors to Lake Erie include the Grand River, the Huron River, the Maumee River, the Sandusky River, the Buffalo River, and the Cuyahoga River. The drainage basin covers .\n\nPoint Pelee National Park, the southernmost point of the Canadian mainland, is located on a peninsula extending into the lake. Several islands are found in the western end of the lake; these belong to Ohio except for Pelee Island and eight neighboring islands, which are part of Ontario.\n\nMajor cities along Lake Erie include Buffalo, New York; Erie, Pennsylvania; Cleveland, Ohio, and Toledo, Ohio.\n\nIslands tend to be located in the western side of the lake and total 31 in number (13 in Canada, 18 in the U.S.). The island-village of Put-in-Bay on South Bass Island attracts young crowds who sometimes wear \"red bucket hats\" and are prone to \"break off cartwheels in the park\" and general merriment. Kelleys Island was depicted by the \"Chicago Tribune\" as having charms that were \"more subtle\" than Put-in-Bay, and offers amenities such as beach lounging, hiking, biking and \"marveling at deep glacial grooves left in limestone.\" Pelee Island is the largest of Erie's islands, accessible by ferry from Leamington, Ontario and Sandusky, Ohio. The island has a \"fragile and unique ecosystem\" with plants rarely found in Canada, such as wild hyacinth, yellow horse gentian (\"Triosteum angustifolium\") and prickly pear cactus, as well as two endangered snakes, the blue racer and the Lake Erie water snake. Songbirds migrate to Pelee in spring, and monarch butterflies stop over during the fall.\n\nLake Erie has a lake retention time of 2.6 years, the shortest of all the Great Lakes. The lake's surface area is . Lake Erie's water level fluctuates with the seasons as in the other Great Lakes. Generally, the lowest levels are in January and February, and the highest in June or July, although there have been exceptions. The average yearly level varies depending on long-term precipitation. Short-term level changes are often caused by seiches that are particularly high when southwesterly winds blow across the length of the lake during storms. These cause water to pile up at the eastern end of the lake. Storm-driven seiches can cause damage onshore. During one storm in November 2003, the water level at Buffalo rose by with waves of for a rise of . Meanwhile, at the western end of the lake, Toledo experienced a similar drop in water level. Lake water is used for drinking purposes.\n\nBULLET::::- Historic High Water. The lake fluctuates from month to month with the highest lake levels in June and July. In the summer of 1986, Lake Erie reached its highest level at above datum. The high water records were set from 1986 (April) through January 1987. Levels ranged from above Chart Datum.\nBULLET::::- Historic Low Water. Lake Erie experiences its lowest levels in the winter. In the winter of 1934, Lake Erie reached its lowest level at below datum. Monthly low water records were set from July 1934 through June 1935. During this twelve-month period water levels ranged from to the Chart Datum.\n\nLake Erie was carved out by glacier ice, and in its current form is less than 4,000 years old, which is a short span in geological terms. Before this, the land on which the lake now sits went through several complex stages. A large lowland basin formed over two million years ago as a result of an eastern flowing river that existed well before the Pleistocene ice ages. This ancient drainage system was destroyed by the first major glacier in the area, while it deepened and enlarged the lowland areas, allowing water to settle and form a lake. The glaciers were able to carve away more land on the eastern side of the lowland because the bedrock is made of shale which is softer than the carbonate rocks of dolomite and limestone on the western side. Thus, the eastern and central basins of the modern lake are much deeper than the western basin, which averages only deep and is rich in nutrients and fish. Lake Erie is the shallowest of the Great Lakes because the ice was relatively thin and lacked erosion power when it reached that far south, according to one view.\n\nAs many as three glaciers advanced and retreated over the land causing temporary lakes to form in the time periods in between each of them. Because each lake had a different volume of water their shorelines rested at differing elevations. The last of these lakes to form, Lake Warren, existed between about 13,000 and 12,000 years ago. It was deeper than the current Lake Erie, so its shoreline existed about inland from the modern one. The shorelines of these lakes left behind high ground sand ridges that cut through swamps and were used as trails for Indians and later, pioneers. These trails became primitive roads which were eventually paved. U.S. Route 30 west of Delphos and U.S. Route 20 west of Norwalk and east of Cleveland were formed in this manner. One can still see some of these ancient sand dunes that formed in the Oak Openings Region in Northwestern Ohio. There, the sandy dry lake bed soil was not enough to support large trees with the exception of a few species of oaks, forming a rare oak savanna.\n\nAt the time of European contact, there were several groups of Native American cultures living around the shores of the eastern end of the lake. The Erie tribe (from whom the lake takes its name) lived along the southern edge, while the Neutrals (also known as Attawandaron) lived along the northern shore. Near Port Stanley, there is a Native American village dating from the 16th century known as the \"Southwold Earthworks\" where as many as 800 Neutral Native Americans once lived; the archaeological remains include double earth walls winding around the grass-covered perimeter. Europeans named the tribe the \"Neutral Indians\" since these people refused to fight with other tribes. Both tribes were conquered and assimilated by their hostile eastern neighbors, the Iroquois Confederacy between AD 1651 and 1657, in what is referred to as part of the Beaver Wars.\n\nFor decades after those wars, the land around eastern Lake Erie was claimed and utilized by the Iroquois as a hunting ground. As the power of the Iroquois waned during the last quarter of the 17th century, several other, mainly Anishinaabe Native American tribes, displaced them from the territories they claimed on the north shore of the lake. There was a legend of a Native American woman named Huldah, who, despairing over her lost British lover, hurled herself from a high rock from Pelee Island.\n\nIn 1669, the Frenchman Louis Jolliet was the first documented European to sight Lake Erie, although there is speculation that Étienne Brûlé may have come across it in 1615. Lake Erie was the last of the Great Lakes to be explored by Europeans, since the Iroquois who occupied the Niagara River area were in conflict with the French, and they did not allow explorers or traders to pass through. Explorers followed rivers out of Lake Ontario and portaged directly into Lake Huron. British authorities in Canada were nervous about possible expansion by American settlers across Lake Erie, so Colonel Talbot developed the Talbot Trail in 1809 as a way to stimulate settlement to the area; Talbot recruited settlers from Ireland and Scotland and there are numerous places named after him, such as Port Talbot and the Talbot River and Talbotville in southern Ontario.\n\nDuring the War of 1812, Oliver Hazard Perry captured an entire British fleet in 1813 near Put-in-Bay, Ohio, despite having inferior numbers. American soldiers swept through the Ontario area around Port Rowan burning towns and villages, but spared a gristmill owned by a Canadian mason named John Backhouse, according to one report. Generally, however, despite the two exceptions being the American Revolutionary War and the War of 1812 which involved conflicts between the U.S. and the United Kingdom, relations between the U.S. and Canada have been remarkably friendly with an \"unfortified boundary\" and an agreement \"that has kept all fleets of war off the Great Lakes.\"\n\nIn 1837, rebellions broke about between Canadian settlers and the British Colonial government. These primarily concerned political reforms and land allocation issues. Some of the rebels stationed themselves in the U.S. and crossed the ice from Sandusky Bay to Pelee Island wearing \"tattered overcoats and worn-out boots\", and carrying muskets, pitchforks, and swords, but the islanders had already fled. Later, there was a battle on the ice with the Royal 32nd regiment, with the rebels being driven to retreat.\nSettlers established commercial fisheries on the north coast of the lake around the 1850s. An important business was fishing. In the pre-Civil War years, railways sprouted everywhere, and around 1852 there were railways circling the lake. Maritime traffic picked up, although the lake was usually closed because of ice from December to early April, and ships had to wait for the ice to clear before proceeding. Since slavery had been abolished in Canada in 1833, but was still legal in southern states of the U.S., a Lake Erie crossing was sometimes required for fugitive slaves seeking freedom:\n\nMerchant shippers lacked modern radar and weather forecasting so vessels were often caught up in intense gales:\n\nThere were reports of disasters usually from sea captains passing information to reporters; in 1868, the captain of the \"Grace Whitney\" saw a sunken vessel \"three men clinging to the masthead\" but he could not help because of the gale and high seas.\n\nA balloonist named John Steiner of Philadelphia made an ambitious trip across the lake in 1857. He was described in \"The New York Times\" as an \"eronaut\" or \"aeronaut\"; powered boats were called \"propellers\"; and fast was deemed \"railroad speed\". Here's an account of the day-long voyage over the lake:\n\nIn 1885, lake winds were so strong that water levels dropped substantially, sometimes by as much as two feet, so that at ports such as Toledo, watercraft could not load coal or depart the port.\n\nDuring the history of the lake as a \"fishery\", there has been marked battling by opposing interest groups. Here's an 1895 newspaper account in which critics of commercial fishing issued dire predictions and calling for government action to solve the problem:\n\nPredictions of the lake being over-fished in 1895 were premature, since the fishery has survived commercial and sport fishing, pollution in the middle of the 20th century, invasive species and other ailments, but state and provincial governments, as well as national governments, have played a greater role as time went by. Business boomed; in 1901, the Carnegie Company proposed building a new harbor near Erie in Elk Creek to accommodate shipments from its tube-plant site nearby. In 1913, a memorial to Commodore Perry was built on Put-in-Bay island featuring a Doric column.\n\nDuring the Prohibition years from 1919 to 1933, a \"great deal of alcohol crossed Erie\" along with \"mobster corpses\" dumped into the Detroit River which sometimes washed up on the beaches of Pelee Island. According to one account, Al Capone hid a \"fortune\" in the walls of the Middle Island luxury club, but no money was found in it as of 2007 when the building no longer stood. The club had a basement casino with poker tables and slot machines.\n\nDuring the 20th century, commercial fishing was prevalent, but so was the boom in manufacturing industry around the lake, and often rivers and streams were used as sewers to flush untreated sewage which ended up in the lake. Sometimes poorly constructed sanitary systems meant that when old mains broke, raw sewage would spill directly into the Cuyahoga and into the lake. A report in \"Time\" magazine in 1969 described the lake as a \"gigantic cesspool\" since only three of 62 beaches were rated \"completely safe for swimming\".\n\nBy 1975 the popular commercial fish blue pike had been declared extinct, although the declaration may have been premature. By the 1980s, there were about 130 fishing vessels with about 3,000 workers, but commercial fishing was declining rapidly, particularly from the American side.\n\nIn 2005, the Great Lakes States of Ohio, Michigan, New York, Pennsylvania, Illinois, Indiana, Wisconsin, Minnesota and the Canadian Provinces of Ontario and Quebec endorsed the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River Basin Sustainable Water Resources Compact (Compact). The Compact was signed into law by President George W. Bush in September 2008. An international water rights policy overseen by the Great Lakes Commission, the Compact aims to prevent diversion of water from Great Lakes to distant states, as well as to set standards for use and conservation. It had support from both political parties, including former United States Senator George Voinovich (R-OH) and former Governor Jennifer Granholm (D-MI), but is not popular in the southwestern states due to frequent drought conditions and water scarcity.\n\nLike the other Great Lakes, Erie produces lake effect snow when the first cold winds of winter pass over the warm waters. When the temperatures of the relatively warm surface water and the colder air separate to at least to apart, then \"lake-effect snow becomes possible:\"\n\nHeavy lake-effect snowfalls can occur when cold air travels or longer over a large unfrozen lake. Lake-effect snow makes Buffalo and Erie the eleventh and thirteenth snowiest places in the entire United States respectively, according to data collected from the National Climatic Data Center. Since winds blow primarily west–to–east along the main axis of the lake, lake effect snow effects are more pronounced on the eastern parts of the lake such as cities such as Buffalo and Erie. Buffalo typically gets of snow each winter, and sometimes of snow; the snowiest city is Syracuse, New York, which can receive heavy snowfall from both the lake effect process and large coastal cyclones. A storm around Christmas in 2001 pounded Buffalo with seven feet of snow.\nThe lake effect ends or its effect is reduced, however, when the lake freezes over. In January 2011, for example, residents of Cleveland were glad when Lake Erie was \"90 percent frozen\" since it meant that the area had \"made it over the hump\" in terms of enduring repeated snowfalls which required much shoveling. Being the shallowest of the Great Lakes, it is the most likely to freeze and frequently does. On February 16, 2010, meteorologists reported that the lake had frozen over marking the first time the lake had completely frozen over since the winter of 1995–1996. In contrast, Lake Michigan has never completely frozen over since the warmer and deeper portion is in the south, although it came close to being totally frozen during three harsh winters over the past century. When the lake freezes over, this usually shuts down the lake effect snowfall. In past years, lake ice was so thick that it was possible to drive over it or go sailing on iceboats; but in the first decade of the 21st century, the ice has not been thick enough for such activities. Many lake residents take advantage of the ice and travel; some drive to Canada and back. Here's one account of ice life around Put-in-Bay:\n\nStrong winds have caused lake currents to shift sediment on the bottom, leading to \"wickedly shifting sandbars\" that have been the cause of shipwrecks. But winds can have a peaceful purpose as well; there have been proposals to place electricity–producing wind turbines in windy and shallow points in the lake and along the coast, both in the United States and Canada. In 2010, there were plans for GE to develop five wind turbines to generate 20 megawatts of power by 2012 with plans to generate 1,000 megawatts by 2020; one proposal called for \"gearless turbines\" with 176-foot long blades helped along with magnets. A nonprofit development group near Cleveland was developing plans to construct hundreds of turbines in the lake. A former steel mill site on the eastern edge of the lake in Buffalo, NY has been redeveloped as an urban wind farm in 2007. Known as Steel Winds, the project currently houses 14 turbines capable of generating up to 35 megawatts of electricity. A plan by Samsung to build an offshore wind farm on the north shore of the lake, from Port Maitland to Nanticoke for a distance of , but the plan has been met with opposition from residents for a number of reasons. Canadians near Leamington and Kingsville have organized protest groups to thwart attempts to bring wind turbines to the lake; reasons against the turbines include spoiling lake views as well as possible adverse effects regarding drinking water and commercial fishing. Plans to install turbines in Pigeon Bay, south of Leamington were met with opposition as well. The notion that bird and bat migration may be hurt by the wind turbines has been used to argue against the wind turbines; a reporter in \"The Globe and Mail\" wrote \"Given the tendency of turbines to make mincemeat of things airborne, it doesn't require great imagination to figure out what would happen.\"\n\nThe lake is also responsible for microclimates that are important to agriculture. Along its north shore is one of the richest areas of Canada's fruit and vegetable production; this southernmost tip, particularly in the area around Leamington, is known as Canada's \"tomato capital\". The area around Port Rowan in Ontario has special trees which grow because of the \"tempering effect of the lake\", and species include tulip trees, flowering dogwood, sassafras and sour gum. In this area there are many greenhouses which produce a \"variety of tropical plants rarely cultivated so far north\", including some species of cacti, because of the lake's tempering effect. Along the southeastern shore of Ohio, Pennsylvania, and New York is an important grape growing region, as are the islands in the lake. Apple orchards are abundant in northeast Ohio to western New York.\n\nAccording to one estimate, 34 to 36 inches of water evaporates each year from the surface of the lake, which allows for rainfall and other precipitation in surrounding areas. There are conflicting reports about the overall effect of global warming on the Great Lakes region, including Lake Erie. One account suggests that climate change is causing greater evaporation of lake water, leading to warmer temperatures as well as ice in winter which is less thick or nonexistent, fueling concerns that \"Erie appears to be shrinking\" and is the most likely candidate among the five Great Lakes to \"turn into a festering mud puddle.\" In 2010, the \"Windsor Star\" reported that the lake experienced \"record-breaking temperatures\" reaching in mid-August and compared the lake to a \"bath tub\". But the long term weather patterns are subject to controversy.\n\nLake Erie has a complex ecosystem with many species in constant interaction. Human activity, such as pollution and maritime ship traffic, can affect this environment in numerous ways. The interactions between the new species can sometimes have beneficial effects, as well as harmful effects. Some introductions have been seen as beneficial such as the introduction of Pacific salmon. Occasionally there have been mass die-offs of certain species of fish, sometimes for reasons unknown, such as many numbers of rainbow smelt in May 2010.\n\nThe lake has been plagued with a number of invasive species, including zebra and quagga mussels, the goby and the grass carp. One estimate was that there have been 180 invasive species in the Great Lakes, some having traveled in ballast water in international ships. Zebra mussels and gobies have been credited with the increased population and size of smallmouth bass in Lake Erie. In 2008 there were concerns that the \"newest invader swarming in the Great Lakes\", which was the bloody-red shrimp, might harm fish populations and promote algae blooms.\n\nEnvironmentalists and biologists study lake conditions via installations such as the Franz Theodore Stone Laboratory on Gibraltar Island. The lab, which was established in 1895, is the oldest biological field station in the United States. Stone Laboratory was donated to the Ohio State University by Julius Stone in 1925 as part of the university's Ohio Sea Grant College Program. In addition, the Great Lakes Institute of the University of Windsor has experts who study issues such as lake sediment pollution and the flow of contaminants such as phosphorus.\n\nA list of the common invasive species in Lake Erie include: Zebra Mussels, Quagga Mussels, Round Gobies, Spiny European Water Fleas, Fishhook Water Fleas, the Sea Lamprey, and White Perch. The invasive plant species that fill Lake Erie consist mainly of Eurasian Milfoil, and Purple Loosestrife,\n\nAn ongoing concern is that \"nutrient overloading from fertilizers, human and animal waste\", known as eutrophication, in which additional nitrogen and phosphorus enter the lake, will cause plant life to \"run wild and multiply like crazy\". Since there are fewer wetlands, which are like \"Nature's kidneys\" by filtering nutrients, as well as greater \"channelization of waterways\", nutrients in water can cause algal blooms to sprout as well as \"low-oxygen dead zones\" in a complex interaction of natural forces. As of the 2010s much of the phosphorus in the lake comes from fertilizer applied to no-till soybean and corn fields but washed into streams by heavy rains. The algal blooms result from growth of Microcystis, a toxic blue-green algae that the zebra mussels which infest the lake don't eat.\n\nThere periodically is a \"dead zone\", or region of low oxygen, in the lake whose exact location varies. Scientists from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration have been studying the lake's blue-green algae blooms, and trying to find ways to predict when they are spreading or where they might hit landfall; typically the blooms arrive late each summer. This problem was extreme in the mid and late 1960s and the Lake Erie Wastewater Management Study (LEWMS) conducted by the Buffalo District of the US Army Corps of Engineers determined that the eutrophication was due to \"point sources\" such as industrial outfalls and municipal sanitary and storm sewer outfalls, as well as \"diffuse sources\", such as overland runoff from farm and forest land. All these sources contribute nutrients, primarily phosphorus, to the lake. Growth of organisms in the lake is then spiked to the point that oxygen levels are depleted. LEWMS made recommendations for reducing point source outflows, as well as reducing farm contributions of phosphorus by changing fertilizer usage, employing \"no-till\" farming and other conservative practices. Many industrial and municipal sources have since then been greatly reduced. The improved farming practices, which were voluntary, were followed for a while, resulting in remarkable recovery of the lake in the 1970s.\n\nUnfortunately, the conservative practices are not monitored and have not been kept up. One recent account suggests that the seasonal algae blooms in Lake Erie were possibly caused by \"runoff from cities, fertilizers, zebra mussels, and livestock near water.\" A second report focuses on the zebra mussels as being the cause of \"big oxygen-poor dead zones\" since they filter so much sediment that this produces an overgrowth of algae. One report suggests the oxygen-poor zone began about 1993 in the lake's central basin and becomes more pronounced during summer months, but it is somewhat of a mystery why this happens. Some scientists speculate that the dead zone is a naturally occurring phenomenon. Another report cited Ohio's Maumee River as the main source of polluted runoff of phosphorus from industries, municipalities, tributaries and agriculture, and in 2008, satellite images showed the algal bloom heading toward Pelee Island, and possibly heading to Lake Erie's central basin. There have been two-year $2 million studies trying to understand the \"growing zone\" which was described as a \"10-foot-thick layer of cold water at the bottom\", in one area, which stretches \"100 miles across the lake's center\". It kills fish and microscopic creatures of the lake's food chain and fouls the water, and may cause further problems in later years for sport and commercial fishing.\n\nAlgae blooms continued in early 2013 but new farming techniques, climate change and even a change in Lake Erie's ecosystem make phosphorus pollution more intractable.\n\nBlue-green algae, or Cyanobacteria blooms, were problematic in August 2019. According to a news report in August, \"scientists fully expect [it] to overwhelm much of western Lake Erie again this summer\". By August 12, 2019, the bloom extended for roughly 50 kilometres. A large bloom does not necessarily mean the cyanobacteria ... will produce toxins\", said Michael McKay, executive director of the Great Lakes Institute for Environmental Research (GLIER) at the University of Windsor. \"Not enough is being done to stop fertilizer and phosphorus from getting into the lake and causing blooms,\" he added. Water testing was being conducted in August. The largest Lake Erie blooms to date occurred in 2015, exceeding the severity index at 10.5 and in 2011 at a 10, according to the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). In early August, the 2019 bloom was expected to measure 7.5 on the severity index, but could range between 6 and 9. At that time, satellite images depicted a bloom stretching up to 1,300 square kilometers on Lake Erie, with the epicenter near Toledo, Ohio.\n\nThe Lake Erie water snake, a subspecies of the northern water snake (\"Nerodia sipedon\"), lives in the vicinity of Ohio's Put-in-Bay Harbor, and had been put on the threatened species list. A threatened species is one which may soon become an endangered species. By 2010, the water snake population was over 12,000 snakes. While they have a non-venomous bite, they are a key predator in the lake's aquatic ecosystem since they feed on mudpuppies and walleye and smallmouth bass. The snake was helpful in keeping the population of goby fish in check. They mate from late May through early June and can be found in large \"mating balls\" with one female bunched with several males.\n\nThere is a concern that Asian carp might enter the Great Lakes region and alter the ecosystem negatively. They have been described as \"greedy giants that suck plankton from the water with the brutal efficiency of vacuum cleaners\" and scientists worry that they may unravel the \"aquatic food web\" by crowding out other species.\n\nThere was concern in 2007 that snakehead fish could get into the Great Lakes area. Officials warn that if the fish invades, it could \"decimate the aquatic food chain\". A YouTube video mentioned in a newspaper account has a man claiming that the fish could \"bite your entire hand off\". The fish can reach in length and \"survive out of water for four days\" and \"has a mouth full of teeth that can shear fish in half\" and can \"eat ducks and small mammals.\" The snakehead fish can not live in a lake that has completely frozen over. They must come to the surface to breathe via their swim bladder.\n\nIn 1999, Doppler radar weather sensors detected millions of mayflies heading for Presque Isle in blue and green splotches on the radar in clouds measuring long. These insects were a sign of Lake Erie's move back to health, since the mayflies require clean water to thrive. Biologist Masteller of Penn State Erie declared the bugs to be a \"nice nuisance\" since they signified the lake's return to health after forty years of absence. Each is an inch and a half long; the three main species of mayflies are \"Ephemera simulans\", \"Hexagenia rigida\" and \"Hexagenia limbata\". The insects mate over a 72-hour period from June through September; they fly in masses up to the shore, mate in the air, then females lay up to 8,000 eggs each over the water; the eggs sink back down and the cycle repeats. Sometimes the clouds of mayflies have caused power outages as well as causing roads to become slippery with squashed insects. Since zebra mussels filter extra nutrients from the lake, it allows the mayfly larvae to thrive.\n\nThere have been incidents of birds dying from botulism, in 2000, and in 2002. Birds affected included grebes, common and red-breasted mergansers, loons, diving ducks, ring-billed gulls and herring gulls. One account suggests that bird populations are in trouble, notably the woodland warbler, which had population declines around 60 percent in 2008. Possible causes for declines in bird populations are farming practices, loss of habitats, soil depletion and erosion, and toxic chemicals. In 2006, there were concerns of possible bird flu after two wild swans on the lake were found diseased, but it was learned that they did not contain the deadly H5N1 virus. There were sightings of a magnificent frigatebird, a tropical bird with a two-metre wingspan, over the lake in 2008.\n\nLake Erie infamously became very polluted in the 1960s and 1970s as a result of the quantity of heavy industry situated in cities on its shores, with reports of bacteria-laden beaches and fish contaminated by industrial waste. In the 1970s, patches of the lake were declared dead because of industrial waste as well as sewage from runoffs; as \"The New York Times\" reporter Denny Lee wrote in 2004, \"The lake, after all, is where the Rust Belt meets the water.\"\n\nThe water quality deteriorated partially due to increasing levels of the nutrient phosphorus in both the water and lake bottom sediments. The resultant high nitrogen levels in the water caused eutrophication, which resulted in algal blooms and algae masses and fish kills increasingly fouled the shoreline during this period. There were incidents of the oily surfaces of tributary rivers emptying into Lake Erie catching fire: in 1969, Cleveland's Cuyahoga River erupted in flames, chronicled in a \"Time\" magazine article which lamented a tendency to use rivers flowing through major cities as \"convenient, free sewers\"; the Detroit River caught fire on another occasion. The outlook was gloomy:\n\nIn December 1970 a federal grand jury investigation led by U.S. Attorney Robert Jones (Ohio lawyer) began, of water pollution allegedly being caused by about 12 companies in northeastern Ohio. It was the first grand jury investigation of water pollution in the area. The grand jury indicted four corporations for polluting Lake Erie and waterways in northeast Ohio. Facing fines were Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co., Shell Oil Co., Uniroyal Chemical Division of Uniroyal Inc. and Olin Corp. The Attorney General of the United States, John N. Mitchell, gave a Press Conference December 18, 1970 referencing new pollution control litigation, with particular reference to work with the new Environmental Protection Agency, and announcing the filing of a lawsuit that morning against the Jones and Laughlin Steel Corporation for discharging substantial quantities of cyanide into the Cuyahoga River near Cleveland. U.S. Attorney Robert W. Jones filed the misdemeanor charges in District Court, alleging violations of the 1899 Rivers and Harbors Act.\n\nCleveland's director of public utilities, Ben Stefanski, pursued a massive effort to \"scrub the Cuyahoga\"; the effort cost $100 million in bonds, according to one estimate. New sewer lines were built. Clevelanders approved a bond issue by 2 to 1 to seriously upgrade Cleveland's sewage system. Federal officials acted as well; the United States Congress passed the Clean Water Act of 1972. In that year, the United States and Canada established water pollution limits in an International Water Quality Agreement. The Corps' LEWMS, mentioned above, was also instituted at that time. The controls were effective, but it took several decades to take effect; by 1999, there were signs that large numbers of mayflies were spotted on the lake after a forty-year absence, signalling a return to health.\n\nThe clearing of the water column is also partly due to the introduction and rapid spread of zebra mussels from Europe, which had the effect of covering \"the basin floor like shag carpeting\" with each creature filtering \"a liter of fresh water a day,\" helping to restore the lake to a cleaner state. The 1972 Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement also significantly reduced the dumping and runoff of phosphorus into the lake. The lake has since become clean enough to allow sunlight to infiltrate its water and produce algae and sea weed, but a dead zone persists in the central Lake Erie Basin during the late summer. The United States Environmental Protection Agency has studied this cyclic phenomenon since 2005. There have been instances of beach closings at Presque Isle off the coast of northwestern Pennsylvania because of unexplained E. Coli contaminations, possibly caused by storm water overflows after heavy downpours.\n\nSince the 1970s environmental regulation has led to a great increase in water quality and the return of economically important fish species such as walleye and other biological life. There was substantial evidence that the new controls had substantially reduced levels of DDT in the water by 1979. Cleanup efforts were described in 1979 as a notable environmental success story, suggesting that the cumulative effect of legislation, studies, and bans had reversed the effects of pollution:\n\nJoint U.S.–Canadian agreements pushed 600 of 864 major industrial dischargers to meet requirements for keeping the water clean. One estimate was that $5 billion was spent to upgrade plants to treat sewage. The change toward cleaner water has been in a positive direction since the 1970s.\n\nThere was a tentative exploratory plan to capture CO, compress it to a liquid form, and pump it a half-mile (800 m) beneath Lake Erie's surface underneath the porous rock structure. According to chemical engineer Peter Douglas, there is sufficient storage space beneath Lake Erie to hold between 15 and 50 years of liquid CO2 emissions from the 4,000 megawatt Nanticoke coal plant. But there has been no substantial progress on this issue since 2007.\n\nLake Erie is home to one of the world's largest freshwater commercial fisheries. Lake Erie's fish populations are the most abundant of the Great Lakes, partially because of the lake's relatively mild temperatures and plentiful supply of plankton, which is the basic building block of the food chain. The lake's fish population accounts for an estimated 50% of all fish inhabiting the Great Lakes. The lake is \"loaded with superstars\" such as steelhead, walleye (American usage) or pickerel (Canadian usage), smallmouth bass, perch, as well as bass, trout, salmon, whitefesh, smelt, and many others. The lake consists of a long list of well established introduced species. Common non-indigenous fish species include the rainbow smelt, alewife, white perch and common carp. Non-native sport fish such as rainbow trout and brown trout are stocked specifically for anglers to catch. Attempts failed to stock coho salmon and its numbers are once again dwindling. Commercial landings are dominated by yellow perch and walleye, with substantial quantities of rainbow smelt and white bass also taken. Anglers target walleye and yellow perch, with some effort directed at rainbow trout. A variety of other species are taken in smaller quantities by both commercial and sport fleets.\n\nUp until the end of the 1950s, the most commonly caught commercial fish (more than 50% of the commercial catch) was a subspecies of the walleye known as the blue walleye (\"Sander vitreus glaucus\") sometimes erroneously called \"blue pike\". In the 1970s and 1980s, as pollution in the lake declined, counts of walleyes which were caught grew from 112,000 in 1975 to 4.1 million in 1985, with estimates of the numbers of walleyes in the lake at around 33 million in the basin, with many of 8 pounds or more. Not all walleyes thrived. The combination of overfishing and the eutrophication of the lake by pollution caused the population to collapse, and in the mid-1980s, one species of walleye called the blue walleye was declared extinct. But the Lake Erie walleye was reportedly having record numbers, even in 1989, according to one report. There have been concerns about rising levels of mercury in walleye fish; a study by the Canadian Ministry of the Environment noted an \"increasing concentration trend\" but that limits were within acceptable established by authorities in Pennsylvania. It was recommended, because of PCBs, that persons eat no more than one walleye meal per month. Because of these and other concerns, in 1990, the National Wildlife Federation was on the verge of having a \"negative fish consumption \"advisory\"\" for walleyes and smallmouth bass, which had been the bread-and-butter catch of an $800 million commercial fishing industry.\n\nThe longest fish in Lake Erie is reportedly the sturgeon which can grow to ten feet long and weight 300 pounds, but it is an endangered species and mostly lives on the bottom of the lake. In 2009, there was a confirmed instance of a sturgeon being caught, which was returned to the lake alive, and there are hopes that the population of sturgeons is resurging.\n\nEstimates vary about the fishing market for the Great Lakes region. One estimate of the total market for fishing, including commercial as well as sport or recreational fishing, for all of the Great Lakes, was $4 billion annually, in 2007. A second estimate was that the fishing industry was valued at more than $7 billion.\n\nBut since high levels of pollution were discovered in the 1960s and 1970s, there has been continued debate over the desired intensity of commercial fishing. Commercial fishing in Lake Erie has been hurt by the bad economy as well as government regulations which limit the size of their catch; one report suggested that the numbers of fishing boats and employees had declined by two-thirds in recent decades. Another concern had been that pollution in the lake, as well as toxins found inside fish, were working against commercial fishing interests. U.S. fishermen based along Lake Erie \"lost their livelihood\" over the past few decades described as being \"caught in a net of laws and bans\", according to the \"Pittsburgh Post-Gazette\", and no longer catch fish such as whitefish for markets in New York. Pennsylvania had a special $3 stamp on fishing licenses to help \"compensate commercial fishermen for their losses\", but this program ended after five years turning Erie's commercial fishing industry into an \"artifact.\" One blamed the commercial fishing ban after a \"test of wills\" between commercial and recreational fishermen: \"One side needed large hauls. The other feared the lake was being emptied.\"\nCommercial fishing is now predominantly based in Canadian communities, with a much smaller fishery—largely restricted to yellow perch—in Ohio. One account suggested that Canadian fishermen are \"still at it and making money\" and they \"know how to fish\" by \"using the old nets.\" The Ontario fishery is one of the most intensively managed in the world. However, there are reports that some Canadian commercial fishermen are dissatisfied with fishing quotas, and have sued their government about this matter, and there have been complaints that the legislative body writing the quotas is \"dominated by the U.S.\" and that sport fishing interests are favored at the expense of commercial fishing interests. Cuts of 30 to 45 percent for certain fish were made in 2007. The Lake Erie fishery was one of the first fisheries in the world managed on individual transferable quotas and features mandatory daily catch reporting and intensive auditing of the catch reporting system. Still, the commercial fishery is the target of critics who would like to see the lake managed for the exclusive benefit of sport fishing and the various industries serving the sport fishery. According to one report, the Canadian town of Port Dover is the home of the lake's largest fishing fleet, and the town features miniature golf, dairy bars, French-fry stands, and restaurants serving perch.\n\nThe lake can be thought of as a common asset with multiple purposes including being a \"fishery\". There was direct competition between commercial fishermen and sport fishermen (including charter boats and sales of fishing licenses) throughout the lake's history, with both sides seeking government assistance from either Washington or Ottawa, and trying to make their case in the \"court\" of public opinion through newspaper reporting. But other groups have entered the political process as well, including environmentalists, lakefront property owners, industry owners and workers seeking cost-effective solutions for sewage, ferry boat operators, even corporations making electric-generating wind turbines.\n\nManagement of the fishery is by consensus of all management agencies with an interest in the resource and include the states of New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Michigan and the province of Ontario, and work under the mandate of the Great Lakes Fishery Commission. The commission makes assessments using sophisticated mathematical modeling systems. The Commission has been the focus of considerable recrimination, primarily from angler and charter fishing groups in the U.S. which have had a historical antipathy to commercial fishing interests. This conflict is complex, dating from the 1960s and earlier, with the result in the United States that, in 2011, commercial fishing was mostly eliminated from Great Lakes states. One report suggests that battling between diverse fishing interests began around Lake Michigan and evolved to cover the entire Great Lakes region. The analysis suggests that in the Lake Erie context, the competition between sport and commercial fishing involves universals and that these conflicts are cultural, not scientific, and therefore not resolvable by reference to ecological data.\n\nThe lake also supports a strong sport fishery. While commercial fishing declined, sport fishing has remained. The deep cool waters that spawn the best fishing is in the Canadian side of the lake. As a result, a fishing boat that crosses the international border triggers the security concerns of border crossings and fishermen are advised to have their passport. If their boat crosses the invisible border line in the lake, upon returning to the American shore, passengers will have to \"drive to a local government reporting station and pose for pictures\" to Customs officers by videophone. There are cumbersome rules for fishing boat operators as well, who will have to fax passenger personal information to a government agency an hour before leaving; officers will be watching and doing spot checks from patrol boats and government aircraft\". Authorities in 2008 from the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission have tried stocking the lake with brown trout in an effort to build what's called a \"put-grow-and-take\" fishery. There was a report that charter boat fishing increased substantially on the American side, from 46 to 638 charter boats in operation in Ohio alone, during a period from 1975 to 1985 as pollution levels declined, and after populations of walleye increased substantially in the lake. In 1984, Ohio sold 27,000 nonresident fishing permits, and sport fishing was described as big business. In 1992, there were accounts of fishermen catching 8, 10, and 12-pound walleyes, and that the \"runt of a five-man daily limit of 25 walleye might be a nuisance of 5 pounds.\" It is possible to fish off piers in winter for a fish called the burbot, also known by pseudonyms such as eelpout, mudblow, lawyer fish, cusk, or freshwater cod which looks \"ugly\" but tastes great; the burbot make a midwinter spawning run and is reportedly one of \"Erie's glacial relics.\"\n\nIn winter when the lake freezes, many fishermen go out on the ice, cut holes, and fish. It is even possible to build bonfires on the ice. But venturing on Lake Erie ice can be dangerous. In a freak incident in 2009, warming temperatures and winds of 35 miles per hour and currents pushing eastward dislodged a miles-wide ice floe which broke away from the shore, trapping more than 130 fishermen offshore; one man died while the rest were rescued by helicopters or boats.\n\nThe lake's formerly more extensive lakebed creates a favorable environment for agriculture in the bordering areas of Ontario, Ohio, Michigan, Pennsylvania, and New York. The Lake Erie sections of western New York State have a suitable climate for growing grapes, and in Chautauqua County there have been many vineyards and wineries in the area as well as in Erie County in northwestern Pennsylvania. Much grape juice is produced in this region. The Canadian region of Lake Erie's north shore is becoming a more prominent wine region as well; it has been dubbed the Lake Erie North Shore, or LENS region, and includes Pelee Island, and since it is farther north than comparable wine-growing areas in the world, the season is longer in terms of light. A longer growing season due to the lake-moderated temperatures make the risk of early frosts less likely.\n\nThe drainage basin has led to well fertilized soil. The north coast of Ohio is widely referred to as its nursery capital.\n\nLake Erie is a favorite for divers since there are many shipwrecks, perhaps 1,400 to 8,000 according to one estimate, of which about 270 are \"confirmed shipwreck locations.\" Most wrecks are undiscovered but believed to be well preserved and in good condition and at most only below the water surface. One report suggests there are more \"wrecks per square mile\" than any other freshwater location, including wrecks from Native American watercraft. There are efforts to identify shipwreck sites and survey the lake floor to map the location of underwater sites, possibly for further study or exploration. While the lake is relatively warmer than the other Great Lakes, there is a thermocline, meaning that as a diver descends, the water temperature drops about , requiring a wetsuit. One estimate is that Lake Erie has a quarter of all 8,000 estimated shipwrecks in the Great Lakes. They are preserved because the water is cold and salt-free creating \"intact time capsules down there\". Divers have a policy of not removing or touching anything at the wreck else the \"next person won't be able to see it\"; when artifacts were removed on occasion, it was met by \"outrage\" by the diving community. The cold conditions make diving difficult and \"strenuous\" requiring divers with skill and experience. One charter firm from western New York State takes about 1,500 divers to Lake Erie shipwrecks in a typical season from April through October.\n\nIn 1991, the 19th-century sidewheeler \"Atlantic\" was discovered. It had sunk in a collision with the \"Ogdensburg\", a steamship sometimes referred to as a \"propeller\" according to 19th-century parlance, in 1852, west of Long Point, Ontario and survivors from the \"Atlantic\" were saved by the \"Ogdensburg\". One account suggests 130 people drowned while another suggests about 20 drowned. The aftermath of the disaster led to calls for authorities to seize captains of both ships so \"that the cause of the collision may be correctly ascertained\" as well as calls for more lifeboats and improved life preservers since the earlier ones proved to be \"totally useless.\" There was speculation that the sunken vessel had been a gambling ship, and therefore there might have been money aboard, but most historians were skeptical. In 1998, the shipwreck of the vessel \"Adventure\" was the first shipwreck registered with the state of Ohio as an \"underwater archaeological site\"; when it was discovered that the \"Adventure's\" propeller had been removed and given to a junkyard, the propeller was rescued days before being converted to scrap metal and brought back to the dive site and back to its underwater home. In 2003, divers discovered the steamer \"Canobie\" near Presque Isle, which sunk in 1921. Other wrecks include the fish tub \"Neal H. Dow\" (1910), the \"Elderado\" \"steamer-cum-barge\" (1880), the \"W. R. Hanna\", the \"Dundee\" which sank north of Cleveland in 1900, the \"F. H. Prince\", and \"The Craftsman\". In 2007, the wreck of the steamship named after \"Mad\" Anthony Wayne was found near Vermilion, Ohio in of water; the vessel sank in 1850 after its boilers exploded, and 38 people died. The wreck belongs to the state of Ohio and \"salvaging it is illegal\" but divers can visit it after it is surveyed. In addition, there are wrecks of smaller vessels, with occasional drownings of fishermen.\n\nThe finding of the well-preserved wreck of the Canadian-built British troop transport warship \"Caledonia\", sunk during the War of 1812, has led to accusations about plundering of the site and legal wrangling about whether the vessel should be resurfaced in time for the 2013 bicentennial of the end of the war.\n\nResearch into shipwrecks has been organized by the Peachman Lake Erie Shipwreck Research Center, or PLESRC, located on the grounds of the Great Lakes Historical Society. In 2008, the Great Lakes Historical Society announced plans to survey the underwater battle site of the Battle of Lake Erie in preparation for the bicentennial celebration of the battle in 2013.\n\nThere are numerous public parks around the lake. In western Pennsylvania, a wildlife reserve was established in 1991 in Springfield Township for hiking, fishing, cross-country skiing and walking along the beach. In Ontario, Long Point is a peninsula on the northwest shore near Port Rowan that extends into Lake Erie which is a stopover for birds migrating as well as turtles; one reporter found a \"turtle-crossing\" sign along the road; Long Point Provincial Park is located there and has been designated as a UNESCO Biosphere reserve. In Ontario's Sand Hill Park, east of Port Burwell, there is a high dune which is so steep it requires people to \"crawl like crabs to the summit\", although there are lake views from the top.\n\nCrystal Beach, in the village of Crystal Beach, Ontario, at the eastern end of the lake, is one of several South-facing beaches on the Canadian side. It is therefore well situated for sun-bathers, facing the sun from sunrise to sunset. The beach is gently sloping with no sharp drop-offs or rip currents, and is usually cooled by southwest breezes, even on the hottest days.\n\nIn southern Michigan, Sterling State Park has campgrounds, for hiking, biking, fishing, boating, with a sand beach for sunbathing, swimming, and picnicking.\n\n\"The New York Times\" reporter Donna Marchetti took a bike tour around the Lake Erie perimeter in 1997, traveling per day and staying at bed and breakfasts. They went through the cities of Cleveland, Erie, Windsor, Detroit and Toledo as well as resort towns, vineyards, and cornfields. The trip highlights were the \"small port towns and rural farmlands of southern Ontario\". There are few bike repair shops in Ontario on the route.\n\nLake Erie islands tend to be in the westernmost part of the lake and have different characters. Some of them include:\nBULLET::::- Kelleys Island has activities such as beach lounging, hiking, biking, and viewing the deep glacial grooves in the bedrock limestone.\nBULLET::::- Pelee Island is reached by ferry from Leamington, Ontario or by plane or ferry in Sandusky, Ohio and is the largest of the Lake Erie islands. The island has a unique ecosystem with plants rarely found in Canada such as wild hyacinth, yellow horse gentian, and prickly pear cactus. There are two endangered snakes including the blue racer and the Lake Erie water snake. Songbirds migrate there in spring, and monarch butterflies stop over during the fall.\nBULLET::::- South Bass Island has the island-village of Put-in-Bay, Ohio which attracts young crowds who sometimes are prone to general merriment. It has been described as a party island with scenic rocky cliffs with a year-round population in the hundreds that grows during summer.\n\nKayaking has become more popular along the lake, particularly in places such as Put-in-Bay, Ohio. There are extensive views with steep cliffs with exotic wildlife and \"100 miles of paddle-friendly shoreline.\" Long distance swimmers have swum across the lake to set records; for example, a 15-year-old amputee swam the stretch across the lake in 2001. In 2008, 14-year-old Jade Scognamillo swam from New York's Sturgeon Point to Ontario's Crystal Beach and completed the 11.9-mile (19.2-km) swim in five hours, 40 minutes and 35 seconds, and also became the youngest swimmer to make the crossing. It is illegal for swimmers younger than 14 to attempt such a crossing. In Port Dover, Ontario, brave swimmers do high-dives at the annual \"Polar Bear Swim\" on the beach; in 2011, the water was , although the air was warmer, which did not deter 14-year-old youth Austin Merrell. Currents can pose a problem, and there have been occasional incidents of drownings.\n\nThe lake is dotted by distinct lighthouses. A lighthouse off the coast of Cleveland, beset with cold lake winter spray, has an unusual artistic icy shape, although sometimes ice prevents the light from being seen by maritime vessels.\n\nA New York Times reporter, biking through the region in 1997, found the Ontario town of Port Stanley to be the \"prettiest of the port towns\" with a lively \"holiday air\" but no \"ticky-tacky commercialism\".\n\nThere are numerous vineyards around the lake, including ones on Pelee Island which makes wines including pinot noir, riesling and chardonnay.\n\nPeople can rent summer houses and cabins near the lake to enjoy the beaches, swimming, as well as be close to activities such as wine tours and fishing and water parks. Presque Isle is a peninsula jutting out into the lake in northwestern Pennsylvania which has nice beaches, although there were incidents in 2006 when beaches had to be closed because of unexplained unhealthy water conditions with E. Coli bacteria.\n\nIt was described as a \"spit of sand, trees and swamp that arcs off the shore\" with seafood restaurants and beautiful sunsets. Pelee Island, Canada's southernmost point and only three miles away from Ohio, is a place that \"forces you to do nothing\":\n\nPleasure boat operators offer dinner cruises in the Cleveland area on the Cuyahoga River as well as Lake Erie.\n\nBULLET::::- Lake Erie Monster. There have been reports of persons spotting a creature akin to the Loch Ness Monster, but there have been no confirmed reports. There were reports in 1990 of people seeing a \"large creature moving in the water about from their boat\" described as black in color, about long, with a \"snakelike head\", and moved as fast as a boat. Five other people reported seeing something similar on three separate occasions but there is no scientific evidence of such a creature. There is a beer named after the \"Lake Erie Monster\" as well as a hockey team. There were reports of people spotting a sea creature in the 19th century which was sometimes called \"Bessie\" or \"South Bay Bessie\".\n\nBULLET::::- Lake Erie Mirage Effect. There have been sporadic reports of people in Cleveland being able to see the Canadian shoreline as if it were immediately offshore, even though Canada is from Cleveland. It has been speculated that this is a weather-related phenomenon, working on similar principles as a mirage.\n\nThe lake has been a \"bustling thoroughfare\" for maritime vessels for centuries. Ships headed eastward can take the Welland Canal and a series of eight locks descending to Lake Ontario which takes about 12 hours, according to one source. Thousands of ships make this journey each year. During the 19th century, ships could enter the Buffalo River and travel the Erie Canal eastward to Albany then south to New York City along the Hudson River. Generally there is heavy traffic on the lake except during the winter months from January through March when ice prevents vessels from traveling safely. In 2007, there was a protest against Ontario's energy policy which allows the shipping of coal in the lake; GreenPeace activists climbed a ladder on a freighter and \"locked themselves to the conveyor belt device that helps to unload the ship's cargo\"; three activists were arrested and the ship was delayed for more than four hours, and anti-coal messages were painted on the ship.\n\nThe ship traffic in Lake Erie being the highest among the Great Lakes and roughest of the lakes has led to it having the highest number of known shipwrecks in the Great Lakes. There have been other accidents as well; for example, in 2010 according to \"The Star\", crewmen from the freighter \"Hermann Schoening\" were sickened by phosphine gas which had been used to fumigate or control pests; rescuers took them by tugboat to receive medical attention.\n\nThe Port of Cleveland generated over $350 million and over 15 million tons of cargo in a recent year. The current port facility is unable to handle larger cargo ships, and the cranes needed to lift goods such as steel to truck trailers are insufficient to meet current shipping standards.\n\nFerryboats operate in numerous places, such as the Jet Express Ferry from Sandusky and Port Clinton. However, plans to operate a ferryboat between the U.S. port of Erie and the Ontario port of Port Dover ran into a slew of political problems, including security restrictions on both sides as well as additional fees required to hire border inspectors. In particular, Canada was described as having a \"sticky set of laws\"; the project was abandoned.\n\nThe Great Lakes Circle Tour is a designated scenic road system connecting all of the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River. One reporter thought the roads on the Canadian side were narrower, sometimes without shoulders, but were less trafficked except for the roads around the Ontario towns of Fort Erie and Port Colborne. Drivers can cross from the United States to the Canadian town of Fort Erie by going over the Peace Bridge.\n\nIn 2004, debris from a plane carrying 9 people was found off Lake Erie isle.\n\nSince the border between the two nations is largely unpatrolled, it is possible for people to cross undetected from one country to the other, in either direction, by boat. In 2010, Canadian police arrested persons crossing the border illegally from the United States to Canada, near the Ontario town of Amherstburg.\n\nBULLET::::- Bass Islands\nBULLET::::- Cedar Point\nBULLET::::- Lake Erie AVA\nBULLET::::- List of lakes by area\nBULLET::::- List of lakes in Ohio\nBULLET::::- Maumee Bay\n\nBULLET::::- Great Lakes Areas of Concern\nBULLET::::- Great Lakes census statistical areas\nBULLET::::- Great Lakes Commission\nBULLET::::- Great Lakes Waterway\nBULLET::::- Great Recycling and Northern Development Canal\nBULLET::::- Great Storm of 1913\nBULLET::::- International Boundary Waters Treaty\nBULLET::::- List of cities along the Great Lakes\nBULLET::::- Sixty Years' War for control of the Great Lakes\nBULLET::::- Snowbelt\nBULLET::::- Third Coast\n\n<br>\nBULLET::::- Assel, R.A. (1983). \"Lake Erie regional ice cover analysis: preliminary results \" [NOAA Technical Memorandum ERL GLERL 48]. Ann Arbor, MI: U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Environmental Research Laboratories, Great Lakes Environmental Research Laboratory.\nBULLET::::- Saylor, J.H. and G.S. Miller. (1983). \"Investigation of the currents and density structure of Lake Erie\" [NOAA Technical Memorandum ERL GLERL 49]. Ann Arbor, MI: U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Environmental Research Laboratories, Great Lakes Environmental Research Laboratory.\n\nBULLET::::- Lake Erie Islands Directory\nBULLET::::- How many Islands are there in Lake Erie?\nBULLET::::- EPA's Great Lakes Atlas\nBULLET::::- Great Lakes Coast Watch\nBULLET::::- Lake Erie Bathymetry – National Geophysical Data Center\nBULLET::::- Frozen lighthouse video via \"Slate Magazine\"\nBULLET::::- Explore the Lake Erie Islands\n"}
{"id": "17947", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17947", "title": "Lake Ontario", "text": "Lake Ontario\n\nLake Ontario is one of the five Great Lakes of North America. It is surrounded on the north, west, and southwest by the Canadian province of Ontario, and on the south and east by the American state of New York, whose water boundaries meet in the middle of the lake. Ontario, Canada's most populous province, was named for the lake. Many of Ontario's most populous cities, including Toronto, Canada's most populous city, and Hamilton, are on the lake's northern and western shores respectively. In the Huron language, the name \"\" means \"great lake\". Its primary inlet is the Niagara River from Lake Erie. The last in the Great Lakes chain, Lake Ontario serves as the outlet to the Atlantic Ocean via the Saint Lawrence River. It is the only Great Lake not to border the state of Michigan.\n\nLake Ontario is the easternmost of the Great Lakes and the smallest in surface area (7,340 sq mi, 18,960 km), although it exceeds Lake Erie in volume (393 cu mi, 1,639 km). It is the 13th largest lake in the world. When its islands are included, the lake's shoreline is long. As the last lake in the Great Lakes' hydrologic chain, Lake Ontario has the lowest mean surface elevation of the lakes at 243 feet (74 m) above sea level; lower than its neighbor upstream. Its maximum length is and its maximum width is . The lake's average depth is 47 fathoms 1 foot (283 ft; 86 m), with a maximum depth of 133 fathoms 4 feet (802 ft; 244 m). The lake's primary source is the Niagara River, draining Lake Erie, with the St. Lawrence River serving as the outlet. The drainage basin covers 24,720 square miles (64,030 km). As with all the Great Lakes, water levels change both within the year (owing to seasonal changes in water input) and among years (owing to longer term trends in precipitation). These water level fluctuations are an integral part of lake ecology, and produce and maintain extensive wetlands. The lake also has an important freshwater fishery, although it has been negatively affected by factors including over-fishing, water pollution and invasive species.\n\nBaymouth bars built by prevailing winds and currents have created a significant number of lagoons and sheltered harbors, mostly near (but not limited to) Prince Edward County, Ontario and the easternmost shores. Perhaps the best-known example is Toronto Bay, chosen as the site of the Upper Canada (Ontario) capital for its strategic harbour. Other prominent examples include Hamilton Harbour, Irondequoit Bay, Presqu'ile Bay, and Sodus Bay. The bars themselves are the sites of long beaches, such as Sandbanks Provincial Park and Sandy Island Beach State Park. These sand bars are often associated with large wetlands, which support large numbers of plant and animal species, as well as providing important rest areas for migratory birds. Presqu'ile, on the north shore of Lake Ontario, is particularly significant in this regard. One unique feature of the lake is the Z-shaped Bay of Quinte which separates Prince Edward County from the Ontario mainland, save for a isthmus near Trenton; this feature also supports many wetlands and aquatic plants, as well as associated fisheries.\n\nMajor rivers draining into Lake Ontario include the Niagara River, Don River, Humber River, Trent River, Cataraqui River, Genesee River, Oswego River, Black River, Little Salmon River, and the Salmon River.\n\nThe lake basin was carved out of soft, weak Silurian-age rocks by the Wisconsin ice sheet during the last ice age. The action of the ice occurred along the pre-glacial Ontarian River valley which had approximately the same orientation as today's basin. Material that was pushed southward by the ice sheet left landforms such as drumlins, kames, and moraines, both on the modern land surface and the lake bottom, reorganizing the region's entire drainage system. As the ice sheet retreated toward the north, it still dammed the St. Lawrence valley outlet, so the lake surface was at a higher level. This stage is known as Lake Iroquois. During that time the lake drained through present-day Syracuse, New York into the Mohawk River, thence to the Hudson River and the Atlantic. The shoreline created during this stage can be easily recognized by the (now dry) beaches and wave-cut hills 10 to 25 miles (15 to 40 km) from the present shoreline.\n\nWhen the ice finally receded from the St. Lawrence valley, the outlet was below sea level, and for a short time the lake became a bay of the Atlantic Ocean, in association with the Champlain Sea. Gradually the land rebounded from the release of the weight of about 6,500 feet (2,000 m) of ice that had been stacked on it. It is still rebounding about 12 inches (30 cm) per century in the St. Lawrence area. Since the ice receded from the area last, the most rapid rebound still occurs there. This means the lake bed is gradually tilting southward, inundating the south shore and turning river valleys into bays. Both north and south shores experience shoreline erosion, but the tilting amplifies this effect on the south shore, causing loss to property owners.\n\nThe name Ontario is derived from the Huron word \"Ontarí'io\", which means \"great lake\". The lake was a border between the Huron people and the Iroquois Confederacy in the pre-Columbian era. In the 1600s, the Iroquois drove out the Huron from southern Ontario and settled the northern shores of Lake Ontario. When the Iroquois withdrew and the Anishnabeg / Ojibwa / Mississaugas moved in from the north to southern Ontario, they retained the Iroquois name.\n\nIt is believed the first European to reach the lake was Étienne Brûlé in 1615. As was their practice, the French explorers introduced other names for the lake. In 1632 and 1656, the lake was referred to as Lac de St. Louis or Lake St. Louis by Samuel de Champlain and cartographer Nicolas Sanson respectively (likely for Louis XIV of France) In 1660 Jesuit historian Francis Creuxius coined the name \"Lacus Ontarius\". In a map drawn in the \"Relation des Jésuites\" (1662–1663), the lake bears the legend \"Lac Ontario ou des Iroquois\" with the name \"Ondiara\" in smaller type. A French map produced in 1712 (currently in the Canadian Museum of History), created by military engineer Jean-Baptiste de Couagne, identified Lake Ontario as \"Lac Frontenac\" named after Louis de Buade, Comte de Frontenac et de Palluau. He was a French soldier, courtier, and Governor General of New France from 1672 to 1682 and from 1689 to his death in 1698.\n\nArtifacts which are believed to be of Norse origin have been found in the area of Sodus Bay, indicating the possibility of trading by the indigenous peoples with Norse explorers on the east coast of North America.\n\nA series of trading posts were established by both the British and French, such as Fort Frontenac (Kingston) in 1673, Fort Oswego in 1722, Fort Rouillé (Toronto) in 1750. After the French and Indian War, all forts around the lake were under British control. The United States did not take possession of forts on present-day American territory until the signing of the Jay Treaty in 1794. Permanent, non-military European settlement began during the American Revolution. As the easternmost and nearest lake to the Atlantic seaboard of Canada and the United States, population centres here are among the oldest in the Great Lakes basin, with Kingston, Ontario, formerly the capital of Canada, dating to the 1670s (Fort Frontenac). The lake became a hub of commercial activity following the War of 1812 with canal building on both sides of the border and heavy travel by lake steamers. Steamer activity peaked in the mid-19th century before competition from railway lines.\n\nIn the late 19th and early 20th centuries, a type of scow known as a \"stone hooker\" was in operation on the north-west shore, particularly around Port Credit and Bronte. Stonehooking was the practice of raking flat fragments of Dundas shale from the shallow lake floor of the area for use in construction, particularly in the growing city of Toronto.\n\nThe Great Lakes watershed is a region of high biodiversity, and Lake Ontario is important for its diversity of birds, fish, reptiles, amphibians, and plants. Many of these special species are associated with shorelines, particularly sand dunes, lagoons, and wetlands. The importance of wetlands to the lake has been appreciated, and many of the larger wetlands have protected status. However, these wetlands are changing in part because the natural water level fluctuations have been reduced. Many wetland plants are dependent upon low water levels to reproduce. When water levels are stabilized, the area and diversity of the marsh is reduced. This is particularly true of meadow marsh (also known as wet meadow wetlands); for example, in Eel Bay near Alexandria Bay, regulation of lake levels has resulted in large losses of wet meadow. Often this is accompanied by the invasion of cattails, which displace many of the native plant species and reduce plant diversity. Eutrophication may accelerate this process by providing nitrogen and phosphorus for the more rapid growth of competitively dominant plants. Similar effects are occurring on the north shore, in wetlands such as Presqu'ile, which have interdunal wetlands called , with high plant diversity and many unusual plant species.\n\nMost of the forests around the lake are deciduous forests dominated by trees including maple, oak, beech, ash and basswood. These are classified as part of the Mixedwood Plains Ecozone by Environment Canada, or as the Eastern Great Lakes and Hudson Lowlands by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, or as the Great Lakes Ecoregion by The Nature Conservancy. Deforestation in the vicinity of the lake has had many negative impacts, including loss of forest birds, extinction of native salmon, and increased amounts of sediment flowing into the lake. In some areas more than 90 percent of the forest cover has been removed and replaced by agriculture. Certain tree species, such as hemlock, have also been particularly depleted by past logging activity. Guidelines for restoration stress the importance of maintaining and restoring forest cover, particularly along streams and wetlands.\n\nThe open water is less-affected by shoreline features, such as wetlands, and more affected by nutrient levels that control the production of algae. Algae are the basis of the open water food web, and the source of primary production that ends up as Lake Trout and Walleye at the top of the open water food web.\nLike the other Great Lakes, Lake Ontario used to have an important commercial fishery. It has been largely destroyed, mostly by over-fishing. Consider the Lake Sturgeon as but one example. Lake sturgeon are huge fish—they can grow up to three meters long and exceed 190 kg in weight. The females mature slowly and require decades to reach sexual maturity. It was once an abundant species in Lake Ontario. \"In 1860, this species, taken on incidental catches of other fishes, was killed and dumped back in the lake, piled up on shore to dry and be burned, fed to pigs, or dug into the earth as fertilizer.\" It was even stacked like cordwood and used to fuel steamboats. Once its value was realized, \"They were taken by every available means from spearing and jigging to set lines of baited or unbaited hooks laid on the bottom to trapnets, poundnets and gillnets.\" Over 5 million pounds were taken from adjoining Lake Erie in a single year. The fishery collapsed, largely by 1900. They have never recovered. Like most sturgeons, the lake sturgeon is rare now, and is protected in many areas. Populations in the Oswego River are being actively managed for recovery.\nThis food web has been damaged not only by over-fishing, and changes in nutrient levels, but also by other types of pollution from industrial chemicals, agricultural fertilizers, untreated sewage, phosphates from laundry detergents, and pesticides. Some pollutant chemicals that have been found in the lake include DDT, benzo[\"a\"]pyrene and other pesticides; PCBs, aramite, chromium, lead, mirex, mercury, and carbon tetrachloride. The International Joint Commission has identified areas where pollution is particularly intense (point sources) and mapped them as Areas of Concern. A Remedial Action Plan has been developed for each area. Some Lake Ontario areas of concern include the Oswego River and Rochester Embayment on the American side, and Hamilton Harbour and Toronto on the Canadian side.\n\nBy the 1960s and 1970s, the increased pollution caused frequent algal blooms to occur in the summer. These blooms killed large numbers of fish, and left decomposing piles of filamentous algae and dead fish along the shores. At times the blooms became so thick waves could not break. Fish eating birds such as osprey, bald eagle and cormorant were being poisoned by contaminated fish. Since the 1960s and 1970s, environmental concerns have forced a cleanup of industrial and municipal wastes. Cleanup has been accomplished through better treatment plants, tighter environmental regulations, deindustrialization and increased public awareness. Today, Lake Ontario has recovered some of its pristine quality; for example, walleye, a fish species considered as a marker of clean water, are now found. However, regional airshed pollution remains a concern. The lake has also become an important sport fishery, although with introduced species (Coho and Chinook salmon) rather than the native species. Bald eagle and osprey populations are also beginning to recover.\n\nInvasive species are a problem for Lake Ontario, particularly lamprey and zebra mussels. Lamprey are being controlled by poisoning in the juvenile stage in the streams where they breed. Zebra mussels in particular are difficult to control, and pose major challenges for the lake and its waterways.\n\nThe lake has a natural seiche rhythm of eleven minutes. The seiche effect normally is only about inches (2 cm) but can be greatly amplified by earth movement, winds, and atmospheric pressure changes.\n\nBecause of its great depth, the lake as a whole never freezes in winter, but an ice sheet covering between 10% and 90% of the lake area typically develops, depending on the severity of the winter. Ice sheets typically form along the shoreline and in slack water bays, where the lake is not as deep. During the winters of 1877 and 1878, the ice sheet coverage was up to 95–100% in most of the lake. In the winter of 1812, the ice cover was stable enough the American naval commander stationed at Sackets Harbor feared a British attack from Kingston, over the ice.\n\nWhen the cold winds of winter pass over the warmer water of the lake, they pick up moisture and drop it as lake effect snow. Since the prevailing winter winds are from the northwest, the southern and southeastern shoreline of the lake is referred to as the snowbelt. In some winters the area between Oswego and Pulaski may receive twenty or more feet (600 cm) of snowfall. \n\nAlso impacted by lake-effect snow is the Tug Hill Plateau, an area of elevated land about east of Lake Ontario, creating ideal conditions for lake-effect snowfall. The \"Hill\", as it is often referred to, typically receives more snow than any other region in the eastern United States. As a result, Tug Hill is a popular location for winter enthusiasts, such as snow-mobilers and cross-country skiers. Lake-effect snow often extends inland as far as Syracuse, with that city often recording the most winter snowfall accumulation of any large city in the United States. Other cities in the world receive more snow annually, such as Quebec City, which averages , and Sapporo, Japan, which receives each year and is often regarded as the snowiest city in the world.\nFoggy conditions (particularly in fall) can be created by thermal contrasts and can be an impediment for recreational boaters. In a normal winter, Lake Ontario will be at most one quarter ice-covered, in a mild winter almost completely unfrozen. Lake Ontario has completely frozen over on five recorded occasions: from about January 20 to about March 20, 1830; in 1874; in 1893; in 1912; and in February 1934.\n\nLake breezes in spring tend to retard fruit bloom until the frost danger is past, and in the autumn delay the onset of fall frost, particularly on the south shore. Cool onshore winds also retard early bloom of plants and flowers until later in the spring season, protecting them from possible frost damage. Such microclimatic effects have enabled tender fruit production in a continental climate, with the southwest shore supporting a major fruit-growing area. Apples, cherries, pears, plums, and peaches are grown in many commercial orchards around Rochester. Between Stoney Creek and Niagara-on-the-Lake on the Niagara Peninsula is a major fruit-growing and wine-making area. The wine-growing region extends over the international border into Niagara and Orleans counties. Apple varieties that tolerate a more extreme climate are grown on the lake's north shore, around Cobourg.\n\nA large conurbation called the Golden Horseshoe occupies the lake's westernmost shores, anchored by the cities of Toronto and Hamilton. Ports on the Canadian side include St. Catharines, Oshawa, Cobourg and Kingston, near the St. Lawrence River outlet. Close to 9 million people or over a quarter of Canada's population lives within the watershed of Lake Ontario. The American shore is largely rural, with the exception of Rochester and the much smaller ports at Oswego and Sackets Harbor. The city of Syracuse is inland, connected to the lake by the New York State Canal System. Over 2 million people live in Lake Ontario's American watershed.\n\nA high-speed passenger/vehicle ferry, the \"Spirit of Ontario I\", operated between Toronto and Rochester from June 17, 2004, to January 10, 2006, when the service was cancelled. The Crystal Lynn II, out of Irondequoit, New York, has been operating between Irondequoit Bay and Henderson, New York since May 2000, operated by Capt. Bob Tein.\nBULLET::::- Ontario, Canada\n\nBULLET::::- Toronto\nBULLET::::- Mississauga\nBULLET::::- Hamilton\nBULLET::::- Burlington\nBULLET::::- Oshawa\nBULLET::::- Kingston\nBULLET::::- Whitby\nBULLET::::- Stoney Creek\nBULLET::::- Grimsby\nBULLET::::- Oakville\nBULLET::::- St. Catharines\nBULLET::::- Port Hope\nBULLET::::- Cobourg\nBULLET::::- Brighton\nBULLET::::- Pickering\nBULLET::::- Ajax\nBULLET::::- Bowmanville\nBULLET::::- Belleville\nBULLET::::- Trenton\nBULLET::::- Niagara-on-the-Lake\n\nBULLET::::- New York, United States\n\nBULLET::::- Rochester\nBULLET::::- Greece\nBULLET::::- Irondequoit\nBULLET::::- Webster\nBULLET::::- Oswego\nBULLET::::- Fair Haven\nBULLET::::- Sackets Harbor\nBULLET::::- Cape Vincent\nBULLET::::- Three Mile Bay\nBULLET::::- Wilson\nBULLET::::- Chaumont\n\nThe Great Lakes Waterway connects the lake sidestream to the Atlantic Ocean via the St. Lawrence Seaway, and upstream to the other rivers in the chain via the Welland Canal and to Lake Erie. The Trent-Severn Waterway for pleasure boats connects Lake Ontario at the Bay of Quinte to Georgian Bay (Lake Huron), via Lake Simcoe. The Oswego Canal connects the lake at Oswego to the New York State Canal System, with outlets to the Hudson River, Lake Erie, and Lake Champlain.\n\nThe Rideau Canal, also for pleasure boats, connects Lake Ontario at Kingston to the Ottawa River in downtown Ottawa, Ontario.\n\nBULLET::::- Beach Canal Lighthouse\nBULLET::::- Braddock Point Light\nBULLET::::- Charlotte-Genesee Lighthouse\nBULLET::::- Gibraltar Point Lighthouse\nBULLET::::- Oswego Harbor West Pierhead Light\nBULLET::::- Presqu'ile Lighthouse\nBULLET::::- Selkirk Lighthouse\nBULLET::::- Sodus Point Light\nBULLET::::- Stony Point Light\nBULLET::::- Thirty Mile Point Light\n\nNearly all of Lake Ontario's islands are on the eastern and north-eastern shores, between the Prince Edward County headland and the lake's outlet at Kingston. The Toronto Islands on the north-western shore are the remnants of a sand spit formed by coastal erosion, whereas the mostly larger eastern islands are underlain by the basement rock found throughout the region. The largest island is Wolfe Island, at the east end of the lake. It is accessible by ferry from both Canada and the U.S.\nBULLET::::- Toronto Islands\nBULLET::::- Wolfe Island\nBULLET::::- Association Island\nBULLET::::- Galloo Island – and nearby Little Galloo Island, Calf Island, and Stony Island\nBULLET::::- Amherst Island\nBULLET::::- Simcoe Island\nBULLET::::- Garden Island\nBULLET::::- Grenadier Island\nBULLET::::- Waupoos Island\nBULLET::::- Nicholson Island\nBULLET::::- Big Island\n\nThe Great Lakes Circle Tour and Seaway Trail are designated scenic road systems connecting all of the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River. As the Seaway Trail is posted on the U.S. side only, Lake Ontario is the only of the five Great Lakes to have no posted bi-national circle tour.\n\nIn the 1800s, there were reports of an alleged creature, similar to the so-called Loch Ness Monster, being sighted in the lake. The creature is described as large with a long neck, green in colour, and generally causes a break in the surface waves.\n\n, nearly 50 people have successfully swum across the lake. The first person who accomplished the feat was Marilyn Bell, who did it in 1954 at the age of 16. Toronto's Marilyn Bell Park is named in her honour. The park opened in 1984, and is just to the east of the spot where Bell completed her swim. In 1974, Diana Nyad became the first person who swam across the lake against the current (from north to south). On August 28, 2007, 14-year-old Natalie Lambert from Kingston, Ontario, made the swim, leaving Sackets Harbor, New York, and reaching Kingston's Confederation basin less than 24 hours after she entered the lake. On August 19, 2012, 14-year-old Annaleise Carr became the youngest person to swim across the lake. She completed the 32-mile (52-km) crossing from Niagara-on-the-Lake to Marilyn Bell Park in just under 27 hours.\n\nThe government of Ontario, which holds the lakebed rights of the Canadian portion of the lake under the Beds of Navigable Waters Act, does not permit off-shore wind power to be generated offshore. In \"Trillium Power Wind Corporation v. Ontario (Natural Resources)\", the Superior Court of Justice held Trillium Power—since 2004 an \"Applicant of Record\" who had invested $35,000 in fees and, when in 2011 the Crown made a policy decision against offshore windfarms, claimed an injury of $2.25 billion—disclosed no reasonable cause of action.\n\nWhile the Great Lakes once supported an industrial-scale fishery, with record hauls in 1899, overfishing later blighted the industry. Today only recreational fishing activities exist.\n\nBULLET::::- Charity Shoal Crater\nBULLET::::- Engagements on Lake Ontario\nBULLET::::- Fort Niagara\nBULLET::::- Glacial Lake Admiralty\nBULLET::::- Glacial Lake Iroquois\nBULLET::::- Iroquois settlement of the northern shores of Lake Ontario\nBULLET::::- Lake Ontario Waterkeeper\nBULLET::::- Ontario Lacus, a hydrocarbon lake on Saturn's moon Titan named after Lake Ontario\nBULLET::::- Wyandot people\n\nBULLET::::- Great Lakes Areas of Concern\nBULLET::::- Great Lakes census statistical areas\nBULLET::::- Great Lakes Commission\nBULLET::::- Great Recycling and Northern Development Canal\nBULLET::::- Great Storm of 1913\nBULLET::::- International Boundary Waters Treaty\nBULLET::::- List of cities along the Great Lakes\nBULLET::::- Sixty Years' War for control of the Great Lakes\nBULLET::::- Third Coast\n\nBULLET::::- Lake Ontario NOAA nautical chart #14820 online\nBULLET::::- EPA's Great Lakes Atlas\nBULLET::::- Great Lakes Coast Watch\nBULLET::::- Lake Ontario Bathymetry\n"}
{"id": "17948", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17948", "title": "Lake Michigan", "text": "Lake Michigan\n\nLake Michigan is one of the five Great Lakes of North America and the only one located entirely within the United States. It is the second-largest of the Great Lakes by volume () and the third-largest by surface area (), after Lake Superior and Lake Huron (and is slightly smaller than the U.S. state of West Virginia). To the east, its basin is conjoined with that of Lake Huron through the narrow Straits of Mackinac, giving it the same surface elevation as its easterly counterpart; the two are technically a single lake.\n\nLake Michigan is shared, from west to east, by the U.S. states of Wisconsin, Illinois, Indiana, and Michigan. Ports along its shores include Chicago; Milwaukee; Green Bay, Wisconsin; Gary, Indiana; and Muskegon, Michigan. The word \"Michigan\" originally referred to the lake itself, and is believed to come from the Ojibwe word \"michi-gami\" meaning \"great water\".\n\nSome of the earliest human inhabitants of the Lake Michigan region were the Hopewell Indians. Their culture declined after 800 AD, and for the next few hundred years, the region was the home of peoples known as the Late Woodland Indians. In the early 17th century, when western European explorers made their first forays into the region, they encountered descendants of the Late Woodland Indians: the Chippewa; Menominee; Sauk; Fox; Winnebago; Miami; Ottawa; and Potawatomi. The French explorer Jean Nicolet is believed to have been the first European to reach Lake Michigan, possibly in 1634 or 1638. In the earliest European maps of the region, the name of Lake Illinois has been found in addition to that of \"Michigan\", named for the Illinois Confederation of tribes.\n\nLake Michigan is joined via the narrow, open-water Straits of Mackinac with Lake Huron, and the combined body of water is sometimes called Michigan–Huron (also Huron–Michigan). The Straits of Mackinac were an important Native American and fur trade route. Located on the southern side of the Straits is the town of Mackinaw City, Michigan, the site of Fort Michilimackinac, a reconstructed French fort founded in 1715, and on the northern side is St. Ignace, Michigan, site of a French Catholic mission to the Indians, founded in 1671. In 1673, Jacques Marquette, Louis Joliet and their crew of five Métis voyageurs followed Lake Michigan to Green Bay and up the Fox River, nearly to its headwaters, in their search for the Mississippi River, cf. Fox–Wisconsin Waterway. The eastern end of the Straits was controlled by Fort Mackinac on Mackinac Island, a British colonial and early American military base and fur trade center, founded in 1781.\n\nWith the advent of European exploration into the area in the late 17th century, Lake Michigan became part of a line of waterways leading from the Saint Lawrence River to the Mississippi River and thence to the Gulf of Mexico. French coureurs des bois and voyageurs established small ports and trading communities, such as Green Bay, on the lake during the late 17th and early 18th centuries.\n\nIn the 19th century, Lake Michigan played a major role in the development of Chicago and the Midwestern United States west of the lake. For example, 90% of the grain shipped from Chicago travelled east over Lake Michigan during the years, and only rarely falling below 50% after the Civil War and the major expansion of railroad shipping.\n\nThe first person to reach the deep bottom of Lake Michigan was J. Val Klump, a scientist at the University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee. Klump reached the bottom via submersible as part of a 1985 research expedition.\n\nIn 2007, a row of stones paralleling an ancient shoreline was discovered by Mark Holley, professor of underwater archeology at Northwestern Michigan College. This formation lies below the surface of the lake. One of the stones is said to have a carving resembling a mastodon. So far the formation has not been authenticated.\n\nThe warming of Lake Michigan was the subject of a report by Purdue University in 2018. In each decade since 1980, steady increases in obscure surface temperature have occurred. This is likely to lead to decreasing native habitat and to adversely affect native species survival.\n\nIt is the sole Great Lake wholly within the borders of the United States; the others are shared with Canada. It lies in the region known as the American Midwest.\n\nLake Michigan has a surface area of 22,404 sq.mi (58,026 km); (13,237 square miles, 34,284 km lying in Michigan state, 7,358 square miles, 19,056 km in Wisconsin, 234 square miles, 606 km in Indiana, & 1,576 square miles, 4,079 km in Illinois) making it the largest lake entirely within one country by surface area (Lake Baikal, in Russia, is larger by water volume), and the fifth-largest lake in the world. It is the larger half of Lake Michigan–Huron, which is the largest body of fresh water in the world by surface area. It is long by wide with a shoreline long. The lake's average depth is 46 fathoms 3 feet (279 ft; 85 m), while its greatest depth is 153 fathoms 5 feet (923 ft; 281 m). It contains a volume of 1,180 cubic miles (4,918 km³) of water. Green Bay in the northwest is its largest bay. Grand Traverse Bay in its northeast is another large bay. Lake Michigan's deepest region, which lies in its northern-half, is called Chippewa Basin (named after prehistoric Lake Chippewa) and is separated from South Chippewa Basin, by a relatively deeper area called the Mid Lake Plateau.\n\nTwelve million people live along Lake Michigan's shores, mainly in the Chicago and Milwaukee metropolitan areas. The economy of many communities in northern Michigan and Door County, Wisconsin is supported by tourism, with large seasonal populations attracted by Lake Michigan. Seasonal residents often have summer homes along the waterfront and return home for the winter. The southern tip of the lake near Gary, Indiana is heavily industrialized. Cities on the shores of Lake Michigan include:\nIllinois\nBULLET::::- Chicago\nBULLET::::- Evanston\nBULLET::::- Glencoe\nBULLET::::- Highland Park\nBULLET::::- Kenilworth\nBULLET::::- Lake Forest\nBULLET::::- Lake Bluff\nBULLET::::- North Chicago\nBULLET::::- Waukegan\nBULLET::::- Wilmette\nBULLET::::- Winnetka\nBULLET::::- Zion\n\nIndiana\nBULLET::::- East Chicago\nBULLET::::- Gary\nBULLET::::- Hammond\nBULLET::::- Michigan City\nBULLET::::- Portage\nBULLET::::- Porter\nBULLET::::- Whiting\nMichigan\nBULLET::::- Benton Harbor\nBULLET::::- Bridgman\nBULLET::::- Charlevoix\nBULLET::::- Douglas\nBULLET::::- Elberta\nBULLET::::- Escanaba\nBULLET::::- Ferrysburg\nBULLET::::- Frankfort\nBULLET::::- Gladstone\nBULLET::::- Glenn\nBULLET::::- Grand Beach\nBULLET::::- Grand Haven\nBULLET::::- Harbor Springs\nBULLET::::- Holland\nBULLET::::- Ludington\n\nBULLET::::- Manistee\nBULLET::::- Manistique\nBULLET::::- Menominee\nBULLET::::- Michiana\nBULLET::::- Muskegon\nBULLET::::- New Buffalo\nBULLET::::- Norton Shores\nBULLET::::- Pentwater\nBULLET::::- Petoskey\nBULLET::::- Saugatuck\nBULLET::::- St. Joseph\nBULLET::::- Shoreham\nBULLET::::- South Haven\nBULLET::::- Traverse City\nWisconsin\nBULLET::::- Algoma\nBULLET::::- Bay View\nBULLET::::- Cudahy\nBULLET::::- Fox Point\nBULLET::::- Green Bay\nBULLET::::- Kenosha\nBULLET::::- Kewaunee\nBULLET::::- Manitowoc\nBULLET::::- Milwaukee\nBULLET::::- Mequon\n\nBULLET::::- Oconto\nBULLET::::- Port Washington\nBULLET::::- Racine\nBULLET::::- Saint Francis\nBULLET::::- Sheboygan\nBULLET::::- Shorewood\nBULLET::::- South Milwaukee\nBULLET::::- Sturgeon Bay\nBULLET::::- Two Rivers\nBULLET::::- Whitefish Bay\nThe Saint Lawrence Seaway and Great Lakes Waterway opened the Great Lakes to ocean-going vessels. Wider ocean-going container ships do not fit through the locks on these routes, and thus shipping is limited on the lakes. Despite their vast size, large sections of the Great Lakes freeze in winter, interrupting most shipping. Some icebreakers ply the lakes.\n\nThe Great Lakes are also connected by the Illinois Waterway to the Gulf of Mexico via the Illinois River (from Chicago) and the Mississippi River. An alternate track is via the Illinois River (from Chicago), to the Mississippi, up the Ohio, and then through the Tennessee-Tombigbee Waterway (combination of a series of rivers and lakes and canals), to Mobile Bay and the Gulf. Commercial tug-and-barge traffic on these waterways is heavy.\n\nPleasure boats can also enter or exit the Great Lakes by way of the Erie Canal and Hudson River in New York. The Erie Canal connects to the Great Lakes at the east end of Lake Erie (at Buffalo, NY) and at the south side of Lake Ontario (at Oswego, NY).\n\nLake Michigan has many beaches. The region is often referred to as the \"Third Coast\" of the United States, after those of the Atlantic Ocean and the Pacific Ocean. The sand is often soft and off-white, known as \"singing sands\" because of the squeaking noise (caused by high quartz content) it emits when walked upon. Some beaches have sand dunes covered in green beach grass and sand cherries, and the water is usually clear and cool, between , even in the late summer months. However, because prevailing westerly winds tend to move the surface water toward the east, there is a flow of warmer water to the Michigan shore in the summer.\n\nThe sand dunes located on the east shore of Lake Michigan are the largest freshwater dune system in the world. In fact, in multiple locations along the shoreline, the dunes rise several hundred feet above the lake surface. Large dune formations can be seen in many state parks, national forests and national parks along the Indiana and Michigan shoreline. Some of the most expansive and unique dune formations can be found at Indiana Dunes National Park, Saugatuck Dunes State Park, Warren Dunes State Park, Hoffmaster State Park, Silver Lake State Park, Ludington State Park, and Sleeping Bear Dunes National Lakeshore. Small dune formations can be found on the western shore of Lake Michigan at Illinois Beach State Park and moderate sized dune formations can be found in Kohler-Andrae State Park and Point Beach State Forest in Wisconsin. A large dune formation can be found in Whitefish Dunes State Park in Wisconsin in the Door Peninsula. Lake Michigan beaches in Northern Michigan are the only place in the world, aside from a few inland lakes in that region, where one can find Petoskey stones, the state stone.\n\nThe beaches of the western coast and the northernmost part of the east coast are often rocky, with some sandy beaches due to local conditions; while the southern and eastern beaches are typically sandy and dune-covered. This is partly because of the prevailing winds from the west (which also cause thick layers of ice to build on the eastern shore in winter).\n\nThe Chicago city waterfront is composed of parks, beaches, harbors and marinas, and residential developments connected by the Chicago Lakefront Trail. Where there are no beaches or marinas, stone or concrete revetments protect the shoreline from erosion. The Chicago lakefront is accessible for about between the city's southern and northern limits along the lake.\n\nTwo passenger and vehicle ferries operate ferry services on Lake Michigan, both connecting Wisconsin on the western shore with Michigan on the east. From May to October, the historic steam ship, , operates daily between Manitowoc, Wisconsin, and Ludington, Michigan, connecting U.S. Highway 10 between the two cities. The \"Lake Express\", established in 2004, carries passengers and vehicles across the lake between Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and Muskegon, Michigan.\n\nBULLET::::- The Beaver Island archipelago in Charlevoix County, Michigan, includes Beaver Island, Garden Island, Grape Island, Gull Island, Hat Island, High Island, Hog Island, Horseshoe Island, Little Island, Pismire Island, Shoe Island, Squaw Island, Trout Island, and Whiskey Island.\nBULLET::::- The Fox Islands in Leelanau County, Michigan, consist of North Fox Island and South Fox Island.\nBULLET::::- The Manitou Islands, North Manitou Island and South Manitou Island, are in Leelanau County, Michigan.\nBULLET::::- Islands within Grand Traverse Bay include Bassett Island, Bellow Island, and Marion Island.\nBULLET::::- Islands south of the Garden Peninsula in Delta County, Michigan include Gravelly Island, Gull Island, Little Gull Island, Little Summer Island, Poverty Island, Rocky Island, St. Martin Island, and Summer Island.\nBULLET::::- Islands in Big Bay de Noc in Delta County, Michigan include Round Island, Saint Vital Island, and Snake Island.\nBULLET::::- Islands in Little Bay de Noc in Delta County, Michigan include Butlers Island and Sand Island.\nBULLET::::- Wilderness State Park in Emmet County, Michigan contains Temperance Island and Waugoshance Island.\nBULLET::::- Epoufette Island, Gravel Island, Little Hog Island, and Naubinway Island are located in Mackinac County, Michigan, in the area of Epoufette, Michigan and Naubinway, Michigan.\nBULLET::::- Green Island and St. Helena Island are in the vicinity of the Mackinac Bridge, in Mackinac County, Michigan.\nBULLET::::- Islands surrounding the Door Peninsula in Wisconsin include Chambers Island, Fish Island, Gravel Island, Spider Island, Horseshoe Island, the Sister Islands, Detroit Island, Green Island, Hog Island, Pilot Island, Plum Island, Rock Island, the Strawberry Islands and Washington Island. The northern half of the peninsula is technically an island itself, due to the Sturgeon Bay Ship Canal.\nBULLET::::- Northerly Island is a man-made island in Chicago. It is the home of the Adler Planetarium, the former site of Meigs Field, and the current site of the temporary concert venue Charter One Pavilion each summer.\nBULLET::::- Other islands included Fisherman Island in Charlevoix County, Michigan and Ile Aux Galets in Emmet County, Michigan.\nBULLET::::- Plum Island (Wisconsin) is the island at the western shore of Lake Michigan in the southern part of the town of Washington in Door County, Wisconsin.\n\nThe National Park Service maintains the Sleeping Bear Dunes National Lakeshore and Indiana Dunes National Park. Parts of the shoreline are within the Hiawatha National Forest and the Manistee National Forest. The Manistee National Forest section of the shoreline includes the Nordhouse Dunes Wilderness. The Lake Michigan division of the Michigan Islands National Wildlife Refuge is also within the lake.\n\nThere are numerous state and local parks located on the shores of the lake or on islands within the lake. A partial list follows.\n\nBULLET::::- Chicago Park District Beaches\nBULLET::::- Duck Lake State Park\nBULLET::::- Fayette Historic State Park\nBULLET::::- Fisherman's Island State Park\nBULLET::::- Grand Haven State Park\nBULLET::::- Grand Mere State Park\nBULLET::::- Harrington Beach State Park\nBULLET::::- Holland State Park\nBULLET::::- Hoffmaster State Park\nBULLET::::- Illinois Beach State Park\nBULLET::::- Indian Lake State Park\nBULLET::::- Indiana Dunes State Park\nBULLET::::- Kohler-Andrae State Park\nBULLET::::- Lake Park, Milwaukee\nBULLET::::- Ludington State Park\nBULLET::::- Leelanau State Park\nBULLET::::- Mears State Park\nBULLET::::- Muskegon State Park\nBULLET::::- Newport State Park\nBULLET::::- Orchard Beach State Park\nBULLET::::- Peninsula State Park\nBULLET::::- Racine Zoo\nBULLET::::- Saugatuck Dunes State Park\nBULLET::::- Silver Lake State Park\nBULLET::::- Traverse City State Park\nBULLET::::- Terry Andrae State Park\nBULLET::::- Van Buren State Park\nBULLET::::- Warren Dunes State Park\nBULLET::::- Wells State Park\nBULLET::::- Wilderness State Park\nBULLET::::- Illinois lighthouses\nBULLET::::- Indiana lighthouses\nBULLET::::- Michigan lighthouses\nBULLET::::- Wisconsin lighthouses\n\nThe Milwaukee Reef, running under Lake Michigan from a point between Milwaukee and Racine to a point between Grand Haven and Muskegon, divides the lake into northern and southern basins. Each basin has a clockwise flow of water, deriving from rivers, winds, and the Coriolis effect. Prevailing westerly winds tend to move the surface water toward the east, producing a moderating effect on the climate of western Michigan. There is a mean difference in summer temperatures of 5 to 10 degrees Fahrenheit (2 to 5 degrees Celsius) between the Wisconsin and Michigan shores.\n\nHydrologically Michigan and Huron are the same body of water (sometimes called Lake Michigan-Huron), but are normally considered distinct. Counted together, it is the largest body of fresh water in the world by surface area. The Mackinac Bridge is generally considered the dividing line between them. Both lakes are part of the Great Lakes Waterway. The main inflow to Lake Michigan from Lake Superior, through Lake Huron, is controlled by the locks operated by the bi-national Lake Superior Board of Control\n\nHistoric High Water\n\nHistoric Low Water\n\nIn January 2013, Lake Michigan's monthly mean water levels dipped to an all-time low of , reaching their lowest ebb since record keeping began in 1918. The lakes were below their long-term average and had declined 17 inches since January 2012. Keith Kompoltowicz, chief of watershed hydrology for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' district office in Detroit, explained that biggest factors leading to the lower water levels in 2013 were a combination of the \"lack of a large snowpack\" in the winter of 2011/2012 coupled with very hot and dry conditions in the summer of 2012. Since then water levels have rebounded, rising about 6 feet (2 meters) in 6.5 years, and are close to breaking the record high level.\n\nLake Michigan, like the other Great Lakes, supplies drinking water to millions of people in bordering areas. The lakes are collectively administered by the state and provincial governments adjacent to them pursuant to the Great Lakes Compact.\n\nEnvironmental problems can still plague the lake. Steel mills and refineries operate near the Indiana shoreline. The \"Chicago Tribune\" reported that BP is a major polluter, dumping thousands of pounds of raw sludge in \nto the lake every day from its Whiting, Indiana, oil refinery. In March 2014 BP's Whiting refinery was responsible for spilling more than of oil into the lake.\n\nLake Michigan is home to a small variety of fish species and other organisms. It was originally home to lake whitefish, lake trout, yellow perch, panfish, largemouth bass, smallmouth bass and bowfin, as well as some species of catfish. As a result of improvements to the Welland Canal in 1918, an invasion of sea lampreys and overharvesting, there has been a decline in native lake trout populations, ultimately causing an increase in the population of another invasive species, the alewife. As a result, salmonids, including various strains of brown trout, steelhead (rainbow trout), coho and chinook salmon, were introduced as predators in order to decrease the wildlife population. This program was so successful that the introduced population of trout and salmon exploded, resulting in the creation of a large sport fishery for these introduced species. Lake Michigan is now stocked annually with steelhead, brown trout, and coho and chinook salmon, which have also begun natural reproduction in some Lake Michigan tributaries. However, several introduced invasive species, such as lampreys, round goby, zebra mussels and quagga mussels, continue to cause major changes in water clarity and fertility, resulting in knock-on changes to Lake Michigan's ecosystem, threatening the vitality of native fish populations.\n\nFisheries in inland waters of the United States are small compared to marine fisheries. The largest fisheries are the landings from the Great Lakes, worth about $14 million in 2001. Michigan's commercial fishery today consists mainly of 150 tribe-licensed commercial fishing operations through the Chippewa-Ottawa Resource Authority (CORA) and tribes belonging to the Great Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife Commission (GLIFWC), which harvest 50 percent of the Great Lakes commercial catch in Michigan waters, and 45 state-licensed commercial fishing enterprises. The prime commercial species is the lake whitefish (Coregonus clupeaformis). The annual harvest declined from an average of from 1981 through to 1999 to more recent annual harvests of . The price for lake whitefish dropped from $1.04/lb. to as low as $.40/lb during periods of high production.\n\nSports fishing includes salmon, whitefish, smelt, lake trout and walleye being major catches. In the late 1960s, successful stocking programs for Pacific salmon led to the development of Lake Michigan's charter fishing industry.\n\nLike all of the Great Lakes, Lake Michigan is today used as a major mode of transport for bulk goods. In 2002, 162 million net tons of dry bulk cargo were moved via the Lakes. This was, in order of volume: iron ore, grain and potash. The iron ore and much of the stone and coal are used in the steel industry. There is also some shipping of liquid and containerized cargo, but most container vessels cannot pass the locks on the Saint Lawrence Seaway because the ships are too wide. The total amount of shipping on the lakes has been on a downward trend for several years.\n\nThe Port of Chicago, operated by the Illinois International Port District, has grain (14 million bushels) and bulk liquid (800,000 barrels) storage facilities along Lake Calumet. The central element of the Port District, Calumet Harbor, is maintained by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.\n\nTourism and recreation are major industries on all of the Great Lakes:\n\nBULLET::::- A few small cruise ships operate on Lake Michigan, including a couple of sailing ships.\nBULLET::::- Many other water sports are practiced on the lakes, such as yachting, sea kayaking, diving, kitesurfing and lake surfing.\nBULLET::::- The Great Lakes Circle Tour, a designated scenic road system, connects all of the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River.\nBULLET::::- Great Lakes passenger steamers have been operating since the mid-1800s. Several ferries currently operate on the Great Lakes to carry passengers to various islands, including Beaver Island and Bois Blanc Island (Michigan). Currently, two car ferry services traverse Lake Michigan from around April to November: the SS Badger, a steamer from Ludington, Michigan, to Manitowoc, Wisconsin, and the Lake Express, a high speed catamaran from Milwaukee to Muskegon, Michigan.\n\nBULLET::::- Beaver Island\nBULLET::::- Chicago beaches\nBULLET::::- Chicago River\nBULLET::::- Door Peninsula\nBULLET::::- Green Bay\nBULLET::::- Jardine Water Purification Plant\nBULLET::::- Lake Michigan Shore AVA\nBULLET::::- Leelanau Peninsula\nBULLET::::- Little Traverse Bay\nBULLET::::- Milwaukee River\nBULLET::::- Port of Milwaukee\nBULLET::::- Washington Island\n\n\nBULLET::::- EPA's Great Lakes Atlas\nBULLET::::- Great Lakes Coast Watch\nBULLET::::- Michigan DNR map of Lake Michigan\nBULLET::::- Official Michigan DNR Freshwater Fishing Regulations\nBULLET::::- Bathymetry of Lake Michigan\n\nBULLET::::- Lighthouses\nBULLET::::- Bibliography on Michigan lighthouses\nBULLET::::- Interactive map of lighthouses in area (northern Lake Michigan)\nBULLET::::- Interactive map of lighthouses in area (southern Lake Michigan)\nBULLET::::- Terry Pepper on lighthouses of the western Great Lakes\nBULLET::::- Wagner, John L., Beacons Shining in the Night, Michigan lighthouse bibliography, chronology, history, and photographs, Clarke Historical Library, Central Michigan University\n"}
{"id": "17949", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17949", "title": "Fibonacci", "text": "Fibonacci\n\nFibonacci (, , ; – ) was an Italian mathematician from the Republic of Pisa, considered to be \"the most talented Western mathematician of the Middle Ages\".\n\nThe name he is commonly called, \"Fibonacci\", was made up in 1838 by the Franco-Italian historian Guillaume Libri and is short for (\"son of Bonacci\"). He is also known as Leonardo Bonacci, Leonardo of Pisa, or Leonardo Bigollo Pisano (\"Leonardo the Traveller from Pisa\").\nFibonacci popularized the Hindu–Arabic numeral system in the Western World primarily through his composition in 1202 of \"Liber Abaci\" (\"Book of Calculation\"). He also introduced Europe to the sequence of Fibonacci numbers, which he used as an example in \"Liber Abaci\".\n\nFibonacci was born around 1170 to Guglielmo, an Italian merchant and customs official. Guglielmo directed a trading post in Bugia, Algeria. Fibonacci travelled with him as a young boy, and it was in Bugia that he learned about the Hindu–Arabic numeral system.\n\nFibonacci travelled around the Mediterranean coast, meeting with many merchants and learning about their systems of doing arithmetic. He soon realised the many advantages of the Hindu-Arabic system, which, unlike the Roman numerals used at the time, allowed easy calculation using a place-value system. In 1202, he completed the \"Liber Abaci\" (\"Book of Abacus\" or \"The Book of Calculation\"), which popularized Hindu–Arabic numerals in Europe.\n\nFibonacci became a guest of Emperor Frederick II, who enjoyed mathematics and science. In 1240, the Republic of Pisa honored Fibonacci (referred to as Leonardo Bigollo) by granting him a salary in a decree that recognized him for the services that he had given to the city as an advisor on matters of accounting and instruction to citizens:\n\n«Considerantes nostre civitatis et civium honorem atque profectum, qui eis, tam per doctrinam quam per sedula obsequia discreti et sapientis viri magistri Leonardi Bigolli, in abbacandis estimationibus et rationibus civitatis eiusque officialium et aliis quoties expedit, conferuntur; ut eidem Leonardo, merito dilectionis et gratie, atque scientie sue prerogativa, in recompensationem laboris sui quem substinet in audiendis et consolidandis estimationibus et rationibus supradictis, a Comuni et camerariis publicis, de Comuni et pro Comuni, mercede sive salario suo, annis singulis, libre xx denariorum et amisceria consueta dari debeant (ipseque pisano Comuni et eius officialibus in abbacatione de cetero more solito serviat), presenti constitutione firmamus».\n\nThe date of Fibonacci's death is not known, but it has been estimated to be between 1240 and 1250, most likely in Pisa.\n\nIn the \"Liber Abaci\" (1202), Fibonacci introduced the so-called \"modus Indorum\" (method of the Indians), today known as the Hindu–Arabic numeral system. The book advocated numeration with the digits 0–9 and place value. The book showed the practical use and value of the new Hindu-Arabic numeral system by applying the numerals to commercial bookkeeping, converting weights and measures, calculation of interest, money-changing, and other applications. The book was well-received throughout educated Europe and had a profound impact on European thought. No copies of the 1202 edition are known to exist.\n\nThe 1228 edition, first section introduces the Hindu-Arabic numeral system and compares the system with other systems, such as Roman numerals, and methods to convert the other numeral systems into Hindu-Arabic numerals. Replacing the Roman numeral system, its ancient Egyptian multiplication method, and using an abacus for calculations, with a Hindu-Arabic numeral system was an advance in making business calculations easier and faster, which assisted the growth of banking and accounting in Europe.\n\nThe second section explains the uses of Hindu-Arabic numerals in business, for example converting different currencies, and calculating profit and interest, which were important to the growing banking industry. The book also discusses irrational numbers and prime numbers.\n\n\"Liber Abaci\" posed and solved a problem involving the growth of a population of rabbits based on idealized assumptions. The solution, generation by generation, was a sequence of numbers later known as Fibonacci numbers. Although Fibonacci's \"Liber Abaci\" contains the earliest known description of the sequence outside of India, the sequence had been described by Indian mathematicians as early as the sixth century.\n\nIn the Fibonacci sequence, each number is the sum of the previous two numbers. Fibonacci omitted the \"0\" included today and began the sequence with 1, 1, 2, ... . He carried the calculation up to the thirteenth place, the value 233, though another manuscript carries it to the next place, the value 377. Fibonacci did not speak about the golden ratio as the limit of the ratio of consecutive numbers in this sequence.\n\nIn the 19th century, a statue of Fibonacci was constructed and raised in Pisa. Today it is located in the western gallery of the Camposanto, historical cemetery on the Piazza dei Miracoli.\n\nThere are many mathematical concepts named after Fibonacci because of a connection to the Fibonacci numbers. Examples include the Brahmagupta–Fibonacci identity, the Fibonacci search technique, and the Pisano period. Beyond mathematics, namesakes of Fibonacci include the asteroid 6765 Fibonacci and the art rock band The Fibonaccis.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Liber Abaci\" (1202), a book on calculations (English translation by Laurence Sigler, 2002)\nBULLET::::- \"Practica Geometriae\" (1220), a compendium of techniques in surveying, the measurement and partition of areas and volumes, and other topics in practical geometry (English translation by Barnabas Hughes, Springer, 2008).\nBULLET::::- \"Flos\" (1225), solutions to problems posed by Johannes of Palermo\nBULLET::::- \"Liber quadratorum\" (\"The Book of Squares\") on Diophantine equations, dedicated to Emperor Frederick II. See in particular congruum and the Brahmagupta–Fibonacci identity.\nBULLET::::- \"Di minor guisa\" (on commercial arithmetic; lost)\nBULLET::::- \"Commentary on Book X of Euclid's Elements\" (lost)\n\nBULLET::::- Fibonacci numbers in popular culture\nBULLET::::- Republic of Pisa\nBULLET::::- Adelard of Bath\n\nBULLET::::- Goetzmann, William N. and Rouwenhorst, K.Geert, \"The Origins of Value: The Financial Innovations That Created Modern Capital Markets\" (2005, Oxford University Press Inc, USA), .\nBULLET::::- Goetzmann, William N., \"Fibonacci and the Financial Revolution\" (October 23, 2003), Yale School of Management International Center for Finance Working Paper No. 03–28\nBULLET::::- Grimm, R. E., \"The Autobiography of Leonardo Pisano\", Fibonacci Quarterly, Vol. 11, No. 1, February 1973, pp. 99–104.\nBULLET::::- Horadam, A. F. \"Eight hundred years young,\" \"The Australian Mathematics Teacher\" 31 (1975) 123–134.\nBULLET::::- Gavin, J., Schärlig, A., extracts of \"Liber Abaci\" online and analyzed on \"BibNum\"\n\nBULLET::::- \"Fibonacci, Leonardo, or Leonardo of Pisa.\" Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography. 2008. Encyclopedia.com. (April 20, 2015).\nBULLET::::- Fibonacci at Convergence\nBULLET::::- Fibonacci (2 vol., 1857 & 1862) \"Il liber abbaci\" and \"Practica Geometriae\" - digital facsimile from the Linda Hall Library\nBULLET::::- Fibonacci, Liber abbaci Bibliotheca Augustana\n"}
{"id": "17951", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17951", "title": "Lake Superior", "text": "Lake Superior\n\nLake Superior (; ), the largest of the Great Lakes of North America, is also the world's largest freshwater lake by surface area, and the third largest freshwater lake by volume. It is shared by the Canadian province of Ontario to the north, the U.S. state of Minnesota to the west, and Wisconsin and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan to the south. The farthest north and west of the Great Lakes chain, Superior has the highest elevation of all five great lakes and drains into the St. Mary's River.\n\nThe Ojibwe name for the lake is \"gichi-gami\" (pronounced as \"gitchi-gami\" and \"kitchi-gami\" in other dialects), meaning \"great sea\". Henry Wadsworth Longfellow wrote the name as \"Gitche Gumee\" in The Song of Hiawatha, as did Gordon Lightfoot in his song, \"The Wreck of the Edmund Fitzgerald\". According to other sources, the actual Ojibwe name is \"Ojibwe Gichigami\" (\"Ojibwe's Great Sea\") or \"Anishinaabe Gichigami\" (\"Anishinaabe's Great Sea\"). The 1878 dictionary by Father Frederic Baraga, the first one written for the Ojibway language, gives the Ojibwe name as Otchipwe-kitchi-gami (reflecting \"Ojibwe Gichigami\").\n\nThe first French explorers approaching the great inland sea by way of the Ottawa River and Lake Huron during the 17th century referred to their discovery as \"le lac supérieur\". Properly translated, the expression means \"Upper Lake,\" that is, the lake above Lake Huron. The lake was also called \"Lac Tracy\" (named for Alexandre de Prouville de Tracy) by 17th century Jesuit missionaries. The British, upon taking control of the region from the French in the 1760s following the French and Indian War, anglicized the lake's name to \"Superior\", \"on account of its being superior in magnitude to any of the lakes on that vast continent\".\n\nLake Superior empties into Lake Huron via the St. Marys River and the Soo Locks. Lake Superior is the largest freshwater lake in the world in area and the third largest in volume, behind Lake Baikal in Siberia and Lake Tanganyika in East Africa. The Caspian Sea, while larger than Lake Superior in both surface area and volume, is brackish; though presently isolated, prehistorically the Caspian has been repeatedly connected to and then isolated from the Mediterranean via the Black Sea.\n\nLake Superior has a surface area of , which is approximately the size of South Carolina or Austria. It has a maximum length of and maximum breadth of . Its average depth is with a maximum depth of . Lake Superior contains 2,900 cubic miles (12,100 km³) of water. There is enough water in Lake Superior to cover the entire land mass of North and South America to a depth of . The shoreline of the lake stretches (including islands).\n\nAmerican limnologist J. Val Klump was the first person to reach the lowest depth of Lake Superior on July 30, 1985, as part of a scientific expedition, which at 122 fathoms 1 foot () below sea level is the second-lowest spot in the continental interior of the United States and the third-lowest spot in the interior of the North American continent after Iliamna Lake in Alaska (942 feet [287 m] below sea level) and Great Slave Lake in the Northwest Territories of Canada at ( below sea level). (Though Crater Lake is the deepest lake in the United States and deeper than Lake Superior, Crater Lake's elevation is higher and consequently its deepest point is \"above\" sea level.)\n\nWhile the temperature of the surface of Lake Superior varies seasonally, the temperature below is an almost constant 39 °F (4 °C). This variation in temperature makes the lake seasonally stratigraphic. Twice per year, however, the water column reaches a uniform temperature of 39 °F (4 °C) from top to bottom, and the lake waters thoroughly mix. This feature makes the lake dimictic. Because of its volume, Lake Superior has a retention time of 191 years.\n\nAnnual storms on Lake Superior regularly feature wave heights of over . Waves well over have been recorded.\n\nLake Superior is fed by more than 200 rivers, including the Nipigon River, the St. Louis River, the Pigeon River, the Pic River, the White River, the Michipicoten River, the Bois Brule River and the Kaministiquia River. Lake Superior drains into Lake Huron via the St. Marys River. There are rapids at the river's upper (Lake Superior) end, where the river bed has a relatively steep gradient. The Soo Locks enable ships to bypass the rapids and to overcome the height difference between Lakes Superior and Huron.\n\nThe lake's average surface elevation is above sea level. Until approximately 1887, the natural hydraulic conveyance through the St. Marys River rapids determined the outflow from Lake Superior. By 1921, development in support of transportation and hydroelectric power resulted in gates, locks, power canals and other control structures completely spanning St. Marys rapids. The regulating structure is known as the Compensating Works and is operated according to a regulation plan known as Plan 1977-A. Water levels, including diversions of water from the Hudson Bay watershed, are regulated by the International Lake Superior Board of Control, which was established in 1914 by the International Joint Commission.\n\nLake Superior's water level was at a new record low in September 2007, slightly less than the previous record low in 1926. However, the water levels returned within a few days.\n\nHistoric high water\nThe lake's water level fluctuates from month to month, with the highest lake levels in October and November. The normal high-water mark is above datum (601.1 ft or 183.2 m). In the summer of 1985, Lake Superior reached its highest recorded level at above datum. The winter of 1986 set new high-water records through the winter and spring months (January to June), ranging from to above Chart Datum.\n\nHistoric low water\nThe lake's lowest levels occur in March and April. The normal low-water mark is below datum (601.1 ft or 183.2 m). In the winter of 1926 Lake Superior reached its lowest recorded level at below datum. Additionally, the entire first half of the year (January to June) included record low months. The low water was a continuation of the dropping lake levels from the previous year, 1925, which set low-water records for October through December. During the nine-month period of October 1925 to June 1926, water levels ranged from to below Chart Datum. In the summer of 2007 monthly historic lows were set; August at , September at .\n\nAccording to a study by professors at the University of Minnesota Duluth, Lake Superior may have warmed faster than its surrounding area. Summer surface temperatures in the lake appeared to have increased by about 4.5 °F (2.5 °C) between 1979 and 2007, compared with an approximately 2.7 °F (1.5 °C) increase in the surrounding average air temperature. The increase in the lake's surface temperature may be related to the decreasing ice cover. Less winter ice cover allows more solar radiation to penetrate and warm the water. If trends continue, Lake Superior, which freezes over completely once every 20 years, could routinely be ice-free by 2040. This would be a significant departure from historical records as, according to Hubert Lamb, Samuel Champlain reported ice along the shores of Lake Superior in June 1608. Warmer temperatures could lead to more snow in the lake effect snow belts along the shores of the lake, especially in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan. However, two recent consecutive winters (2013–2014 and 2014–2015) brought unusually high ice coverage to the Great Lakes, and on March 6, 2014, overall ice coverage peaked at 92.5%, the second-highest in recorded history. Lake Superior's ice coverage further beat 2014's record in 2019, reaching 95% coverage.\n\nThe largest island in Lake Superior is Isle Royale in the state of Michigan. Isle Royale contains several lakes, some of which also contain islands. Other well-known islands include Madeline Island in the state of Wisconsin, Michipicoten Island in the province of Ontario, and Grand Island (the location of the Grand Island National Recreation Area) in the state of Michigan.\n\nThe larger cities on Lake Superior include the twin ports of Duluth, Minnesota and Superior, Wisconsin; Thunder Bay, Ontario; Marquette, Michigan; and the twin cities of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan, and Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario. Duluth-Superior, at the western end of Lake Superior, is the most inland point on the St. Lawrence Seaway and the most inland port in the world.\n\nAmong the scenic places on the lake are Apostle Islands National Lakeshore, Isle Royale National Park, Porcupine Mountains Wilderness State Park, Pukaskwa National Park, Lake Superior Provincial Park, Grand Island National Recreation Area, Sleeping Giant (Ontario) and Pictured Rocks National Lakeshore.\n\nThe Great Lakes Circle Tour is a designated scenic road system connecting all of the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River.\n\nLake Superior's size reduces the severity of the seasons of its humid continental climate (more typically seen in locations like Nova Scotia). The water surface's slow reaction to temperature changes, seasonally ranging between 32 and 55 °F (0–13 °C) around 1970, helps to moderate surrounding air temperatures in the summer and winter, and creates lake effect snow in colder months. The hills and mountains that border the lake hold moisture and fog, particularly in the fall.\n\nThe lake's surface temperature rose by 4.5 °F (2.5 °C) from 1979 to 2006.\n\nThe rocks of Lake Superior's northern shore date back to the early history of the earth. During the Precambrian (between 4.5 billion and 540 million years ago) magma forcing its way to the surface created the intrusive granites of the Canadian Shield. These ancient granites can be seen on the North Shore today. It was during the Penokean orogeny, part of the process that created the Great Lakes Tectonic Zone, that many valuable metals were deposited. The region surrounding the lake has proved to be rich in minerals. Copper, iron, silver, gold and nickel are or were the most frequently mined. Examples include the Hemlo gold mine near Marathon, copper at Point Mamainse, silver at Silver Islet and uranium at Theano Point.\n\nThe mountains steadily eroded, depositing layers of sediments that compacted and became limestone, dolomite, taconite and the shale at Kakabeka Falls.\n\nThe continent was later riven, creating one of the deepest rifts in the world. The lake lies in this long-extinct Mesoproterozoic rift valley, the Midcontinent Rift. Magma was injected between layers of sedimentary rock, forming diabase sills. This hard diabase protects the layers of sedimentary rock below, forming the flat-topped mesas in the Thunder Bay area.\n\nAmethyst formed in some of the cavities created by the Midcontinent Rift and there are several amethyst mines in the Thunder Bay area.\n\nLava erupted from the rift and formed the black basalt rock of Michipicoten Island, Black Bay Peninsula, and St. Ignace Island.\n\nDuring the Wisconsin glaciation 10,000 years ago, ice covered the region at a thickness of . The land contours familiar today were carved by the advance and retreat of the ice sheet. The retreat left gravel, sand, clay and boulder deposits. Glacial meltwaters gathered in the Superior basin creating Lake Minong, a precursor to Lake Superior. Without the immense weight of the ice, the land rebounded, and a drainage outlet formed at Sault Ste. Marie, which would become known as St. Mary's River.\n\nThe first people came to the Lake Superior region 10,000 years ago after the retreat of the glaciers in the last Ice Age. They are known as the Plano, and they used stone-tipped spears to hunt caribou on the northwestern side of Lake Minong.\n\nThe next documented people are known as the Shield Archaic (c. 5000–500 BC). Evidence of this culture can be found at the eastern and western ends of the Canadian shore. They used bows and arrows, dugout canoes, fished, hunted, mined copper for tools and weapons, and established trading networks. They are believed to be the direct ancestors of the Ojibwe and Cree.\n\nThe Laurel people (c. 500 BC to AD 500) developed seine net fishing, evidence being found at rivers around Superior such as the Pic and Michipicoten.\nAnother culture known as the Terminal Woodland Indians (c. AD 900–1650) has been found. They were Algonkian people who hunted, fished and gathered berries. They used snow shoes, birch bark canoes and conical or domed lodges. At the mouth of the Michipicoten River, nine layers of encampments have been discovered. Most of the Pukaskwa Pits were likely made during this time.\n\nThe Anishinaabe, which includes the Ojibwe or Chippewa, have inhabited the Lake Superior region for over five hundred years and were preceded by the Dakota, Fox, Menominee, Nipigon, Noquet and Gros Ventres. They called Lake Superior either \"Ojibwe Gichigami\" (\"the Ojibwe's Great Sea\") or \"Anishnaabe Gichgamiing\" (\"the Anishinaabe's Great Sea\"). After the arrival of Europeans, the Anishinaabe made themselves the middle-men between the French fur traders and other Native peoples. They soon became the dominant Native American nation in the region: they forced out the Sioux and Fox and won a victory against the Iroquois west of Sault Ste. Marie in 1662. By the mid-18th century, the Ojibwe occupied all of Lake Superior's shores.\nIn the 18th century, the fur trade in the region was booming, with the Hudson's Bay Company having a virtual monopoly. In 1783, however, the North West Company was formed to rival the Hudson's Bay Company. The North West Company built forts on Lake Superior at Grand Portage, Fort William, Nipigon, the Pic River, the Michipicoten River, and Sault Ste. Marie. But by 1821, with competition taking too great a toll on both, the companies merged under the Hudson's Bay Company name.\n\nMany towns around the lake are either current or former mining areas, or engaged in processing or shipping. Today, tourism is another significant industry; the sparsely populated Lake Superior country, with its rugged shorelines and wilderness, attracts tourists and adventurers.\n\nLake Superior has been an important link in the Great Lakes Waterway, providing a route for the transportation of iron ore as well as grain and other mined and manufactured materials. Large cargo vessels called lake freighters, as well as smaller ocean-going freighters, transport these commodities across Lake Superior.\n\nShipping was slow to arrive at Lake Superior in the 19th century. The first steamboat to run on the lake was the \"Independence\", which didn't appear until 1847, compared to the arrival of the first steamers on the other Great Lakes beginning in 1816. \n\nBecause of ice, the Lake is closed to shipping from mid-January to late March. Exact dates for the shipping season vary each year, depending on weather conditions that form and break the ice.\n\nThe southern shore of Lake Superior between Grand Marais, Michigan, and Whitefish Point is known as the \"Graveyard of the Great Lakes\" and more ships have been lost around the Whitefish Point area than any other part of Lake Superior. These shipwrecks are now protected by the Whitefish Point Underwater Preserve.\n\nStorms that claimed multiple ships include the Mataafa Storm in 1905 and the Great Lakes Storm of 1913.\n\nWreckage of —a ore carrier that sank on October 11, 1907, during a Lake Superior storm in 77 fathoms () of water—was located in August 2007. All but Charles G. Pitz of \"Cyprus\"s 23 crew perished . The ore carrier sank in Lake Superior on her second voyage, while hauling iron ore from Superior, Wisconsin, to Buffalo, New York. Built in Lorain, Ohio, \"Cyprus\" was launched August 17, 1907.\n\nIn 1918 the last warships to sink in the Great Lakes, French minesweepers \"Inkerman\" and \"Cerisoles\", vanished in a Lake Superior storm, perhaps upon striking the uncharted danger of the Superior Shoal in an otherwise deep part of the lake. With 78 crewmembers dead, their sinking marked the largest loss of life on Lake Superior to date.\n\nAccording to legend, \"Lake Superior seldom gives up her dead\". This is because of the unusually low temperature of the water, estimated at under on average around 1970. Normally, bacteria feeding on a sunken decaying body will generate gas inside the body, causing it to float to the surface after a few days. However, Lake Superior's water is cold enough year-round to inhibit bacterial growth, and bodies tend to sink and never resurface. This is alluded to in Lightfoot's \"The Wreck of the \"Edmund Fitzgerald\"\" ballad. \"Fitzgerald\" adventurer Joe MacInnis reported that, in July 1994, explorer Frederick Shannon's Expedition 94 to the wreck of \"Edmund Fitzgerald\" discovered and filmed a man's body near the port side of her pilothouse, not far from the open door, \"fully clothed, wearing an orange life jacket, and lying face down in the sediment\".\n\nMore than 80 species of fish have been found in Lake Superior. Species native to the lake include: banded killifish, bloater, brook trout, burbot, cisco, lake sturgeon, lake trout, lake whitefish, longnose sucker, muskellunge, northern pike, pumpkinseed, rock bass, round whitefish, smallmouth bass, walleye, white sucker and yellow perch. In addition, many fish species have been either intentionally or accidentally introduced to Lake Superior: Atlantic salmon, brown trout, carp, chinook salmon, coho salmon, freshwater drum, pink salmon, rainbow smelt, rainbow trout, round goby, ruffe, sea lamprey and white perch.\n\nLake Superior has fewer dissolved nutrients relative to its water volume than the other Great Lakes and so is less productive in terms of fish populations and is an oligotrophic lake. This is a result of the underdeveloped soils found in its relatively small watershed. It is also a reflection of relatively small human population and small amount of agriculture in its watershed. However, nitrate concentrations in the lake have been continuously rising for more than a century. They are still much lower than levels considered dangerous to human health; but this steady, long-term rise is an unusual record of environmental nitrogen buildup. It may relate to anthropogenic alternations to the regional nitrogen cycle, but researchers are still unsure of the causes of this change to the lake's ecology.\n\nAs for other Great Lakes fish, populations have also been affected by the accidental or intentional introduction of foreign species such as the sea lamprey and Eurasian ruffe. Accidental introductions have occurred in part by the removal of natural barriers to navigation between the Great Lakes. Overfishing has also been a factor in the decline of fish populations.\n\nBULLET::::- List of lakes in Ontario\nBULLET::::- North Shore of Lake Superior\nBULLET::::- South Shore of Lake Superior\n\nBULLET::::- Great Lakes\nBULLET::::- Great Lakes Areas of Concern\nBULLET::::- Great Lakes census statistical areas\nBULLET::::- Great Lakes Commission\nBULLET::::- Great Recycling and Northern Development Canal\nBULLET::::- Great Lakes Storm of 1913\nBULLET::::- International Boundary Waters Treaty\nBULLET::::- List of cities along the Great Lakes\nBULLET::::- Seiche\nBULLET::::- Shipwrecks of the 1913 Great Lakes storm\nBULLET::::- Sixty Years' War for control of the Great Lakes\nBULLET::::- Third Coast\n\n\nBULLET::::- Lake Superior NOAA nautical chart #14961 online\nBULLET::::- International Lake Superior Board of Control\nBULLET::::- EPA's Great Lakes Atlas\nBULLET::::- EPA's Great Lakes Atlas Factsheet #1\nBULLET::::- Great Lakes Coast Watch\nBULLET::::- Parks Canada - Lake Superior National Marine Conservation Area\nBULLET::::- Minnesota Sea Grant Lake Superior Page\nBULLET::::- Lake Superior Bathymetry\n"}
{"id": "17955", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17955", "title": "Leipzig", "text": "Leipzig\n\nLeipzig (, , ; ; Upper Saxon: ) is the most populous city in the German federal state of Saxony. With a population of 600,000 inhabitants as of 2019 (1.1 million residents in the larger urban zone), it is Germany's eighth most populous city as well as the second most populous city in the area of former East Germany after (East) Berlin. Together with Halle (Saale), the largest city of the neighbouring state of Saxony-Anhalt, the city forms the polycentric conurbation of Leipzig-Halle. Between the two cities (in Schkeuditz) lies Leipzig/Halle International Airport.\n\nLeipzig is located about southwest of Berlin in the Leipzig Bay, which constitutes the southernmost part of the North German Plain, at the confluence of the White Elster River (progression: ) and two of its tributaries: the Pleiße and the Parthe. The name of the city as well as the names of many of its boroughs are of Slavic origin.\n\nLeipzig has been a trade city since at least the time of the Holy Roman Empire. The city sits at the intersection of the Via Regia and the Via Imperii, two important medieval trade routes. Leipzig was once one of the major European centres of learning and culture in fields such as music and publishing. After the Second World War and during the period of the German Democratic Republic (East Germany) Leipzig remained a major urban centre in East German terms, but its cultural and economic importance declined. Events in Leipzig in 1989 played a significant role in precipitating the fall of communism in Central and Eastern Europe, mainly through demonstrations starting from St. Nicholas Church. The immediate effects of the reunification of Germany included the collapse of the local economy, which had come to depend of highly polluting heavy industry, severe unemployment, and urban blight. Starting around 2000, however, decline was first arrested and then reversed. Leipzig has undergone significant change with the restoration of major historical buildings, the demolition of derelict properties of little historical value, and the development of new industries and a modern transport infrastructure.\n\nLeipzig today is an economic centre, the most livable city in Germany, according to the GfK marketing research institution and has the second-best future prospects of all cities in Germany, according to HWWI and Berenberg Bank. The city is one of two seats of the German National Library (together with Frankfurt), as well as the seat of the German Federal Administrative Court. Leipzig Zoo is one of the most modern zoos in Europe and ranks first in Germany and second in Europe according to Anthony Sheridan. Since the opening of the Leipzig City Tunnel in 2013, Leipzig forms the centrepiece of the S-Bahn Mitteldeutschland public transit system. Leipzig is currently listed as a Gamma World City, Germany's \"Boomtown\" and as the European City of the Year 2019.\n\nLeipzig has long been a major centre for music, both classical as well as modern \"dark alternative music\" or darkwave genres. The Oper Leipzig is one of the most prominent opera houses in Germany. It was founded in 1693, making it the third-oldest opera venue in Europe after La Fenice (Venice, Italy) and the Hamburg State Opera (Hamburg, Germany). Leipzig is also home to the University of Music and Theatre \"Felix Mendelssohn Bartholdy\". It was during a stay in this city that Friedrich Schiller wrote his poem \"Ode to Joy\". The Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra, established in 1743, is one of the oldest symphony orchestras in the world. Johann Sebastian Bach is one among many major composers who lived and worked in Leipzig.\n\nThe name Leipzig is derived from the Slavic word \"\", which means \"settlement where the linden trees (British English: lime trees; U.S. English: basswood trees) stand\". An older spelling of the name in English is '. The Latin name ' was also used. The name is cognate with () in Russia and in Latvia.\nIn 1937 the Nazi government officially renamed the city \"\" (Imperial Trade Fair City Leipzig).\n\nSince 1989 Leipzig has been informally dubbed \"Hero City\" (), in recognition of the role that the Monday demonstrations there played in the fall of the East German regime – the name alludes to the honorary title awarded in the former Soviet Union to certain cities that played a key role in the victory of the Allies during the Second World War. The common usage of this nickname for Leipzig up until the present is reflected, for example, in the name of a popular blog for local arts and culture, \"Heldenstadt.de\".\n\nMore recently, the city has sometimes been nicknamed the \"Boomtown of eastern Germany\", \"Hypezig\" or \"The better Berlin\" for being celebrated by the media as a hip urban centre for the vital lifestyle and creative scene with many startups.\n\nLeipzig was first documented in 1015 in the chronicles of Bishop Thietmar of Merseburg as \" (\" VII\", 25) and endowed with city and market privileges in 1165 by Otto the Rich. Leipzig Trade Fair, started in the Middle Ages, has become an event of international importance and is the oldest surviving trade fair in the world.\n\nThere are records of commercial fishing operations on the river Pleiße in Leipzig dating back to 1305, when the Margrave Dietrich the Younger granted the fishing rights to the church and convent of St Thomas.\n\nThere were a number of monasteries in and around the city, including a Franciscan monastery after which the (Barefoot Alley) is named and a monastery of Irish monks (, destroyed in 1544) near the present day (the old \").\n\nThe foundation of the University of Leipzig in 1409 initiated the city's development into a centre of German law and the publishing industry, and towards being the location of the \" (Imperial Court of Justice) and the German National Library (founded in 1912).\n\nDuring the Thirty Years' War, two battles took place in , about outside Leipzig city walls. The first Battle of Breitenfeld took place in 1631 and the second in 1642. Both battles resulted in victories for the Swedish-led side.\n\nOn 24 December 1701, an oil-fueled street lighting system was introduced. The city employed light guards who had to follow a specific schedule to ensure the punctual lighting of the 700 lanterns.\n\nThe Leipzig region was the arena of the 1813 Battle of Leipzig between Napoleonic France and an allied coalition of Prussia, Russia, Austria and Sweden. It was the largest battle in Europe before the First World War and the coalition victory ended Napoleon's presence in Germany and would ultimately lead to his first exile on Elba. The Monument to the Battle of the Nations celebrating the centenary of this event was completed in 1913. In addition to stimulating German nationalism, the war had a major impact in mobilizing a civic spirit in numerous volunteer activities. Many volunteer militias and civic associations were formed, and collaborated with churches and the press to support local and state militias, patriotic wartime mobilization, humanitarian relief and postwar commemorative practices and rituals.\n\nWhen it was made a terminus of the first German long-distance railway to Dresden (the capital of Saxony) in 1839, Leipzig became a hub of Central European railway traffic, with Leipzig Hauptbahnhof the largest terminal station by area in Europe. The railway station has two grand entrance halls, the eastern one for the Royal Saxon State Railways and the western one for the Prussian state railways.\n\nIn the 19th century, Leipzig was a centre of the German and Saxon liberal movements. The first German labor party, the General German Workers' Association (\"Allgemeiner Deutscher Arbeiterverein\", ADAV) was founded in Leipzig on 23 May 1863 by Ferdinand Lassalle; about 600 workers from across Germany travelled to the foundation on the new railway. Leipzig expanded rapidly to more than 700,000 inhabitants. Huge \"Gründerzeit\" areas were built, which mostly survived both war and post-war demolition.\nWith the opening of a fifth production hall in 1907, the Leipziger Baumwollspinnerei became the largest cotton mill company on the continent, housing over 240,000 spindles. Daily production surpassed 5 million kilograms of yarn.\n\nDuring the 1930s and 1940s, music was prominent throughout Leipzig. Many students attended Felix Mendelssohn Bartholdy College of Music and Theatre (then named Landeskonservatorium.) However, in 1944, it was closed due to World War II. It re-opened soon after the war ended in 1945.\n\nOn 22 May 1930, Carl Friedrich Goerdeler was elected mayor of Leipzig. He was well known as an opponent of the Nazi regime. He resigned in 1937 when, in his absence, his Nazi deputy ordered the destruction of the city's statue of Felix Mendelssohn. On Kristallnacht in 1938, the 1855 Moorish Revival Leipzig synagogue, one of the city's most architecturally significant buildings, was deliberately destroyed. Goerdeler was later executed by the Nazis on 2 February 1945.\n\nSeveral thousand forced labourers were stationed in Leipzig during the Second World War.\n\nBeginning in 1933, many Jewish citizens of Leipzig were members of the Gemeinde, a large Jewish religious community spread throughout Germany, Austria and Switzerland. In October 1935, the Gemeinde helped found the Lehrhaus (English: a house of study) in Leipzig to provide different forms of studies to Jewish students who were prohibited from attending any institutions in Germany. Jewish studies were emphasized and much of the Jewish community of Leipzig became involved.\n\nLike all other cities claimed by the Nazis, Leipzig was subject to aryanisation. Beginning in 1933 and increasing in 1939, Jewish business owners were forced to give up their possessions and stores. This eventually intensified to the point where Nazi officials were strong enough to evict the Jews from their own homes. They also had the power to force many of the Jews living in the city to sell their houses. Many people who sold their homes emigrated elsewhere, outside of Leipzig. Others moved to Judenhäuser, which were smaller houses that acted as ghettos, housing large groups of people.\n\nAs with other cities in Europe during the Holocaust, the Jews of Leipzig were greatly affected by the Nuremberg Laws. However, due to the Leipzig Trade Fair and the international attention it garnered, Leipzig was especially cautious about its public image. Despite this, the Leipzig authorities were not afraid to strictly apply and enforce anti-semitic measures. Shortly before Kristallnacht, Polish Jews living in the city were expelled.\n\nOn 20 December 1937, after the Nazis took control of the city, they renamed it Reichsmessestadt Leipzig, meaning the \"Imperial Trade Fair City Leipzig\". In early 1938, Leipzig saw an increase in Zionism through Jewish citizens. Many of these Zionists attempted to flee before deportations began. On 28 October 1938, Heinrich Himmler ordered the deportation of Polish Jews from Leipzig to Poland.\n\nOn 9 November 1938, as part of Kristallnacht, in Gottschedstrasse (German: Gottschedstraße), now a popular dining and nightlife area in Leipzig, synagogues and businesses were set on fire. Only a couple of days later, on 11 November 1938, many Jews in the Leipzig area were deported to the Buchenwald Concentration Camp. As World War II came to an end, much of Leipzig was destroyed. Following the war, the Communist Party of Germany (German: \"Kommunistische Partei Deutschlands\", \"KPD\") provided aid for the reconstruction of the city.\n\nIn 1933, a census recorded that over 11,000 Jews were living in Leipzig. In the 1939 census, the number had fallen to roughly 4,500, and by January 1942 only 2,000 remained. In that month, these 2,000 Jews began to be deported. On 13 July 1942, 170 Jews were deported from Leipzig to Auschwitz Concentration Camp. On 19 September 1942, 440 Jews were deported from Leipzig to Theresienstadt Concentration Camp. On 18 June 1943, the remaining 18 Jews still in Leipzig were deported from Leipzig to Auschwitz Concentration Camp. According to records of the two waves of deportations to Auschwitz there were no survivors. According to records of the Theresienstadt deportation, only 53 Jews survived.\n\nUntil late 1943, there was little threat of aerial bombings to the city. However, on the morning of 4 December 1943, the British Royal Air Force dropped over 1,000 tons of explosives, resulting in the death of nearly 1,000 civilians. This bombing was the largest up to that time. Due to the close proximity of many of the buildings hit, a firestorm occurred. This prompted firefighters to rush to the city; however, the storm was too overwhelming for them. Unlike its neighbouring city of Dresden, this was a largely conventional bombing with high explosives rather than incendiaries. The resultant pattern of loss was a patchwork, rather than wholesale loss of its centre, but was nevertheless extensive.\n\nThe Allied ground advance into Germany reached Leipzig in late April 1945. The U.S. 2nd Infantry Division and U.S. 69th Infantry Division fought their way into the city on 18 April and completed its capture after fierce urban action, in which fighting was often house-to-house and block-to-block, on 19 April 1945. In April 1945 the SS Gruppehfuhrer/Mayor of Leipzig Bruno Erich Alfred Freyberg, his wife and daughter; the Deputy Mayor/Treasurer of Leipzig, Ernest Kurt Lisso, his wife, daughter, and a Volkssturm Major Walter Dönicke committed suicide in Leipzig City Hall.\n\nThe United States turned the city over to the Red Army as it pulled back from the line of contact with Soviet forces in July 1945 to the designated occupation zone boundaries. Leipzig became one of the major cities of the German Democratic Republic (East Germany).\n\nFollowing the end of World War II in 1945, Leipzig saw a slow return of Jews to the city.\n\nIn the mid-20th century, the city's trade fair assumed renewed importance as a point of contact with the Comecon Eastern Europe economic bloc, of which East Germany was a member. At this time, trade fairs were held at a site in the south of the city, near the Monument to the Battle of the Nations.\n\nThe planned economy of the German Democratic Republic, however, was not kind to Leipzig. Before the Second World War, Leipzig had developed a mixture of industry, creative business (notably publishing), and services (including legal services). During the period of the German Democratic Republic, services became the concern of the state, concentrated in (East) Berlin; creative business moved to West Germany; and Leipzig was left only with heavy industry. To make bad worse, this industry was extremely polluting, making Leipzig an even less attractive city to live in. Between 1950 and the end of the German Democratic Republic, the population of Leipzig fell from 600,000 to 500,000.\n\nIn October 1989, after prayers for peace at St. Nicholas Church, established in 1983 as part of the peace movement, the Monday demonstrations started as the most prominent mass protest against the East German government. The reunification of Germany, however, was at first not good for Leipzig. The centrally planned heavy industry that had become the city's speciality was, in terms of the advanced economy of reunited Germany, almost completely unviable, and closed. Within only six years, 90% of jobs in industry had vanished. As unemployment rocketed, the population fell dramatically; some 100,000 people left Leipzig in the ten years after reunificaiton, and vacant and derelict housing became an urgent problem.\n\nStarting in 2000, an ambitious (and subsequently much-praised) urban-renewal plan first stopped Leipzig's decline and then reversed it. The plan focused on saving and improving as much as possible of the city's urban structure, especially its attractive historic center and various architectural gems, and attracting new industries, partly through infrastructure improvement.\n\nNowadays, Leipzig is an important economic center in Germany. Since the 2010s, the city has been celebrated by the media as a hip urban center with a very high quality of living. It is often called \"The new Berlin\". Leipzig is also Germany's fastest growing city. Leipzig was the German candidate for the 2012 Summer Olympics, but was unsuccessful. After ten years of construction, the Leipzig City Tunnel opened on 14 December 2013. Leipzig forms the centerpiece of the S-Bahn Mitteldeutschland public transit system, which operates in the four German states of Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt, Thuringia and Brandenburg.\n\nLeipzig lies at the confluence of the rivers White Elster, Pleiße and Parthe, in the Leipzig Bay, on the most southerly part of the North German Plain, which is the part of the North European Plain in Germany. The site is characterized by swampy areas such as the Leipzig Riverside Forest, though there are also some limestone areas to the north of the city. The landscape is mostly flat though there is also some evidence of moraine and drumlins.\n\nAlthough there are some forest parks within the city limits, the area surrounding Leipzig is relatively unforested. During the 20th century, there were several open-cast mines in the region, many of which are being converted to use as lakes. Also see: Neuseenland\n\nLeipzig is also situated at the intersection of the ancient roads known as the Via Regia (King's highway), which traversed Germany in an east-west direction, and the Via Imperii (Imperial Highway), a north-south road.\n\nLeipzig was a walled city in the Middle Ages and the current \"ring\" road around the historic centre of the city follows the line of the old city walls.\n\nSince 1992 Leipzig has been divided administratively into ten districts, which in turn contain a total of 63 subdistricts. Some of these correspond to outlying villages which have been annexed by Leipzig.\n+ \"Stadtteile\" of Leipzig\n! style=\"width:80px;\"Districtstyle=\"width:50px;\"Pop.style=\"width:50px;\"Areakm²style=\"width:50px;\"Pop.per km\nstyle=\"text-align:center\"Center49,562style=\"text-align:center\"13,88style=\"text-align:center\"3,570\nstyle=\"text-align:center\"Northeaststyle=\"text-align:center\"41,186style=\"text-align:center\"26.29style=\"text-align:center\"1.566\nstyle=\"text-align:center\"Eaststyle=\"text-align:center\"69,666style=\"text-align:center\"40.74style=\"text-align:center\"1,710\nstyle=\"text-align:center\"Southeaststyle=\"text-align:center\"51,139style=\"text-align:center\"34.65style=\"text-align:center\"1,476\nstyle=\"text-align:center\"Southstyle=\"text-align:center\"57,434style=\"text-align:center\"16.92style=\"text-align:center\"3,394\nstyle=\"text-align:center\"Southweststyle=\"text-align:center\"45,886style=\"text-align:center\"46.67style=\"text-align:center\"983\nstyle=\"text-align:center\"Weststyle=\"text-align:center\"51,276style=\"text-align:center\"14.69style=\"text-align:center\"3,491\nstyle=\"text-align:center\"Old Weststyle=\"text-align:center\"46,009style=\"text-align:center\"26.09style=\"text-align:center\"1,764\nstyle=\"text-align:center\"Northweststyle=\"text-align:center\"28,036style=\"text-align:center\"39.09style=\"text-align:center\"717\nstyle=\"text-align:center\"Northstyle=\"text-align:center\"57,559style=\"text-align:center\"38.35style=\"text-align:center\"1,501\n\nstyle=\"width:10%;\"\nstyle=\"width:10%;\"Delitzsch\nstyle=\"width:10%;\"Jesewitz\nSchkeuditz\nRackwitz\nTaucha\n\nBorsdorf\nBrandis\nMarkranstädt\nMarkkleeberg\nNaunhof\nKitzen\nZwenkau\nGrosspoesna\n\nLike many places located in Eastern parts of Germany, Leipzig has an oceanic climate (Köppen: \"Cfb\" close to a \"Dfb\" [0 °C US isoterm]) with significant continental influences due to inland location. Winters are variably mild to cold, with an average of around . Summers are generally warm, averaging at with daytime temperatures of . Precipitation in winter is about half that of the summer. The amount of sunshine is very different between winter and summer, with an average of around 51 hours of sunshine in December (1.7 hours a day) compared with 229 hours of sunshine in July (7.4 hours a day).\n\nLeipzig has a population of about 570,000. In 1930, the population reached its historical peak of over 700,000. It decreased steadily from 1950-89 to about 530,000. In the 1990s, the population decreased rather rapidly to 437,000 in 1998. This reduction was mostly due to outward migration and suburbanisation. After almost doubling the city area by incorporation of surrounding towns in 1999, the number stabilised and started to rise again with an increase of 1,000 in 2000. , Leipzig is the fastest-growing city in Germany with over 500,000 inhabitants.\nThe growth of the past 10–15 years has mostly been due to inward migration. In recent years, inward migration accelerated, reaching an increase of 12,917 in 2014.\n\nIn the years following German reunification, many people of working age took the opportunity to move to the states of the former West Germany to seek employment opportunities. This was a contributory factor to falling birth rates. Births dropped from 7,000 in 1988 to less than 3,000 in 1994. However, the number of children born in Leipzig has risen since the late-1990s. In 2011, it reached 5,490 births resulting in a RNI of -17.7 (-393.7 in 1995).\n\nThe unemployment rate decreased from 18.2% in 2003 to 9.8% in 2014 and 7.6% in June 2017.\n\nThe percentage of the population from an immigrant background is low compared with other German cities. , only 5.6% of the population were foreigners, compared to the German national average of 7.7%.\n\nThe number of people with an immigrant background (immigrants and their children) grew from 49,323 in 2012 to 77,559 in 2016, making them 13.3% of the city's population (Leipzig's population 579,530 in 2016).\n\nThe largest minorities (first and second generation) in Leipzig by country of origin in 31.12.2018 are:\n! style=\"background:#efefef;\"Rank\n! style=\"background:#efefef;\"Ancestry\n! style=\"background:#efefef;\"Total\n! style=\"background:#efefef;\"Foreigners\n! style=\"background:#efefef;\"Germans\n19,0598,523536\n28,7733,2145,559\n35,0193,0062,013\n44,1613,675486\n53,4912,2451,246\n63,4302,4031,027\n72,8162,104712\n82,4671,549218\n92,2442461,998\n102,1711,916255\n111,9831,564419\n121,8141,349465\n131,6151,238377\n141,5441,016528\n151,4651,254211\n\nThe historic central area of Leipzig features a Renaissance-style ensemble of buildings from the sixteenth century, including the old city hall in the marketplace. There are also several baroque period trading houses and former residences of rich merchants. As Leipzig grew considerably during the economic boom of the late-nineteenth century, the town has many buildings in the historicist style representative of the \"Gründerzeit\" era. Approximately 35% of Leipzig's flats are in buildings of this type. The new city hall, completed in 1905, is built in the same style.\n\nSome 64,000 apartments in Leipzig were built in Plattenbau buildings during Communist rule in East Germany. and although some of these have been demolished and the numbers living in this type of accommodation have declined in recent years, at least 10% of Leipzig's population (50,000 people) are still living in Plattenbau accommodation. Grünau, for example, has approximately 40,000 people living in this sort of accommodation.\n\nThe St. Paul's Church was destroyed by the Communist government in 1968 to make room for a new main building for the university. After some debate, the city decided to establish a new, mainly secular building at the same location, called Paulinum, which was completed in 2012. Its architecture alludes to the look of the former church and it includes space for religious use by the faculty of theology, including the original altar from the old church and two newly built organs.\n\nMany commercial buildings were built in the 1990s as a result of tax breaks after German reunification.\n\nThe tallest structure in Leipzig is the chimney of the Stahl- und Hartgusswerk Bösdorf GmbH with a height of . With , the City-Hochhaus Leipzig is the tallest high-rise building in Leipzig. From 1972 to 1973 it was Germany's tallest building.\n\n! Buildings and structures\n!class=\"unsortable\"Image\n! Height in metres\n! Year\n!class=\"unsortable\"Notes\nalign=leftChimney of Stahl- und Hartgusswerk Bösdorf GmbH\n205\n1984\n\nalign=leftFunkturm Leipzig\n191\n2015\n\nalign=leftDVB-T-Sendeturm\n190\n1986\n\nalign=leftCity-Hochhaus Leipzig\n142\n1972\nTotal height 153 m, tallest building in Germany 1972–1973. Headquarter of European Energy Exchange.\nalign=leftFernmeldeturm Leipzig\n132\n1995\n\nalign=leftTower of New Town Hall\n115\n1905\nTallest Town Hall in Germany\nalign=leftWintergartenhochhaus\n106,8\n1972\nUsed as residential tower\nalign=leftHotel The Westin Leipzig\n95\n1972\nHotel with skybar and restaurant\nalign=leftMonument to the Battle of the Nations\n91\n1913\nTallest monument in Europe.\nalign=leftSt. Peters'\n88,5\n1885\nLeipzig's tallest church.\nalign=leftMDR-Hochhaus\n65\n2000\nMDR is one of Germany's public broadcasters.\nalign=leftHochhaus Löhr's Carree\n65\n1997\nHeadquarters of Sachsen Bank and Sparkasse Leipzig.\nalign=leftCenter Torgauer Platz\n63\n1995\n\nalign=leftEuropahaus\n56\n1929\nHeadquarters of Stadtwerke Leipzig\n\nOne of the highlights of the city's contemporary arts was the Neo Rauch retrospective opening in April 2010 at the Leipzig Museum of Fine Arts. This is a show devoted to the father of the New Leipzig School of artists. According to \"The New York Times\", this scene \"has been the toast of the contemporary art world\" for the past decade. In addition, there are eleven galleries in the so-called Spinnerei.\n\nThe Grassi Museum complex contains three more of Leipzig's major collections: the Ethnography Museum, Applied Arts Museum and Musical Instrument Museum (the last of which is run by the University of Leipzig). The university also runs the Museum of Antiquities.\n\nFounded in March 2015, the G2 Kunsthalle houses the Hildebrand Collection. This private collection focuses on the so-called New Leipzig School. Leipzig's first private museum dedicated to contemporary art in Leipzig after the turn of the millennium is located in the city centre close to the famous St. Thomas Church on the third floor of the former GDR processing centre.\n\nOther museums in Leipzig include the following:\nBULLET::::- The German Museum of Books and Writing is the world's oldest museum of its kind, founded in 1884.\nBULLET::::- The Egyptian Museum of the University of Leipzig comprises a collection of about 7,000 artefacts from several millennia.\nBULLET::::- The Schillerhaus is the house where Schiller lived in summer 1785.\nBULLET::::- The Zeitgeschichtliches Forum Leipzig (Forum of Contemporary History) shows the history of the German division and the everyday life in the socialist German Democratic Republic.\nBULLET::::- Naturkundemuseum Leipzig is the city's natural history museum.\nBULLET::::- The Leipzig Panometer is a visual panorama displayed inside a former gasometer, accompanied by a thematic exhibition.\nBULLET::::- The \"Museum in der Runden Ecke\" is the best known museum in the city. It deals with the operation of the Stasi State Security of former East Germany.\nBULLET::::- Johann Sebastian Bach lived from 1723 until his death in Leipzig. The Bach Archive is an institution for the documentation and research of his life and work.\n\nBULLET::::- Leipzig Zoological Garden is one of the most modern zoos in Europe with approximately 850 different animal species. It houses the world's largest zoological facilities for primates (Pongoland). Gondwanaland is the world's largest indoor rainforest hall.\nBULLET::::- Monument to the Battle of the Nations (\"Völkerschlachtdenkmal\") (Battle of the Nations Monument): one of the largest monuments in Europe, built to commemorate the victorious battle against Napoleonic troops.\nBULLET::::- Bundesverwaltungsgericht: Germany's federal administrative court was the site of the Reichsgericht, the highest state court between 1888-1945.\nBULLET::::- New City Hall: the city's administrative building was built upon the remains of the \"Pleissenburg\", a castle that was the site of the 1519 debate between Johann Eck and Martin Luther. It is also Germany's tallest town hall.\nBULLET::::- \"Old City Hall\" on Marktplatz: the old city hall was built in 1556 and houses a museum of the city's history.\nBULLET::::- City-Hochhaus Leipzig: built in 1972, the city's tallest building is one of the top 25 tallest buildings in Germany.\nBULLET::::- The Augusteum and Paulinum form the new main campus of the University of Leipzig.\nBULLET::::- international trade fair centre in the north of the city is home to the world's largest levitated glass hall.\nBULLET::::- Leipzig Hauptbahnhof is the world's largest railway station by floor area and a shopping destination.\nBULLET::::- Auerbach's Cellar: a young Goethe ate and drank in this basement-level restaurant while studying in Leipzig; it is the venue of a scene from his play \"Faust\".\nBULLET::::- The Old Leipzig bourse at Naschmarkt with a monument of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe.\nBULLET::::- South Cemetery (Südfriedhof) is, with an area of 82 hectares, the largest cemetery in Leipzig.\nBULLET::::- The German National Library has two locations, one of them in Leipzig.\nBULLET::::- Leipzig Bayerischer Bahnhof is Germany's oldest preserved railway station.\nBULLET::::- Gohliser Schlösschen\nBULLET::::- Leipzig Synagogue was destroyed in 1938. Now a memorial stands on the same spot. Where the pews once were, 140 bronze chairs take their place.\n\nBULLET::::- St. Thomas's Church (Thomaskirche): Most famous as the place where Johann Sebastian Bach worked as a cantor and home to the renowned boys choir \"Thomanerchor\". A monument to Felix Mendelssohn stands in front of this church. Destroyed by the Nazis in 1936, the statue was re-erected on 18 October 2008.\nBULLET::::- St. Nicholas's Church (Nikolaikirche), for which Bach was also responsible. The weekly \"Montagsgebet\" (Monday prayer) held here became the starting point of peaceful Monday demonstrations against the DDR regime in the 1980s.\nBULLET::::- St. Peter's has the highest tower of any church in Leipzig, at .\nBULLET::::- The new Propsteikirche, opened in 2015.\nBULLET::::- The Continental Reformed Church of Leipzig (\"Evangelisch-reformierte Kirche\") is one of the most prominent buildings on the Leipzig Innercity ring.\nBULLET::::- The Russian Church of Leipzig is the Russian-Orthodox church of Leipzig.\nBULLET::::- St. Michael's Church is one of the landmarks of Gohlis district.\n\nLeipzig is well known for its large parks. The \"Leipziger Auwald\" (riparian forest) lies mostly within the city limits. Neuseenland is an area south of Leipzig where old open-cast mines are being converted into a huge lake district. It is planned to be finished in 2060.\nBULLET::::- Leipzig Botanical Garden is the oldest of its kind in Germany. It contains a total of some 7,000 plant species, of which nearly 3,000 species comprise ten special collections.\nBULLET::::- Johannapark and Clara-Zetkin-Park are the most prominent parks in the Leipzig city centre.\nBULLET::::- \"Leipziger Auwald\" covers a total area of approx. 2,500 hectares. The Rosental is a park in the north of the forest and borders Leipzig Zoo.\nBULLET::::- Wildpark in Connewitz, showing 25 species.\n\nJohann Sebastian Bach worked in Leipzig from 1723–50, conducting the Thomanerchor (St. Thomas Church Choir), at the St. Thomas Church, the St. Nicholas Church and the Paulinerkirche, the university church of Leipzig (destroyed in 1968). The composer Richard Wagner was born in Leipzig in 1813, in the Brühl. Robert Schumann was also active in Leipzig music, having been invited by Felix Mendelssohn when the latter established Germany's first musical conservatoire in the city in 1843. Gustav Mahler was second conductor (working under Artur Nikisch) at the Leipzig Opera from June 1886 until May 1888, and achieved his first significant recognition while there by completing and publishing Carl Maria von Weber's opera Die Drei Pintos. Mahler also completed his own 1st Symphony while living in Leipzig.\n\nToday the conservatory is the University of Music and Theatre Leipzig. A broad range of subjects are taught, including artistic and teacher training in all orchestral instruments, voice, interpretation, coaching, piano chamber music, orchestral conducting, choir conducting and musical composition in various musical styles. The drama departments teach acting and scriptwriting.\n\nThe Bach-Archiv Leipzig, an institution for the documentation and research of the life and work of Bach (and also of the Bach family), was founded in Leipzig in 1950 by Werner Neumann. The Bach-Archiv organizes the prestigious International Johann Sebastian Bach Competition, initiated in 1950 as part of a music festival marking the bicentennial of Bach's death. The competition is now held every two years in three changing categories. The Bach-Archiv also organizes performances, especially the international festival Bachfest Leipzig () and runs the Bach-Museum.\n\nThe city's musical tradition is also reflected in the worldwide fame of the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra, under its chief conductor Riccardo Chailly, and the Thomanerchor.\n\nThe MDR Leipzig Radio Symphony Orchestra is Leipzig's second largest symphony orchestra. Its current chief conductor is Kristjan Järvi. Both the Gewandhausorchester and the MDR Leipzig Radio Symphony Orchestra make use of in the Gewandhaus concert hall.\n\nFor over sixty years Leipzig has been offering a \"school concert\" programme for children in Germany, with over 140 concerts every year in venues such as the Gewandhaus and over 40,000 children attending.\n\nAs for contemporary music, Leipzig is known for its independent music scene and subcultural events. Leipzig has for twenty years been home to the world's largest Gothic festival, the annual Wave-Gotik-Treffen (WGT), where thousands of fans of gothic and dark styled music from across Europe and the world gather in the early summer. The first Wave Gotik Treffen was held at the Eiskeller club, today known as Conne Island, in the Connewitz district. Mayhem's notorious album Live in Leipzig was also recorded at the Eiskeller club. Leipzig Pop Up is an annual music trade fair for the independent music scene as well as a music festival taking place on Pentecost weekend. Its most famous indie-labels are Moon Harbour Recordings (House) and Kann Records (House/Techno/Psychedelic). Several venues offer live music on a daily basis, including the Moritzbastei which was once part of the city's fortifications, and is one of the oldest student clubs in Europe with concerts in various styles. For over 15 years \"Tonelli's\" has been offering free weekly concerts every day of the week, though door charges may apply Saturdays.\n\nThe cover photo for the Beirut band's 2005 album Gulag Orkestar, according to the sleeve notes, was stolen from a Leipzig library by Zach Condon.\n\nThe city of Leipzig is also the birthplace of Till Lindemann, best known as the lead vocalist of Rammstein, a band formed in 1994.\n\nBULLET::::- Auto Mobil International (AMI) motor show\nBULLET::::- AMITEC, trade fair for vehicle maintenance, care, servicing and repairs in Germany and Central Europe\nBULLET::::- A cappella: vocal music festival, organized by the Ensemble amarcord\nBULLET::::- \"Bach-Fest\": Johann Sebastian Bach-festival\nBULLET::::- Christmas market (since 1767)\nBULLET::::- \"Dok Leipzig\": international festival for documentary and animated film\nBULLET::::- Jazztage, contemporary jazz festival\nBULLET::::- Ladyfest Leipzig (August) Emancipatoric, feminist punk and electro festival\nBULLET::::- Leipzig Book Fair: the second largest German book fair after Frankfurt\nBULLET::::- , festival celebrating the demonstrations leading up to the collapse of the East German regime\nBULLET::::- OPER unplugged with Music Dance Theatre by Heike Hennig & Co\nBULLET::::- \"Stadtfest\": city festival\nBULLET::::- \"Wave-Gotik-Treffen\" at Pentecost: world's largest goth or \"dark culture\" festival\nBULLET::::- Leipzig Pop Up\nBULLET::::- Chaos Communication Congress\n\nMore than 300 sport clubs in the city represent 78 different disciplines. Over 400 athletic facilities are available to citizens and club members.\n\nThe German Football Association (DFB) was founded in Leipzig in 1900. The city was the venue for the 2006 FIFA World Cup draw, and hosted four first-round matches and one match in the round of 16 in the central stadium.\n\nVfB Leipzig, now 1. FC Lokomotive Leipzig, won the first national Association football championship in 1903. The club was reformed as 1. FC Lokomotive Leipzig in 1966 and has had a glorious past in international competition as well, having been champions of the 1965–66 Intertoto Cup, semi-finalists in the 1973–74 UEFA Cup, and runners-up in the 1986–87 European Cup Winners' Cup.\n\nIn May 2009 Red Bull entered the local market after being denied the right to buy into FC Sachsen Leipzig in 2006. The newly founded RB Leipzig declared the intention to come up through the ranks of German football to bring Bundesliga football back to the region. RB Leipzig was finally promoted to the top level of the Bundesliga after finishing the 2015–16 2. Bundesliga season as runners-up.\n\nList of Leipzig men and women's football clubs playing at state level and above:\n\n! class=\"unsortable\"Club\n! Founded\n! class=\"unsortable\"League\n! Level\n! class=\"unsortable\"Home ground\n! Capacity\nalign=leftRB Leipzig2009align=leftBundesliga1align=leftRed Bull Arena42,959\nalign=leftRB Leipzig (women)2016align=leftRegionalliga (women)3align=leftSportanlage Gontardweg1,300\nalign=left1. FC Lokomotive Leipzig2003align=leftRegionalliga Nordost4align=leftBruno-Plache-Stadion7,000\nalign=leftBSG Chemie Leipzig1997align=leftNOFV-Oberliga Süd5align=leftAlfred-Kunze-Sportpark4,999\nalign=leftFC International Leipzig2013align=leftNOFV-Oberliga Süd5align=leftSportpark Tresenwald1,500\nalign=leftRoter Stern Leipzig ()1999align=leftLandesklasse Sachsen Nord7align=leftSportpark Dölitz1,200\nNote 1: The RB Leipzig women's football team was formed in 2016 and began play in the 2016-17 season.<br>\nNote 2: The club began play in the 2008-09 season.\n\nSince the beginning of the 20th century Ice hockey gained popularity and several local clubs established departments dedicated to that sport.\n\nSC DHfK Leipzig is the men's handball club in Leipzig and were six times (1959, 1960, 1961, 1962, 1965 and 1966) the champion of East Germany handball league and was winner of EHF Champions League in 1966. They finally promoted to Handball-Bundesliga as champions of 2. Bundesliga in 2014–15 season. They play in the Arena Leipzig which has a capacity of 6,327 spectators in HBL games but can take up to 7,532 spectators for handball in maximum capacity.\n\nHandball-Club Leipzig is one of the most successful women's handball clubs in Germany, winning 20 domestic championships since 1956 and 3 Champions League titles. The team was however relegated to the third tier league in 2017 due to failing to achieve the economic standard demanded by the league licence.\n\nFrom 1950 to 1990 Leipzig was host of the Deutsche Hochschule für Körperkultur (DHfK, German College of Physical Culture), the national sports college of the GDR.\n\nLeipzig also hosted the Fencing World Cup in 2005 and hosts a number of international competitions in a variety of sports each year.\n\nLeipzig made a bid to host the 2012 Summer Olympics. The bid did not make the shortlist after the International Olympic Committee pared the bids down to 5.\n\nMarkkleeberger See is a new lake next to Markkleeberg, a suburb on the south side of Leipzig. A former open-pit coal mine, it was flooded in 1999 with groundwater and developed in 2006 as a tourist area. On its southeastern shore is Germany's only pump-powered artificial whitewater slalom course, Markkleeberg Canoe Park (Kanupark Markkleeberg), a venue which rivals the Eiskanal in Augsburg for training and international canoe/kayak competition.\n\nLeipzig Rugby Club competes in the German Rugby Bundesliga but finished at the bottom of their group in 2013.\n\nBULLET::::- An all-season local dish is Leipziger Allerlei, a stew consisting of seasonal vegetables and crayfish.\nBULLET::::- Leipziger Lerche is a shortcrust pastry dish filled with crushed almonds, nuts and strawberry jam; the name (\"Leipzig lark\") comes from a lark pâté which was a Leipzig speciality until the banning of songbird hunting in Saxony in 1876.\nBULLET::::- Gose is a locally brewed top-fermenting sour beer that originated in the Goslar region and in the 18th century became popular in Leipzig.\n\nLeipzig University, founded 1409, is one of Europe's oldest universities. The philosopher and mathematician Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz was born in Leipzig in 1646, and attended the university from 1661 to 1666. Nobel Prize laureate Werner Heisenberg worked here as a physics professor (from 1927 to 1942), as did Nobel Prize laureates Gustav Ludwig Hertz (physics), Wilhelm Ostwald (chemistry) and Theodor Mommsen (Nobel Prize in literature). Other former staff of faculty include mineralogist Georg Agricola, writer Gotthold Ephraim Lessing, philosopher Ernst Bloch, eccentric founder of psychophysics Gustav Theodor Fechner, and psychologist Wilhelm Wundt. Among the university's many noteworthy students were writers Johann Wolfgang Goethe and Erich Kästner, and philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche, political activist Karl Liebknecht, and composer Richard Wagner. Germany's chancellor since 2006, Angela Merkel, studied physics at Leipzig University. The university has about 30,000 students.\n\nA part of Leipzig University is the German Institute for Literature which was founded in 1955 under the name \"Johannes R. Becher-Institut\". Many noted writers have graduated from this school, including Heinz Czechowski, Kurt Drawert, Adolf Endler, Ralph Giordano, Kerstin Hensel, Sarah and Rainer Kirsch, Angela Krauß, Erich Loest, Fred Wander. After its closure in 1990 the institute was refounded in 1995 with new teachers.\n\nThe Academy of Visual Arts (\"Hochschule für Grafik und Buchkunst\") was established in 1764. Its 530 students () are enrolled in courses in painting and graphics, book design/graphic design, photography and media art. The school also houses an Institute for Theory.\n\nThe University of Music and Theatre offers a broad range of subjects ranging from training in orchestral instruments, voice, interpretation, coaching, piano chamber music, orchestral conducting, choir conducting and musical composition to acting and scriptwriting.\n\nThe Leipzig University of Applied Sciences (HTWK) has approximately 6,200 students () and is () the second biggest institution of higher education in Leipzig. It was founded in 1992, merging several older schools. As a university of applied sciences (German: \"Fachhochschule\") its status is slightly below that of a university, with more emphasis on the practical part of the education. The HTWK offers many engineering courses, as well as courses in computer science, mathematics, business administration, librarianship, museum studies and social work. It is mainly located in the south of the city.\n\nThe private Leipzig Graduate School of Management, (in German \"Handelshochschule Leipzig (HHL)\"), is the oldest business school in Germany. According to The Economist, HHL is one of the best schools in the world, rankend at number six overall.\n\nLeipzig is currently the home of twelve research institutes and the Saxon Academy of Sciences and Humanities.\n\nMax Planck Society: Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, and Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.\n\nFraunhofer Society institutes: Fraunhofer IZI and Fraunhofer IMW.\n\nHelmholtz Association of German Research Centres: Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research\n\nLeibniz Association: , , , , Leibniz-Institute Jewish history.\n\nLeipzig is home to one of the world's oldest schools \"Thomasschule zu Leipzig\" (St. Thomas' School, Leipzig), which gained fame for its long association with the Bach family of musicians and composers.\n\nThe Lutheran Theological Seminary is a seminary of the Evangelical Lutheran Free Church in Leipzig. The seminary trains students to become pastors for the Evangelical Lutheran Free Church or for member church bodies of the Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference.\n\nThe city is a location for automobile manufacturing by BMW and Porsche in large plants north of the city. In 2011 and 2012 DHL transferred the bulk of its European air operations from Brussels Airport to Leipzig/Halle Airport. Kirow Ardelt AG, the world market leader in breakdown cranes, is based in Leipzig. The city also houses the European Energy Exchange, the leading energy exchange in Central Europe. With VNG – Verbundnetz Gas AG, one of Germany's large natural gas suppliers is headquartered at Leipzig. In addition, inside its larger metropolitan area, Leipzig has developed an important petrochemical center.\n\nSome of the largest employers in the area (outside of manufacturing) include software companies such as Spreadshirt and the various schools and universities in and around the Leipzig/Halle region. The University of Leipzig attracts millions of euros of investment yearly and is in the middle of a massive construction and refurbishment to celebrate its 600th anniversary.\n\nLeipzig also benefits from world leading medical research (Leipzig Heart Centre) and a growing biotechnology industry.\n\nMany bars, restaurants and stores found in the downtown area are patronized by German and foreign tourists. Leipzig Hauptbahnhof itself is the location of a shopping mall. Leipzig is one of Germany's most visited cities with over 3 million overnight stays in 2017.\n\nIn 2010, Leipzig was included in the top 10 cities to visit by \"The New York Times\", and ranked 39th globally out of 289 cities for innovation in the 4th Innovation Cities Index published by Australian agency 2thinknow. In 2015, Leipzig have among the 30 largest German cities the third best prospects for the future. In recent years Leipzig has often been nicknamed the \"Boomtown of eastern Germany\" or \"Hypezig\". it had the highest rate of population growth of any German city.\n\nCompanies with operations in or around Leipzig include:\nBULLET::::- Amazon\nBULLET::::- Blüthner: piano-manufacturing\nBULLET::::- BMW\nBULLET::::- DHL\nBULLET::::- Porsche\nBULLET::::- Siemens\nBULLET::::- Future Electronics\n\nBULLET::::- MDR, one of Germany's public broadcasters, has its headquarters and main television studios in the city. It provides programmes to various TV and radio networks and has its own symphony orchestra, choir and a ballet.\nBULLET::::- \"Leipziger Volkszeitung\" (\"LVZ\") is the city's only daily newspaper. Founded in 1894, it has published under several different forms of government. The monthly magazine \"Kreuzer\" specializes in culture, festivities and the arts in Leipzig. Leipzig was also home to the world's first daily newspaper in modern times. The \"Einkommende Zeitungen\" were first published in 1650.\nBULLET::::- Leipzig has one daily or semi-daily English-language publication, \"The Leipzig Glocal.\" It is an online-based magazine and blog that caters to an international as well as local audience. Besides publishing pages on jobs, doctors and movies available in English and other languages, the site's team of authors writes articles about lifestyle, arts & culture, politics, entertainment, Leipzig events, etc.\nBULLET::::- Once known for its large number of publishing houses, Leipzig had been called \"Buch-Stadt\" (book city)., the most notable of them being branches of Brockhaus and Insel Verlag. Few are left after the years of economic decline during the German Democratic Republic, during which time Frankfurt developed as a much more important publishing center. Reclam, founded in 1828, was one of the large publishing houses to move away. Leipzig still has a book fair, but Frankfurt's is far bigger.\nBULLET::::- The German Library (Deutsche Bücherei) in Leipzig is part of Germany's National Library. Its task is to collect a copy of every book published in German.\n\nIn December 2013, according to a study by Marktforschungsinstituts GfK, Leipzig was ranked as the most livable city in Germany and is one of the three European cities with the highest quality of living (after Groningen and Kraków). In 2015/2016, Leipzig was named the second-best city for students in Germany (after Munich).\n\nIn a 2017 study, the Leipzig inner city ranked first among all large cities in Germany due to its urban aesthetics, gastronomy, and shopping opportunities.\n\nIt also has the second-best future prospects of all cities in Germany, only surpassed by Munich.\n\nAccording to the 2017 Global Least & Most Stressful Cities Ranking, Leipzig was one of the least stressful cities in the World. It was ranked 25th out of 150 cities worldwide and above Dortmund, Cologne, Frankfurt, and Berlin.\n\nIn 2018, Leipzig won the European Cities of Future prize in the category of \"Best Large City for Human Capital & Lifestyle\".\n\nLeipzig was named European City of the Year at the 2019 Urbanism Awards.\n\nAccording to the 2019 study by Forschungsinstitut Prognos, Leipzig is the most dynamic region in Germany. Within 15 years, the city climbed 230 places and occupied in 2019 rank 104 of all 401 German regions.\n\nFounded at the crossing of Via Regia and Via Imperii, Leipzig has been a major interchange of inter-European traffic and commerce since medieval times. After the Reunification of Germany, immense efforts to restore and expand the traffic network have been undertaken and left the city area with an excellent infrastructure.\n\nOpened in 1915, Leipzig Central Station is the largest overhead railway station in Europe in terms of its built-up area. At the same time, it is an important supra-regional junction in the ICE and Intercity network of the Deutsche Bahn as well as a connection point for S-Bahn and regional traffic in the Halle/Leipzig area.\n\nIn Leipzig, the Intercity Express routes (Hamburg-)Berlin-Leipzig-Nuremberg-Munich and Dresden-Leipzig-Erfurt-Frankfurt am Main-(Wiesbaden/Saarbrücken) intersect. After completion of the high-speed line to Erfurt, the ICE will run on both lines via Leipzig/Halle Airport and Erfurt. Leipzig is also the starting point for the intercity lines Leipzig-Halle (Saale)-Magdeburg-Braunschweig-Hannover-Dortmund-Köln and -Bremen-Oldenburg(-Norddeich Mole). Both lines complement each other at hourly intervals and also stop at Leipzig/Halle Airport. The only international connection is the daily EuroCity Leipzig-Prague.\n\nMost major and medium-sized towns in Saxony and southern Saxony-Anhalt can be reached without changing trains. There are also direct connections via regional express lines to Falkenberg/Elster-Cottbus, Hoyerswerda and Dessau-Magdeburg as well as Chemnitz. Neighbouring Halle (Saale) can be reached via two S-Bahn lines, one of which runs hourly via Leipzig/Halle Airport. The surrounding area of Leipzig is served by numerous regional and S-Bahn lines.\n\nThe city's rail connections are currently being greatly improved by major construction projects, particularly within the framework of the German Unity transport projects. The line to Berlin has been extended and has been passable at 200 km/h since 2006. On 13 December 2015, the high-speed line from Leipzig to Erfurt, designed for 300 km/h, was put into operation. Its continuation to Nuremberg is scheduled for completion in December 2017. This integration into the high-speed network will considerably reduce the journey times of the ICE from Leipzig to Nuremberg, Munich and Frankfurt am Main. The Leipzig-Dresden railway line, which was the first German long-distance railway to go into operation in 1839, is also undergoing expansion for 200 km/h. The ICE will also be able to operate from Leipzig to Dresden in the near future. The most important construction project in regional transport was the four-kilometer-long City Tunnel, which went into operation in December 2013 as the main line of the S-Bahn Mitteldeutschland.\n\nFor freight traffic, there are freight stations in the districts of Wahren and Engelsdorf. In addition, a large freight traffic centre has been set up near the Schkeuditzer Kreuz junction for goods handling between road and rail, as well as a freight station on the site of the DHL hub at Leipzig/Halle Airport.\n\nLeipzig is the core of the S-Bahn Mitteldeutschland line network. Together with the tram, six of the ten lines form the backbone of local public transport and an important link to the region and the neighbouring Halle. The main line of the S-Bahn consists of the underground S-Bahn stations Hauptbahnhof, Markt, Wilhelm-Leuschner-Platz and Bayerischer Bahnhof leading through the City Tunnel as well as the above-ground station Leipzig MDR. There are a total of 30 S-Bahn stations in the Leipzig city area. Endpoints of the S-Bahn lines include Oschatz, Zwickau, Geithain and Bitterfeld. Two lines run to Halle, one of them via Leipzig/Halle Airport. In 2015, the network will be extended to Dessau and Lutherstadt Wittenberg.\n\nWith the timetable change in December 2004, the networks of Leipzig and Halle were combined to form the Leipzig-Halle S-Bahn. However, this network only served as a transitional solution and was replaced by the S-Bahn Mitteldeutschland on 15 December 2013. At the same time, the main line tunnel, marketed as the Leipzig City Tunnel, went into operation. The tunnel, which is almost four kilometres long, crosses the entire city centre from the main railway station to the Bavarian railway station. The S-Bahn stations are up to 22 metres underground. This construction was the first to create a continuous north-south axis, which had not existed until now due to the north-facing terminus station. The connection to the south of the city and the federal state will thus be greatly improved.\n\nThe Leipziger Verkehrsbetriebe, existing since 1 January 1917, operate a total of 13 tram lines and 51 bus lines in the city.\n\nThe total length of the tram network is , making it the largest in Saxony (cvt130.2km}}) ahead of Dresden and the second largest in Germany ( after Berlin). The longest line in the Leipzig network is line 11, which connects Schkeuditz with Markkleeberg over 22 kilometres and is the only tram line in Leipzig to run in three tariff zones of the Central German Transport Association.\n\nNight bus lines N1 to N9 and the night tram N17 operate in the night traffic. On Saturdays, Sundays and holidays the tram line N10 and the bus line N60 also operate. The central transfer point between the bus and tram lines as well as to the S-Bahn is Leipzig Central Station.\n\nLike most German cities, Leipzig has a traffic layout designed to be bicycle-friendly. There is an extensive cycle network. In most of the one-way central streets, cyclists are explicitly allowed to cycle both ways. A few cycle paths have been built or declared since 1990.\n\nSince 2004 there is a bicycle-sharing system. Bikes can be borrowed and returned via smartphone app or by telephone. Since 2018, the system has enabled flexible borrowing and returning of bicycles in the inner city; in this zone, bicycles can be handed in and borrowed from almost any street corner. Outside these zones, there are stations where the bikes are waiting. The current locations of the bikes can be seen via the app. There are cooperation offers with the Leipzig public transport companies and car sharing in order to offer as complete a mobility chain as possible.\n\nSeveral federal motorways pass by Leipzig: the A 14 in the north, the A 9 in the west and the A 38 in the south. The three motorways form a triangular partial ring of the double ring Mitteldeutsche Schleife around Halle and Leipzig. To the south towards Chemnitz, the A 72 is also partly under construction or being planned.\n\nThe federal roads B 2, B 6, B 87, B 181, B 184 and B 186 lead through the city area.\n\nThe ring, which corresponds to the course of the old city fortification, surrounds the city centre of Leipzig, which today is largely traffic-calmed.\n\nLeipzig has a dense network of carsharing stations. Additionally, since 2018 there is also a stationless car sharing system in Leipzig. Here the cars can be parked and booked anywhere in the inner city without having to define a specific car or period in advance. Finding and booking is done via a smartphone app.\n\nApart from the usual taxi traffic, Leipzig is one of the few cities in Germany with a ridesharing provider. Taxi-like rides can be booked via an app. However, in contrast to a taxi, the start and destination must be defined beforehand and other passengers can be taken along at the same time if they share a route.\n\nSince March 2018 there has been a central bus station directly east of Leipzig Central Station.\n\nIn addition to a large number of national lines, several international lines also serve Leipzig. The cities of Bregenz, Budapest, Milan, Prague, Sofia and Zurich, among others, can be reached without having to change trains. Around 30,000 journeys and 1.5 million passengers a year are expected at the new bus station.\n\nSome lines also use Leipzig/Halle Airport, located at the A 9/A 14 motorway junction, and Leipziger Messe for a stop. Passengers can take the S-Bahn from there to the city centre.\n\nLeipzig/Halle Airport is the international commercial airport of the region. It is located at the Schkeuditzer Kreuz junction northwest of Leipzig, halfway between the two major cities. The easternmost section of the new Erfurt-Leipzig/Halle line under construction gave the airport a long-distance railway station, which was also integrated into the ICE network when the railway line was completed in 2015.\n\nPassenger flights are operated to the major German hub airports, European metropolises and holiday destinations, especially in the Mediterranean region and North Africa. The airport is of international importance in the cargo sector. In Germany, it ranks second behind Frankfurt am Main, fifth in Europe and 26th worldwide (as of 2011). DHL uses the airport as its central European hub. It is also the home base of the freight airlines Aerologic and European Air Transport Leipzig.\n\nThe former military airport near Altenburg, Thuringia called Leipzig-Altenburg Airport about a half-hour drive from Leipzig was served by Ryanair until 2010.\n\nIn the first half of the 20th century, the construction of the Elster-Saale canal, White Elster and Saale was started in Leipzig in order to connect to the network of waterways. The outbreak of the Second World War stopped most of the work, though some may have continued through the use of forced labor. The Lindenauer port was almost completed but not yet connected to the Elster-Saale and Karl-Heine canal respectively. The Leipzig rivers (White Elster, New Luppe, Pleiße, and Parthe) in the city have largely artificial river beds and are supplemented by some channels. These waterways are suitable only for small leisure boat traffic.\n\nThrough the renovation and reconstruction of existing mill races and watercourses in the south of the city and flooded disused open cast mines, the city's navigable water network is being expanded. The city commissioned planning for a link between Karl Heine Canal and the disused Lindenauer port in 2008. Still more work was scheduled to complete the Elster-Saale canal. Such a move would allow small boats to reach the Elbe from Leipzig. The intended completion date has been postponed because of an unacceptable cost-benefit ratio.\n\n\"Mein Leipzig lob' ich mir! Es ist ein klein Paris und bildet seine Leute.\" (I praise my Leipzig! It is a small Paris and educates its people.) – Frosch, a university student in Goethe's \"Faust, Part One\"\n\n\"Ich komme nach Leipzig, an den Ort, wo man die ganze Welt im Kleinen sehen kann.\" (I'm coming to Leipzig, to the place where one can see the whole world in miniature.) – Gotthold Ephraim Lessing\n\n\"Extra Lipsiam vivere est miserrime vivere.\" (To live outside Leipzig is to live miserably.) – Benedikt Carpzov the Younger\n\n\"Das angenehme Pleis-Athen, Behält den Ruhm vor allen, Auch allen zu gefallen, Denn es ist wunderschön.\" (The pleasurable Pleiss-Athens, earns its fame above all, appealing to every one, too, for it is mightily beauteous.) – Johann Sigismund Scholze\n\nLeipzig is twinned with:\n\nBULLET::::- Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, since 2004\nBULLET::::- Birmingham, England, since 1992\nBULLET::::- Bologna, Italy, since 1962, renewed in 1997\nBULLET::::- Brno, Czech Republic, since 1973, renewed in 1999\nBULLET::::- Frankfurt, Germany, since 1990\nBULLET::::- Hanover, Germany, since 1987\nBULLET::::- Herzliya, Israel, since 2010\nBULLET::::- Houston, United States, since 1993\nBULLET::::- Kiev, Ukraine, since 1961, renewed in 1992\nBULLET::::- Kraków, Poland, since 1973, renewed in 1995\nBULLET::::- Lyon, France, since 1981\nBULLET::::- Nanjing, China, since 1988\nBULLET::::- Thessaloniki, Greece, since 1984\nBULLET::::- Travnik, Bosnia and Herzegovina, since 2003\n\nBULLET::::- Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz; (1646–1716), philosopher and scientist, mathematician, diplomat\nBULLET::::- Johann Friedrich Mayer; (1650–1712), Lutheran theologian\nBULLET::::- Augustus Quirinus Rivinus, origin. \" Bachmann \"; (1652–1723), physician and botanist\nBULLET::::- Johann Sebastian Bach; (1685–1750), composer\n\nBULLET::::- Johann Christian Bach; (1735–1782), youngest son of Johann Sebastian Bach, composer\nBULLET::::- Christian Gottfried Körner; (1756–1831), jurist and writer\nBULLET::::- Friedrich Arnold Brockhaus; (1772–1823), publisher, originator of the Brockhaus encyclopedia\nBULLET::::- Carl Gustav Carus; (1789–1869), doctor, painter and natural philosopher\n\nBULLET::::- Christian Hermann Weisse; (1801–1866), Protestant theologian and philosopher\nBULLET::::- Felix Mendelssohn; (1809–1847), composer, pianist, organist and conductor\nBULLET::::- Robert Schumann; (1810–1856), composer and music critic\nBULLET::::- Richard Wagner; (1813–1883), composer, theatre director and conductor (among others opera \"The Flying Dutchman\")\nBULLET::::- Louise Otto-Peters; (1819–1895), suffragette, author, founder of the General German Women's Association\n\nBULLET::::- Clara Schumann; (1819–1896), German pianist and composer\nBULLET::::- Carl Johann Lasch (1822-1888), German painter\nBULLET::::- Carl Reinecke; (1824–1910), composer, conductor, and pianist\nBULLET::::- August Bebel; (1840–1913), socialist politician, co-founder of Germany's Social Democratic Party\nBULLET::::- Paul Mendelssohn Bartholdy (1841-1880), chemist\nBULLET::::- Karl Wittgenstein; (1847–1913), entrepreneur\n\nBULLET::::- Hans Meyer; (1858–1929), geographer, Africanist and mountaineer, first European to reach the summit of Mount Kilimanjaro\nBULLET::::- Wilhelm Souchon; (1864–1946), Vice Admiral of the Imperial Navy, commander of the Ottoman and Bulgarian Navy\nBULLET::::- Karl Liebknecht; (1871–1919), socialist politician (co-founder of the Communist Party of Germany)\nBULLET::::- Carl Friedrich Goerdeler; (1884–1945), mayor, one of the leaders of conservative resistance against Hitler\nBULLET::::- Max Beckmann; (1884–1950), Expressionist painter, professor at art academies and schools\nBULLET::::- Wilhelm Backhaus; (1884–1969), pianist\nBULLET::::- Paul Frölich; (1884–1953), politician (KPD co-founder), executor and biographer of Rosa Luxemburg\nBULLET::::- Walter Ulbricht; (1893–1973), Communist politician (SED), GDR Chairman of the Council of State from 1960 to 1973\nBULLET::::- Ruth Fischer; (1895–1961), communist politician and journalist, co-founder of the CPA\nBULLET::::- Hanns Eisler; (1898–1962), composer (inter alia of the national anthem of the GDR.)\nBULLET::::- Bruno Apitz; (1900–1979), writer (\"Naked among wolves\")\n\nBULLET::::- Karl Eberhard Schöngarth; (1903–1946), SS officer and war criminal, executed in Hamelin, commander of the state police (Security Office) and the Security Service (SD)\nBULLET::::- Hans Mayer; (1907–2001), literary scholar\nBULLET::::- Annemarie Renger; (1919–2008), politician (SPD), President of the Bundestag from 1972 to 1976\nBULLET::::- Elfriede Rinkel; (1922–2018), former warden of a concentration camp during the Nazi dictatorship\nBULLET::::- Martin Broszat, (1926–1989), historian, head of Institut für Zeitgeschichte in Munich\nBULLET::::- Kurt Masur, (1927–2015), conductor of the Gewandhaus orchestra\nBULLET::::- Herbert Blomstedt, (born 1927), conductor of the Gewandhaus orchestra\nBULLET::::- Werner Tübke, (1929–2004), painter\nBULLET::::- Rita Wilden, (born 1947), athlete (sprinter)\nBULLET::::- Ruth Pfau, (1929–2017), nun, physician, writer( \"Pakistan's Mother Teresa\")\n\nBULLET::::- Hans-Joachim Schulze (born 1934), German Bach scholar\nBULLET::::- Riccardo Chailly (born 1953), conductor of the Gewandhaus orchestra\nBULLET::::- René Müller (born 1959), footballer for Lokomotive Leipzig and the East German national team\nBULLET::::- Neo Rauch (born 1960), painter\nBULLET::::- Simone Thomalla (born 1965), actress\nBULLET::::- Kristin Otto (born 1966), swimmer, 6-time Olympic gold medalist, sports journalist and TV presenter (ZDF)\nBULLET::::- Matthias Weischer (born 1973), painter\nBULLET::::- Till Lindemann (born 1963), vocalist\n\nBULLET::::- Ubiquity Theatre Company – English speaking theatre projects in Leipzig.\nBULLET::::- Leipzig Human Rights Award\nBULLET::::- List of mayors of Leipzig\nBULLET::::- Hugo Schneider AG\nBULLET::::- Leipzig University Library\nBULLET::::- Leipzig Jewish community\nBULLET::::- Battle of Breitenfeld (1642)\n\nBULLET::::- The city's official website\nBULLET::::- Leipzig as virtual city 408 Points of Interest – English\nBULLET::::- The Leipzig Glocal, English language webzine and blog publishing regularly\nBULLET::::- Ubiquity Theatre Company, – English language theatre projects in Leipzig\nBULLET::::- Leipzig Zeitgeist, an English magazine about Leipzig\nBULLET::::- This is Leipzig, an English web site for Leipzig\nBULLET::::- LostInLeipzig, Get lost in Germany's best city\nBULLET::::- Events in Leipzig Music Festivals in Leipzig\nBULLET::::- Leipzig: One Thousand Years of German History. Bach, Luther, Faust: The City of Books and Music. By Sebastian Ringel. Berlinica, 2015\n"}
{"id": "17956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17956", "title": "LimeWire", "text": "LimeWire\n\nLimeWire is a discontinued free peer-to-peer file sharing (P2P) client for Windows, OS X, Linux and Solaris. LimeWire used the gnutella network as well as the BitTorrent protocol. A freeware version and a purchasable \"enhanced\" version were available. BitTorrent support is provided by libtorrent.\n\nOn October 26, 2010, U.S. federal court judge Kimba Wood issued an injunction enforcing LimeWire to prevent \"the searching, downloading, uploading, file trading and/or file distribution functionality, and/or all functionality\" of its software in \"Arista Records LLC v. Lime Group LLC\". A trial investigating the damages necessary to compensate the affected record labels was scheduled to begin in January 2011. As a result of the injunction, LimeWire stopped distributing the LimeWire software, and versions 5.5.11 and newer have been disabled using a backdoor installed by the company. However, version 5.5.10 and all prior versions of LimeWire remain fully functional and cannot be disabled unless a user upgrades to one of the newer versions. The program has been \"resurrected\" by the creators of WireShare (formerly known as \"LimeWire Pirate Edition\").\n\nWritten in the Java programming language, LimeWire can run on any computer with a Java Virtual Machine installed. Installers were provided for Apple's Mac OS X, Microsoft's Windows, and Linux. Support for Mac OS 9 and other previous versions was dropped with the release of LimeWire 4.0.10. From version 4.8 onwards, LimeWire works as a UPnP Internet Gateway Device controller in that it can automatically set up packet-forwarding rules with UPnP-capable routers.\n\nLimeWire offers sharing of its library through the Digital Audio Access Protocol (DAAP). As such, when LimeWire is running and configured to allow it, any files shared are detectable and downloaded on the local network by DAAP-enabled devices (e.g., Zune, iTunes). Beginning with LimeWire 4.13.9, connections can be encrypted with Transport Layer Security (TLS). Following LimeWire 4.13.11, TLS became the default connection option.\n\nUntil October 2010, Lime Wire LLC, the New York City based developer of LimeWire, distributed two versions of the program: a basic free version, and an enhanced version, LimeWire PRO, which sold for a fee of $21.95 with 6 months of updates, or around $35.00 with 1 year of updates. The company claimed the paid version provides faster downloads and 66% better search results. This is accomplished by facilitating direct connection with up to 10 hosts of an identical searched file at any one time, whereas the free version is limited to a maximum of 8 hosts.\n\nBeing free software, LimeWire has spawned forks, including LionShare, an experimental software development project at Penn State University, and Acquisition, a Mac OS X-based gnutella client with a proprietary interface. Researchers at Cornell University developed a reputation management add-in called Credence that allows users to distinguish between \"genuine\" and \"suspect\" files before downloading them. An October 12, 2005 report states that some of LimeWire's free and open source software contributors have forked the project and called it FrostWire.\n\nLimeWire was the second file sharing program after Frostwire to support firewall-to-firewall file transfers, a feature introduced in version 4.2, which was released in November 2004. LimeWire also now includes BitTorrent support, but is limited to three torrent uploads and three torrent downloads, which coexist with ordinary downloads. LimeWire 5.0 added an instant messenger that uses the XMPP Protocol, an open source communication protocol. Users can now chat and share files with individuals or a group of friends in their buddy list.\n\nFrom version 5.5.1, LimeWire has added a key activation, which requires the user to enter the unique key before activating the \"Pro\" version of the software. This has stopped people from illegally downloading the \"Pro\" versions. However, there are still ways to bypass this security feature, which was done when creating the pirate edition. For example, there are currently cracks available on the internet, and people can continue using the LimeWire Pro 5.5.1 Beta, which also includes AVG for LimeWire and is the first version to include AVG. The most recent stable version of LimeWire is 5.5.16.\n\nVersions of LimeWire prior to 5.5.10 can still connect to the Gnutella network and users of these versions are still able to download files, even though a message is displayed concerning the injunction during the startup process of the software. LimeWire versions 5.5.11 and newer feature an auto-update feature that allowed Lime Wire LLC to disable newer versions of the LimeWire software. Older versions of LimeWire prior to version 5.5.11, however, do not include the auto-update feature and are still fully functional. As a result, neither the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) nor Lime Wire LLC have the ability to disable older versions of LimeWire, unless the user chooses to upgrade to a newer version of LimeWire.\n\nOn November 10, 2010, a secret group of developers called the \"Secret Dev Team\" sought to keep the application working by releasing the \"LimeWire Pirate Edition\". The software is based on LimeWire 5.6 Beta, and is aimed to allow Windows versions to still work and remove the threat of spyware or adware. The exclusive features in LimeWire PRO were also unlocked, and all security features installed by Lime Wire LLC were removed.\n\nA number of forks from LimeWire have appeared, with the goal of giving users more freedom, or objecting to decisions made by Lime Wire LLC they disagreed with.\n\nFrostWire was started in September 2004 by members of the LimeWire open source community, after LimeWire's distributor considered adding \"blocking\" code, in response to RIAA pressure and the threat of legal action, in light of the U.S. Supreme Court's decision in \"MGM Studios, Inc. v. Grokster, Ltd.\". When eventually activated, the code could block its users from sharing licensed files. This code was recently changed when lawsuits had been filed against LimeWire for P2P downloading. It had blocked all their users and redirected them to FrostWire. FrostWire has since completely moved to the BitTorrent protocol from Gnutella (LimeWire's file sharing network).\n\nIn November 2010, as a response to the legal challenges regarding LimeWire, an anonymous individual by the handle of Meta Pirate released a modified version of LimeWire Pro, which was entitled LimeWire Pirate Edition. It came without the Ask.com toolbar, advertising, spyware, and backdoors, as well as all dependencies on Lime Wire LLC servers.\n\nIn response to allegations that a current or former member of Lime Wire LLC staff wrote and released the software, the company has stated that: LimeWire is not behind these efforts. LimeWire does not authorize them. LimeWire is complying with the Court’s October 26, 2010 injunction.\"\n\nThe LimeWire team, after being accused by the RIAA of being complicit in the development of LimeWire Pirate Edition, swiftly acted to shut down the LimeWire Pirate Edition website. A court order was issued to close down the website, and, to remain anonymous, Meta Pirate, the developer of LimeWire PE, did not contest the order.\n\nAccording to its SourceForge website, WireShare is the newest fork of the original LimeWire open source project (a successor of LPE: LimeWire Pirate Edition, which name was dropped for legal reasons). The software was developed to help keep the Gnutella network alive and to maintain a good faith continuation of the original project (without adware or spyware).\n\nOn February 15, 2010, LimeWire reversed its previous anti-bundling stance and announced the inclusion of an Ask.com-powered browser toolbar that users had to explicitly opt-out of to prevent installation. The toolbar sends web and bittorrent searches to Ask.com, and LimeWire searches to an instance of LimeWire on the user's machine.\n\nIn LimeWire versions before 5.0, users could accidentally configure the software to allow access to any file on their computer, including documents with personal information. Recent versions of LimeWire do not allow unintentional sharing of documents or applications. In 2005, the US Federal Trade Commission issued a consumer warning regarding the dangers of using peer-to-peer file sharing networks, stating that using such networks can lead to identity theft and lawsuits. On May 5, 2009, a P2P industry spokesman represented Lime Wire and others at a U.S. House of Representatives legislative hearing on H.R. 1319, \"The Informed P2P User Act.\"\n\nOne investigation showed that of 123 randomly selected downloaded files, 37 contained malware – about 30%. In mid-2008, a Macintosh trojan exploiting a vulnerability involving Apple Remote Desktop was distributed via LimeWire affecting users of Mac OS X Tiger and Leopard. The ability to distribute such malware and viruses has also been reduced in versions of LimeWire 5.0 and greater, with the program defaulting to not share or search for executable files.\n\nPrior to April 2004, the free version of LimeWire was distributed with a bundled program called LimeShop (a variant of TopMoxie), which was spyware. Among other things, LimeShop monitored online purchases in order to redirect sales commissions to Lime Wire LLC. Uninstallation of LimeWire would not remove LimeShop. With the removal of all bundled software in LimeWire 3.9.4 (released on April 20, 2004), these objections were addressed. LimeWire currently has a facility that allows its server to contact a running LimeWire client and gather various information.\n\nAn identity theft scheme involving LimeWire was discovered in Denver in 2006. On September 7, 2007, Gregory Thomas Kopiloff of Seattle was arrested in what the U.S. Justice Department described as its first case against someone accused of using file sharing computer programs to commit identity theft. According to federal prosecutors, Kopiloff used LimeWire to search other people's computers for inadvertently shared financial information and then used it to obtain credit cards for an online shopping spree.\n\nLimeWire automatically receives a cryptographically signed file, called simpp.xml, containing an IP block list.\n\nIt was the key technology behind the now defunct cyber security firm Tiversa which is alleged to have used information from the network to pressure prospective clients into engaging the company's services.\n\nAccording to a June 2005 report in \"The New York Times\", Lime Wire LLC was considering ceasing its distribution of LimeWire because the outcome of \"MGM v. Grokster\" \"handed a tool to judges that they can declare inducement whenever they want to.\"\n\nOn May 12, 2010, Judge Kimba Wood of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York ruled in \"Arista Records LLC v. Lime Group LLC\" that LimeWire and its creator, Mark Gorton, had committed copyright infringement, engaged in unfair competition, and induced others to commit copyright infringement. On October 26, 2010, LimeWire was ordered to disable the \"searching, downloading, uploading, file trading and/or file distribution functionality\" after losing a court battle with the RIAA over claims of copyright infringement. The RIAA also announced intentions to pursue legal action over the damages caused by the program in January to compensate the affected record labels. In retaliation, the RIAA's website was taken offline on October 29 via denial-of-service attacks executed by members of Operation Payback and Anonymous.\n\nIn response to the ruling, a company spokesperson said that the company is not shutting down, but will use its \"best efforts\" to cease distributing and supporting P2P software.\n\nIn early 2011, the RIAA announced their intention to sue LimeWire, pursuing a statutory damages theory that claimed up to $72 trillion in damagesa sum greater than the current GDP of the entire global economy. There are currently around 11,000 songs on LimeWire that have been tagged as copyright-infringed, and the RIAA estimates that each one has been downloaded thousands of times, the penalties accruing to the above sum.\n\nA trial to decide on the eventual amount of damages owed by Limewire to thirteen record labels, including Warner Music Group and Sony Music, all of which are represented by the RIAA, started early in May and went on until on May 13, 2011, when Gorton agreed to pay the 13 record companies $105 million in an out-of-court settlement.\n\nMitch Bainwol, chairman of the RIAA, referred to the \"resolution of the case [as] another milestone in the continuing evolution of online music to a legitimate marketplace that appropriately rewards creators.\"\n\nBULLET::::- Comparison of file sharing applications\nBULLET::::- Open Music Model\n\nBULLET::::- AllOfMP3\nBULLET::::- Grooveshark\nBULLET::::- Kazaa\nBULLET::::- Mininova\nBULLET::::- Megaupload\nBULLET::::- Napster\n\n\nBULLET::::- 10 Alternatives to LimeWire (2012), Zeropaid.com\nBULLET::::- LimeWire Resurrected By Secret Dev Team (2010), TorrentFreak\n"}
{"id": "17957", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17957", "title": "Latveria", "text": "Latveria\n\nLatveria is a fictional nation appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. It is depicted within the storylines of Marvel's comic titles as an isolated European country ruled by the fictional Supreme Lord Doctor Doom, supposedly located in the Banat region. It is surrounded by the Carpathian Mountains, and also borders Symkaria (home of Silver Sable) to the south. Its capital is Doomstadt.\n\nLatveria first appeared in \"Fantastic Four Annual\" #2, published in 1964. Victor von Doom is the ruler of Latveria. Though he has been dethroned a number of times, Victor has invariably managed to return to the throne of his country within a matter of months.\n\nVictor also has a council who obey him entirely. In \"Fantastic Four\" #536 in 2006, he killed his own Prime Minister for claiming control of Latveria in his absence and threatened to kill two other ministers if they failed to find the landing spot of Thor's hammer.\n\nDoctor Doom's style of rule can best be described as an absolute monarchy, as it was revealed that there is no legislature, and one minister boasted \"\"Doctor Doom decides everything. His slightest whim is Latverian law!\"\" It is shown Doom has devices throughout the Kingdom to watch his people and even has hidden weapons to prevent them leaving without his consent. In one story he is able to activate a force field around Latveria which prevents anybody leaving, though apparently it can be a defense against nuclear attack.\n\nLatveria was formed out of land annexed from southern Hungary centuries before, and possibly land from Serbia as well as Romania.\n\nAt some point, Doctor Doom had his army of Servo Guards invade Rotruvia where he was successful at annexing it.\n\nDue to Doom's undertakings that drive him away from Latveria, the monarch is often absent. After Doom's descent into Hell, the nation became a target for conquest by the neighboring countries. This forces Reed Richards to seize control of the country, attempting to pry the populace out from under the thumb of Doom, while at the same time disarming all of Doom's weaponry and technology, so if he ever returned, he would come back to absolutely nothing. In the process, Richards relocated Doom from Hell into a pocket dimension of his own design, and although Doom used his consciousness-switching abilities to escape, the death of his host body seemingly caused him to die as well, and the Fantastic Four pulled out of the country.\n\nHowever Doom survives this and rules Latveria for a time with a 'puppet' Prime Minister and robotic enforcers.\n\nAfter the Fantastic Four left, the United States attempted to fill the void left by Doom by establishing a democracy for the nation. The Countess Lucia von Bardas was elected as Prime Minister. However, when it was revealed that von Bardas was employing the Tinkerer to use Doom's technology to arm various tech-based villains in the United States, S.H.I.E.L.D. Commander Nick Fury took action.\n\nDuring \"Secret War\", Fury and a number of superheroes invaded Latveria without permission of the US Government and attempted to assassinate von Bardas. While von Bardas survived, she was horribly disfigured and sought to destroy Fury and the heroes responsible. She was killed by S.H.I.E.L.D. Agent Daisy Johnson while trying to blow up New York with the armor of the various villains she employed.\n\nMuch of Latveria was destroyed and the population severely reduced by an attack executed by the Marquis of Death (a.k.a. \"Dooms Master\").\n\nS.H.I.E.L.D., under the leadership of Iron Man and his team of U.S. sanctioned Avengers invaded Latveria after discovering Doom's (unintentional) involvement in the release of a symbiote virus on New York. The country was yet again devastated and Doom was taken into custody for crimes against humanity.\n\nDoom is released from prison due to the influence of H.A.M.M.E.R director Norman Osborn. He restores his nation with the use of his time travel technology.\n\nDuring the \"Avengers vs. X-Men\" storyline, Spider-Man fights against a Juggernaut-empowered Colossus here.\n\nThe common geographic description of Latveria places it as a small nation, around the area where Hungary, Romania and Serbia (Vojvodina) meet in real life. To its south in the Marvel universe is the nation of Symkaria, which is depicted as a benevolent constitutional monarchy in contrast to the dictatorship to its north. The capital city of Latveria is Doomstadt, formerly Hassenstadt, renamed when Doom seized power, located just north of the Kline River. The administrative center is Castle Doom.\n\nBULLET::::- Population: 500,000 (This is an approximation since the government of Latveria has been fiercely secretive of its census activity)\nBULLET::::- Type of Government: Dictatorship (Victor von Doom prefers to call this an \"enforced monarchy\")\nBULLET::::- Languages: German, Hungarian, English, Latverian (local dialect, derivative of Hungarian), Romanian.\nBULLET::::- Ethnic Groups: Mixed European stock, Slavs, Roma, Greek, possibly Bulgarians who migrated in Banat during the Ottoman rule in Bulgaria\nBULLET::::- Major Business Centers: None\nBULLET::::- Currency: Latverian Franc\nBULLET::::- Public Holidays: Doom's Day, Christmas, New Year (Note: Doom's Day is an eclectic holiday, celebrated whenever Doom declares it. It is different from Doomsday)\nBULLET::::- Airports: The only airport for the country, Doomsport, lies on the southern outskirts of Doomstadt. It maintains two runways and a modern terminal, but flights into and out of Doomsport are quite limited. There have been no scheduled flights from Latveria to western European nations or the United States, due to a combination of Latveria's poor economy, international embargoes, and that no major airline has seen profit in establishing a route to Latveria.\n\nBULLET::::- Doomsburg -\nBULLET::::- Doomsdale -\nBULLET::::- Doomstadt - The capital of Latveria, replacing on the map the real-life Romanian city of Timișoara. The \"City of Doom\" (The suffix \"-stadt\" is German for \"city\")\nBULLET::::- Doomsvale -\nBULLET::::- Doomton -\nBULLET::::- Doomwood -\n\nBULLET::::- Boar's Vale -\nBULLET::::- Castle Doom - An ancient castle with modern-day technology, home to Victor Von Doom.\nBULLET::::- Citadel of Doom -\nBULLET::::- Cynthia Von Doom Memorial Park -\nBULLET::::- Doom Falls -\nBULLET::::- Doomsport Airport - The only airport in Latveria, which is located south of Doomstadt.\nBULLET::::- Doomstadt Rail Station -\nBULLET::::- Doomstadt Rathauz -\nBULLET::::- Doomwood Forest -\nBULLET::::- Folding City -\nBULLET::::- Lanzarini Temple -\nBULLET::::- Heroic Andrew Boulevard -\nBULLET::::- Kron Victory Swad -\nBULLET::::- Latverian Academy of the Science -\nBULLET::::- Latverian Southern Border -\nBULLET::::- Monument Park -\nBULLET::::- Mount Sorcista - A demon sorceress named Pandemonia lives here.\nBULLET::::- Mount Victorum -\nBULLET::::- Old Town of Doomstadt - It is located in Doomstadt and overlooked by Castle Doom.\nBULLET::::- St. Blaise Church -\nBULLET::::- St. Peter Church -\nBULLET::::- Werner Academy -\n\nThe population consists of mixed European stock and Romani people, in whose welfare von Doom takes a particular interest. Victor von Doom, being Roma, has declared the Romani a protected class and attempts to shower them with benefits, however due to Latveria's poor economy and oppressive rule their lifestyles hardly outshine other ethnicities, and the Romani by and large live in the same fear of their own government as do fellow Latverians.\n\nBecause it lacks a native superhero populace, Latveria relies largely on Dooms' robot sentinels called Doombots to keep law and order. One of the few known Latverian superhumans is Dreadknight, whom Doom himself created by punishing Dreadknight's alter ego for hoarding ideas from him. Dreadknight has since tried to get revenge on Doctor Doom, only to be thwarted by various superheroes. \nAside from superhuman activity, the Latverian military appears to function in multiple capacity; in addition to being responsible for defense of Latveria (or more accurately, keeping Victor von Doom on the throne), they have been commissioned to make arrests and function as Latveria's secret police.\n\nLatveria is generally depicted as a rural nation with a primitive economy and a population living an almost medieval lifestyle, likely enforced by Doom. Nonetheless, the state itself is consistently depicted as a global superpower on-par with or even surpassing any nation on Earth, including the United States, and rivalled only by the likes of Wakanda. This is largely due to Doom himself being a scientific genius of the highest order, not only possessing but actually inventing numerous technological wonders, including time and interdimensional travel, personally creating a highly sophisticated robot army of myriad designs and capabilities, and frequently coming into possession of-or outright creating-various devices that could be classified as Weapons of Mass Destruction. Thus, despite the country being both extremely small and economically backward, it is a powerhouse in military and technological terms and therefore has a vastly disproportionate influence on global affairs relative to its size and GDP. Doom also proudly claims that the country is free of poverty, disease, famine and crime and while citizens of the nation are commonly shown to be oppressed and to live in fear of their monarch, they are also shown to be relatively well cared for, so long as they do not cross Doom. Other occasions suggest that Doom is at the centre of a self-propagated personality cult and is admired and worshipped by other segments of the populace in spite of his mistreatments and he is often demonstrated to be at least a more stable and less corrupt ruler than any other Latverian leader who has replaced him,\n\nBULLET::::- Doctor Doom - The current ruler of Latveria.\nBULLET::::- Alexander Flynn - The alleged mutant son of Doctor Doom and an unidentified Romani woman.\nBULLET::::- Arturo Frazen - He was installed as Latveria's ambassador during the temporary reign of Prince Zorba Fortunov.\nBULLET::::- Baron Karl Hassen - He was the ruler of Latveria during the 14th Century.\nBULLET::::- Baron Karl Hassen III - He was part of Latveria's royalty sometime before Doctor Doom became Latveria's ruler.\nBULLET::::- Boris - Doctor Doom's Zefiro guardian since childhood and closest confidant.\nBULLET::::- Count Sabbat - He was part of Latveria's royalty during the 15th Century.\nBULLET::::- Cristos Malachi - A one-time member of Doctor Doom's Zefiro Gypsy Clan. He served as the Zefiro Gypsy Clan's fortune-teller.\nBULLET::::- Cynthia Von Doom - The mother of Doctor Doom.\nBULLET::::- Daniel Kurtz - A one-time classmate of Doctor Doom. He lost an eye during Victor's experiment which involved contacting his mother.\nBULLET::::- Djordji Zindelo Hungaro - The Zefiro mystic who trained Cynthia Von Doom in the mystic arts.\nBULLET::::- Dreadknight - A Latverian scientist who had a skull-shaped cybernetic helmet bio-fused to his head by Doctor Doom and developed a vendetta against him.\nBULLET::::- Editor - He was tasked with rewriting Latverian history to conform with Doctor Doom's world view.\nBULLET::::- Fydor Gittrlsohn - One of Doctor Doom's chief scientists.\nBULLET::::- Gert Hauptmann - One of Doctor Doom's chief scientists and the brother of Gustav Hauptmann. His attempt at betrayal led to his death at the hands of Doctor Doom.\nBULLET::::- Gustav Hauptmann - One of Doctor Doom's chief scientists. He was a former Nazi that worked for Adolf Hitler and Red Skull. When the flamethrower that Gustav was using to attack Mister Fantastic with nearly endangered his art collection, Doctor Doom reversed the sonic weapon he planned to use on the Fantastic Four and ended up using it to kill Gustav Hauptmann.\nBULLET::::- Gustav von Kampen - A one-time member of Doctor Doom's Zefiro Gypsy Clan.\nBULLET::::- Gustav van Erven - A Latverian refugee living on Brazil on Doctor Doom 2099 timeline.\nBULLET::::- Hans Stutgart - A Latverian agent who is living in the United States.\nBULLET::::- Jakob Gorzenk - He serves as the chief ambassador to the United States.\nBULLET::::- King Rudolfo I - He ruled Latveria sometime before Doctor Doom became Latveria's ruler.\nBULLET::::- King Stefan - He ruled Latveria sometime before Doctor Doom became Latveria's ruler.\nBULLET::::- King Vladimir Vassily Gonereo Tristian Mangegi Fortunov - The tyrannical ruler of Latveria who was extremely harsh to the gypsies that lived on the borders. He was killed by Doctor Doom.\nBULLET::::- Kristoff Vernard - The adopted son of Doctor Doom. His mother was killed by a robot that was used by Prince Zorba Fortunov.\nBULLET::::- Kroft Family - A family of vampire hunters that existed from the 16th Century to the 19th Century.\nBULLET::::- Kurt Kroft -\nBULLET::::- Leo Kroft -\nBULLET::::- Oscar Kroft -\nBULLET::::- Pietro Kroft -\nBULLET::::- Stefan Kroft -\nBULLET::::- Wilhelm Kroft -\nBULLET::::- Larin - A Tibetan Monk who helped to construct Doctor Doom's first armor.\nBULLET::::- Lucia von Bardas - The Prime Minister of Latveria.\nBULLET::::- Mengo Brothers - A pair of international mercenaries.\nBULLET::::- Grigori Mengochuzcraus -\nBULLET::::- Stanislaus Mengochuzcraus -\nBULLET::::- Otto Kronsteig - One of Doctor Doom's chief scientists.\nBULLET::::- Prince Rudolfo Fortunov - The former crown prince of Latveria before his family was ousted by Doctor Doom.\nBULLET::::- Prince Zorba Fortunov - The former prince of Latveria and brother of Rudolfo. He once reclaimed the throne to Latveria when the Fantastic Four had defeated Doctor Doom. With the help of the Fantastic Four, Doctor Doom was able to reclaim his throne.\nBULLET::::- Robert Doom - The distant cousin of Doctor Doom.\nBULLET::::- Torvalt - A one-time member of Doctor Doom's Zefiro Gypsy Clan.\nBULLET::::- Tristian de Sabbat -\nBULLET::::- Valeria - The teenage love of Doctor Doom's life who is the granddaughter of Boris. Her life was sacrificed to the Haazareth Three (a group of demons) by Doctor Doom.\nBULLET::::- Vlad Draasen - He was a member of Latveria's royalty during the 15th Century.\nBULLET::::- Werner Von Doom - A talented doctor of the Zefiro Gypsy Tribe and father of Doctor Doom.\n\nIn the future depicted in \"Loki: Agent of Asgard\", Doctor Doom discovers Latveria completely destroyed after King Loki destroyed the Earth. Doom attempts to prevent this future by imprisoning the Loki of the present.\n\nIn the \"Marvel 1602\" storyline, Latveria is ruled by Count Otto von Doom, also known as \"Otto the Handsome\". It is inhabited by mythical beings, and Latveria experiments on intricate clockwork devices, one of which was used to kill Queen Elizabeth I of England. The native language appears to bear a close resemblance to modern German.\n\nIn the alternate future called \"Marvel 2099\", various power struggles over the fate of Latveria end with most of the country's population destroyed by chemical weapons known as \"necrotoxins\".\n\nIn the \"Marvel Zombies\" storyline, Latveria is one of the last few outposts of humanity, as Doctor Doom gathers up the fittest and most fertile of the Latverian survivors in order to send them off to other dimensions. An army of super-zombies lay siege to Doom's castle and eventually break inside. Despite this and Doom himself being bitten, all the Latverian citizens successfully escape.\n\nLatveria was introduced as a bankrupt peasant nation, but thanks to Doctor Doom it was made the ninth richest country on Earth. The townsfolk wear Doom's dragon tattoos, which incorporate microfibers that interfaced with the brain, acting as mind control devices. Where this Latveria lies is unclear but there are Belgian Flags on display in the background in the one picture displayed of Latveria.\n\nIn \"Ultimate Marvel Team-Up\", Latveria was presented as an impoverished dictatorial theocracy, under \"his holiness\" President Victor von Doom (wearing his traditional Marvel armour and cloak). They attempted, in collusion with the United States via Nick Fury, to steal the Iron Man technology from Tony Stark; this fails, partly due to the intervention of Spider-Man. At some point, however, Doom declared a holy war on the United States, creating tensions between two countries. This would be ignored and retconned away in later Ultimate Marvel titles.\n\nBULLET::::- Latveria appears in the 1994 \"Fantastic Four\" TV series.\nBULLET::::- Latveria appears in \"The Super Hero Squad Show\" episode \"Pedicure of Doom.\" Doctor Doom, MODOK, and Abomination fall back to Castle Doom only to find that Doctor Doom's mother Cynthia \"Coco\" Von Doom had converted it into a spa with Chthon's help.\nBULLET::::- Latveria is mentioned in the \"\" episode \"The Might of Doom.\"\nBULLET::::- Latveria appears in \"\" episode \"The Private War of Doctor Doom.\"\nBULLET::::- Latveria appears in the \"Ultimate Spider-Man\" episode \"Doomed.\" Spider-Man, Power Man, Iron Fist, Nova, and White Tiger head to Latveria in order to capture Doctor Doom as part of their plan to impress Nick Fury. The Latverian Embassy appears in the episode \"Not a Toy\" when Captain America's shield ends up in the Latverian Embassy and that Spider-Man must work with Captain America to get it back before Doctor Doom can experiment with it.\nBULLET::::- Latveria appears in \"Avengers Assemble\".\nBULLET::::- Latveria appears in the \"Hulk and the Agents of S.M.A.S.H.\" episode \"Red Rover.\" Red Hulk unknowingly drops off Devil Dinosaur in Latveria when he mistook it for Transia. In the \"Days of Future Smash\" episodes, the Latverian embassy is featured.\n\nBULLET::::- In the \"Fantastic Four\" film, Latveria is mentioned initially in reference to Victor Von Doom's past and is described as \"the old country\", possibly indicating his birth there. After \"The End\" has appeared, Von Doom's incarcerated body is shown on board a ship bound for Latveria. Also during the scene where he first dons his trademark metal mask, a plaque can be seen declaring it as a gift to Doom from the people of Latveria.\nBULLET::::- In the sequel \"\", Doom is reawakened in his castle by the Silver Surfer's passage through Latveria. The capital's name has been changed from \"Doomstadt\" to \"Hassenstadt\", likely because Doom is merely a native of the country in this continuity, rather than its leader, as the previous movie established him as merely a wealthy businessman.\nBULLET::::- In the trailer for the 2015 Reboot of \"Fantastic Four\", about 45 seconds into the trailer an IP address was shown on the bottom left hand corner of the screen. That IP address leads to this article. In the movie itself, Latveria is shown to be Doom's home country on a government report on him.\n\nBULLET::::- In the 1980s computer game \"Accolade's Comics\" the protagonist Steve Keene is offered tickets to the Latverian Ballet.\nBULLET::::- In \"Spider-Man: The Game\", a billboard can be seen in the first level advertising tourism in Latvania, a misspelling of Latveria.\nBULLET::::- Latveria is referred to in the \"Spider-Man 2\" video game when J. Jonah Jameson says that a Latverian diplomat is landing at the United Nations building by helicopter, although circumstances force the player to miss sighting any such diplomat.\nBULLET::::- In the \"Ultimate Spider-Man\" video game, the Beetle was reported to have ducked into the Latverian Embassy after evading Spider-Man. In the special edition of the game, the player can look at concept art that shows what happens to Beetle after his confrontation with Spider-Man. He flies into the embassy and walks up to a throne, kneels down, and presents the Sandman vial to Doctor Doom in some plot to develop super-soldiers for Latveria. Later on in the game, the Green Goblin is seen escaping from the Latverian Embassy.\nBULLET::::- In \"\", Castle Doom in Latveria is a level. If the player asks about Latveria to Vision, he mentions that there is barely any crime there since Doctor Doom's robots are always patrolling the country.\nBULLET::::- The Latverian Embassy is featured in \"The Incredible Hulk\" video game.\nBULLET::::- Latveria is featured in \"\". The first part of the game is based on the \"Secret War\" storyline. Nick Fury leads the heroes to Latveria to deal with Lucia von Bardas after the President does not want to take action against her illegal activities.\nBULLET::::- The Latverian Embassy is featured in \"\".\nBULLET::::- Latveria appears in \"Lego Marvel Super Heroes\". The level \"Doctor in the House\" takes place in Castle Doom.\nBULLET::::- In \"Marvel Heroes\", The player explores the city of doomstadt and also manages to explore Castle Doom leading up to a final confrontation in Dooms throne room.\n\nBULLET::::- In a 1992, month-long edition of the Spider-Man serial strip by Stan Lee, Latveria and Dr. Doom are featured prominently. The story begins with J.J Jameson's assistant Robbie suggesting that Latveria is up to something, marked by Latveria's prolonged absence from United Nations meetings. The strip is then interspersed with Doctor Doom's iron rule over Latverians and Peter and Mary Jane Parker posing as tourists entering Latveria (to provide cover for Peter Parker's attempt to find out what Dr. Doom is plotting). Doom's withdrawal is soon revealed a launching a satellite that will fire lasers on oil wells anywhere on Earth, effectively holding the world responsive to Doom's demands. Doom opens fire on one small oil field as an example of his power projection. The satellite also creates a force field that protects it and Latveria from the forthcoming missile counterattacks. President Bush, as well as other First World leaders, ignore all of Doom's demands, causing an enraged Doom to order the satellite to open fire on \"a dozen oil fields, at once!\", which ultimately proves his undoing as that requires a time window to charge such a large amount. Spider-Man takes advantage of this to overload the satellite, thus nullifying Doom's threats. In a subplot, Dr. Doom's autocratic manner is also shown when he sees a captured Peter and Mary Jane. The despot announces his plans to become a prominent world leader, but should not do it as a single man, saying that in his capacity as a leader he has the power to annul Peter Parker's marriage and make Mary Jane his queen consort, a different take from the Fantastic Four storylines which usually show Doom trying to force Susan Richards to be on his arm.\n\nBULLET::::- Latveria at Marvel.com\nBULLET::::- Latveria at Marvel Wiki\nBULLET::::- Article on History of Latveria\n"}
{"id": "17961", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17961", "title": "Least common multiple", "text": "Least common multiple\n\nIn arithmetic and number theory, the least common multiple, lowest common multiple, or smallest common multiple of two integers \"a\" and \"b\", usually denoted by LCM(\"a\", \"b\"), is the smallest positive integer that is divisible by both \"a\" and \"b\". Since division of integers by zero is undefined, this definition has meaning only if \"a\" and \"b\" are both different from zero. However, some authors define LCM (\"a\",0) as 0 for all \"a\", which is the result of taking the LCM to be the least upper bound in the lattice of divisibility.\n\nThe LCM is the \"lowest common denominator\" (LCD) that can be used before fractions can be added, subtracted or compared. The LCM of more than two integers is also well-defined: it is the smallest positive integer that is divisible by each of them.\n\nA multiple of a number is the product of that number and an integer. For example, 10 is a multiple of 5 because 5 × 2 = 10, so 10 is divisible by 5 and 2. Because 10 is the smallest positive integer that is divisible by both 5 and 2, it is the least common multiple of 5 and 2. By the same principle, 10 is the least common multiple of −5 and −2 as well.\n\nIn this article we will denote the least common multiple of two integers \"a\" and \"b\" as lcm(\"a\", \"b\").\n\nSome older textbooks use [\"a\", \"b\"].\n\nThe programming language J uses a*.b\n\nWhat is the LCM of 4 and 6?\n\nMultiples of 4 are:\n\nand the multiples of 6 are:\n\n\"Common multiples\" of 4 and 6 are simply the numbers that are in both lists:\n\nSo, from this list of the first few common multiples of the numbers 4 and 6, their \"least common multiple\" is 12.\n\nWhen adding, subtracting, or comparing vulgar fractions, it is useful to find the least common multiple of the denominators, often called the lowest common denominator, because each of the fractions can be expressed as a fraction with this denominator. For instance,\n\nwhere the denominator 42 was used because it is the least common multiple of 21 and 6.\n\nSuppose there are two meshing gears in a machine, having \"m\" and \"n\" teeth, respectively, and the gears are marked by a line segment drawn from the center of the first gear to the center of the second gear. When the gears begin rotating, we can determine how many rotations the first gear must complete to realign the line segment by making use of LCM(\"m\", \"n\"). The first gear must complete LCM(\"m\", \"n\")/\"m\" rotations for the realignment. By that time, the second gear will have made LCM(\"m\", \"n\")/\"n\" rotations.\n\nSuppose there are three planets revolving around a star which take \"l\", \"m\" and \"n\" units of time respectively to complete their orbits. Assume that \"l\", \"m\" and \"n\" are integers. Assuming the planets started moving around the star after an initial linear alignment, all the planets attain a linear alignment again after LCM(\"l\", \"m\", \"n\") units of time. At this time, the first, second and third planet will have completed LCM(\"l\", \"m\", \"n\")/\"l\", LCM(\"l\", \"m\", \"n\")/\"m\" and LCM(\"l\", \"m\", \"n\")/\"n\" orbits respectively around the star.\n\nThe following formula reduces the problem of computing the least common multiple to the problem of computing the greatest common divisor (GCD), also known as the greatest common factor:\n\nThis formula is also valid when exactly one of \"a\" and \"b\" is 0, since gcd(\"a\", 0) = \"a\". However, if both \"a\" and \"b\" are 0, this formula would cause division by zero; lcm(0, 0) = 0 is a special case.\n\nThere are fast algorithms for computing the GCD that do not require the numbers to be factored, such as the Euclidean algorithm. To return to the example above,\n\nBecause gcd(\"a\", \"b\") is a divisor of both \"a\" and \"b\", it is more efficient to compute the LCM by dividing \"before\" multiplying:\n\nThis reduces the size of one input for both the division and the multiplication, and reduces the required storage needed for intermediate results (overflow in the \"a\"×\"b\" computation). Because gcd(\"a\", \"b\") is a divisor of both \"a\" and \"b\", the division is guaranteed to yield an integer, so the intermediate result can be stored in an integer. Done this way, the previous example becomes:\n\nThe unique factorization theorem says that every positive integer greater than 1 can be written in only one way as a product of prime numbers. The prime numbers can be considered as the atomic elements which, when combined together, make up a composite number.\n\nFor example:\n\nHere we have the composite number 90 made up of one atom of the prime number 2, two atoms of the prime number 3 and one atom of the prime number 5.\n\nThis knowledge can be used to find the LCM of a set of numbers.\n\nExample: Find the value of lcm(8,9,21).\n\nFirst, factor each number and express it as a product of prime number powers.\n\nThe lcm will be the product of multiplying the highest power of each prime number together. The highest power of the three prime numbers 2, 3, and 7 is 2, 3, and 7, respectively. Thus,\n\nThis method is not as efficient as reducing to the greatest common divisor, since there is no known general efficient algorithm for integer factorization, but is useful for illustrating concepts.\n\nThis method can be illustrated using a Venn diagram as follows. Find the prime factorization of each of the two numbers. Put the prime factors into a Venn diagram with one circle for each of the two numbers, and \"all\" factors they share in common in the intersection. To find the LCM, just multiply all of the prime numbers in the diagram.\n\nHere is an example:\n\nand what they share in common is two \"2\"s and a \"3\":\n\nThis also works for the greatest common divisor (GCD), except that instead of multiplying all of the numbers in the Venn diagram, one multiplies only the prime factors that are in the intersection. Thus the GCD of 48 and 180 is 2 × 2 × 3 = 12.\n\nThis method works as easily for finding the LCM of several integers.\n\nLet there be a finite sequence of positive integers \"X\" = (\"x\", \"x\", ..., \"x\"), \"n\" > 1. The algorithm proceeds in steps as follows: on each step \"m\" it examines and updates the sequence \"X\" = (\"x\", \"x\", ..., \"x\"), \"X\" = \"X\", where \"X\" is the \"m\"th iteration of \"X\", that is, \"X\" at step \"m\" of the algorithm, etc. The purpose of the examination is to pick the least (perhaps, one of many) element of the sequence \"X\". Assuming \"x\" is the selected element, the sequence \"X\" is defined as\n\nIn other words, the least element is increased by the corresponding \"x\" whereas the rest of the elements pass from \"X\" to \"X\" unchanged.\n\nThe algorithm stops when all elements in sequence \"X\" are equal. Their common value \"L\" is exactly LCM(\"X\").\n\nThis method works for any number of factors. One begins by listing all of the numbers vertically in a table (in this example 4, 7, 12, 21, and 42):\n\nThe process begins by dividing all of the factors by 2. If any of them divides evenly, write 2 at the top of the table and the result of division by 2 of each factor in the space to the right of each factor and below the 2. If a number does not divide evenly, just rewrite the number again. If 2 does not divide evenly into any of the numbers, try 3.\n\n! \"x\"\n! 2\n\nNow, check if 2 divides again:\n\n! \"x\"\n! 2\n! 2\n\nOnce 2 no longer divides, divide by 3. If 3 no longer divides, try 5 and 7. Keep going until all of the numbers have been reduced to 1.\n\n! \"x\"\n! 2\n! 2\n! 3\n! 7\n\nNow, multiply the numbers on the top and you have the LCM. In this case, it is . You will get to the LCM the quickest if you use prime numbers and start from the lowest prime, 2.\n\nAs a general computational algorithm, the above is quite inefficient. One would never want to implement it in software: it takes too many steps, and requires too much storage space. A far more efficient numerical algorithm can be obtained simply by using Euclid's algorithm to compute the gcd first, and then obtaining the lcm by division.\n\nAccording to the fundamental theorem of arithmetic a positive integer is the product of prime numbers, and, except for their order, this representation is unique:\n\nwhere the exponents \"n\", \"n\", ... are non-negative integers; for example, 84 = 2 3 5 7 11 13 ...\n\nGiven two positive integers their least common multiple and greatest common divisor are given by the formulas\n\nand\n\nSince\nthis gives\n\nIn fact, every rational number can be written uniquely as the product of primes if negative exponents are allowed. When this is done, the above formulas remain valid. For example:\n\nThe positive integers may be partially ordered by divisibility: if \"a\" divides \"b\" (that is, if \"b\" is an integer multiple of \"a\") write \"a\" ≤ \"b\" (or equivalently, \"b\" ≥ \"a\"). (Forget the usual magnitude-based definition of ≤ in this section - it is not used.)\n\nUnder this ordering, the positive integers become a lattice with meet given by the gcd and join given by the lcm. The proof is straightforward, if a bit tedious; it amounts to checking that lcm and gcd satisfy the axioms for meet and join. Putting the lcm and gcd into this more general context establishes a duality between them:\n\nThe following pairs of dual formulas are special cases of general lattice-theoretic identities.\n\nBULLET::::- Commutative laws\n\nBULLET::::- Associative laws\n\nBULLET::::- Absorption laws:\n\nBULLET::::- Idempotent laws\n\nBULLET::::- Define divides in terms of lcm and gcd\n\nIt can also be shown that this lattice is distributive, that is, lcm distributes over gcd and, dually, that gcd distributes over lcm:\n\nThis identity is self-dual:\n\nBULLET::::- Let \"D\" be the product of \"ω\"(\"D\") distinct prime numbers (that is, \"D\" is squarefree).\n\nThen\n\nwhere the absolute bars  denote the cardinality of a set.\n\nBULLET::::- If none of formula_29 is zero, then\n\nThe least common multiple can be defined generally over commutative rings as follows: Let \"a\" and \"b\" be elements of a commutative ring \"R\". A common multiple of \"a\" and \"b\" is an element \"m\" of \"R\" such that both \"a\" and \"b\" divide \"m\" (that is, there exist elements \"x\" and \"y\" of \"R\" such that \"ax\" = \"m\" and \"by\" = \"m\"). A least common multiple of \"a\" and \"b\" is a common multiple that is minimal in the sense that for any other common multiple \"n\" of \"a\" and \"b\", \"m\" divides \"n\".\n\nIn general, two elements in a commutative ring can have no least common multiple or more than one. However, any two least common multiples of the same pair of elements are associates. In a unique factorization domain, any two elements have a least common multiple. In a principal ideal domain, the least common multiple of \"a\" and \"b\" can be characterised as a generator of the intersection of the ideals generated by \"a\" and \"b\" (the intersection of a collection of ideals is always an ideal).\n\nBULLET::::- Anomalous cancellation\nBULLET::::- Chebyshev function\n\n"}
