{"id": "15179", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15179", "title": "Indira Gandhi", "text": "Indira Gandhi\n\nIndira Priyadarshini Gandhi (; née Nehru; 19 November 1917 – 31 October 1984) was an Indian politician and a central figure of the Indian National Congress. She was the first and, to date, the only female Prime Minister of India. Indira Gandhi was the daughter of Jawaharlal Nehru, the first prime minister of India. She served as Prime Minister from January 1966 to March 1977 and again from January 1980 until her assassination in October 1984, making her the second longest-serving Indian Prime Minister, after her father.\n\nGandhi served as her father's personal assistant and hostess during his tenure as Prime Minister between 1947 and 1964. She was elected President of the Indian National Congress in 1959. Upon her father's death in 1964 she was appointed as a member of the Rajya Sabha (upper house) and became a member of Lal Bahadur Shastri's cabinet as Minister of Information and Broadcasting. In the Congress Party's parliamentary leadership election held in early 1966 (upon the death of Shastri), she defeated her rival Morarji Desai to become leader, and thus succeeded Shastri as Prime Minister of India.\n\nAs Prime Minister, Gandhi was known for her political intransigency and unprecedented centralisation of power. She went to war with Pakistan in support of the independence movement and war of independence in East Pakistan, which resulted in an Indian victory and the creation of Bangladesh, as well as increasing India's influence to the point where it became the regional hegemon of South Asia. Citing separatist tendencies and in response to a call for revolution, Gandhi instituted a state of emergency from 1975 to 1977 where basic civil liberties were suspended and the press was censored. Widespread atrocities were carried out during the emergency. In 1980, she returned to power after free and fair elections. After Gandhi ordered military action in the Golden Temple in Operation Blue Star, she was assassinated by her own bodyguards and Sikh nationalists on 31 October 1984.\n\nIndira Gandhi was born as Indira Nehru in a Kashmiri Pandit family on 19 November 1917 in Allahabad. Her father, Jawaharlal Nehru, was a leading figure in India's political struggle for independence from British rule, and became the first Prime Minister of the Dominion (and later Republic) of India. She was the only child (a younger brother was born, but died young), and grew up with her mother, Kamala Nehru, at the Anand Bhavan; a large family estate in Allahabad. She had a lonely and unhappy childhood. Her father was often away, directing political activities or incarcerated, while her mother was frequently bed-ridden with illness, and later suffered an early death from tuberculosis. She had limited contact with her father, mostly through letters.\n\nIndira was mostly taught at home by tutors, and intermittently attended school until matriculation in 1934. She was a student at the Modern School in Delhi, St Cecilia's and St Mary's Christian convent schools in Allahabad, the International School of Geneva, the Ecole Nouvelle in Bex, and the Pupils' Own School in Poona and Bombay, which is affiliated to University of Mumbai. She and her mother Kamala Nehru moved to Belur Math headquarters of Ramakrishna Mission where Swami Ranganathananda was her guardian later she went on to study at the Vishwa Bharati in Santiniketan, which later in 1951 became Visva-Bharati University. It was during her interview that Rabindranath Tagore named her \"Priyadarshini\", literally \"looking at everything with kindness\" in Sanskrit, and she came to be known as Indira Priyadarshini Nehru. A year later, however, she had to leave university to attend to her ailing mother in Europe. While there, it was decided that Indira would continue her education at the University of Oxford. After her mother died, she briefly attended the Badminton School before enrolling at Somerville College in 1937 to study history. Indira had to take the entrance examination twice, having failed at her first attempt with a poor performance in Latin. At Oxford, she did well in history, political science and economics, but her grades in Latin—a compulsory subject—remained poor. She attended, for one year each at Visva-Bharati University and University of Oxford. Gandhi did, however, have an active part within the student life of the university, such as the Oxford Majlis Asian Society.\n\nDuring her time in Europe, Indira was plagued with ill-health and was constantly attended to by doctors. She had to make repeated trips to Switzerland to recover, disrupting her studies. She was being treated there in 1940, when the German armies rapidly conquered Europe. Gandhi tried to return to England through Portugal but was left stranded for nearly two months. She managed to enter England in early 1941, and from there returned to India without completing her studies at Oxford. The university later awarded her an honorary degree. In 2010, Oxford further honoured her by selecting her as one of the ten Oxasians, illustrious Asian graduates from the University of Oxford. During her stay in Great Britain, Indira frequently met her future husband Feroze Gandhi (no relation to Mahatma Gandhi), whom she knew from Allahabad, and who was studying at the London School of Economics. The marriage took place in Allahabad according to Adi Dharm rituals though Feroze belonged to a Zoroastrian Parsi family of Gujarat. The couple had two sons, Rajiv Gandhi (born 1944) and Sanjay Gandhi (born 1946).\n\nIn the 1950s, Indira, now Mrs Indira Gandhi after her marriage, served her father unofficially as a personal assistant during his tenure as the first Prime Minister of India. Towards the end of the 1950s, Indira Gandhi served as the President of the Congress. In that capacity, she was instrumental in getting the Communist led Kerala State Government dismissed in 1959. That government had the distinction of being India's first ever elected Communist Government. After her father's death in 1964 she was appointed as a member of the Rajya Sabha (upper house) and served in Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri's cabinet as Minister of Information and Broadcasting. In January 1966, after Shastri's death, the Congress legislative party elected Indira Gandhi over Morarji Desai as their leader. Congress party veteran K. Kamaraj was instrumental in achieving Indira's victory. Because she was a woman, other political leaders in India saw Gandhi as weak and hoped to use her as a puppet once elected: Congress President Kamaraj orchestrated Mrs. Gandhi's selection as prime minister because he perceived her to be weak enough that he and the other regional party bosses could control her, and yet strong enough to beat Desai [her political opponent] in a party election because of the high regard for her father...a woman would be an ideal tool for the Syndicate.\n\nThe first eleven years of Indira's position as prime minister saw her evolving from the perception of Congress party leaders as their puppet to a strong leader with the iron resolve to split the party for her policy positions or to go to war with Pakistan to liberate Bangladesh. At the end of this term in 1977, she was such a dominating figure in Indian politics that Congress party president D. K. Barooah had coined the phrase \"India is Indira and Indira is India.\"\n\nIndira formed her government with Morarji Desai as deputy prime minister and finance minister. At the beginning of her first term as prime minister, Indira was widely criticized by the media and the opposition as a \"Goongi goodiya\" (Hindi word for a dumb doll or puppet) of the Congress party bosses who had got her elected and tried to constrain her.\n\nThe first electoral test for Indira was the 1967 general elections for the Lok Sabha and state assemblies. The Congress Party won a reduced majority for the Lok Sabha in these elections owing to widespread disenchantment over rising prices of commodities, unemployment, economic stagnation and a food crisis. Gandhi herself was elected to Lok Sabha from the Raebareli constituency. Indira Gandhi had started on a rocky note after agreeing to a devaluation of the rupee, which created much hardship for Indian businesses and consumers, and the import of wheat from the United States fell through due to political disputes.\n\nThe party also for the first time lost power or lost majority in a number of states across the country. Following the 1967 elections, Indira Gandhi gradually started moving towards socialist policies. In 1969, she fell out with senior Congress party leaders on a number of issues. Chief among them was the decision by Indira to support V. V. Giri, the independent candidate rather than the official Congress party candidate Neelam Sanjiva Reddy for the vacant position of President of India. The other was the announcement by the prime minister of Bank nationalization without consulting the finance minister, Morarji Desai. These steps culminated in Party president S. Nijalingappa expelling her from the party for indiscipline. Gandhi, in turn floated her own faction of the Congress party and managed to retain most of the Congress MPs on her side with only 65 on the side of Congress (O) faction. The Indira faction, called Congress (R), lost its majority in the parliament but remained in power with the support of regional parties such as DMK. The policies of the Congress under Indira Gandhi, prior to the 1971 elections, also included proposals for the abolition of Privy Purse to former rulers of the Princely states and the 1969 nationalization of the fourteen largest banks in India.\n\nGaribi Hatao (Eradicate Poverty) was the theme for Gandhi's 1971 political bid. On the other hand, the combined opposition alliance had a two word manifesto of \"Indira Hatao\" (Remove Indira). The Garibi Hatao slogan and the proposed anti-poverty programs that came with it were designed to give Gandhi an independent national support, based on rural and urban poor. This would allow her to bypass the dominant rural castes both in and of state and local governments; likewise the urban commercial class. And, for their part, the previously voiceless poor would at last gain both political worth and political weight. The programs created through Garibi Hatao, though carried out locally, were funded and developed by the Central Government in New Delhi. The program was supervised and staffed by the Indian National Congress party. \"These programs also provided the central political leadership with new and vast patronage resources to be disbursed... throughout the country.\",\n\nThe biggest achievement of Indira Gandhi after the 1971 election came in December 1971 with India's decisive victory over Pakistan in the Indo-Pakistani War that occurred in the last two weeks of the Bangladesh Liberation War which led to the formation of independent Bangladesh. She was said to be hailed as Goddess Durga by opposition leader Atal Bihari Vajpayee at that time. In the elections held for State assemblies across India in March 1972, the Congress (R) swept to power in most states riding on the post-war \"Indira wave\".\n\nDespite the victory against Pakistan, the Congress government faced numerous problems during this term. Some of these were due to high inflation which was in turn caused by war time expenses, drought in some parts of the country and more importantly, the 1973 oil crisis. The opposition to Gandhi in 1973–75 period, after the Indira wave had receded, was strongest in the states of Bihar and Gujarat. In Bihar, Jayaprakash Narayan, the veteran leader came out of retirement to lead the protest movement there.\n\nOn 12 June 1975, the Allahabad High Court declared Indira Gandhi's election to the Lok Sabha in 1971 void on grounds of electoral malpractice. In an election petition filed by her 1971 opponent, Raj Narain (who later on defeated her in 1977 parliamentary election from Raebareli), alleged several major as well as minor instances of using government resources for campaigning. Gandhi had asked one of her colleagues in government, Ashoke Kumar Sen to defend her in court. Gandhi gave evidence in her defence during the trial. After almost four years, the court found her guilty of dishonest election practices, excessive election expenditure, and of using government machinery and officials for party purposes. The judge, however, rejected more serious charges of bribery against her.\n\nThe court ordered her stripped of her parliamentary seat and banned from running for any office for six years. As the constitution holds that the Prime Minister must be a member of either the Lok Sabha or the Rajya Sabha, the two houses of the Parliament of India, this would have effectively removed her from office. However, Gandhi rejected calls to resign and announced plans to appeal to the Supreme Court. Gandhi insisted that the conviction did not undermine her position, despite having been unseated from Lok Sabha. She said: \"There is a lot of talk about our government not being clean, but from our experience the situation was very much worse when [opposition] parties were forming governments\". And she dismissed criticism of the way her Congress Party raised election campaign money, saying all parties used the same methods. The prime minister retained the support of her party, which issued a statement backing her.\n\nAfter news of the verdict spread, hundreds of supporters demonstrated outside her house, pledging their loyalty. Indian High Commissioner to the United Kingdom Braj Kumar Nehru said Gandhi's conviction would not harm her political career. \"Mrs Gandhi has still today overwhelming support in the country,\" he said. \"I believe the prime minister of India will continue in office until the electorate of India decides otherwise\".\n\nGandhi moved to restore order by ordering the arrest of most of the opposition participating in the unrest. Her Cabinet and government then recommended that President Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed declare a state of emergency because of the disorder and lawlessness following the Allahabad High Court decision. Accordingly, Ahmed declared a State of Emergency caused by internal disorder, based on the provisions of Article 352(1) of the Constitution, on 25 June 1975.\n\nWithin a few months, President's rule was imposed on the two opposition party ruled states of Gujarat and Tamil Nadu thereby bringing the entire country under direct Central rule or by governments led by the ruling Congress party. Police were granted powers to impose curfews and indefinitely detain citizens and all publications were subjected to substantial censorship by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. Finally, the impending legislative assembly elections were indefinitely postponed, with all opposition-controlled state governments being removed by virtue of the constitutional provision allowing for a dismissal of a state government on recommendation of the state's governor.\n\nIndira Gandhi used the emergency provisions to change conflicting party members:\nPresident Ahmed issued ordinances that did not require debate in the Parliament, allowing Gandhi to rule by decree.\n\nThe Emergency saw the entry of Gandhi's younger son, Sanjay Gandhi, into Indian politics. Sanjay wielded tremendous power during the emergency without holding any Government office. According to Mark Tully, \"His inexperience did not stop him from using the Draconian powers his mother, Indira Gandhi, had taken to terrorise the administration, setting up what was in effect a police state.\"\n\nIt was said that during the Emergency he virtually ran India along with his friends, especially Bansi Lal. It was also quipped that Sanjay Gandhi had total control over his mother and that the government was run by the PMH (Prime Minister House) rather than the PMO (Prime Minister Office).\n\nIn 1977, after extending the state of emergency twice, Indira Gandhi called elections to give the electorate a chance to vindicate her rule. Gandhi may have grossly misjudged her popularity by reading what the heavily censored press wrote about her. In any case, she was opposed by the Janata alliance of Opposition parties. The alliance was made up of Bharatiya Jana Sangh, Congress (O), The Socialist parties, and Charan Singh's Bharatiya Kranti Dal representing northern peasant and farmers. Janata alliance, with Jai Prakash Narayan as its spiritual guide, claimed the elections were the last chance for India to choose between \"democracy and dictatorship.\" The Congress Party split during the election campaign of 1977: veteran Indira supporters like Jagjivan Ram, Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna and Nandini Satpathy were compelled to part ways and form a new political entity, CFD (Congress for Democracy), primarily due to intra-party politicking and also due to circumstances created by Sanjay Gandhi. The prevailing rumour was that Sanjay had intentions of dislodging Gandhi and the trio stood between that. Gandhi's Congress party was crushed soundly in the elections. The public realized the statement and motto of the Janata Party alliance. Indira and Sanjay Gandhi both lost their seats, and Congress was cut down to 153 seats (compared with 350 in the previous Lok Sabha), 92 of which were in the South. The Janata alliance, under the leadership of Morarji Desai, came into power after the State of Emergency was lifted. The alliance parties later merged to form the Janata Party under the guidance of Gandhian leader, Jayaprakash Narayan. The other leaders of the Janata Party were Charan Singh, Raj Narain, George Fernandes and Atal Bihari Vajpayee.\n\nSince Gandhi had lost her seat in the election, the defeated Congress party appointed Yashwantrao Chavan as their parliamentary party leader. Soon afterwards, the Congress party split again with Gandhi floating her own Congress faction. She won a by-election from the Chikmagalur Constituency to the Lok Sabha in November 1978 after Janata Party's attempts to have Kannada matinee idol Rajkumar to contest against her failed when he refused to contest elections saying he wanted to remain apolitical. However, the Janata government's Home Minister, Choudhary Charan Singh, ordered the arrest of her and Sanjay Gandhi on several charges, none of which would be easy to prove in an Indian court. The arrest meant that Indira Gandhi was automatically expelled from Parliament. These allegations included that she \"had planned or thought of killing all opposition leaders in jail during the Emergency\". In response to her arrest, Indira Gandhi's supporters hijacked an Indian Airlines jet and demanded her immediate release. However, this strategy backfired disastrously. Her arrest and long-running trial gained her great sympathy from many people. The Janata coalition was only united by its hatred of Gandhi (or \"that woman\" as some called her). The party included right wing Hindu Nationalists, Socialists and former Congress party members. With so little in common, the Morarji Desai government was bogged down by infighting. In 1979, the government started to unravel over the issue of dual loyalties of some members to Janata and the RSS. The ambitious Union Finance minister, Charan Singh, who as the Union Home Minister during the previous year had ordered arrest of Gandhi, took advantage of this and started courting the Congress. After a significant exodus from the party to Charan Singh's faction, Desai resigned in July 1979. Charan Singh was appointed Prime Minister, by President Reddy, after Indira and Sanjay Gandhi promised Singh that Congress would support his government from outside on certain conditions. The conditions included dropping all charges against Indira and Sanjay. Since Charan Singh refused to drop the charges, Congress withdrew its support and President Reddy dissolved Parliament in August 1979.\n\nBefore the 1980 elections Gandhi approached the then Shahi Imam of Jama Masjid, Syed Abdullah Bukhari and entered into an agreement with him on the basis of 10-point programme to secure the support of the Muslim votes. In the elections held in January, Congress returned to power with a landslide majority.\n\nThe Congress under Gandhi swept back to power in January 1980. In this election, Gandhi was elected from the Medak constituency. Elections soon after to legislative assemblies in States ruled by opposition parties brought back Congress ministries to those states. Indira's son, Sanjay Gandhi selected his own loyalists to head the governments in these states. On 23 June, Gandhi's son Sanjay was killed in an air crash while performing an aerobatic manoeuvre in New Delhi. In 1980, as tribute to her son's dream of launching an indigenously manufactured car, Gandhi nationalized Sanjay's debt ridden company called Maruti Udyog for Rs. 4.34 crore and invited joint venture bids from automobile companies around the world. Suzuki of Japan was selected as the partner. The company launched its first Indian manufactured car in 1984.\n\nGandhi, by the time of Sanjay's death, trusted only family members, and therefore persuaded her reluctant son, Rajiv, to enter politics.\n\nHer staff at the Prime Ministers Office (PMO) included H.Y.Sharada Prasad as her information adviser and speech writer.\n\nIn the 1977 elections, a coalition led by the Sikh-majority Akali Dal came to power in the northern Indian state of Punjab. In an effort to split the Akali Dal and gain popular support among the Sikhs, Indira Gandhi's Congress helped bring the orthodox religious leader Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale to prominence in Punjab politics. Later, Bhindranwale's organisation Damdami Taksal became embroiled in violence with another religious sect called the Sant Nirankari Mission, and he was accused of instigating the murder of Jagat Narain, the owner of \"Punjab Kesari\" newspaper. After being arrested in this matter, Bhindranwale disassociated himself from Congress and joined hands with the Akali Dal. In July 1982, he led the campaign for the implementation of the Anandpur Resolution, which demanded greater autonomy for the Sikh-majority state. Meanwhile, a small section of the Sikhs, including some of Bhindranwale's followers, turned to militancy after being targeted by government officials and police in support of the Resolution. In 1982, Bhindranwale and approximately 200 armed followers moved into a guest house called the Guru Nanak Niwas, in the precinct of the Golden Temple.\n\nBy 1983, the Temple complex had become a fort for a large number of militants. \"The Statesman\" later reported that light machine guns and semi-automatic rifles were known to have been brought into the compound. On 23 April 1983, the Punjab Police Deputy Inspector General A. S. Atwal was shot dead as he left the Temple compound. The following day, Harchand Singh Longowal (then president of Shiromani Akali Dal) confirmed the involvement of Bhindranwale in the murder.\n\nAfter several futile negotiations, Indira Gandhi ordered the Indian army in June 1984 to enter the Golden Temple in order to remove Bhindranwale and his supporters from the complex. The army used heavy artillery, including tanks, in the action code-named Operation Blue Star. The operation badly damaged or destroyed parts of the Temple complex, including the Akal Takht shrine and the Sikh library. It also led to the deaths of a large number of Sikh fighters and innocent pilgrims. The number of casualties remain disputed with estimates ranging from many hundreds to many thousands\n\nGandhi was accused of using the attack for political ends. Dr. Harjinder Singh Dilgeer stated that Indira Gandhi attacked the temple complex to present herself as a great hero in order to win general elections planned towards the end of 1984. There was fierce criticism of the action by Sikhs in India and overseas. There were also incidents of mutiny by Sikh soldiers in the aftermath of the attack.\n\nThe day before her death (30 October 1984), Gandhi visited Orissa where she gave her last speech at the then Parade Ground in front of the Secretariat of Orissa. In that speech, she strikingly associated her blood with the health of the nation: \"I am alive today, I may not be there tomorrow...I shall continue to serve until my last breath and when I die, I can say, that every drop of my blood will invigorate India and strengthen it... Even if I died in the service of the nation, I would be proud of it. Every drop of my blood... will contribute to the growth of this nation and to make it strong and dynamic.\"\n\nOn 31 October 1984, two of Gandhi's bodyguards, Satwant Singh and Beant Singh, shot her with their service weapons in the garden of the Prime Minister's residence at 1 Safdarjung Road, New Delhi. The shooting occurred as she was walking past a wicket gate guarded by Satwant and Beant. She was to be interviewed by the British actor Peter Ustinov, who was filming a documentary for Irish television. Beant Singh shot her three times using his side-arm and Satwant Singh fired 30 rounds. Beant Singh and Satwant Singh dropped their weapons and surrendered. Afterwards, they were taken away by other guards into a closed room where Beant Singh was shot dead. Kehar Singh was later arrested for conspiracy in the attack. Both Satwant and Kehar were sentenced to death and hanged in Delhi's Tihar Jail.\n\nIndira Gandhi was brought at 9:30 am to the All India Institutes of Medical Sciences where doctors operated on her. She was declared dead at 2:20 pm. The post-mortem examination was conducted by a team of doctors headed by Dr. Tirath Das Dogra. Dr Dogra stated that as many as 30 bullet wounds were sustained by Indira Gandhi, from two sources, a Sterling submachine gun and a pistol. The assailants had fired 31 bullets at her, of which 30 had hit; 23 had passed through her body while 7 were trapped inside her. Dr Dogra extracted bullets to establish the identity of the weapons and to match each weapon with the bullets recovered by ballistic examination. The bullets were matched with respective weapons at CFSL Delhi. Subsequently, Dr Dogra appeared in the court of Shri Mahesh Chandra as an expert witness (PW-5), and his testimony lasted several sessions. The cross examination was conducted by Shri Pran Nath Lekhi, the defence counsel. Salma Sultan gave the first news of the assassination of Indira Gandhi on Doordarshan's evening news on 31 October 1984, more than 10 hours after she was shot. \n\nGandhi was cremated on 3 November near Raj Ghat. The site where she was cremated is today known as Shakti Sthal. After her death, the Parade Ground was converted to the Indira Gandhi Park which was inaugurated by her son, Rajiv Gandhi.\n\nHer funeral was televised live on domestic and international stations, including the BBC. Following her cremation, millions of Sikhs were displaced and nearly three thousand were killed in anti-Sikh riots. Rajiv Gandhi on a live TV show said of the carnage, \"When a big tree falls, the earth shakes.\"\n\nGandhi is remembered for her ability to effectively promote Indian foreign policy measures.\n\nIn early 1971, disputed elections in Pakistan led the then East Pakistan to declare independence as Bangladesh. Repression and violence by the Pakistani army led 10 million refugees to cross border in to India over the coming months. Finally in December 1971, Gandhi directly intervened in the conflict to liberate Bangladesh. India emerged victorious in the resulting conflict to become the dominant power of South Asia. India had signed a treaty with the Soviet Union promising mutual assistance in the case of war, while Pakistan received active support from the United States during the conflict. U.S. President Richard Nixon disliked Gandhi personally, referring to her as a \"witch\" and \"clever fox\" in his private communication with Secretary of State Henry Kissinger. Nixon later wrote of the war: \"[Gandhi] suckered [America]. Suckered us...this woman suckered us.\". Relations with the U.S. became distant as Gandhi developed closer ties with the Soviet Union after the war. The latter grew to become India's largest trading partner and its biggest arms supplier for much of Gandhi's premiership. India's new hegemonic position as articulated under the \"Indira Doctrine\" led to attempts to bring the Himalayan states under the Indian sphere of influence. Nepal and Bhutan remained aligned with India, while in 1975, after years of building up support, Gandhi incorporated Sikkim into India, after a referendum in which a majority of Sikkimese voted to join India. This was denounced as a \"despicable act\" by China.\n\nIndia maintained close ties with neighbouring Bangladesh (formerly East Pakistan) following the Liberation War. Prime Minister Sheikh Mujibur Rahman recognized Gandhi's contributions to the independence of Bangladesh. However, Mujibur Rahman's pro-India policies antagonised many in Bangladeshi politics and the military, who feared that Bangladesh had become a client state of India. The Assassination of Mujibur Rahman in 1975 led to the establishment of Islamist military regimes that sought to distance the country from India. Gandhi's relationship with the military regimes was strained, due to her alleged support of anti-Islamist leftist guerrilla forces in Bangladesh. Generally, however, there was a rapprochement between Gandhi and the Bangladeshi regimes, although issues such as border disputes and the Farakka Dam remained an irritant in bilateral ties. In 2011, the Government of Bangladesh conferred its highest state award posthumously on Gandhi for her \"outstanding contribution\" to the country's independence.\n\nGandhi's approach to dealing with Sri Lanka's ethnic problems was initially accommodating. She enjoyed cordial relations with Prime Minister Sirimavo Bandaranaike. In 1974, India ceded the tiny islet of Katchatheevu to Sri Lanka in order to save Bandaranaike's socialist government from a political disaster. However, relations soured over Sri Lanka's turn away from socialism under J. R. Jayewardene, whom Gandhi despised as a \"western puppet.\" India under Gandhi was alleged to have supported LTTE militants in the 1980s to put pressure on Jayewardene to abide by Indian interests. Nevertheless, Gandhi rejected demands to invade Sri Lanka in the aftermath of Black July 1983, an anti-Tamil pogrom carried out by Sinhalese mobs. Gandhi made a statement emphasizing that she stood for the territorial integrity of Sri Lanka, although she also stated that India cannot \"remain a silent spectator to any injustice done to the Tamil community.\"\n\nIndia's relationship with Pakistan remained strained following the Shimla Accord in 1972. Gandhi's authorization of the detonation of a nuclear device at Pokhran in 1974 was viewed by Pakistani leader Zulfikar Ali Bhutto as an attempt to intimidate Pakistan into accepting India's hegemony in the subcontinent. However, in May 1976, Gandhi and Bhutto both agreed to reopen diplomatic establishments and normalize relations. Following the rise to power of General Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq in Pakistan in 1978, India's relations with its neighbour reached a nadir. Gandhi accused General Zia of supporting Khalistani militants in Punjab. Military hostilities recommenced in 1984 following Gandhi's authorization of Operation Meghdoot. India was victorious in the resulting Siachen conflict against Pakistan.\n\nIn order to keep the Soviet Union and the United States out of South Asia, Mrs Gandhi was instrumental in establishing the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) in 1983\n\nGandhi remained a staunch supporter of Palestinians in the Arab–Israeli conflict and was critical of the Middle East diplomacy sponsored by the United States. Israel was viewed as a religious state and thus an analogue to India's archrival Pakistan. Indian diplomats also hoped to win Arab support in countering Pakistan in Kashmir. Nevertheless, Gandhi authorized the development of a secret channel of contact and security assistance with Israel in the late 1960s. Her lieutenant, P. V. Narasimha Rao, later became Prime Minister and approved full diplomatic ties with Israel in 1992.\n\nIndia's pro-Arab policy had mixed success. Establishment of close ties with the socialist and secular Baathist regimes to some extent neutralized Pakistani propaganda against India. However, the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971 put the Arab and Muslim states of the Middle East in a dilemma as the war was fought by two states both friendly to the Arabs. The progressive Arab regimes in Egypt, Syria, and Algeria chose to remain neutral, while the conservative pro-American Arab monarchies in Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and United Arab Emirates openly supported Pakistan. Egypt's stance was met with dismay by the Indians, who had come to expect close co-operation with the Baathist regimes. But, the death of Nasser in 1970 and Sadat's growing friendship with Riyadh, and his mounting differences with Moscow, constrained Egypt to a policy of neutrality. Gandhi's overtures to Muammar Gaddafi were rebuffed. Libya agreed with the Arab monarchies in believing that Gandhi's intervention in East Pakistan was an attack against Islam.\n\nThe 1971 war temporarily became a stumbling block in growing Indo-Iranian ties. Although Iran had earlier characterized the Indo-Pakistani war in 1965 as Indian aggression, the Shah had launched an effort at rapprochement with India in 1969 as part of his effort to secure support for a larger Iranian role in the Persian Gulf. Gandhi's tilt towards Moscow and her dismemberment of Pakistan was perceived by the Shah as part of a larger anti-Iran conspiracy involving India, Iraq, and the Soviet Union. Nevertheless, Iran had resisted Pakistani pressure to activate the Baghdad Pact and draw in the Central Treaty Organisation (CENTO) into the conflict. Gradually, Indian and Iranian disillusionment with their respective regional allies led to a renewed partnership between the nations. Gandhi was unhappy with the lack of support from India's Arab allies during the war with Pakistan, while the Shah was apprehensive at the growing friendship between Pakistan and Arab states of the Persian Gulf, specially Saudi Arabia, and the growing influence of Islam in Pakistani society. There was an increase in Indian economic and military co-operation with Iran during the 1970s. The 1974 India-Iranian agreement led to Iran supplying nearly 75 percent of India's crude oil demands. Gandhi appreciated the Shah's disregard of Pan-Islamism in diplomacy.\n\nOne of the major developments in Southeast Asia during Gandhi's premiership was the formation of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in 1967. Relations between ASEAN and India was mutually antagonistic. ASEAN in the Indian perception was linked to the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO), and it was therefore, seen as a pro-American organisation. On their part, the ASEAN nations were unhappy with Gandhi's sympathy for the Viet Cong and India's strong links with the USSR. Furthermore, they were also apprehensions in the region about Gandhi's future plans, particularly after India played a big role in breaking up Pakistan and facilitating in the emergence of Bangladesh as a sovereign country in 1971. India's entry into the nuclear weapons club in 1974 contributed to tensions in Southeast Asia. Relations only began to improve following Gandhi's endorsement of the ZOPFAN declaration and the disintegration of the SEATO alliance in the aftermath of Pakistani and American defeats in the region. Nevertheless, Gandhi's close relations with reunified Vietnam and her decision to recognize the Vietnam installed Government of Cambodia in 1980 meant that India and ASEAN were not able to develop a viable partnership.\n\nOn 26 September 1981, Indira was conferred with the Honorory Degree of Doctor at the Laucala Graduation at the University of the South Pacific in Fiji.\n\nAlthough independent India was initially viewed as a champion of anti-colonialism, its cordial relationship with the Commonwealth of Nations and liberal views of British colonial policies in East Africa had harmed its image as a staunch supporter of the anti-colonial movements. Indian condemnation of militant struggles in Kenya and Algeria was in sharp contrast to China, who had supported armed struggle to win African independence. After reaching a high diplomatic point in the aftermath of Nehru's role in the Suez Crisis, India's isolation from Africa was complete when only four nations; Ethiopia, Kenya, Nigeria and Libya supported her during the Sino-Indian War in 1962. After Gandhi became Prime Minister, diplomatic and economic relations with the states which had sided with India during the Sino-Indian War were expanded. Gandhi began negotiations with the Kenyan government to establish the Africa-India Development Cooperation. The Indian government also started considering the possibility of bringing Indians settled in Africa within the framework of its policy goals to help recover its declining geo-strategic influence. Gandhi declared the people of Indian origin settled in Africa as \"Ambassadors of India.\" Efforts to rope in the Asian community to join Indian diplomacy, however, came to naught, partly because of the unwillingness of Indians to remain in politically insecure surroundings and partly due to the exodus of African Indians to Britain with the passing of the Commonwealth Immigrants Act in 1968. In Uganda, the African Indian community even suffered persecution and eventually expulsion under the government of Idi Amin.\n\nForeign and domestic policy successes in the 1970s enabled Gandhi to rebuild India's image in the eyes of African states. Victory over Pakistan and India's possession of nuclear weapons showed the degree of India's progress. Furthermore, the conclusion of the Indo-Soviet treaty in 1971 and threatening gestures by the major western power, the United States, to send its nuclear armed Task Force 74 into the Bay of Bengal at the height of the East Pakistan crisis had enabled India to regain its anti-imperialist image. Gandhi firmly tied Indian anti-imperialist interests in Africa to those of the Soviet Union. Unlike Nehru, she openly and enthusiastically supported liberation struggles in Africa. At the same time, Chinese influence in Africa had declined owing to its incessant quarrels with the Soviet Union. These developments permanently halted India's decline in Africa and helped reestablish its geo-strategic presence.\n\nThe Commonwealth is voluntary association of mainly former British colonies. India maintained cordial relations with most of the members during Indira Gandhi's time in power. In the 1980s, Indira Gandhi along with Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau, Zambia's President Kenneth Kaunda, Australian prime minister Malcolm Fraser and Singapore Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew was regarded as one of the pillars of the commonwealth India under Indira also hosted the 1983 Commonwealth heads of Government summit in New Delhi in 1983. Gandhi used to use the Commonwealth meetings as a forum to put pressure on member countries to cut economic, sports, and cultural ties with Apartheid South Africa \n\nIn the early 1980s under Gandhi, India attempted to reassert its prominent role in the Non-Aligned Movement by focusing on the relationship between disarmament and economic development. By appealing to the economic grievances of developing countries, Gandhi and her successors exercised a moderating influence on the Non-aligned movement, diverting it from some of the Cold War issues that marred the controversial 1979 Havana meeting where Cuban leader Fidel Castro attempted to steer the movement towards the Soviet Union. Although hosting the 1983 summit at Delhi boosted Indian prestige within the movement, its close relations with the Soviet Union and its pro-Soviet positions on Afghanistan and Cambodia limited its influence.\n\nIndira spent a number of years in Europe during her youth and formed many friendships during her stay there. During her premiership she formed friendships with many leaders such as West German chancellor, Willy Brandt and Austrian chancellor Bruno Kreisky. She also enjoyed closed working relationship with many British leaders including conservative premiers, Edward Heath and Margaret Thatcher.\n\nThe relationship between India and the Soviet Union deepened during Gandhi's rule. The main reason was the perceived bias of United States and China, the rivals of USSR, towards Pakistan. The support of the Soviets with arms supplies and casting of veto at United Nations helped in winning and consolidating the victory over Pakistan in the 1971 Bangladesh liberation war. Prior to the war Indira signed a treaty of friendship with the Soviets. The Soviets were not happy with the 1974 nuclear test conducted by India but did not support further action because of the ensuing Cold War with the United States. Indira was not happy with the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan but once again calculations involving relations with Pakistan and China kept from criticizing the Soviet Union harshly. The Soviets became the main arms supplier during the Indira years by offering cheap credit and transactions in rupees rather than in dollars. The easy trade deals also applied to non-military goods. Under Indira by the early 1980s the Soviets became the largest trading partner of India.\n\nWhen Indira came to power in 1966, Lyndon Johnson was the US president. At that time, India was reliant on US for food aid. Indira resented the US policy of food aid as a tool in forcing India to adopt policies favored by the US. She also resolutely refused to sign the NPT (Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons). Relations with US strained badly under President Richard Nixon and his favoring of Pakistan during the Bangladesh liberation war. Nixon despised Indira politically and personally. Indira met President Ronald Reagan in 1981 for the first time at the North–South Summit held to discuss global poverty. Indira had been described to him as an 'Ogre' but he found her charming and easy to work with and they formed a close working relationship during her premiership in the 1980s.\n\nGandhi presided over three Five-Year Plans as Prime Minister, two of which succeeded in meeting the targeted growth.\n\nThere is considerable debate regarding whether Gandhi was a socialist on principle or out of political expediency. Sunanda K. Datta-Ray described her as \"a master of rhetoric...often more posture than policy\", while \"The Times\" journalist, Peter Hazelhurst, famously quipped that Gandhi's socialism was \"slightly left of self-interest.\" Critics have focused on the contradictions in the evolution of her stance towards communism; Gandhi being known for her anti-communist stance in the 1950s with Meghnad Desai even describing her as \"the scourge of [India's] Communist Party.\" Yet, she later forged close relations with Indian communists even while using the army to break the Naxalites. In this context, Gandhi was accused of formulating populist policies to suit her political needs; being seemingly against the rich and big business while preserving the status quo in order to manipulate the support of the left at times of political insecurity, such as the late 1960s. Although Gandhi came to be viewed in time as the scourge of the right-wing and reactionary political elements of India, leftist opposition to her policies emerged. As early as 1969, critics had begun accusing her of insincerity and machiavellianism. \"The Indian Libertarian\" wrote that: \"it would be difficult to find a more machiavellian leftist than Mrs Indira Gandhi...for here is Machiavelli at its best in the person of a suave, charming and astute politician.\" Rosser wrote that \"some have even seen the declaration of emergency rule in 1975 as a move to suppress [leftist] dissent against Gandhi's policy shift to the right.\" In the 1980s, Gandhi was accused of \"betraying socialism\" after the beginning of \"Operation Forward\", an attempt at economic reform. Nevertheless, others were more convinced of Gandhi's sincerity and devotion to socialism. Pankaj Vohra noted that \"even the late prime minister's critics would concede that the maximum number of legislations of social significance was brought about during her tenure...[and that] she lives in the hearts of millions of Indians who shared her concern for the poor and weaker sections and who supported her politics.\"\n\nIn summarizing the biographical works on Gandhi, Blema S. Steinberg concluded she was decidedly non-ideological. Only 7.4% (24) of the total 330 biographical extractions posit ideology as a reason for her policy choices. Steinberg noted Gandhi's association with socialism was superficial; only having a general and traditional commitment to the ideology, by way of her political and family ties. Gandhi personally had a fuzzy concept of socialism. In one of the early interviews she had given as Prime Minister, Gandhi had ruminated: \"I suppose you could call me a socialist, but you have understand what we mean by that term...we used the word [socialism] because it came closest to what we wanted to do here – which is to eradicate poverty. You can call it socialism; but if by using that word we arouse controversy, I don't see why we should use it. I don't believe in words at all.\" Regardless of the debate over her ideology or lack of thereof, Gandhi remains a left-wing icon. She has been described by Hindustan Times columnist, Pankaj Vohra as \"arguably the greatest mass leader of the last century.\" Her campaign slogan, \"Garibi Hatao\" ('Remove Poverty'), has become the iconic motto of the Indian National Congress. To the rural and urban poor, untouchables, minorities and women in India, Gandhi was \"Indira Amma or Mother Indira.\"\n\nGandhi inherited a weak and troubled economy. Fiscal problems associated with the war with Pakistan in 1965, along with a drought-induced food crisis that spawned famines, had plunged India into the sharpest recession since independence. The government responded by taking steps to liberalize the economy, and by agreeing to the devaluation of the currency in return for the restoration of foreign aid. The economy managed to recover in 1966 and ended up growing at 4.1% over 1966–1969. But, much of that growth was offset by the fact that the external aid promised by the United States government and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), meant to ease the short-run costs of adjustment to a liberalized economy, never materialized. American policy makers had complained of continued restrictions imposed on the economy. At the same time, Indo-US relations were straining due to Gandhi's criticism of the American bombing campaign in Vietnam. While it was thought, at the time, and for decades after, that President Johnson's policy of withholding food grain shipments was to coerce Indian support for the war, in fact, it was to offer India rainmaking technology that he wanted to use as a counterweight to China's possession of the atomic bomb. In light of the circumstances, liberalization became politically suspect and was soon abandoned. Grain diplomacy and currency devaluation became matters of intense national pride in India. After the bitter experience with Johnson, Gandhi decided not to request food aid in the future. Moreover, Gandhi's government resolved never again to become \"so vulnerably dependent\" on aid, and painstakingly began building up substantial foreign exchange reserves. When food stocks slumped after poor harvests in 1972, the government made it a point to use foreign exchange to buy US wheat commercially rather than seek resumption of food aid.\n\nThe period of 1967–75 was characterized by socialist ascendency in India which culminated in 1976 with the official declaration of state socialism. Gandhi not only abandoned the short lived liberalization programme but also aggressively expanded the public sector with new licensing requirements and other restrictions for industry. She began a new course by launching the Fourth Five-Year Plan in 1969. The government targeted growth at 5.7% while stating as its goals, \"growth with stability and progressive achievement of self-reliance.\" The rationale behind the overall plan was Gandhi's \"Ten Point Programme\" of 1967. This had been her first economic policy formulation, six months after coming to office. The programme emphasized greater state control of the economy with the understanding that government control assured greater welfare than private control. Related to this point were a set of policies which were meant to regulate the private sector. By the end of the 1960s, the reversal of the liberalization process was complete, and India's policies were characterised as \"protectionist as ever.\"\n\nTo deal with India's food problems, Gandhi expanded the emphasis on production of inputs to agriculture that had already been initiated by her father, Jawaharlal Nehru. The Green Revolution in India subsequently culminated under her government in the 1970s and transformed the country from a nation heavily reliant on imported grains and prone to famine to being largely able to feed itself, and become successful in achieving its goal of food security. Gandhi had a personal motive in pursuing agricultural self-sufficiency, having found India's dependency on the U.S. for shipments of grains humiliating.\n\nThe economic period of 1967–75 became significant for its major wave of nationalisations amidst the increased regulation of the private sector.\n\nSome of the other objectives of the economic plan for the period was to provide for the minimum needs of the community through a rural works program and the removal of the privy purses of the nobility. Both these, and many other goals of the 1967 program were accomplished by 1974–75. Nevertheless, the success of the overall economic plan was tempered by the fact that annual growth at 3.3–3.4% over 1969–74 fell short of the targeted figure.\n\nThe Fifth Five-Year Plan (1974–79) was enacted in the backdrop of the state of emergency and the \"Twenty Point Program\" of 1975. The latter was the economic rationale of the emergency, a political act which has often been justified on economic grounds. In contrast to the reception of Gandhi's earlier economic plan, this one was criticized for being a \"hastily thrown together wish list.\" Gandhi promised to reduce poverty by targeting the consumption levels of the poor and enact wide-ranging social and economic reforms. The government additionally targeted an annual growth of 4.4% over the period of the plan.\n\nThe measures of the emergency regime was able to halt the economic trouble of the early to mid-1970s, which had been marred by harvest failures, fiscal contraction, and the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system of fixed exchanged rate; the resulting turbulence in the foreign exchange markets being further accentuated by the oil shock of 1973. The government was even able to exceed the targeted growth figure with an annual growth rate of 5.0–5.2% over the five-year period of the plan (1974–79). The economy grew at the rate of 9% in 1975–76 alone, and the Fifth Plan, became the first plan during which the per capita income of the economy grew by over 5%.\n\nGandhi inherited a weak economy when she again became Prime Minister in 1980. The preceding year in 1979–80 under the Janata Party government had led to the strongest recession (−5.2%) in the history of modern India with inflation rampant at 18.2%. Gandhi proceeded to abrogate the Janata Party government's Five-Year Plan in 1980 and launched the Sixth Five-Year Plan (1980–85). The government targeted an average growth of 5.2% over the period of the plan. Measures to check the inflation were also taken; by the early 1980s inflation was under control at an annual rate of about 5%.\n\nAlthough Gandhi continued professing socialist beliefs, the Sixth Five-Year Plan was markedly different from the years of Garibi Hatao. Populist programs and policies were replaced by pragmatism. There was an emphasis on tightening public expenditures, greater efficiency of the state-owned enterprises (SOE), which Gandhi qualified as a \"sad thing\", and in stimulating the private sector through deregulation and liberation of the capital market. The government subsequently launched \"Operation Forward\" in 1982, the first cautious attempt at reform. The Sixth Plan went on to become the most successful of the Five-Year Plans yet; showing an average growth of 5.7% over 1980–85.\n\nDuring Lal Bahadur Shastri's last full year in office (1965), inflation averaged 7.7%, compared to 5.2% at the end of Gandhi's first stint in office (1977). On average, inflation in India had remained below 7% through the 1950s and 1960s. But, it then accelerated sharply in the 1970s, from 5.5% in 1970–71 to over 20% by 1973–74, due to the international oil crisis. Gandhi declared inflation the gravest of problems in 1974 (at 25.2%) and devised a severe anti-inflation program. The government was successful in bringing down inflation during the emergency; achieving negative figures of −1.1% by the end of 1975–76.\n\nGandhi inherited a tattered economy in her second term; harvest failures and a second oil shock in the late 1970s had again caused inflation to rise. During Charan Singh's short reign in office in the second half of 1979, inflation averaged 18.2%, compared to 6.5% during Gandhi's last year in office (1984). General economic recovery under Gandhi led to an average inflation at 6.5% from 1981–82 to 1985–86; the lowest since the beginning of India's inflation problems in the 1960s.\n\nUnemployment stayed constant at 9% over a nine-year period (1971–80) before declining to 8.3% in 1983.\n\nDespite the provisions, control and regulations of Reserve Bank of India, most banks in India had continued to be owned and operated by private persons. Businessmen who owned the banks were often accused of channeling the deposits into their own companies, and ignoring the priority sector. Furthermore, there was a great resentment against \"class\" banking in India, which had left the poor (the majority population) unbanked. After becoming Prime Minister, Gandhi expressed the intention of nationalising the banks in a paper titled, \"\"Stray thoughts on Bank Nationalisation\"\" in order to alleviate poverty. The paper received the overwhelming support of the public. In 1969, Gandhi moved to nationalise fourteen major commercial banks. After the nationalisation of banks, the branches of the public sector banks in India rose to approximate 800 percent in deposits, and advances took a huge jump by 11,000 percent. Nationalisation also resulted in a significant growth in the geographical coverage of banks; the number of bank branches rose from 8,200 to over 62,000, most of which were opened in the unbanked, rural areas. The nationalization drive not only helped to increase household savings, but it also provided considerable investments in the informal sector, in small and medium-sized enterprises, and in agriculture, and contributed significantly to regional development and to the expansion of India's industrial and agricultural base. Jayaprakash Narayan, who became famous for leading the opposition to Gandhi in the 1970s, was solid in his praise for her bank nationalisations.\n\nHaving been re-elected in 1971 on a nationalisation platform, Gandhi proceeded to nationalise the coal, steel, copper, refining, cotton textiles, and insurance industries. Most of these nationalisations were made to protect employment and the interest of the organised labour. The remaining private sector industries were placed under strict regulatory control.\n\nDuring the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971, foreign-owned private oil companies had refused to supply fuel to the Indian Navy and Indian Air Force. In response, Gandhi nationalised oil companies in 1973. After nationalisation the oil majors such as the Indian Oil Corporation (IOC), the Hindustan Petroleum Corporation (HPCL) and the Bharat Petroleum Corporation (BPCL) had to keep a minimum stock level of oil, to be supplied to the military when needed.\n\nIn 1966, Gandhi accepted the demands of the Akalis to reorganize Punjab on linguistic lines. The Hindi-speaking southern half of Punjab became a separate state, Haryana, while the Pahari speaking hilly areas in the north east were joined to Himachal Pradesh. In doing so, she had hoped to ward off the growing political conflict between Hindu and Sikh groups in the region. However, a contentious issue that was considered unresolved by the Akalis was the status of Chandigarh, a prosperous city on the Punjab-Haryana border, which Gandhi declared a union territory to be shared as a capital by both the states.\n\nVictory over Pakistan in 1971 consolidated Indian power in Kashmir. Gandhi indicated that she would make no major concessions on Kashmir. The most prominent of the Kashmiri separatists, Sheikh Abdullah, had to recognize India's control over Kashmir in light of the new order in South Asia. The situation was normalized in the years following the war after Abdullah agreed to an accord with Gandhi, by giving up the demand for a plebiscite in return for a special autonomous status for Kashmir. In 1975, Gandhi declared the state of Jammu and Kashmir as a constituent unit of India. The Kashmir conflict remained largely peaceful if frozen under Gandhi's premiership.\n\nIn 1972, Gandhi granted statehood to Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura, while the North-East Frontier Agency was declared a union territory and renamed Arunachal Pradesh. The transition to statehood for these territories was successfully overseen by her administration. This was followed by the annexation of Sikkim in 1975.\n\nThe principle of equal pay for equal work for both men and women was enshrined in the Indian Constitution under the Gandhi administration.\n\nGandhi questioned the continued existence of a privy purse for former rulers of princely states. She argued the case for abolition based on equal rights for all citizens and the need to reduce the government's revenue deficit. The nobility responded by rallying around the Jana Sangh and other right-wing parties that stood in opposition to Gandhi's attempts to abolish royal privileges. The motion to abolish privy purses, and the official recognition of the titles, was originally brought before the Parliament in 1970. It was passed in the Lok Sabha but felt short of the two-thirds majority in the Rajya Sabha by a single vote. Gandhi responded by having a Presidential proclamation issued; de-recognizing the princes; with this withdrawal of recognition, their claims to privy purses were also legally lost. However, the proclamation was struck down by the Supreme Court of India. In 1971, Gandhi again motioned to abolish the privy purse. This time, it was successfully passed as the 26th Amendment to the Constitution of India. Many royals tried to protest the abolition of the privy purse, primarily through campaigns to contest seats in elections. They, however, received a final setback when many of them were defeated by huge margins.\n\nGandhi claimed that only \"clear vision, iron will and the strictest discipline\" can remove poverty. She justified the imposition of the state of emergency in 1975 in the name of the socialist mission of the Congress. Armed with the power to rule by decree and without constitutional constraints, Gandhi embarked on a massive redistribution program. The provisions included rapid enforcement of land ceilings, housing for landless labourers, the abolition of bonded labour and a moratorium on the debts of the poor. North India was at the centre of the reforms; millions of acres of land were acquired and redistributed. The government was also successful in procuring houses for landless labourers; according to Frankel, three-fourths of the targeted four million houses was achieved in 1975 alone. Nevertheless, others have disputed the success of the program and criticized Gandhi for not doing enough to reform land ownership. The political economist, Jyotindra Das Gupta, cryptically questioned \"...whether or not the real supporters of land-holders were in jail or in power?\" Critics also accused Gandhi of choosing to \"talk left and act right\", referring to her concurrent pro-business decisions and endeavours. Rosser wrote that \"some have even seen the declaration of emergency rule in 1975 as a move to suppress dissent against Gandhi's policy shift to the right.\" Regardless of the controversy over the nature of the reforms, the long-term effects of the social changes gave rise to prominence of middle-ranking farmers from intermediate and lower castes in North India. The rise of these newly empowered social classes challenged the political establishment of the Hindi Belt in the years to come.\n\nUnder the Constitution of India of 1950, Hindi was to have become the official national language by 1965. This was not acceptable to many non-Hindi speaking states, who wanted the continued use of English in government. In 1967, Gandhi made a constitutional amendment that guaranteed the de facto use of both Hindi and English as official languages. This established the official government policy of bilingualism in India and satisfied the non-Hindi speaking Indian states. Gandhi thus put herself forward as a leader with a pan-Indian vision. Nevertheless, critics alleged that her stance was actually meant to weaken the position of rival Congress leaders from the northern states such as Uttar Pradesh, where there had been strong, sometimes violent, pro-Hindi agitations. Gandhi came out of the language conflicts with the strong support of the south Indian populace.\n\nIn the late 1960s and 1970s, Gandhi had the Indian army crush militant Communist uprisings in the Indian state of West Bengal. The communist insurgency in India was completely suppressed during the state of emergency.\n\nGandhi considered the north-eastern regions important, because of its strategic situation. In 1966, the Mizo uprising took place against the government of India and overran almost the whole of the Mizoram region. Gandhi ordered the Indian Army to launch massive retaliatory strikes in response. The rebellion was suppressed with the Indian Air Force even carrying out airstrikes in Aizawl; this remains the only instance of India carrying out an airstrike in its own civilian territory. The defeat of Pakistan in 1971 and the secession of East Pakistan as pro-India Bangladesh led to the collapse of the Mizo separatist movement. In 1972, after the less extremist Mizo leaders came to the negotiating table, Gandhi upgraded Mizoram to the status of a union territory. A small-scale insurgency by some militants continued into the late 1970s but was successfully dealt with by the government. The Mizo conflict was definitively resolved during the administration of Gandhi's son Rajiv. Today, Mizoram is considered as one of the most peaceful states in the north-east.\n\nResponding to the insurgency in Nagaland, Gandhi \"unleashed a powerful military offensive\" in the 1970s. Finally, a massive crackdown on the insurgents took place during the state of emergency ordered by Gandhi. The insurgents soon agreed to surrender and signed the Shillong Accord in 1975. While the agreement was considered a victory for the Indian government and ended large-scale conflicts, there has since been spurts of violence by rebel holdouts and ethnic conflict amongst the tribes.\n\nGandhi contributed and further carried out the vision of Jawaharlal Nehru, former Premier of India to develop the program. Gandhi authorised the development of nuclear weapons in 1967, in response to the \"Test No. 6\" by People's Republic of China. Gandhi saw this test as Chinese nuclear intimidation, therefore, Gandhi promoted the views of Nehru to establish India's stability and security interests as independent from those of the nuclear superpowers.\n\nThe program became fully mature in 1974, when Dr. Raja Ramanna reported to Gandhi that India had the ability to test its first nuclear weapon. Gandhi gave verbal authorisation of this test, and preparations were made in a long-constructed army base, the Indian Army Pokhran Test Range. In 1974, India successfully conducted an underground nuclear test, unofficially code named as \"\"Smiling Buddha\"\", near the desert village of Pokhran in Rajasthan. As the world was quiet by this test, a vehement protest came forward from Pakistan. Great ire was raised in Pakistan and its Prime Minister, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, described this test as \"\"Indian hegemony\"\" to intimidate Pakistan. In response to this Bhutto launched a massive campaign all over the Pakistan to make Pakistan a nuclear power. In these campaigns Bhutto asked the nation to get united and great slogans were raised such as \"hum ghaas aur pattay kha lay gay magar nuclear power ban k rhe gay (We will eat grass or leaves even go hungry but will get nuclear power)\". Gandhi directed a letter to Bhutto and, later to the world, describing the test for peaceful purposes and India's commitment to develop its programme for industrial and scientific use.\n\nShe married Feroze Gandhi at the age of 25, in 1942. Their marriage lasted 18 years, until Feroze died of a heart attack in 1960. They had two sons – Rajiv (b. 1944) and Sanjay (b. 1946). Her younger son Sanjay had initially been her chosen heir; but after his death in a flying accident in June 1980, Gandhi persuaded her reluctant elder son Rajiv to quit his job as a pilot and enter politics in February 1981. Rajiv took office as prime minister following his mother's assassination in 1984; he served until December 1989. Rajiv Gandhi himself was assassinated by a suicide bomber working on behalf of LTTE on 21 May 1991.\n\nGandhi's yoga guru, Dhirendra Brahmachari, helped her in making certain decisions and also executed certain top level political tasks on her behalf, especially from 1975 to 1977 when Gandhi \"declared a state of emergency and suspended civil liberties.\"\n\nIn 1952 in a letter to her American friend Dorothy Norman, Gandhi wrote: \"I am in no sense a feminist, but I believe in women being able to do everything...Given the opportunity to develop, capable Indian women have come to the top at once.\" While this statement appears paradoxical, it reflects Gandhi's complex feelings toward her gender and feminism. Her egalitarian upbringing with her cousins helped contribute to her sense of natural equality. \"Flying kites, climbing trees, playing marbles with her boy cousins, Indira said she hardly knew the difference between a boy and a girl until the age of twelve.\"\n\nIndira Gandhi did not often discuss her gender, but she did involve herself in women's issues before becoming the prime minister. Before her election as the Prime Minister, she became active in the organizational wing of the Congress party, working in part in the Women's Department. In 1956, Gandhi had an active role in setting up the Congress Party's Women's Section. Unsurprisingly, a lot of her involvement stemmed from her father. As an only child, Gandhi naturally stepped into the political light. And, as a woman, Gandhi naturally helped head the Women's section of the Congress Party. She often tried to organize women to involve themselves in politics. Although rhetorically Gandhi may have attempted to separate her political success from her gender, Gandhi did involve herself in women's organizations. The political parties in India paid substantial attention to Gandhi's gender before she became prime minister, hoping to use her for political gain. \nEven though men surrounded Gandhi during her upbringing, she still had a female role model as a child. Several books on Gandhi mention her interest in Joan of Arc. In her own accounts through her letters she wrote to her friend Dorothy Norman, in 1952 she wrote: \"At about eight or nine I was taken to France; Jeanne d'Arc became a great heroine of mine. She was one of the first people I read about with enthusiasm.\" Another historian recounts Indira's comparison of herself to Joan of Arc: \"Indira developed a fascination for Joan of Arc, telling her aunt, 'Someday I am going to lead my people to freedom just as Joan of Arc did! Gandhi's linking of herself to Joan of Arc presents a nice model for historians to assess Gandhi. As one writer said: \"The Indian people were her children; members of her family were the only people capable of leading them.\"\n\nGandhi had been swept up in the call for Indian independence since she was born in 1917. Thus by 1947 she was already well immersed in politics, and by 1966, when she first assumed the position of prime minister, she had held several cabinet positions in her father's office.\n\nGandhi's advocacy for women's rights began with her help in establishing the Congress Party's Women's Section. In 1956, she wrote in a letter: \"It is because of this that I am taking a much more active part in politics. I have to do a great deal of touring in order to set up the Congress Party Women's Section, and am on numerous important committees.\" Gandhi spent a great deal of time throughout the 1950s helping organize women. She wrote to Norman in 1959, irritable that women had organized around the communist cause but had not mobilized for the Indian cause: \"The women, whom I have been trying to organize for years, had always refused to come into politics. Now they are out in the field.\" Once appointed president in 1959, she \"travelled relentlessly, visiting remote parts of the country that had never before received a VIP...she talked to women, asked about child health and welfare, inquired after the crafts of the region\" Gandhi's actions throughout her ascent to power clearly reflect a desire to mobilize women. Gandhi did not see the purpose of feminism. Gandhi saw her own success as a woman, and also noted that \"Given the opportunity to develop, capable Indian women have come to the top at once.\"\n\nGandhi felt guilty about her inability to fully devote her time to her children. She noted that her main problem in office was how to balance her political duties with tending to her children, and \"stressed that motherhood was the most important part of her life.\" At another point, she went into more detail: \"To a woman, motherhood is the highest fulfilment...To bring a new being into this world, to see its perfection and to dream of its future greatness is the most moving of all experiences and fills one with wonder and exaltation.\"\n\nHer domestic initiatives did not necessarily reflect favourably on Indian women. Gandhi did not make a special effort to appoint women to cabinet positions. She did not appoint any women to full cabinet rank during her terms in office. Yet despite this, many women saw Gandhi as a symbol for feminism and an image of women's power.\n\nAfter leading India to victory against Pakistan in the Bangladesh liberation war in 1971, Prime Minister (Mrs. Indira Gandhi) recommended & President V. V. Giri awarded Mrs. Gandhi India's highest civilian honour, the Bharat Ratna.\n\nIn 2011, the Bangladesh Freedom Honour (Bangladesh Swadhinata Sammanona), Bangladesh's highest civilian award, was posthumously conferred on Indira Gandhi for her \"outstanding contributions\" to Bangladesh's Liberation War.\n\nIndira Gandhi's main legacy was standing firm in face of American pressure to defeat Pakistan and turn East Pakistan into independent Bangladesh. She was also responsible for India joining the group of countries with nuclear weapons. Despite India being officially part of the Non-Aligned Movement, she gave Indian foreign policy a tilt towards the Soviet bloc.\n\nIn 1999, Indira Gandhi was named \"Woman of the Millennium\" in an online poll organised by the BBC. In 2012, Gandhi was ranked number 7 in Outlook India's poll of the Greatest Indian. \n\nBeing at the forefront of Indian politics for decades, Gandhi left a powerful but controversial legacy on Indian politics. The main legacy of her rule was destroying internal party democracy in the Congress party. Her detractors accuse her of weakening State chief ministers and thereby weakening the federal structure, weakening independence of judiciary, and weakening her cabinet by vesting power in her secretariat and her sons. Gandhi is also associated with fostering a culture of nepotism in Indian politics and in India's institutions. She is also almost singularly associated with the period of Emergency rule and the dark period in Indian Democracy that it entailed.\nThe Congress party was a \"broad church\" during the independence movement; however, it started turning into a family firm controlled by Indira Gandhi's family during the emergency.This was characterized by servility and sycophancy towards the family which later turned into hereditary succession of Gandhi family members to power.\nHer actions in storming the Golden Temple alienated Sikhs for a very long time. One of her legacies is supposed to be the systematic corruption of all parts of India's government from the executive to the judiciary due to her sense of insecurity.\nAlthough the Maruti Udyog company was first established by Gandhi's son, Sanjay, it was under Indira that the then nationalized company came to prominence.\nShe remains the only woman ever to occupy the office of the Prime Minister of India.\n\nBULLET::::- The southernmost Indira Point (6.74678°N 93.84260°E) is named after Gandhi.\nBULLET::::- The Indira Awaas Yojana, a central government low-cost housing programme for the rural poor, was named after her.\nBULLET::::- The international airport at New Delhi is named Indira Gandhi International Airport in her honour.\nBULLET::::- The Indira Gandhi National Open University, the largest university in the world, is also named after her.\nBULLET::::- Indian National Congress established the annual Indira Gandhi Award for National Integration in 1985, given in her memory on her death anniversary.\nBULLET::::- The Indira Gandhi Memorial Trust also constituted the annual Indira Gandhi Prize.\n\nBULLET::::- Massa Ranghar\nBULLET::::- List of assassinated Indian politicians\nBULLET::::- List of elected and appointed female heads of state and government\n\n\nBULLET::::- Ved Mehta, \"A Family Affair: India Under Three Prime Ministers\" (1982)\nBULLET::::- Pupul Jayakar, \"Indira Gandhi: An Intimate Biography\" (1992)\nBULLET::::- Ramachandra Guha, \"India after Gandhi: The History of the World's Largest Democracy\" (2007)\nBULLET::::- Inder Malhotra, \"Indira Gandhi: A personal and political biography\" (1991)\nBULLET::::- Shourie, Arun (1984). Mrs Gandhi's second reign. New Delhi: Vikas.\nBULLET::::- Indira Gandhi – Iron Lady of India by Dr Sulakshi Thelikorala\nBULLET::::- Midnight's Children, Salman Rushdie\nBULLET::::- Rare pictures of Indira Gandhi\nBULLET::::- Rare letters by Indira Gandhi\nBULLET::::- Famous and Historic speeches given by Indira Gandhi\nBULLET::::- website of Indira gandhi\n"}
{"id": "15180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15180", "title": "Intergovernmentalism", "text": "Intergovernmentalism\n\nIn political science, intergovernmentalism treats states, and national governments in particular, as the primary actors in the integration process. Intergovernmentalist approaches claim to be able to explain both periods of radical change in the European Union because of converging governmental preferences and periods of inertia because of diverging national interests. Intergovernmentalism is distinguishable from realism and neorealism because of its recognition of the significance of institutionalisation in international politics and the impact of domestic politics upon governmental preferences.\n\nThe best-known example of regional integration is the European Union (EU), an economic and political intergovernmental organisation of 28 member states, all in Europe. The EU operates through a system of supranational independent institutions and intergovernmental negotiated decisions by the member states. Institutions of the EU include the European Commission, the Council of the European Union, the European Council, the Court of Justice of the European Union, the European Central Bank, the Court of Auditors, and the European Parliament. The European Parliament is elected every five years by EU citizens. The EU's \"de facto\" capital is Brussels.\n\nThe EU has developed a single market through a standardised system of laws that apply in all member states. Within the Schengen Area (which includes 22 EU and 4 non-EU European states) passport controls have been abolished. EU policies favour the free movement of people, goods, services, and capital within its boundaries, enact legislation in justice and home affairs, and maintain common policies on trade, agriculture, fisheries and regional development.\n\nA monetary union, the eurozone, was established in 1999 and is composed of 17 member states. Through the Common Foreign and Security Policy the EU has developed a role in external relations and defence. Permanent diplomatic missions have been established around the world. The EU is represented at the United Nations, the World Trade Organization, the G8 and the G-20.\n\nIntergovernmentalism represents a way for limiting the conferral of powers upon supranational institutions, halting the emergence of common policies. In the current institutional system of the EU, the European Council and the Council play the role of the institutions which have the last word about decisions and policies of the EU, institutionalizing a de facto intergovernmental control over the EU as a whole, with the possibility to give more power to a small group of states. This extreme consequence can create the condition of supremacy of someone over someone else violating the principle of a \"Union of Equals\".\n\nThe African Union (AU, or, in its other official languages, UA) is a continental intergovernmental union, similar but less integrated to the EU, consisting of 54 African states. The AU was established on 26 May 2001 in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, and launched on 9 July 2002 in South Africa to replace the Organisation of African Unity (OAU). The most important decisions of the AU are made by the Assembly of the African Union, a semi-annual meeting of the heads of state and government of its member states. The AU's secretariat, the African Union Commission, is based in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.\n\nBULLET::::- Continental Union\nBULLET::::- Continentalism\nBULLET::::- Intergovernmental organization\nBULLET::::- Liberal intergovernmentalism\nBULLET::::- Mundialization\nBULLET::::- Neofunctionalism\nBULLET::::- Union for the Mediterranean\nBULLET::::- Union of South American Nations\n"}
{"id": "15181", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15181", "title": "Individualism", "text": "Individualism\n\nIndividualism is the moral stance, political philosophy, ideology, or social outlook that emphasizes the moral worth of the individual. Individualists promote the exercise of one's goals and desires and so value independence and self-reliance and advocate that interests of the individual should achieve precedence over the state or a social group, while opposing external interference upon one's own interests by society or institutions such as the government. Individualism is often defined in contrast to totalitarianism, collectivism, and more corporate social forms.\n\nIndividualism makes the individual its focus and so starts \"with the fundamental premise that the human individual is of primary importance in the struggle for liberation.\" Anarchism, existentialism, and liberalism are examples of movements that take the human individual as a central unit of analysis. Individualism thus involves \"the right of the individual to freedom and self-realization\".\n\nIt has also been used as a term denoting \"The quality of being an individual; individuality\" related to possessing \"An individual characteristic; a quirk.\" Individualism is thus also associated with artistic and bohemian interests and lifestyles where there is a tendency towards self-creation and experimentation as opposed to tradition or popular mass opinions and behaviors, as with humanist philosophical positions and ethics.\n\nIn the English language, the word \"individualism\" was first introduced, as a pejorative, by the Owenites in the late 1830s, although it is unclear if they were influenced by Saint-Simonianism or came up with it independently. A more positive use of the term in Britain came to be used with the writings of James Elishama Smith, who was a millenarian and a Christian Israelite. Although an early Owenite socialist, he eventually rejected its collective idea of property, and found in individualism a \"universalism\" that allowed for the development of the \"original genius.\" Without individualism, Smith argued, individuals cannot amass property to increase one's happiness. William Maccall, another Unitarian preacher, and probably an acquaintance of Smith, came somewhat later, although influenced by John Stuart Mill, Thomas Carlyle, and German Romanticism, to the same positive conclusions, in his 1847 work \"Elements of Individualism\".\n\nAn individual is a person or any specific object in a collection. In the 15th century and earlier, and also today within the fields of statistics and metaphysics, individual means \"indivisible\", typically describing any numerically singular thing, but sometimes meaning \"a person.\" (q.v. \"The problem of proper names\"). From the 17th century on, individual indicates separateness, as in individualism. Individuality is the state or quality of being an individuated being; a person separated from everything with unique character by possessing his or her own needs, goals, and desires in comparison to other persons.\n\nThe principle of individuation, or \"\", describes the manner in which a thing is identified as distinguished from other things. For Carl Jung, individuation is a process of transformation, whereby the personal and collective unconscious is brought into consciousness (by means of dreams, active imagination or free association to take examples) to be assimilated into the whole personality. It is a completely natural process necessary for the integration of the psyche to take place. Jung considered individuation to be the central process of human development. In \"L'individuation psychique et collective\", Gilbert Simondon developed a theory of individual and collective individuation in which the individual subject is considered as an effect of individuation rather than a cause. Thus, the individual atom is replaced by a never-ending ontological process of individuation. Individuation is an always incomplete process, always leaving a \"pre-individual\" left-over, itself making possible future individuations. The philosophy of Bernard Stiegler draws upon and modifies the work of Gilbert Simondon on individuation and also upon similar ideas in Friedrich Nietzsche and Sigmund Freud. For Stiegler \"the \"I\", as a psychic individual, can only be thought in relationship to \"we\", which is a collective individual. The \"I\" is constituted in adopting a collective tradition, which it inherits and in which a plurality of \"I\" 's acknowledge each other's existence.\"\n\nIndividualism holds that a person taking part in society attempts to learn and discover what his or her own interests are on a personal basis, without a presumed following of the interests of a societal structure (an individualist need not be an egoist). The individualist does not follow one particular philosophy, rather creates an amalgamation of elements of many, based on personal interests in particular aspects that he/she finds of use. On a societal level, the individualist participates on a personally structured political and moral ground. Independent thinking and opinion is a common trait of an individualist. Jean-Jacques Rousseau, claims that his concept of \"general will\" in the \"social contract\" is not the simple collection of individual wills and that it furthers the interests of the individual (the constraint of law itself would be beneficial for the individual, as the lack of respect for the law necessarily entails, in Rousseau's eyes, a form of ignorance and submission to one's passions instead of the preferred autonomy of reason).\n\nSocieties and groups can differ in the extent to which they are based upon predominantly \"self-regarding\" (individualistic, and/or self-interested) behaviors, rather than \"other-regarding\" (group-oriented, and group, or society-minded) behaviors. Ruth Benedict made a distinction, relevant in this context, between \"guilt\" societies (e.g., medieval Europe) with an \"internal reference standard\", and \"shame\" societies (e.g., Japan, \"bringing shame upon one's ancestors\") with an \"external reference standard\", where people look to their peers for feedback on whether an action is \"acceptable\" or not.\n\nIndividualism is often contrasted either with totalitarianism or with collectivism, but in fact, there is a spectrum of behaviors at the societal level ranging from highly individualistic societies through mixed societies to collectivist.\n\nMethodological individualism is the view that phenomena can only be understood by examining how they result from the motivations and actions of individual agents. In economics, people's behavior is explained in terms of rational choices, as constrained by prices and incomes. The economist accepts individuals' preferences as givens. Becker and Stigler provide a forceful statement of this view:On the traditional view, an explanation of economic phenomena that reaches a difference in tastes between people or times is the terminus of the argument: the problem is abandoned at this point to whoever studies and explains tastes (psychologists? anthropologists? phrenologists? sociobiologists?). On our preferred interpretation, one never reaches this impasse: the economist continues to search for differences in prices or incomes to explain any differences or changes in behavior.\"\"\n\nAccording to an Oxford Dictionary, \"competitive individualism\" in sociology is:\n\nCompetitive individualism is a form of individualism that arises from competitive systems. The function of the system is to maintain an inequality in the society and fields of human engagement. This pins the ups and downs of a person's life onto themselves by not acknowledging a range of factors like influence of socioeconomic class, race, gender, etc. It supports the privilege theories that affirms position of certain individuals higher in the hierarchy of ranks at the expense of others. For better individuality cooperation is considered to be a better remedy for personal growth.\n\nIndividualists are chiefly concerned with protecting individual autonomy against obligations imposed by social institutions (such as the state or religious morality). For L. Susan Brown, \"Liberalism and anarchism are two political philosophies that are fundamentally concerned with individual freedom yet differ from one another in very distinct ways. Anarchism shares with liberalism a radical commitment to individual freedom while rejecting liberalism's competitive property relations.\"\n\nCivil libertarianism is a strain of political thought that supports civil liberties, or which emphasizes the supremacy of individual rights and personal freedoms over and against any kind of authority (such as a state, a corporation, social norms imposed through peer pressure, etc.). Civil libertarianism is not a complete ideology; rather, it is a collection of views on the specific issues of civil liberties and civil rights. Because of this, a civil libertarian outlook is compatible with many other political philosophies, and civil libertarianism is found on both the right and left in modern politics. For scholar Ellen Meiksins Wood, \"there are doctrines of individualism that are opposed to Lockean individualism ... and non-lockean individualism may encompass socialism\".\n\nBritish Historians Emily Robinson, Camilla Schofield, Florence Sutcliffe-Braithwaite, and Natalie Thomlinson have argued that by the 1970s Britons were keen about defining and claiming their individual rights, identities and perspectives. They demanded greater personal autonomy and self-determination and less outside control. They angrily complained that the 'establishment' was withholding it. They argue this shift in concerns helped cause Thatcherism, and was incorporated into Thatcherism's appeal.\n\nLiberalism (from the Latin \"liberalis\", \"of freedom; worthy of a free man, gentlemanlike, courteous, generous\") is the belief in the importance of individual freedom. This belief is widely accepted in the United States, Europe, Australia and other Western nations, and was recognized as an important value by many Western philosophers throughout history, in particular since the Enlightenment. It is often rejected by collectivist, Abrahamic or Confucian in civilized societies (though Taoists were and are known to be individualists). The Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius wrote praising \"the idea of a polity administered with regard to equal rights and equal freedom of speech, and the idea of a kingly government which respects most of all the freedom of the governed\".\n\nLiberalism has its roots in the Age of Enlightenment and rejects many foundational assumptions that dominated most earlier theories of government, such as the Divine Right of Kings, hereditary status, and established religion. John Locke is often credited with the philosophical foundations of classical liberalism. He wrote \"no one ought to harm another in his life, health, liberty, or possessions.\"\n\nIn the 17th century, liberal ideas began to influence governments in Europe, in nations such as The Netherlands, Switzerland, England and Poland, but they were strongly opposed, often by armed might, by those who favored absolute monarchy and established religion. In the 18th century, in America, the first modern liberal state was founded, without a monarch or a hereditary aristocracy. The American \"Declaration of Independence\" includes the words (which echo Locke) \"all men are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness; that to insure these rights, governments are instituted among men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed.\"\n\nLiberalism comes in many forms. According to John N. Gray, the essence of liberalism is toleration of different beliefs and of different ideas as to what constitutes a good life.\n\nAutarchism is a political philosophy that promotes the principles of individualism, the moral ideology of individual liberty and self-reliance. It rejects compulsory government and supports the elimination of government in favor of ruling oneself to the exclusion of rule by others.\n\nIndividualist anarchism refers to several traditions of thought within the anarchist movement that emphasize the individual and their will over any kinds of external determinants such as groups, society, traditions, and ideological systems. Individualist anarchism is not a single philosophy but refers to a group of individualistic philosophies that sometimes are in conflict.\n\nIn 1793, William Godwin, who has often been cited as the first anarchist, wrote \"Political Justice\", which some consider to be the first expression of anarchism. Godwin, a philosophical anarchist, from a rationalist and utilitarian basis opposed revolutionary action and saw a minimal state as a present \"necessary evil\" that would become increasingly irrelevant and powerless by the gradual spread of knowledge.\nGodwin advocated individualism, proposing that all cooperation in labour be eliminated on the premise that this would be most conducive with the general good.\n\nAn influential form of individualist anarchism, called \"egoism,\" or egoist anarchism, was expounded by one of the earliest and best-known proponents of individualist anarchism, the German Max Stirner. Stirner's \"The Ego and Its Own\", published in 1844, is a founding text of the philosophy. According to Stirner, the only limitation on the rights of the individual is their power to obtain what they desire, without regard for God, state, or morality. To Stirner, rights were \"spooks\" in the mind, and he held that society does not exist but \"the individuals are its reality\". Stirner advocated self-assertion and foresaw unions of egoists, non-systematic associations continually renewed by all parties' support through an act of will, which Stirner proposed as a form of organization in place of the state. Egoist anarchists claim that egoism will foster genuine and spontaneous union between individuals. \"Egoism\" has inspired many interpretations of Stirner's philosophy. It was re-discovered and promoted by German philosophical anarchist and LGBT activist John Henry Mackay.\n\nJosiah Warren is widely regarded as the first American anarchist, and the four-page weekly paper he edited during 1833, \"The Peaceful Revolutionist\", was the first anarchist periodical published. For American anarchist historian Eunice Minette Schuster \"It is apparent...that Proudhonian Anarchism was to be found in the United States at least as early as 1848 and that it was not conscious of its affinity to the Individualist Anarchism of Josiah Warren and Stephen Pearl Andrews...William B. Greene presented this Proudhonian Mutualism in its purest and most systematic form.\". Henry David Thoreau (1817–1862) was an important early influence in individualist anarchist thought in the United States and Europe. Thoreau was an American author, poet, naturalist, tax resister, development critic, surveyor, historian, philosopher, and leading transcendentalist. He is best known for his books \"Walden\", a reflection upon simple living in natural surroundings, and his essay, \"Civil Disobedience\", an argument for individual resistance to civil government in moral opposition to an unjust state. Later Benjamin Tucker fused Stirner's egoism with the economics of Warren and Proudhon in his eclectic influential publication \"Liberty\".\n\nFrom these early influences individualist anarchism in different countries attracted a small but diverse following of bohemian artists and intellectuals, free love and birth control advocates (see Anarchism and issues related to love and sex), individualist naturists nudists (see anarcho-naturism), freethought and anti-clerical activists as well as young anarchist outlaws in what came to be known as illegalism and individual reclamation (see European individualist anarchism and individualist anarchism in France). These authors and activists included Oscar Wilde, Emile Armand, Han Ryner, Henri Zisly, Renzo Novatore, Miguel Gimenez Igualada, Adolf Brand and Lev Chernyi among others. In his important essay \"The Soul of Man under Socialism\" from 1891 Oscar Wilde defended socialism as the way to guarantee individualism and so he saw that \"With the abolition of private property, then, we shall have true, beautiful, healthy Individualism. Nobody will waste his life in accumulating things, and the symbols for things. One will live. To live is the rarest thing in the world. Most people exist, that is all.\" For anarchist historian George Woodcock \"Wilde's aim in \"The Soul of Man under Socialism\" is to seek the society most favorable to the artist ... for Wilde art is the supreme end, containing within itself enlightenment and regeneration, to which all else in society must be subordinated ... Wilde represents the anarchist as aesthete.\" Woodcock finds that \"The most ambitious contribution to literary anarchism during the 1890s was undoubtedly Oscar Wilde \"The Soul of Man under Socialism\"\" and finds that it is influenced mainly by the thought of William Godwin.\n\nEthical egoism, also called simply egoism, is the normative ethical position that moral agents ought to do what is in their own self-interest. It differs from psychological egoism, which claims that people \"do\" only act in their self-interest. Ethical egoism also differs from rational egoism, which holds merely that it is rational to act in one's self-interest. However, these doctrines may occasionally be combined with ethical egoism.\n\nEthical egoism contrasts with ethical altruism, which holds that moral agents have an obligation to help and serve others. Egoism and altruism both contrast with ethical utilitarianism, which holds that a moral agent should treat one's self (also known as the subject) with no higher regard than one has for others (as egoism does, by elevating self-interests and \"the self\" to a status not granted to others), but that one also should not (as altruism does) sacrifice one's own interests to help others' interests, so long as one's own interests (i.e. one's own desires or well-being) are substantially-equivalent to the others' interests and well-being. Egoism, utilitarianism, and altruism are all forms of consequentialism, but egoism and altruism contrast with utilitarianism, in that egoism and altruism are both agent-focused forms of consequentialism (i.e. subject-focused or subjective), but utilitarianism is called agent-neutral (i.e. objective and impartial) as it does not treat the subject's (i.e. the self's, i.e. the moral \"agent's\") own interests as being more or less important than if the same interests, desires, or well-being were anyone else's.\n\nEthical egoism does not, however, require moral agents to harm the interests and well-being of others when making moral deliberation; e.g. what is in an agent's self-interest may be incidentally detrimental, beneficial, or neutral in its effect on others. Individualism allows for others' interest and well-being to be disregarded or not, as long as what is chosen is efficacious in satisfying the self-interest of the agent. Nor does ethical egoism necessarily entail that, in pursuing self-interest, one ought always to do what one wants to do; e.g. in the long term, the fulfilment of short-term desires may prove detrimental to the self. Fleeting pleasance, then, takes a back seat to protracted eudaemonia. In the words of James Rachels, \"Ethical egoism [...] endorses selfishness, but it doesn't endorse foolishness.\"\nEthical egoism is sometimes the philosophical basis for support of libertarianism or individualist anarchism as in Max Stirner, although these can also be based on altruistic motivations. These are political positions based partly on a belief that individuals should not coercively prevent others from exercising freedom of action.\n\nEgoist anarchism is a school of anarchist thought that originated in the philosophy of Max Stirner, a 19th-century Hegelian philosopher whose \"name appears with familiar regularity in historically orientated surveys of anarchist thought as one of the earliest and best-known exponents of individualist anarchism.\" According to Stirner, the only limitation on the rights of the individual is their power to obtain what they desire, without regard for God, state, or morality. Stirner advocated self-assertion and foresaw unions of egoists, non-systematic associations continually renewed by all parties' support through an act of will, which Stirner proposed as a form of organisation in place of the state. Egoist anarchists argue that egoism will foster genuine and spontaneous union between individuals. \"Egoism\" has inspired many interpretations of Stirner's philosophy but within anarchism it has also gone beyond Stirner. It was re-discovered and promoted by German philosophical anarchist and LGBT activist John Henry Mackay. John Beverley Robinson wrote an essay called \"Egoism\" in which he states that \"Modern egoism, as propounded by Stirner and Nietzsche, and expounded by Ibsen, Shaw and others, is all these; but it is more. It is the realization by the individual that they are an individual; that, as far as they are concerned, they are the only individual.\" Nietzsche (see Anarchism and Friedrich Nietzsche) and Stirner were frequently compared by French \"literary anarchists\" and anarchist interpretations of Nietzschean ideas appear to have also been influential in the United States. Anarchists who adhered to egoism include Benjamin Tucker, Émile Armand, John Beverley Robinson, Adolf Brand, Steven T. Byington, Renzo Novatore, James L. Walker, Enrico Arrigoni, Biofilo Panclasta, Jun Tsuji, André Arru and contemporary ones such as Hakim Bey, Bob Black and Wolfi Landstreicher.\n\nExistentialism is a term applied to the work of a number of 19th- and 20th-century philosophers who, despite profound doctrinal differences, generally held that the focus of philosophical thought should be to deal with the conditions of existence of the individual person and his or her emotions, actions, responsibilities, and thoughts. The early 19th century philosopher Søren Kierkegaard, posthumously regarded as the father of existentialism, maintained that the individual solely has the responsibilities of giving one's own life meaning and living that life passionately and sincerely, in spite of many existential obstacles and distractions including despair, angst, absurdity, alienation, and boredom.\n\nSubsequent existential philosophers retain the emphasis on the individual, but differ, in varying degrees, on how one achieves and what constitutes a fulfilling life, what obstacles must be overcome, and what external and internal factors are involved, including the potential consequences of the existence or non-existence of God. Many existentialists have also regarded traditional systematic or academic philosophy, in both style and content, as too abstract and remote from concrete human experience. Existentialism became fashionable after World War II as a way to reassert the importance of human individuality and freedom.\n\nFreethought holds that individuals should not accept ideas proposed as truth without recourse to knowledge and reason. Thus, freethinkers strive to build their opinions on the basis of facts, scientific inquiry, and logical principles, independent of any logical fallacies or intellectually limiting effects of authority, confirmation bias, cognitive bias, conventional wisdom, popular culture, prejudice, sectarianism, tradition, urban legend, and all other dogmas. Regarding religion, freethinkers hold that there is insufficient evidence to scientifically validate the existence of supernatural phenomena.\n\nHumanism is a perspective common to a wide range of ethical stances that attaches importance to human dignity, concerns, and capabilities, particularly rationality. Although the word has many senses, its meaning comes into focus when contrasted to the supernatural or to appeals to authority. Since the 19th century, humanism has been associated with an anti-clericalism inherited from the 18th-century Enlightenment \"philosophes\". 21st century Humanism tends to strongly endorse human rights, including reproductive rights, gender equality, social justice, and the separation of church and state. The term covers organized non-theistic religions, secular humanism, and a humanistic life stance.\n\nPhilosophical hedonism is a meta-ethical theory of value which argues that pleasure is the only intrinsic good and pain is the only intrinsic bad. The basic idea behind hedonistic thought is that pleasure (an umbrella term for all inherently likable emotions) is the only thing that is good in and of itself or by its very nature. This implies evaluating the moral worth of character or behavior according to the extent that the pleasure it produces exceeds the pain it entails. \n\nA libertine is one devoid of most moral restraints, which are seen as unnecessary or undesirable, especially one who ignores or even spurns accepted morals and forms of behaviour sanctified by the larger society. Libertines place value on physical pleasures, meaning those experienced through the senses. As a philosophy, libertinism gained new-found adherents in the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries, particularly in France and Great Britain. Notable among these were John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester, and the Marquis de Sade. During the Baroque era in France, there existed a freethinking circle of philosophers and intellectuals who were collectively known as \"libertinage érudit\" and which included Gabriel Naudé, Élie Diodati and François de La Mothe Le Vayer. The critic Vivian de Sola Pinto linked John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester's libertinism to Hobbesian materialism.\n\nObjectivism is a system of philosophy created by philosopher and novelist Ayn Rand (1905–1982) that holds: reality exists independent of consciousness; human beings gain knowledge rationally from perception through the process of concept formation and inductive and deductive logic; the moral purpose of one's life is the pursuit of one's own happiness or rational self-interest. Rand thinks the only social system consistent with this morality is full respect for individual rights, embodied in pure \"laissez-faire\" capitalism; and the role of art in human life is to transform man's widest metaphysical ideas, by selective reproduction of reality, into a physical form—a work of art—that he can comprehend and to which he can respond emotionally. Objectivism celebrates man as his own hero, \"with his own happiness as the moral purpose of his life, with productive achievement as his noblest activity, and reason as his only absolute.\"\n\nPhilosophical anarchism is an anarchist school of thought which contends that the State lacks moral legitimacy and – in contrast to revolutionary anarchism – does not advocate violent revolution to eliminate it but advocates peaceful evolution to superate it. Though philosophical anarchism does not necessarily imply any action or desire for the elimination of the State, philosophical anarchists do not believe that they have an obligation or duty to obey the State, or conversely, that the State has a right to command.\n\nPhilosophical anarchism is a component especially of individualist anarchism. Philosophical anarchists of historical note include Mohandas Gandhi, William Godwin, Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, Max Stirner, Benjamin Tucker, and Henry David Thoreau. Contemporary philosophical anarchists include A. John Simmons and Robert Paul Wolff.\n\nSubjectivism is a philosophical tenet that accords primacy to subjective experience as fundamental of all measure and law. In extreme forms like Solipsism, it may hold that the nature and existence of every object depends solely on someone's subjective awareness of it. For example, Wittgenstein wrote in Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus: \"The subject doesn't belong to the world, but it is a limit of the world\" (proposition 5.632). Metaphysical subjectivism is the theory that reality is what we perceive to be real, and that there is no underlying true reality that exists independently of perception. One can also hold that it is consciousness rather than perception that is reality (subjective idealism). In probability, a subjectivism stands for the belief that probabilities are simply degrees-of-belief by rational agents in a certain proposition, and which have no objective reality in and of themselves.\n\nEthical subjectivism stands in opposition to moral realism, which claims that moral propositions refer to objective facts, independent of human opinion; to error theory, which denies that any moral propositions are true in any sense; and to non-cognitivism, which denies that moral sentences express propositions at all. The most common forms of ethical subjectivism are also forms of moral relativism, with moral standards held to be relative to each culture or society (c.f. cultural relativism), or even to every individual. The latter view, as put forward by Protagoras, holds that there are as many distinct scales of good and evil as there are subjects in the world. Moral subjectivism is that species of moral relativism that relativizes moral value to the individual subject.\n\nHorst Matthai Quelle was a Spanish language German anarchist philosopher influenced by Max Stirner. He argued that since the individual gives form to the world, he is those objects, the others and the whole universe. One of his main views was a \"theory of infinite worlds\" which for him was developed by pre-socratic philosophers.\n\nSolipsism is the philosophical idea that only one's own mind is sure to exist. The term comes from Latin \"solus\" (alone) and \"ipse\" (self). Solipsism as an epistemological position holds that knowledge of anything outside one's own mind is unsure. The external world and other minds cannot be known, and might not exist outside the mind. As a metaphysical position, solipsism goes further to the conclusion that the world and other minds do not exist. As such it is the only epistemological position that, by its own postulate, is both irrefutable and yet indefensible in the same manner. Although the number of individuals sincerely espousing solipsism has been small, it is not uncommon for one philosopher to accuse another's arguments of entailing solipsism as an unwanted consequence, in a kind of reductio ad absurdum. In the history of philosophy, solipsism has served as a skeptical hypothesis.\n\nThe doctrine of economic individualism holds that each individual should be allowed autonomy in making his or her own economic decisions as opposed to those decisions being made by the state, the community, the corporation etc. for him or her.\n\nLiberalism is a political ideology that developed in the 19th century in England, Western Europe, and the Americas. It followed earlier forms of liberalism in its commitment to personal freedom and popular government, but differed from earlier forms of liberalism in its commitment to free markets and classical economics. Notable liberals in the 19th century include Jean-Baptiste Say, Thomas Malthus, and David Ricardo. Classical liberalism was revived in the 20th century by Ludwig von Mises and Friedrich Hayek, and further developed by Milton Friedman, Robert Nozick, Loren Lomasky, and Jan Narveson. The phrase classical liberalism is also sometimes used to refer to all forms of liberalism before the 20th century.\n\nIn regards to economic questions within individualist anarchism there are adherents to mutualism (Pierre Joseph Proudhon, Emile Armand, early Benjamin Tucker); natural rights positions (early Benjamin Tucker, Lysander Spooner, Josiah Warren); and egoistic disrespect for \"ghosts\" such as private property and markets (Max Stirner, John Henry Mackay, Lev Chernyi, later Benjamin Tucker, Renzo Novatore, illegalism). Contemporary individualist anarchist Kevin Carson characterizes American individualist anarchism saying that \"Unlike the rest of the socialist movement, the individualist anarchists believed that the natural wage of labor in a free market was its product, and that economic exploitation could only take place when capitalists and landlords harnessed the power of the state in their interests. Thus, individualist anarchism was an alternative both to the increasing statism of the mainstream socialist movement, and to a classical liberal movement that was moving toward a mere apologetic for the power of big business.\" \n\nMutualism is an anarchist school of thought which can be traced to the writings of Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, who envisioned a society where each person might possess a means of production, either individually or collectively, with trade representing equivalent amounts of labor in the free market. Integral to the scheme was the establishment of a mutual-credit bank which would lend to producers at a minimal interest rate only high enough to cover the costs of administration. Mutualism is based on a labor theory of value which holds that when labor or its product is sold, in exchange, it ought to receive goods or services embodying \"the amount of labor necessary to produce an article of exactly similar and equal utility\". Receiving anything less would be considered exploitation, theft of labor, or usury.\n\nLibertarian socialism, sometimes dubbed socialist libertarianism, or left-libertarianism, is a group of anti-authoritarian political philosophies inside the socialist movement that rejects socialism as centralized state ownership and control of the economy, as well as the state itself. It criticizes wage labour relationships within the workplace. Instead, it emphasizes workers' self-management of the workplace and decentralized structures of political organization. It asserts that a society based on freedom and justice can be achieved through abolishing authoritarian institutions that control certain means of production and subordinate the majority to an owning class or political and economic elite. Libertarian socialists advocate for decentralized structures based on direct democracy and federal or confederal associations such as libertarian municipalism, citizens' assemblies, trade unions, and workers' councils. All of this is generally done within a general call for libertarian and voluntary human relationships through the identification, criticism, and practical dismantling of illegitimate authority in all aspects of human life. As such libertarian socialism, within the larger socialist movement, seeks to distinguish itself both from Leninism/Bolshevism and from social democracy.\n\nPast and present political philosophies and movements commonly described as libertarian socialist include anarchism (especially anarchist communism, anarchist collectivism, anarcho-syndicalism, and mutualism) as well as autonomism, communalism, participism, guild socialism, revolutionary syndicalism, and libertarian Marxist philosophies such as council communism and Luxemburgism; as well as some versions of \"utopian socialism\" and individualist anarchism.\n\nLeft-libertarianism, or left-wing libertarianism, names several related but distinct approaches to politics, society, culture, and political and social theory, which stress both individual freedom and social justice. Unlike right-libertarians, they believe that neither claiming nor mixing one's labor with natural resources is enough to generate full private property rights, and maintain that natural resources (land, oil, gold, trees) ought to be held in some egalitarian manner, either unowned or owned collectively. Those left-libertarians who support private property do so under the condition that recompense is offered to the local community.\n\nLeft-libertarianism can refer generally to these related and overlapping schools of thought:\nBULLET::::- Anti-authoritarian varieties of left-wing politics and, in particular, the socialist movement, usually known as libertarian socialism.\nBULLET::::- Geolibertarianism: a synthesis of libertarianism and geoism (or Georgism)\nBULLET::::- The Steiner–Vallentyne school, whose proponents draw conclusions from classical liberal or market liberal premises.\nBULLET::::- Left-wing market anarchism, which stresses the socially transformative potential of non-aggression and anticapitalist, \"freed\" markets.\n\nRight-libertarianism, or right-wing libertarianism, is a phrase used by some to describe either non-collectivist forms of libertarianism or a variety of different libertarian views some label \"right\" of mainstream libertarianism including \"libertarian conservatism\".\n\nThe \"Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy\" calls it \"right libertarianism\", but states: \"Libertarianism is often thought of as 'right-wing' doctrine. This, however, is mistaken for at least two reasons. First, on social—rather than economic—issues, libertarianism tends to be 'left-wing'. It opposes laws that restrict consensual and private sexual relationships between adults (e.g., gay sex, non-marital sex, and deviant sex), laws that restrict drug use, laws that impose religious views or practices on individuals, and compulsory military service. Second, in addition to the better-known version of libertarianism—right-libertarianism—there is also a version known as 'left-libertarianism'. Both endorse full self-ownership, but they differ with respect to the powers agents have to appropriate unappropriated natural resources (land, air, water, etc.).\"\n\nThe anarchist writer and bohemian Oscar Wilde wrote in his famous essay \"The Soul of Man under Socialism\" that \"Art is individualism, and individualism is a disturbing and disintegrating force. There lies its immense value. For what it seeks is to disturb monotony of type, slavery of custom, tyranny of habit, and the reduction of man to the level of a machine.\" For anarchist historian George Woodcock \"Wilde's aim in \"The Soul of Man under Socialism\" is to seek the society most favorable to the artist...for Wilde art is the supreme end, containing within itself enlightenment and regeneration, to which all else in society must be subordinated...Wilde represents the anarchist as aesthete.\" The word individualism in this way has been used to denote a personality with a strong tendency towards self-creation and experimentation as opposed to tradition or popular mass opinions and behaviors.\n\nAnarchist writer Murray Bookchin describes a lot of individualist anarchists as people who \"expressed their opposition in uniquely personal forms, especially in fiery tracts, outrageous behavior, and aberrant lifestyles in the cultural ghettos of fin de siècle New York, Paris, and London. As a credo, individualist anarchism remained largely a bohemian lifestyle, most conspicuous in its demands for sexual freedom ('free love') and enamored of innovations in art, behavior, and clothing.\"\n\nIn relation to this view of individuality, French individualist anarchist Emile Armand advocates egoistical denial of social conventions and dogmas to live in accord to one's own ways and desires in daily life since he emphasized anarchism as a way of life and practice. In this way he opines \"So the anarchist individualist tends to reproduce himself, to perpetuate his spirit in other individuals who will share his views and who will make it possible for a state of affairs to be established from which authoritarianism has been banished. It is this desire, this will, not only to live, but also to reproduce oneself, which we shall call \"activity\".\n\nIn the book \"Imperfect Garden: The Legacy of Humanism\", humanist philosopher Tzvetan Todorov identifies individualism as an important current of socio-political thought within modernity and as examples of it he mentions Michel de Montaigne, François de La Rochefoucauld, Marquis de Sade, and Charles Baudelaire. In La Rochefoucauld, he identifies a tendency similar to stoicism in which \"the honest person works his being in the manner of a sculptor who searches the liberation of the forms which are inside a block of marble, to extract the truth of that matter.\" In Baudelaire he finds the dandy trait in which one searches to cultivate \"the idea of beauty within oneself, of satisfying one's passions of feeling and thinking.\"\n\nThe Russian-American poet Joseph Brodsky once wrote that \"The surest defense against Evil is extreme individualism, originality of thinking, whimsicality, even—if you will—eccentricity. That is, something that can't be feigned, faked, imitated; something even a seasoned imposter couldn't be happy with.\" Ralph Waldo Emerson famously declared, \"Whoso would be a man must be a nonconformist\"—a point of view developed at length in both the life and work of Henry David Thoreau. Equally memorable and influential on Walt Whitman is Emerson's idea that \"a foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of small minds, adored by little statesmen and philosophers and divines.\" Emerson opposes on principle the reliance on civil and religious social structures precisely because through them the individual approaches the divine second-hand, mediated by the once original experience of a genius from another age. \"An institution,\" he explains, \"is the lengthened shadow of one man.\" To achieve this original relation one must \"Insist on one's self; never imitate\" for if the relationship is secondary the connection is lost.\n\nSome sociologists have criticized the excessive levels of individualism in the United States. T. W. Greene, for example, argued that three distinct yet overlapping ideologies of individualism are currently prevalent: (1) The ideology of self-willed wealth; (2) The ideology of full self-reliance; and (3) The ideology of high self-esteem. Each strand of individualism developed during periods of structural crisis and transition in the U.S. Individualistic ideologies sidetrack many Americans from acknowledging structural contributors to their nation's problems. The ideologies may cause adherents to believe all low-income individuals are lazy, for example, while dismissing evidence that the American middle class has declined for macro-economic reasons. By causing persons to blame individuals solely for their misfortunes, the three individualistic ideologies perpetuate systems of inequality. The same ideologies can also fuel selfish behaviors. Persons embracing individualistic ideologies may become preoccupied with attaining wealth, full self-reliance, and/or high self-esteem at the expense of altruism, healthy marriages, and the development of deep social bonds, which are assumed to be self-evident virtues. Greene concluded that Americans are too individualistic in the \"wrong\" ways (preoccupied with attaining individual wealth, full self-reliance, and high self-esteem), while not being individualistic enough in the \"right\" ways (thinking critically and independently as individuals).\n\nPeople in Western countries tend to be more individualistic than communitarian. The authors of one study proposed that this difference is due in part to the influence of the Catholic Church in the Middle Ages. They pointed specifically to its bans on incest, cousin marriage, adoption, and remarriage, and its promotion of the nuclear family over the extended family.\n\nThe Catholic Church teaches that the Lord's Prayer opposes individualism because God loves everyone and everyone must be loved in turn.\n\nBULLET::::- Albrecht, James M. (2012) \"Reconstructing Individualism : A Pragmatic Tradition from Emerson to Ellison\". Fordham University Press.\nBULLET::::- Dewey, John. (1930). \"Individualism Old and New\".\nBULLET::::- Gagnier, Regenia. (2010). \"Individualism, Decadence and Globalization: On the Relationship of Part to Whole, 1859–1920\". Palgrave Macmillan.\nBULLET::::- Meiksins Wood, Ellen. (1972). \"Mind and Politics: An Approach to the Meaning of Liberal and Socialist Individualism\". University of California Press.\nBULLET::::- Shanahan, Daniel. (1991) \"Toward a Genealogy of Individualism\". Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press. .\nBULLET::::- Watt, Ian. (1996) \"Myths of Modern Individualism.\" Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. .\nBULLET::::- Barzilai, Gad. (2003). \"Communities and Law.\" Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. .\nBULLET::::- Fruehwald, Edwin, \"A Biological Basis of Rights\", 19 \"Southern California Interdisciplinary Law Journal\" 195 (2010).\n"}
{"id": "15187", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15187", "title": "In vivo", "text": "In vivo\n\nStudies that are in vivo (Latin for \"within the living\"; often not italicized in English) are those in which the effects of various biological entities are tested on whole, living organisms or cells, usually animals, including humans, and plants, as opposed to a tissue extract or dead organism. This is not to be confused with experiments done \"in vitro\" (\"within the glass\"), i.e., in a laboratory environment using test tubes, Petri dishes, etc. Examples of investigations \"in vivo\" include: the pathogenesis of disease by comparing the effects of bacterial infection with the effects of purified bacterial toxins; the development of non-antibiotics, antiviral drugs, and new drugs generally; and new surgical procedures. Consequently, animal testing and clinical trials are major elements of \"in vivo\" research. \"In vivo\" testing is often employed over \"in vitro\" because it is better suited for observing the overall effects of an experiment on a living subject. In drug discovery, for example, verification of efficacy \"in vivo\" is crucial, because \"in vitro\" assays can sometimes yield misleading results with drug candidate molecules that are irrelevant \"in vivo\" (e.g., because such molecules cannot reach their site of \"in vivo\" action, for example as a result of rapid catabolism in the liver).\n\nThe English microbiologist Professor Harry Smith and his colleagues in the mid-1950s found that sterile filtrates of serum from animals infected with \"Bacillus anthracis\" were lethal for other animals, whereas extracts of culture fluid from the same organism grown \"in vitro\" were not. This discovery of anthrax toxin through the use of \"in vivo\" experiments had a major impact on studies of the pathogenesis of infectious disease.\n\nThe maxim \"in vivo veritas\" (\"in a living thing [there is] truth\") is used to describe this type of testing and is a play on \"in vino veritas\", (\"in wine [there is] truth\"), a well-known proverb.\n\nIn microbiology, \"in vivo\" is often used to refer to experimentation done in live isolated cells rather than in a whole organism, for example, cultured cells derived from biopsies. In this situation, the more specific term is \"ex vivo\". Once cells are disrupted and individual parts are tested or analyzed, this is known as \"in vitro\".\n\nAccording to Christopher Lipinski and Andrew Hopkins, \"Whether the aim is to discover drugs or to gain knowledge of biological systems, the nature and properties of a chemical tool cannot be considered independently of the system it is to be tested in. Compounds that bind to isolated recombinant proteins are one thing; chemical tools that can perturb cell function another; and pharmacological agents that can be tolerated by a live organism and perturb its systems are yet another. If it were simple to ascertain the properties required to develop a lead discovered \"in vitro\" to one that is active \"in vivo\", drug discovery would be as reliable as drug manufacturing.\" Studies on \"In vivo\" behavior, determined the formulations of set specific drugs and their habits in a Biorelevant (or Biological relevance) medium.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Ex situ\nBULLET::::- \"Ex vitoro\nBULLET::::- \"Ex vivo\nBULLET::::- \"In natura\nBULLET::::- \"In operando\nBULLET::::- \"In ovo\nBULLET::::- \"In papyro\nBULLET::::- \"In silico\nBULLET::::- \"In simulacra\nBULLET::::- \"In situ\nBULLET::::- \"In utero\nBULLET::::- \"In vitro\nBULLET::::- \"\"In vivo\" imaging\nBULLET::::- Vivisection\n"}
{"id": "15188", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15188", "title": "In vitro", "text": "In vitro\n\nIn vitro (meaning: \"in the glass\") studies are performed with microorganisms, cells, or biological molecules outside their normal biological context. Colloquially called \"test-tube experiments\", these studies in biology and its subdisciplines are traditionally done in labware such as test tubes, flasks, Petri dishes, and microtiter plates. Studies conducted using components of an organism that have been isolated from their usual biological surroundings permit a more detailed or more convenient analysis than can be done with whole organisms; however, results obtained from \"in vitro\" experiments may not fully or accurately predict the effects on a whole organism. In contrast to \"in vitro\" experiments, \"in vivo\" studies are those conducted in living organisms, including humans, and whole plants.\n\n\"In vitro\" (; often not italicized in English) studies are conducted using components of an organism that have been isolated from their usual biological surroundings, such as microorganisms, cells, or biological molecules. For example, microorganisms or cells can be studied in artificial culture media, and proteins can be examined in solutions. Colloquially called \"test-tube experiments\", these studies in biology, medicine, and their subdisciplines are traditionally done in test tubes, flasks, Petri dishes, etc. They now involve the full range of techniques used in molecular biology, such as the omics. \nIn contrast, studies conducted in living beings (microorganisms, animals, humans, or whole plants) are called \"in vivo\" .\n\nExamples of \"in vitro\" studies include: the isolation, growth and identification of cells derived from multicellular organisms in (cell or tissue culture); subcellular components (e.g. mitochondria or ribosomes); cellular or subcellular extracts (e.g. wheat germ or reticulocyte extracts); purified molecules such as proteins, DNA, or RNA); and the commercial production of antibiotics and other pharmaceutical products. Viruses, which only replicate in living cells, are studied in the laboratory in cell or tissue culture, and many animal virologists refer to such work as being \"in vitro\" to distinguish it from \"in vivo\" work in whole animals.\n\nBULLET::::- Polymerase chain reaction is a method for selective replication of specific DNA and RNA sequences in the test tube.\nBULLET::::- Protein purification involves the isolation of a specific protein of interest from a complex mixture of proteins, often obtained from homogenized cells or tissues.\nBULLET::::- \"In vitro\" fertilization is used to allow spermatozoa to fertilize eggs in a culture dish before implanting the resulting embryo or embryos into the uterus of the prospective mother.\nBULLET::::- \"In vitro\" diagnostics refers to a wide range of medical and veterinary laboratory tests that are used to diagnose diseases and monitor the clinical status of patients using samples of blood, cells, or other tissues obtained from a patient.\nBULLET::::- \"In vitro\" testing has been used to characterize specific adsorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion processes of drugs or general chemicals inside a living organism; for example, Caco-2 cell experiments can be performed to estimate the absorption of compounds through the lining of the gastrointestinal tract; The partitioning of the compounds between organs can be determined to study distribution mechanisms; Suspension or plated cultures of primary hepatocytes or hepatocyte-like cell lines (HepG2, HepaRG) can be used to study and quantify metabolism of chemicals. These ADME process parameters can then be integrated into so called \"physiologically based pharmacokinetic models\" or PBPK.\n\n\"In vitro\" studies permit a species-specific, simpler, more convenient, and more detailed analysis than can't be done with the whole organism. Just as studies in whole animals more and more replace human trials, so are \"in vitro\" studies replacing studies in whole animals.\n\nLiving organisms are extremely complex functional systems that are made up of, at a minimum, many tens of thousands of genes, protein molecules, RNA molecules, small organic compounds, inorganic ions, and complexes in an environment that is spatially organized by membranes, and in the case of multicellular organisms, organ systems. These myriad components interact with each other and with their environment in a way that processes food, removes waste, moves components to the correct location, and is responsive to signalling molecules, other organisms, light, sound, heat, taste, touch, and balance.\n\nThis complexity makes it difficult to identify the interactions between individual components and to explore their basic biological functions. \"In vitro\" work simplifies the system under study, so the investigator can focus on a small number of components.\n\nFor example, the identity of proteins of the immune system (e.g. antibodies), and the mechanism by which they recognize and bind to foreign antigens would remain very obscure if not for the extensive use of \"in vitro\" work to isolate the proteins, identify the cells and genes that produce them, study the physical properties of their interaction with antigens, and identify how those interactions lead to cellular signals that activate other components of the immune system.\n\nAnother advantage of \"in vitro\" methods is that human cells can be studied without \"extrapolation\" from an experimental animal's cellular response.\n\n\"In vitro\" methods can be miniaturized and automated, yielding high-throughput screening methods for testing molecules in pharmacology or toxicology \n\nThe primary disadvantage of \"in vitro\" experimental studies is that it may be challenging to extrapolate from the results of \"in vitro\" work back to the biology of the intact organism. Investigators doing \"in vitro\" work must be careful to avoid over-interpretation of their results, which can lead to erroneous conclusions about organismal and systems biology.\n\nFor example, scientists developing a new viral drug to treat an infection with a pathogenic virus (e.g. HIV-1) may find that a candidate drug functions to prevent viral replication in an \"in vitro\" setting (typically cell culture). However, before this drug is used in the clinic, it must progress through a series of \"in vivo\" trials to determine if it is safe and effective in intact organisms (typically small animals, primates, and humans in succession). Typically, most candidate drugs that are effective \"in vitro\" prove to be ineffective \"in vivo\" because of issues associated with delivery of the drug to the affected tissues, toxicity towards essential parts of the organism that were not represented in the initial \"in vitro\" studies, or other issues.\n\nResults obtained from \"in vitro\" experiments cannot usually be transposed, as is, to predict the reaction of an entire organism \"in vivo\". Building a consistent and reliable extrapolation procedure from \"in vitro\" results to \"in vivo\" is therefore extremely important. Solutions include:\n\nBULLET::::- Increasing the complexity of \"in vitro\" systems to reproduce tissues and interactions between them (as in “human on chip” systems)\nBULLET::::- Using mathematical modeling to numerically simulate the behavior of the complex system, where the \"in vitro\" data provide model parameter values\n\nThese two approaches are not incompatible; better \"in vitro\" systems provide better data to mathematical models. However, increasingly sophisticated \"in vitro\" experiments collect increasingly numerous, complex, and challenging data to integrate. Mathematical models, such as systems biology models, are much needed here.\n\nIn pharmacology, IVIVE can be used to approximate pharmacokinetics (PK) or pharmacodynamics (PD).\nSince the timing and intensity of effects on a given target depend on the concentration time course of candidate drug (parent molecule or metabolites) at that target site, \"in vivo\" tissue and organ sensitivities can be completely different or even inverse of those observed on cells cultured and exposed \"in vitro\". That indicates that extrapolating effects observed \"in vitro\" needs a quantitative model of \"in vivo\" PK. Physiologically based PK (PBPK) models are generally accepted to be central to the extrapolations.\n\nIn the case of early effects or those without intercellular communications, the same cellular exposure concentration is assumed to cause the same effects, both qualitatively and quantitatively, \"in vitro\" and \"in vivo\". In these conditions, developing a simple PD model of the dose–response relationship observed \"in vitro\", and transposing it without changes to predict \"in vivo\" effects is not enough.\n\nBULLET::::- Animal testing\nBULLET::::- \"Ex vivo\"\nBULLET::::- \"In situ\"\nBULLET::::- \"In utero\"\nBULLET::::- \"In vivo\"\nBULLET::::- \"In silico\"\nBULLET::::- \"In papyro\"\nBULLET::::- \"In natura\"\nBULLET::::- Animal \"in vitro\" cellular and developmental biology\nBULLET::::- Plant \"in vitro\" cellular and developmental biology\nBULLET::::- \"In vitro\" toxicology\nBULLET::::- In vitro to in vivo extrapolation\nBULLET::::- Slice preparation\n"}
{"id": "15189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15189", "title": "IEEE 754-1985", "text": "IEEE 754-1985\n\nIEEE 754-1985 was an industry standard for representing floating-point numbers in computers, officially adopted in 1985 and superseded in 2008 by IEEE 754-2008, and then again in 2019 by minor revision IEEE 754-2019. During its 23 years, it was the most widely used format for floating-point computation. It was implemented in software, in the form of floating-point libraries, and in hardware, in the instructions of many CPUs and FPUs. The first integrated circuit to implement the draft of what was to become IEEE 754-1985 was the Intel 8087.\n\nIEEE 754-1985 represents numbers in binary, providing definitions for four levels of precision, of which the two most commonly used are:\n\n!Level\n!Width\n!Range at full precision\n!Precision\nSingle precision\n32 bits\n±1.18 to ±3.4\nApproximately 7 decimal digits\nDouble precision\n64 bits\n±2.23 to ±1.80\nApproximately 16 decimal digits\n\nThe standard also defines representations for positive and negative infinity, a \"negative zero\", five exceptions to handle invalid results like division by zero, special values called NaNs for representing those exceptions, denormal numbers to represent numbers smaller than shown above, and four rounding modes.\n\nFloating-point numbers in IEEE 754 format consist of three fields: a sign bit, a biased exponent, and a fraction. The following example illustrates the meaning of each.\n\nThe decimal number 0.15625 represented in binary is 0.00101 (that is, 1/8 + 1/32). (Subscripts indicate the number base.) Analogous to scientific notation, where numbers are written to have a single non-zero digit to the left of the decimal point, we rewrite this number so it has a single 1 bit to the left of the \"binary point\". We simply multiply by the appropriate power of 2 to compensate for shifting the bits left by three positions:\n\nNow we can read off the fraction and the exponent: the fraction is .01 and the exponent is −3.\n\nAs illustrated in the pictures, the three fields in the IEEE 754 representation of this number are:\n\nIEEE 754 adds a bias to the exponent so that numbers can in many cases be compared conveniently by the same hardware that compares signed 2's-complement integers. Using a biased exponent, the lesser of two positive floating-point numbers will come out \"less than\" the greater following the same ordering as for sign and magnitude integers. If two floating-point numbers have different signs, the sign-and-magnitude comparison also works with biased exponents. However, if both biased-exponent floating-point numbers are negative, then the ordering must be reversed. If the exponent were represented as, say, a 2's-complement number, comparison to see which of two numbers is greater would not be as convenient.\n\nThe leading 1 bit is omitted since all numbers except zero start with a leading 1; the leading 1 is implicit and doesn't actually need to be stored which gives an extra bit of precision for \"free.\"\n\nThe number zero is represented specially:\n\nThe number representations described above are called \"normalized,\" meaning that the implicit leading binary digit is a 1. To reduce the loss of precision when an underflow occurs, IEEE 754 includes the ability to represent fractions smaller than are possible in the normalized representation, by making the implicit leading digit a 0. Such numbers are called denormal. They don't include as many significant digits as a normalized number, but they enable a gradual loss of precision when the result of an arithmetic operation is not exactly zero but is too close to zero to be represented by a normalized number.\n\nA denormal number is represented with a biased exponent of all 0 bits, which represents an exponent of −126 in single precision (not −127), or −1022 in double precision (not −1023). In contrast, the smallest biased exponent representing a normal number is 1 (see examples below).\n\nThe biased-exponent field is filled with all 1 bits to indicate either infinity or an invalid result of a computation.\n\nPositive and negative infinity are represented thus:\n\nSome operations of floating-point arithmetic are invalid, such as taking the square root of a negative number. The act of reaching an invalid result is called a floating-point \"exception.\" An exceptional result is represented by a special code called a NaN, for \"Not a Number\". All NaNs in IEEE 754-1985 have this format:\n\nPrecision is defined as the minimum difference between two successive mantissa representations; thus it is a function only in the mantissa; while the gap is defined as the difference between two successive numbers.\n\nSingle-precision numbers occupy 32 bits. In single precision:\nBULLET::::- The positive and negative numbers closest to zero (represented by the denormalized value with all 0s in the exponent field and the binary value 1 in the fraction field) are\nBULLET::::- ±2 × 2 ≈ ±1.40130\nBULLET::::- The positive and negative normalized numbers closest to zero (represented with the binary value 1 in the exponent field and 0 in the fraction field) are\nBULLET::::- ±1 × 2 ≈ ±1.17549\nBULLET::::- The finite positive and finite negative numbers furthest from zero (represented by the value with 254 in the exponent field and all 1s in the fraction field) are\nBULLET::::- ±(2−2) × 2 ≈ ±3.40282\n\nSome example range and gap values for given exponents in single precision:\n\n! Actual Exponent (unbiased)\n! Exp (biased)\n! Minimum\n! Maximum\n! Gap\n\nAs an example, 16,777,217 cannot be encoded as a 32-bit float as it will be rounded to 16,777,216. This shows why floating point arithmetic is unsuitable for accounting software. However, all integers within the representable range that are a power of 2 can be stored in a 32-bit float without rounding.\n\nDouble-precision numbers occupy 64 bits. In double precision:\nBULLET::::- The positive and negative numbers closest to zero (represented by the denormalized value with all 0s in the Exp field and the binary value 1 in the Fraction field) are\nBULLET::::- ±2 × 2 ≈ ±4.94066\nBULLET::::- The positive and negative normalized numbers closest to zero (represented with the binary value 1 in the Exp field and 0 in the fraction field) are\nBULLET::::- ±1 × 2 ≈ ±2.22507\nBULLET::::- The finite positive and finite negative numbers furthest from zero (represented by the value with 2046 in the Exp field and all 1s in the fraction field) are\nBULLET::::- ±(2−2) × 2 ≈ ±1.79769\n\nSome example range and gap values for given exponents in double precision:\n\n! Actual Exponent (unbiased)\n! Exp (biased)\n! Minimum\n! Maximum\n! Gap\n\nThe standard also recommends extended format(s) to be used to perform internal computations at a higher precision than that required for the final result, to minimise round-off errors: the standard only specifies minimum precision and exponent requirements for such formats. The x87 80-bit extended format is the most commonly implemented extended format that meets these requirements.\n\nHere are some examples of single-precision IEEE 754 representations:\n\n! Type\n! Sign\n! Actual Exponent\n! Exp (biased)\n! Exponent field\n! Fraction field\n! Value\n\nEvery possible bit combination is either a NaN or a number with a unique value in the affinely extended real number system with its associated order, except for the two combinations of bits for negative zero and positive zero, which sometimes require special attention (see below). The binary representation has the special property that, excluding NaNs, any two numbers can be compared as sign and magnitude integers (endianness issues apply). When comparing as 2's-complement integers: If the sign bits differ, the negative number precedes the positive number, so 2's complement gives the correct result (except that negative zero and positive zero should be considered equal). If both values are positive, the 2's complement comparison again gives the correct result. Otherwise (two negative numbers), the correct FP ordering is the opposite of the 2's complement ordering.\n\nRounding errors inherent to floating point calculations may limit the use of comparisons for checking the exact equality of results. Choosing an acceptable range is a complex topic. A common technique is to use a comparison epsilon value to perform approximate comparisons. Depending on how lenient the comparisons are, common values include codice_1 or codice_2 for single-precision, and codice_3 for double-precision. Another common technique is ULP, which checks what the difference is in the last place digits, effectively checking how many steps away the two values are.\n\nAlthough negative zero and positive zero are generally considered equal for comparison purposes, some programming language relational operators and similar constructs treat them as distinct. According to the Java Language Specification, comparison and equality operators treat them as equal, but codice_4 and codice_5 distinguish them (officially starting with Java version 1.1 but actually with 1.1.1), as do the comparison methods codice_6, codice_7 and even codice_8 of classes codice_9 and codice_10.\n\nThe IEEE standard has four different rounding modes; the first is the default; the others are called \"directed roundings\".\n\nBULLET::::- Round to Nearest – rounds to the nearest value; if the number falls midway it is rounded to the nearest value with an even (zero) least significant bit, which means it is rounded up 50% of the time (in IEEE 754-2008 this mode is called \"roundTiesToEven\" to distinguish it from another round-to-nearest mode)\nBULLET::::- Round toward 0 – directed rounding towards zero\nBULLET::::- Round toward +∞ – directed rounding towards positive infinity\nBULLET::::- Round toward −∞ – directed rounding towards negative infinity.\n\nThe IEEE standard employs (and extends) the affinely extended real number system, with separate positive and negative infinities. During drafting, there was a proposal for the standard to incorporate the projectively extended real number system, with a single unsigned infinity, by providing programmers with a mode selection option. In the interest of reducing the complexity of the final standard, the projective mode was dropped, however. The Intel 8087 and Intel 80287 floating point co-processors both support this projective mode.\n\nThe following functions must be provided:\nBULLET::::- Add, subtract, multiply, divide\nBULLET::::- Square root\nBULLET::::- Floating point remainder. This is not like a normal modulo operation, it can be negative for two positive numbers. It returns the exact value of .\nBULLET::::- Round to nearest integer. For undirected rounding when halfway between two integers the even integer is chosen.\nBULLET::::- Comparison operations. Besides the more obvious results, IEEE 754 defines that −∞ = −∞, +∞ = +∞ and x ≠ codice_11 for any x (including codice_11).\n\nBULLET::::- codice_13 returns x with the sign of y, so codice_14 equals codice_15. This is one of the few operations which operates on a NaN in a way resembling arithmetic. The function codice_16 is new in the C99 standard.\nBULLET::::- −x returns x with the sign reversed. This is different from 0−x in some cases, notably when x is 0. So −(0) is −0, but the sign of 0−0 depends on the rounding mode.\nBULLET::::- codice_17\nBULLET::::- codice_18\nBULLET::::- codice_19 a predicate for \"x is a finite value\", equivalent to −Inf < x < Inf\nBULLET::::- codice_20 a predicate for \"x is a NaN\", equivalent to \"x ≠ x\"\nBULLET::::- codice_21 which turns out to have different exception behavior than NOT(x = y).\nBULLET::::- codice_22 is true when \"x is unordered with y\", i.e., either x or y is a NaN.\nBULLET::::- codice_23\nBULLET::::- codice_24 returns the next representable value from x in the direction towards y\n\nIn 1976 Intel began planning to produce a floating point coprocessor. John Palmer, the manager of the effort, persuaded them that they should try to develop a standard for all their floating point operations. William Kahan was hired as a consultant; he had helped improve the accuracy of Hewlett-Packard's calculators. Kahan initially recommended that the floating point base be decimal but the hardware design of the coprocessor was too far along to make that change.\n\nThe work within Intel worried other vendors, who set up a standardization effort to ensure a 'level playing field'. Kahan attended the second IEEE 754 standards working group meeting, held in November 1977. Here, he received permission from Intel to put forward a draft proposal based on the standard arithmetic part of their design for a coprocessor. The arguments over gradual underflow lasted until 1981 when an expert hired by DEC to assess it sided against the dissenters.\n\nEven before it was approved, the draft standard had been implemented by a number of manufacturers. The Intel 8087, which was announced in 1980, was the first chip to implement the draft standard.\n\nBULLET::::- IEEE 754\nBULLET::::- Minifloat for simple examples of properties of IEEE 754 floating point numbers\nBULLET::::- Fixed-point arithmetic\n\nBULLET::::- : A compendium of non-intuitive behaviours of floating-point on popular architectures, with implications for program verification and testing.\n\nBULLET::::- Comparing floats\nBULLET::::- Coprocessor.info: x87 FPU pictures, development and manufacturer information\nBULLET::::- IEEE 854-1987 — History and minutes\nBULLET::::- IEEE754 (Single and Double precision) Online Converter\n"}
{"id": "15190", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15190", "title": "Intel 80186", "text": "Intel 80186\n\nThe Intel 80186, also known as the iAPX 186, or just 186, is a microprocessor and microcontroller introduced in 1982. It was based on the Intel 8086 and, like it, had a 16-bit external data bus multiplexed with a 20-bit address bus. It was also available as the 80188, with an 8-bit external data bus.\n\nThe 80186 series was generally intended for embedded systems, as microcontrollers with external memory. Therefore, to reduce the number of integrated circuits required, it included features such as clock generator, interrupt controller, timers, wait state generator, DMA channels, and external chip select lines.\n\nThe initial clock rate of the 80186 was 6 MHz, but due to more hardware available for the microcode to use, especially for address calculation, many individual instructions ran faster than on an 8086 at the same clock frequency. For instance, the common \"register+immediate\" addressing mode was significantly faster than on the 8086, especially when a memory location was both (one of the) operand(s) and the destination. Multiply and divide also showed great improvement being several times as fast as on the original 8086 and multi-bit shifts were done almost four times as quickly as in the 8086.\n\nA few new instructions were introduced with the 80186 (referred to as the 8086-2 instruction set in some datasheets): enter/leave (replacing several instructions when handling stack frames), pusha/popa (push/pop all general registers), bound (check array index against bounds), and ins/outs (input/output of string). A useful \"immediate\" mode was added for the push, imul, and multi-bit shift instructions. These instructions were also included in the contemporary 80286 and in successor chips. (The instruction set of the 80286 is superset of the 80186's, plus new instructions for Protected mode.)\nThe (redesigned) CMOS version, 80C186, introduced DRAM refresh, a power-save mode, and a direct interface to the 8087 or 80187 floating point numeric coprocessor.\n\nThe 80186 would have been a natural successor to the 8086 in personal computers. However, because its integrated hardware was incompatible with the hardware used in the original IBM PC, the 80286 was used as the successor instead in the IBM PC/AT.\n\nA few notable personal computers used the 80186: the Australian Dulmont Magnum laptop, one of the first laptops; the Wang Office Assistant, marketed as a PC-like stand-alone word processor; the Mindset; the Siemens (not 100% IBM PC compatible but using MS-DOS 2.11); the Compis (a Swedish school computer); the French SMT-Goupil G4; the RM Nimbus (a British school computer); the Unisys ICON (a Canadian school computer); ORB Computer by ABS; the HP 100LX, HP 200LX, HP 1000CX, and HP OmniGo 700LX; the Tandy 2000 desktop (a somewhat PC-compatible workstation with sharp graphics for its day); the Telex 1260 (a desktop PC-XT compatible); the ; the Nokia MikroMikko 2. Acorn created a plug-in for the BBC Master range of computers containing an 80186-10 with 512 KB of RAM, the BBC Master 512 system.\n\nIn addition to the above examples of stand-alone implementations of the 80186 for personal computers, there was at least one example of an \"add-in\" accelerator card implementation: the Orchid Technology PC Turbo 186, released in 1985. It was intended for use with the original Intel 8088-based IBM PC (Model 5150).\n\nThe Intel 80186 is intended to be embedded in electronic devices that are not primarily computers. For example:\nBULLET::::- the 80186 was used to control the Microtek 8086 in-circuit emulator\nBULLET::::- its offshoot, Intel 80188 was embedded inside the Intel 14.4EX modem released in 1991. The 16 MHz processor was used to perform complex algorithms needed for forward error correction, Trellis modulation, and echo cancellation in the modem\nBULLET::::- the IBM 7171 protocol converter, which made ASCII character-oriented terminals appear as an IBM 3270 terminal to an IBM mainframe, used the Intel 80186 as its CPU.\n\nIn May 2006, Intel announced that production of the 186 would cease at the end of September 2007. Pin- and instruction-compatible replacements might still be manufactured by various third party sources, and FPGA versions are publicly available.\n\nBULLET::::- iAPX, for the iAPX name\n\nBULLET::::- Attribution:\n\nBULLET::::- Intel Datasheet\nBULLET::::- Scan of the Intel 80186 data book at datasheetarchive.com\nBULLET::::- Intel 80186/80188 images and descriptions at cpu-collection.de\nBULLET::::- Chipdb.org\n"}
{"id": "15191", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15191", "title": "Inquisition", "text": "Inquisition\n\nThe Inquisition, in historical ecclesiastical parlance also referred to as the \"Holy Inquisition\", was a group of institutions within the Catholic Church whose aim was to combat heresy. The Inquisition started in 12th-century France to combat religious dissent, in particular the Cathars and the Waldensians. Other groups investigated later included the Spiritual Franciscans, the Hussites (followers of Jan Hus) and the Beguines. Beginning in the 1250s, inquisitors were generally chosen from members of the Dominican Order, replacing the earlier practice of using local clergy as judges. The term Medieval Inquisition covers these courts up to mid-15th century.\n\nDuring the Late Middle Ages and the early Renaissance, the concept and scope of the Inquisition significantly expanded in response to the Protestant Reformation and the Catholic Counter-Reformation. It expanded to other European countries, resulting in the Spanish Inquisition and Portuguese Inquisition. The Spanish and Portuguese operated inquisitorial courts throughout their empires in Africa, Asia, and the Americas (resulting in the Peruvian Inquisition and Mexican Inquisition). The Spanish and Portuguese inquisitions focused particularly on the issue of Jewish anusim and Muslim converts to Catholicism, partly because these minority groups were more numerous in Spain and Portugal than in many other parts of Europe, and partly because they were often considered suspect due to the assumption that they had secretly reverted to their previous religions.\n\nWith the exception of the Papal States, the institution of the Inquisition was abolished in the early 19th century, after the Napoleonic Wars in Europe and the Spanish American wars of independence in the Americas. The institution survived as part of the Roman Curia, but in 1908 it was renamed the \"Supreme Sacred Congregation of the Holy Office\". In 1965 it became the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith.\n\nThe term \"Inquisition\" comes from the Medieval Latin word \"inquisitio\", which referred to any court process that was based on Roman law, which had gradually come back into use during the late medieval period. Today, the English term \"Inquisition\" can apply to any one of several institutions that worked against heretics (or other offenders against canon law) within the judicial system of the Roman Catholic Church. Although the term \"Inquisition\" is usually applied to ecclesiastical courts of the Catholic Church, it has several different usages:\n\nBULLET::::- an ecclesiastical tribunal,\nBULLET::::- the institution of the Catholic Church for combating heresy,\nBULLET::::- a number of historical expurgation movements against heresy (orchestrated by the Catholic Church or a Catholic state), or\nBULLET::::- the trial of an individual accused of heresy.\n\nThe Inquisition, as a church-court, had no jurisdiction over Moors and Jews as such. Generally, the Inquisition was concerned only with the heretical behaviour of Catholic adherents or converts.\n\nThe overwhelming majority of sentences seem to have consisted of penances like wearing a cross sewn on one's clothes, going on pilgrimage, etc. When a suspect was convicted of unrepentant heresy, the inquisitorial tribunal was required by law to hand the person over to secular authorities for final sentencing, at which point a magistrate would determine the penalty, which was usually burning at the stake although the penalty varied based on local law. The laws were inclusive of proscriptions against certain religious crimes (heresy, etc.), and the punishments included death by burning, although usually the penalty was banishment or imprisonment for life, which was generally commuted after a few years. Thus the inquisitors generally knew what would be the fate of anyone so remanded.\n\nThe 1578 edition of the Directorium Inquisitorum (a standard Inquisitorial manual) spelled out the purpose of inquisitorial penalties: \"... quoniam punitio non refertur primo & per se in correctionem & bonum eius qui punitur, sed in bonum publicum ut alij terreantur, & a malis committendis avocentur\" (translation: \"... for punishment does not take place primarily and \"per se\" for the correction and good of the person punished, but for the public good in order that others may become terrified and weaned away from the evils they would commit\").\n\nBefore 1100, the Catholic Church suppressed what they believed to be heresy, usually through a system of ecclesiastical proscription or imprisonment, but without using torture,\nand seldom resorting to executions. Such punishments were opposed by a number of clergymen and theologians, although some countries punished heresy with the death penalty.\nIn the 12th century, to counter the spread of Catharism, prosecution of heretics became more frequent. The Church charged councils composed of bishops and archbishops with establishing inquisitions (the Episcopal Inquisition). The first Inquisition was temporarily established in Languedoc (south of France) in 1184. The murder of Pope Innocent's papal legate Pierre de Castelnau in 1208 sparked the Albigensian Crusade (1209–1229). The Inquisition was permanently established in 1229, run largely by the Dominicans in Rome and later at Carcassonne in Languedoc.\n\nHistorians use the term \"Medieval Inquisition\" to describe the various inquisitions that started around 1184, including the Episcopal Inquisition (1184–1230s) and later the Papal Inquisition (1230s). These inquisitions responded to large popular movements throughout Europe considered apostate or heretical to Christianity, in particular the Cathars in southern France and the Waldensians in both southern France and northern Italy. Other Inquisitions followed after these first inquisition movements. The legal basis for some inquisitorial activity came from Pope Innocent IV's papal bull \"Ad extirpanda\" of 1252, which explicitly authorized (and defined the appropriate circumstances for) the use of torture by the Inquisition for eliciting confessions from heretics. However, Nicholas Eymerich, the inquisitor who wrote the \"Directorium Inquisitorum\", stated: 'Quaestiones sunt fallaces et ineficaces' (\"interrogations via torture are misleading and futile\"). By 1256 inquisitors were given absolution if they used instruments of torture.\n\nIn the 13th century, Pope Gregory IX (reigned 1227–1241) assigned the duty of carrying out inquisitions to the Dominican Order and Franciscan Order. By the end of the Middle Ages, England and Castile were the only large western nations without a papal inquisition.\nMost inquisitors were friars who taught theology and/or law in the universities. They used inquisitorial procedures, a common legal practice adapted from the earlier Ancient Roman court procedures. They judged heresy along with bishops and groups of \"assessors\" (clergy serving in a role that was roughly analogous to a jury or legal advisers), using the local authorities to establish a tribunal and to prosecute heretics. After 1200, a Grand Inquisitor headed each Inquisition. Grand Inquisitions persisted until the mid 19th century.\n\nWith the sharpening of debate and of conflict between the Protestant Reformation and the Catholic Counter-Reformation, Protestant societies came to see/use the Inquisition as a terrifying \"Other\", while staunch Catholics regarded the Holy Office as a necessary bulwark against the spread of reprehensible heresies.\n\nWhile belief in witchcraft, and persecutions directed at or excused by it, were widespread in pre-Christian Europe, and reflected in Germanic law, the influence of the Church in the early medieval era resulted in the revocation of these laws in many places, bringing an end to traditional pagan witch hunts. Throughout the medieval era mainstream Christian teaching had denied the existence of witches and witchcraft, condemning it as pagan superstition. However, Christian influence on popular beliefs in witches and \"maleficium\" (harm committed by magic) failed to entirely eradicate folk belief in witches.\n\nThe fierce denunciation and persecution of supposed sorceresses that characterized the cruel witchhunts of a later age were not generally found in the first thirteen hundred years of the Christian era. The medieval Church distinguished between \"white\" and \"black\" magic. Local folk practice often mixed chants, incantations, and prayers to the appropriate patron saint to ward off storms, to protect cattle, or ensure a good harvest. Bonfires on Midsummer's Eve were intended to deflect natural catastrophes or the influence of fairies, ghosts, and witches. Plants, often harvested under particular conditions, were deemed effective in healing.\n\nBlack magic was that which was used for a malevolent purpose. This was generally dealt with through confession, repentance, and charitable work assigned as penance. Early Irish canons treated sorcery as a crime to be visited with excommunication until adequate penance had been performed. In 1258 Pope Alexander IV ruled that inquisitors should limit their involvement to those cases in which there was some clear presumption of heretical belief.\n\nThe prosecution of witchcraft generally became more prominent throughout the late medieval and Renaissance era, perhaps driven partly by the upheavals of the era – the Black Death, Hundred Years' War, and a gradual cooling of the climate that modern scientists call the Little Ice Age (between about the 15th and 19th centuries). Witches were sometimes blamed. Since the years of most intense witch-hunting largely coincide with the age of the Reformation, some historians point to the influence of the Reformation on the European witch-hunt.\n\nDominican priest Heinrich Kramer was assistant to the Archbishop of Salzburg. In 1484 Kramer requested that Pope Innocent VIII clarify his authority to prosecute witchcraft in Germany, where he had been refused assistance by the local ecclesiastical authorities. They maintained that Kramer could not legally function in their areas.\n\nThe bull \"Summis desiderantes affectibus\" sought to remedy this jurisdictional dispute by specifically identifying the dioceses of Mainz, Köln, Trier, Salzburg, and Bremen. Some scholars view the bull as \"clearly political\". The bull failed to ensure that Kramer obtained the support he had hoped for, in fact he was subsequently expelled from the city of Innsbruck by the local bishop, George Golzer, who ordered Kramer to stop making false accusations. Golzer described Kramer as senile in letters written shortly after the incident. This rebuke led Kramer to write a justification of his views on witchcraft in his book \"Malleus Maleficarum\", written in 1486. In the book, Kramer stated his view that witchcraft was to blame for bad weather. The book is also noted for its animus against women. Despite Kramer's claim that the book gained acceptance from the clergy at the university of Cologne, it was in fact condemned by the clergy at Cologne for advocating views that violated Catholic doctrine and standard inquisitorial procedure. In 1538 the Spanish Inquisition cautioned its members not to believe everything the Malleus said.\n\nPortugal and Spain in the late Middle Ages consisted largely of multicultural territories of Muslim and Jewish influence, reconquered from Islamic control, and the new Christian authorities could not assume that all their subjects would suddenly become and remain orthodox Roman Catholics. So the Inquisition in Iberia, in the lands of the Reconquista counties and kingdoms like León, Castile, and Aragon, had a special socio-political basis as well as more fundamental religious motives.\n\nIn some parts of Spain towards the end of the 14th century, there was a wave of violent anti-Judaism, encouraged by the preaching of Ferrand Martinez, Archdeacon of Écija. In the pogroms of June 1391 in Seville, hundreds of Jews were killed, and the synagogue was completely destroyed. The number of people killed was also high in other cities, such as Córdoba, Valencia, and Barcelona.\n\nOne of the consequences of these pogroms was the mass conversion of thousands of surviving Jews. Forced baptism was contrary to the law of the Catholic Church, and theoretically anybody who had been forcibly baptized could legally return to Judaism. However, this was very narrowly interpreted. Legal definitions of the time theoretically acknowledged that a forced baptism was not a valid sacrament, but confined this to cases where it was literally administered by physical force. A person who had consented to baptism under threat of death or serious injury was still regarded as a voluntary convert, and accordingly forbidden to revert to Judaism. After the public violence, many of the converted \"felt it safer to remain in their new religion\". Thus, after 1391, a new social group appeared and were referred to as \"conversos\" or \"New Christians\".\n\nKing Ferdinand II of Aragon and Queen Isabella I of Castile established the Spanish Inquisition in 1478. In contrast to the previous inquisitions, it operated completely under royal Christian authority, though staffed by clergy and orders, and independently of the Holy See. It operated in Spain and in all Spanish colonies and territories, which included the Canary Islands, the Kingdom of Naples, and all Spanish possessions in North, Central, and South America. It primarily focused upon forced converts from Islam (Moriscos, Conversos and \"secret Moors\") and from Judaism (Conversos, Crypto-Jews and Marranos)—both groups still resided in Spain after the end of the Islamic control of Spain—who came under suspicion of either continuing to adhere to their old religion or of having fallen back into it.\n\nIn 1492 all Jews who had not converted were expelled from Spain; those who converted became nominal Catholics and thus subject to the Inquisition.\n\nIn the Americas, King Philip II set up three tribunals (each formally titled \"Tribunal del Santo Oficio de la Inquisición\") in 1569, one in Mexico, Cartagena de Indias (in modern-day Colombia) and Peru. The Mexican office administered Mexico (central and southeastern Mexico), Nueva Galicia (northern and western Mexico), the Audiencias of Guatemala (Guatemala, Chiapas, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica), and the Spanish East Indies. The Peruvian Inquisition, based in Lima, administered all the Spanish territories in South America and Panama.\n\nThe Portuguese Inquisition formally started in Portugal in 1536 at the request of King João III. Manuel I had asked Pope Leo X for the installation of the Inquisition in 1515, but only after his death in 1521 did Pope Paul III acquiesce. At its head stood a \"Grande Inquisidor\", or General Inquisitor, named by the Pope but selected by the Crown, and always from within the royal family. The Portuguese Inquisition principally focused upon the Sephardi Jews, whom the state forced to convert to Christianity. Spain had expelled its Sephardi population in 1492; many of these Spanish Jews left Spain for Portugal but eventually were subject to inquisition there as well.\n\nThe Portuguese Inquisition held its first \"auto-da-fé\" in 1540. The Portuguese inquisitors mostly focused upon the Jewish New Christians (i.e. \"conversos\" or \"marranos\"). The Portuguese Inquisition expanded its scope of operations from Portugal to its colonial possessions, including Brazil, Cape Verde, and Goa. In the colonies, it continued as a religious court, investigating and trying cases of breaches of the tenets of orthodox Roman Catholicism until 1821. King João III (reigned 1521–57) extended the activity of the courts to cover censorship, divination, witchcraft, and bigamy. Originally oriented for a religious action, the Inquisition exerted an influence over almost every aspect of Portuguese society: political, cultural, and social.\n\nThe Goa Inquisition, which began in 1560, was initiated by Jesuit priest Francis Xavier from his headquarters in Malacca, originally because of the New Christians who were living there and also in Goa and the region whose population had reverted to Judaism. The Goa inquisition also focused upon Catholic converts from Hinduism or Islam who were thought to have returned to their original ways. In addition, this inquisition prosecuted non-converts who broke prohibitions against the observance of Hindu or Muslim rites or interfered with Portuguese attempts to convert non-Christians to Catholicism. Aleixo Dias Falcão and Francisco Marques set it up in the palace of the Sabaio Adil Khan.\n\nAccording to Henry Charles Lea, between 1540 and 1794, tribunals in Lisbon, Porto, Coimbra, and Évora resulted in the burning of 1,175 persons, the burning of another 633 in effigy, and the penancing of 29,590. But documentation of 15 out of 689 autos-da-fé has disappeared, so these numbers may slightly understate the activity.\n\nWith the Protestant Reformation, Catholic authorities became much more ready to suspect heresy in any new ideas,\nincluding those of Renaissance humanism, previously strongly supported by many at the top of the Church hierarchy. The extirpation of heretics became a much broader and more complex enterprise, complicated by the politics of territorial Protestant powers, especially in northern Europe. The Catholic Church could no longer exercise direct influence in the politics and justice-systems of lands that officially adopted Protestantism. Thus war (the French Wars of Religion, the Thirty Years' War), massacre (the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre) and the missional and propaganda work (by the \"Sacra congregatio de propaganda fide\") of the Counter-Reformation came to play larger roles in these circumstances, and the Roman law type of a \"judicial\" approach to heresy represented by the Inquisition became less important overall.\nIn 1542 Pope Paul III established the Congregation of the Holy Office of the Inquisition as a permanent congregation staffed with cardinals and other officials. It had the tasks of maintaining and defending the integrity of the faith and of examining and proscribing errors and false doctrines; it thus became the supervisory body of local Inquisitions. Arguably the most famous case tried by the Roman Inquisition was that of Galileo Galilei in 1633.\n\nThe penances and sentences for those who confessed or were found guilty were pronounced together in a public ceremony at the end of all the processes. This was the \"sermo generalis\" or \"auto-da-fé\".\nPenances (not matters for the civil authorities) might consist of a pilgrimage, a public scourging, a fine, or the wearing of a cross. The wearing of two tongues of red or other brightly colored cloth, sewn onto an outer garment in an \"X\" pattern, marked those who were under investigation. The penalties in serious cases were confiscation of property by the Inquisition or imprisonment. This led to the possibility of false charges to enable confiscation being made against those over a certain income, particularly rich \"marranos\". Following the French invasion of 1798, the new authorities sent 3,000 chests containing over 100,000 Inquisition documents to France from Rome.\n\nThe wars of independence of the former Spanish colonies in the Americas concluded with the abolition of the Inquisition in every quarter of Hispanic America between 1813 and 1825.\n\nBy decree of Napoleon's government in 1797, the Inquisition in Venice was abolished in 1806.\n\nIn Portugal, in the wake of the Liberal Revolution of 1820, the \"General Extraordinary and Constituent Courts of the Portuguese Nation\" abolished the Portuguese inquisition in 1821.\n\nThe last execution of the Inquisition was in Spain in 1826. This was the execution by garroting of the school teacher Cayetano Ripoll for purportedly teaching Deism in his school. In Spain the practices of the Inquisition were finally outlawed in 1834.\n\nIn Italy, after the restoration of the Pope as the ruler of the Papal States in 1814, the activity of the Papal States Inquisition continued on until the mid-19th century, notably in the well-publicised Mortara affair (1858–1870). In 1908 the name of the Congregation became \"The Sacred Congregation of the Holy Office\", which in 1965 further changed to \"Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith\", as retained to .\n\nBeginning in the 19th century, historians have gradually compiled statistics drawn from the surviving court records, from which estimates have been calculated by adjusting the recorded number of convictions by the average rate of document loss for each time period. Gustav Henningsen and Jaime Contreras studied the records of the Spanish Inquisition, which list 44,674 cases of which 826 resulted in executions \"in person\" and 778 \"in effigy\" (i.e. a straw dummy was burned in place of the person). William Monter estimated there were 1000 executions between 1530–1630 and 250 between 1630–1730. Jean-Pierre Dedieu studied the records of Toledo's tribunal, which put 12,000 people on trial. For the period prior to 1530, Henry Kamen estimated there were about 2,000 executions in all of Spain's tribunals. Italian Renaissance history professor and Inquisition expert Carlo Ginzburg had his doubts about using statistics to reach a judgment about the period. \"In many cases, we don’t have the evidence, the evidence has been lost,\" said Ginzburg.\n\nBULLET::::- In the \"Monty Python\" comedy team's Spanish Inquisition sketches, an inept Inquisitor group repeatedly bursts into scenes after someone utters the words \"I didn't expect a kind of Spanish Inquisition\", screaming \"Nobody expects the Spanish Inquisition!\" The Inquisition then uses ineffectual forms of torture, including a dish-drying rack, soft cushions and a comfy chair.\n\nBULLET::::- The 1982 novel \"Baltasar and Blimunda\" by José Saramago, portrays how the Portuguese Inquisition impacts the fortunes of the title characters as well as several others from history, including the priest and aviation pioneer Bartolomeu de Gusmão.\n\nBULLET::::- The 1981 comedy film \"History of the World, Part I\", produced and directed by Mel Brooks, features a segment on the Spanish Inquisition.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Inquisitio\" is a French television series set in the Middle Ages.\n\nBULLET::::- In the novel \"Name of the Rose\" by Umberto Eco, there is some discussion about various sects of Christianity and inquisition, a small discussion about the ethics and purpose of inquisition, and a scene of Inquisition. In the movie by the same name, The Inquisition plays a prominent role including torture and a burning at the stake.\n\nBULLET::::- In the novel \"La Catedral del Mar\" by Ildefonso Falcones, and Netflix series \"Cathedral of the Sea\" based on the novel, there are scenes of inquisition investigations in small towns and a great scene in Barcelona.\n\nBULLET::::- Milos Foreman's \"Goya's Ghosts\", released June 9, 2007 in the US, brings to light the stories behind some of Spanish painter Francisco Goya's paintings during the Spanish Inquisition, particularly one of a priest condemning and imprisoning a beautiful woman for his own profit. Her family retaliates, but cannot save her.\n\nBULLET::::- A fictionalized version of the Inquisition serves as a basis for the action-adventure horror stealth game \"\".\n\nBULLET::::- Black legend (Spain)\nBULLET::::- Black Legend of the Spanish Inquisition\nBULLET::::- Cathars\nBULLET::::- List of people executed in the Papal States\nBULLET::::- Witch-cult hypothesis\nBULLET::::- Witch trials in the early modern period\nBULLET::::- Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith\nBULLET::::- Historical revision of the Inquisition\nBULLET::::- Marian Persecutions of Protestant heretics\nBULLET::::- Vatican Secret Archives\n\nBULLET::::- \"Directorium Inquisitorum\"\nBULLET::::- \"Histoire de l'Inquisition en France\"\nBULLET::::- \"Malleus Maleficarum\"\n\nBULLET::::- List of Grand Inquisitors\nBULLET::::- Konrad von Marburg\nBULLET::::- Tomás de Torquemada\nBULLET::::- Bernardo Gui\n\nBULLET::::- Trial of Joan of Arc\nBULLET::::- Trial of Galileo Galilei\nBULLET::::- Edgardo Mortara's abduction\nBULLET::::- Logroño witch trials\nBULLET::::- Caterina Tarongí\nBULLET::::- Execution of Giordano Bruno\n\nBULLET::::- Apologies by Pope John Paul II\n\nBULLET::::- Burman, Edward, \"The Inquisition: The Hammer of Heresy\" (Sutton Publishers, 2004) . A new edition of a book first published in 1984, a general history based on the main primary sources.\nBULLET::::- Carroll, Warren H., \"Isabel: the Catholic Queen\" Front Royal, Virginia, 1991 (Christendom Press)\nBULLET::::- Given, James B, \"Inquisition and Medieval Society\" (Cornell University Press, 2001)\nBULLET::::- Kamen, Henry, \"The Spanish Inquisition: A Historical Revision.\" (Yale University Press, 1999); . This revised edition of his 1965 original contributes to the understanding of the Spanish Inquisition in its local context.\nBULLET::::- Lea, Henry Charles, \"A History of the Inquisition of Spain\", 4 volumes (New York and London, 1906–7)\nBULLET::::- Walsh, William Thomas, \"Characters of the Inquisition\" (TAN Books and Publishers, Inc, 1940/97);\nBULLET::::- Whitechapel, Simon, \"Flesh Inferno: Atrocities of Torquemada and the Spanish Inquisition\" (Creation Books, 2003);\n\nBULLET::::- Frequently Asked Questions About the Inquisition by James Hannam\nBULLET::::- Jewish Virtual Library on the Spanish Inquisition\n"}
{"id": "15192", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15192", "title": "Isaac", "text": "Isaac\n\nIsaac is one of the three patriarchs of the Israelites and is an important figure in Abrahamic religions, such as Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. He was the son of Abraham and Sarah, the father of Jacob, and the grandfather of twelve tribes of Israel;. \n\nIsaac's name means \"he will laugh\", reflecting when both Abraham and Sarah laughed in disbelief when told by God that they would have a child. He is the only patriarch whose name was not changed, and the only one who did not move out of Canaan. According to the narrative, he died when he was 180 years old, the longest-lived of the three.\n\nThe anglicized name Isaac is a transliteration of the Hebrew term \"Yiṣḥāq\" (יִצְחָק) which literally means \"He laughs/will laugh.\" Ugaritic texts dating from the 13th century BCE refer to the benevolent smile of the Canaanite deity El. Genesis, however, ascribes the laughter to Isaac's parents, Abraham and Sarah, rather than El. According to the biblical narrative, Abraham fell on his face and laughed when God (Hebrew, \"Elohim\") imparted the news of their son's eventual birth. He laughed because Sarah was past the age of childbearing; both she and Abraham were advanced in age. Later, when Sarah overheard three messengers of the Lord renew the promise, she laughed inwardly for the same reason. Sarah denied laughing when God questioned Abraham about it.\n\nIn Amos, Isaac is spelled not with a צ but with a ש - Amos 7:9 ישחק.\n\nIt was prophesied to the patriarch Abraham that he would have a son and that his name should be Isaac. When Abraham became one hundred years old, this son was born to him by his first wife Sarah. Though this was Abraham's second son it was Sarah's first and only child.\n\nOn the eighth day from his birth, Isaac was circumcised, as was necessary for all males of Abraham's household, in order to be in compliance with Yahweh's covenant.\n\nAfter Isaac had been weaned, Sarah saw Ishmael mocking, and urged her husband to cast out Hagar the bondservant and her son, so that Isaac would be Abraham's sole heir. Abraham was hesitant, but at God's order he listened to his wife's request.\n\nAt some point in Isaac's youth, his father Abraham took him to Mount Moriah. At God's command, Abraham was to build a sacrificial altar and sacrifice his son Isaac upon it. After he had bound his son to the altar and drawn his knife to kill him, at the very last moment an angel of God prevented Abraham from proceeding. Rather, he was directed to sacrifice instead a nearby ram that was stuck in thickets.\nBefore Isaac was 40 (Gen 25:20) Abraham sent Eliezer, his steward, into Mesopotamia to find a wife for Isaac, from his nephew Bethuel's family. Eliezer chose the Aramean Rebekah for Isaac. After many years of marriage to Isaac, Rebekah had still not given birth to a child and was believed to be barren. Isaac prayed for her and she conceived. Rebekah gave birth to twin boys, Esau and Jacob. Isaac was 60 years old when his two sons were born. Isaac favored Esau, and Rebekah favored Jacob.\n\nThe narratives about Isaac do not mention him having concubines.\n\nIsaac moved to \"Beer-lahai-roi\" after his father died. When the land experienced famine, he removed to the Philistine land of Gerar where his father once lived. This land was still under the control of King Abimelech as it was in the days of Abraham. Like his father, Isaac also deceived Abimelech about his wife and also got into the well business. He had gone back to all of the wells that his father dug and saw that they were all stopped up with earth. The Philistines did this after Abraham died. So, Isaac unearthed them and began to dig for more wells all the way to Beersheba, where he made a pact with Abimelech, just like in the day of his father.\nIsaac grew old and became blind. He called his son Esau and directed him to procure some venison for him, in order to receive Isaac's blessing. While Esau was hunting, Jacob, after listening to his mother's advice, deceived his blind father by misrepresenting himself as Esau and thereby obtained his father's blessing, such that Jacob became Isaac's primary heir and Esau was left in an inferior position. According to Genesis 25:29–34, Esau had previously sold his birthright to Jacob for \"bread and stew of lentils\". Thereafter, Isaac sent Jacob into Mesopotamia to take a wife of his mother's brother's house. After 20 years working for his uncle Laban, Jacob returned home. He reconciled with his twin brother Esau, then he and Esau buried their father, Isaac, in Hebron after he died at the age of 180.\n\nAccording to local tradition, the graves of Isaac and Rebekah, along with the graves of Abraham and Sarah and Jacob and Leah, are in the Cave of the Patriarchs.\n\nIn rabbinical tradition, the age of Isaac at the time of binding is taken to be 37, which contrasts with common portrayals of Isaac as a child. The rabbis also thought that the reason for the death of Sarah was the news of the intended sacrifice of Isaac. The sacrifice of Isaac is cited in appeals for the mercy of God in later Jewish traditions. The post-biblical Jewish interpretations often elaborate the role of Isaac beyond the biblical description and primarily focus on Abraham's intended sacrifice of Isaac, called the \"aqedah\" (\"binding\"). According to a version of these interpretations, Isaac died in the sacrifice and was revived. According to many accounts of Aggadah, unlike the Bible, it is Satan who is testing Isaac as an agent of God. Isaac's willingness to follow God's command at the cost of his death has been a model for many Jews who preferred martyrdom to violation of the Jewish law.\n\nAccording to the Jewish tradition, Isaac instituted the afternoon prayer. This tradition is based on Genesis chapter 24, verse 63 (\"Isaac went out to meditate in the field at the eventide\").\n\nIsaac was the only patriarch who stayed in Canaan during his whole life and though once he tried to leave, God told him not to do so. Rabbinic tradition gave the explanation that Isaac was almost sacrificed and anything dedicated as a sacrifice may not leave the Land of Israel. Isaac was the oldest of the biblical patriarchs at the time of his death, and the only patriarch whose name was not changed.\n\nRabbinic literature also linked Isaac's blindness in old age, as stated in the Bible, to the sacrificial binding: Isaac's eyes went blind because the tears of angels present at the time of his sacrifice fell on Isaac's eyes.\n\nThe early Christian church continued and developed the New Testament theme of Isaac as a type of Christ and the Church being both \"the son of the promise\" and the \"father of the faithful\". Tertullian draws a parallel between Isaac's bearing the wood for the sacrificial fire with Christ's carrying his cross. and there was a general agreement that, while all the sacrifices of the Old Law were anticipations of that on Calvary, the sacrifice of Isaac was so \"in a pre-eminent way\".\n\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church and the Roman Catholic Church consider Isaac as a saint along with other biblical patriarchs. Along with those of other patriarchs and the Old Testament Righteous, his feast day is celebrated in the Eastern Orthodox Church and the Byzantine rite of the Catholic Church on the Second Sunday before Christmas (December 11–17), under the title \"the Sunday of the Forefathers\".\n\nThe New Testament states Isaac was \"offered up\" by his father Abraham, and that Isaac blessed his sons. Paul contrasted Isaac, symbolizing Christian liberty, with the rejected older son Ishmael, symbolizing slavery; Hagar is associated with the Sinai covenant, while Sarah is associated with the covenant of grace, into which her son Isaac enters. The Epistle of James chapter 2, verses 21–24, states that the sacrifice of Isaac shows that justification (in the Johannine sense) requires both faith and works.\n\nIn the Epistle to the Hebrews, Abraham's willingness to follow God's command to sacrifice Isaac is used as an example of faith as is Isaac's action in blessing Jacob and Esau with reference to the future promised by God to Abraham In verse 19, the author views the release of Isaac from sacrifice as analogous to the resurrection of Jesus, the idea of the sacrifice of Isaac being a prefigure of the sacrifice of Jesus on the cross.\n\nIslam considers Isaac a prophet of Islam, and describes him as the father of the Israelites and a righteous servant of God.\n\nIsaac, along with Ishmael, is highly important for Muslims for continuing to preach the message of monotheism after his father Abraham. Among Isaac's children was the follow-up Israelite patriarch Jacob, who too is venerated an Islamic prophet.\n\nIsaac is mentioned fifteen times by name in the Quran, often with his father and his son, Jacob. The Quran states that Abraham received \"good tidings of Isaac, a prophet, of the righteous\", and that God blessed them both (37: 112). In a fuller description, when angels came to Abraham to tell him of the future punishment to be imposed on Sodom and Gomorrah, his wife, Sarah, \"laughed, and We gave her good tidings of Isaac, and after Isaac of (a grandson) Jacob\" (11: 71–74); and it is further explained that this event will take place despite Abraham and Sarah's old age. Several verses speak of Isaac as a \"gift\" to Abraham (6: 84; 14: 49–50), and 24: 26–27 adds that God made \"prophethood and the Book to be among his offspring\", which has been interpreted to refer to Abraham's two prophetic sons, his prophetic grandson Jacob, and his prophetic great-grandson Joseph. In the Qur'an, it later narrates that Abraham also praised God for giving him Ishmael and Isaac in his old age (14: 39–41).\n\nElsewhere in the Quran, Isaac is mentioned in lists: Joseph follows the religion of his forefathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob (12: 38) and speaks of God's favor to them (12: 6); Jacob's sons all testify their faith and promise to worship the God that their forefathers, \"Abraham, Ishmael and Isaac\", worshiped (2: 127); and the Qur'an commands Muslims to believe in the revelations that were given to \"Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob and the Patriarchs\" (2: 136; 3: 84). In the Quran's narrative of Abraham's near-sacrifice of his son (37: 102), the name of the son is not mentioned and debate has continued over the son's identity, though many feel that the identity is the least important element in a story which is given to show the courage that one develops through faith.\n\nThe Quran mentions Isaac as a prophet and a righteous man of God. Isaac and Jacob are mentioned as being bestowed upon Abraham as gifts of God, who then worshipped God only and were righteous leaders in the way of God:\n\nSome scholars have described Isaac as \"a legendary figure\" or \"as a figure representing tribal history, or \"as a seminomadic leader.\" The stories of Isaac, like other patriarchal stories of Genesis, are generally believed to have \"their origin in folk memories and oral traditions of the early Hebrew pastoralist experience.\" \"The Cambridge Companion to the Bible\" makes the following comment on the biblical stories of the patriarchs:\n\nAccording to Martin Noth, a scholar of the Hebrew Bible, the narratives of Isaac date back to an older cultural stage than that of the West-Jordanian Jacob. At that era, the Israelite tribes were not yet sedentary. In the course of looking for grazing areas, they had come in contact in southern Philistia with the inhabitants of the settled countryside. The biblical historian A. Jopsen believes in the connection between the Isaac traditions and the north, and in support of this theory adduces Amos 7:9 (\"the high places of Isaac\").\n\nAlbrecht Alt and Martin Noth hold that, \"The figure of Isaac was enhanced when the theme of promise, previously bound to the cults of the 'God the Fathers' was incorporated into the Israelite creed during the southern-Palestinian stage of the growth of the Pentateuch tradition.\" According to Martin Noth, at the Southern Palestinian stage of the growth of the Pentateuch tradition, Isaac became established as one of the biblical patriarchs, but his traditions were receded in the favor of Abraham.\n\nThe earliest Christian portrayal of Isaac is found in the Roman catacomb frescoes. Excluding the fragments, Alison Moore Smith classifies these artistic works in three categories:\n\nBULLET::::- Biblical narratives and the Qur'an\nBULLET::::- Testament of Isaac\nBULLET::::- Wife–sister narratives in the Book of Genesis – three such narratives involving Abraham (two) and Isaac (one)\n\n\nBULLET::::- Isaac in Jewish Encyclopedia\nBULLET::::- Abraham's son as the intended sacrifice (Al-Dhabih, Qur'an 37:99, Qur'an 37:99–113): Issues in qur'anic exegesis, journal of Semitic Studies XXX1V/ Spring 1989\n"}
{"id": "15193", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15193", "title": "Italian Football League", "text": "Italian Football League\n\nItalian Football League (IFL) is an American football league in Italy.\n\nThe league was founded in 2008, taking over previous league's significance (National Football League Italy). The league was born as a result of the escape of several of the best clubs of the old championship organized by the Italian federation, such as Milano Rhinos, Parma Panthers, Bologna Doves and Bolzano Giants. However some of the historic Italian clubs have not joined the new league and continue to participate in different tournaments organized by other federations. This is the case of Legnano Frogs, Torino Giaguari, etc.\nIn the following years a lot of teams moved to the FIDAF (the federation where the IFL belongs to) and most of the biggest teams are now part of the IFL that is the First Division or in the other 2 divisions.\n\nBULLET::::- Ancona Dolphins (2008–present)\nBULLET::::- Bergamo Lions (2008–10, 2012, 2014–present)\nBULLET::::- Bologna Doves (2008–09, 2011–12) (now in III Division)\nBULLET::::- Bologna Warriors (2009–present)\nBULLET::::- Bolzano Giants (2008–present)\nBULLET::::- Catania Elephants (2008–12) (now in II Division)\nBULLET::::- Ferrara Aquile (2014–present)\nBULLET::::- Lazio Marines (2009–present)\nBULLET::::- Martesana Daemons (2012) (now in II Division)\nBULLET::::- Milano Rhinos (2008–present)\nBULLET::::- Milano Seamen (2011–present)\nBULLET::::- Napoli Briganti (2014–present ♦)\nBULLET::::- Palermo Corsari (2008 †)\nBULLET::::- Palermo Sharks (2008) (now in II Division)\nBULLET::::- Parma Panthers (2008–present)\nBULLET::::- Reggio Emilia Hogs (2009–13) (now in II Division)\nBULLET::::- Roma Grizzlies (2015–present ‡)\nBULLET::::- Torino Giaguari (2014–present)\n\n† defunct\n♦ due to league expansion the Napoli team can play the 2015 IFL season and is not relegated to the second division\n‡ Roma Grizzlies won the second division championship and earned the right to play the 2015 IFL season\n\n! Date !! Winner !! Opponent!! Result !! Location !! Television\n\nUntil 2014 the championship game was called \"Superbowl italiano\".\nBULLET::::- 2008 MVP Reggie Green (RB, Giants Bolzano)\nBULLET::::- 2009 MVP Reggie Green (RB, Giants Bolzano)\nBULLET::::- 2010 MVP Greg Hay (RB, Panthers Parma)\nBULLET::::- 2011 MVP Tanyon Bissell (WR, Panthers Parma), MVP Ita Tommaso Monardi (QB, Panthers Parma), MVP Def Michele Canali (DL, Panthers Parma)\nBULLET::::- 2012 MVP Kevin Grayson (WR, Panthers Parma)\nBULLET::::- 2013 MVP Alessandro Malpeli Avalli (RB, Panthers Parma), MVP Usa Ryan Christian (RB, Panthers Parma), MVP Def Simone Bernardoni (DL, Panthers Parma)\nBULLET::::- 2014 MVP Mattia Binda (RB, Milano Seamen),MVP Usa Jonathan Dally (QB, Milano Seamen), MVP def Andrea Zini (DB, Milano Seamen).\nBULLET::::- 2015 MVP Stefano Di Tunisi (WR, Milano Seamen)\nBULLET::::- 2016 MVP Nick Ricciardulli (RB, Rhinos Milano)\n\nBULLET::::- American Football International\nBULLET::::- American Football International Italy\nBULLET::::- Italian Superbowl history\n"}
{"id": "15195", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15195", "title": "Iduna", "text": "Iduna\n\nIduna can mean several things:\nBULLET::::- One of several modern anglicizations of the name of the Norse goddess Iðunn\nBULLET::::- 176 Iduna, an asteroid named after the goddess\nBULLET::::- \"Iduna\" (bird), a genus of tree warblers\nBULLET::::- Iduna (literature society)\nBULLET::::- Iduna, Wisconsin, an unincorporated community, United States\nBULLET::::- Iduna language, spoken in Papua New Guinea\nBULLET::::- The journal of the Swedish Geatish Society\nBULLET::::- Iduna, a character from Disney's animated films of Frozen\n"}
{"id": "15198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15198", "title": "Indic", "text": "Indic\n\nIndic is an adjective that may refer to:\nBULLET::::- the Indo-Aryan languages\nBULLET::::- various scripts:\nBULLET::::- Brahmic scripts, a family of scripts used to write Indian and other Asian languages\nBULLET::::- Kharoshthi (extinct)\nBULLET::::- the Indian numerals\nBULLET::::- the Indian religions, also known as the Dharmic faiths\nBULLET::::- other things related to the Indian subcontinent\n\nBULLET::::- Inđić, a Serbian surname\nBULLET::::- Indica (disambiguation)\n"}
{"id": "15199", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15199", "title": "Papua (province)", "text": "Papua (province)\n\nPapua is the largest and easternmost province of Indonesia, comprising most of Western New Guinea. It is bordered by the state of Papua New Guinea to the east, the province of West Papua to the west, the Pacific Ocean to the north, and the Arafura Sea to the south. According to the 2010 census by Statistics Indonesia, Papua had a population of 2,833,381, the majority of whom are Christians. The 2015 Intermediate Census revealed a population of 3,143,088, while the latest official estimate (as at mid 2019) is 3,347,100. The province is divided into twenty-eight regencies and one city. Its capital and largest city is Jayapura.\n\nThe province was formerly called Irian Jaya and comprised the entire Western New Guinea until the inauguration of the province of West Papua in 2003. In 2002, Papua adopted its current name and was granted a special autonomous status by the Indonesian legislation. Puncak Jaya is the province's highest mountain as well as the highest point of Indonesia.\n\nIndonesia proclaimed its independence in 1945 and claimed all of the territory of the former Dutch East Indies, including Western New Guinea. However, the region was retained by the Netherlands until the mid-1960s, which caused Indonesia to repeatedly launch military operations there. It was agreed through the New York Agreement in 1962 that the administration of Western New Guinea would be temporarily transferred from the Netherlands to Indonesia and that by 1969 the United Nations should oversee a referendum of the Papuan people, in which they would be given two options: to remain part of Indonesia or to become an independent nation. This vote was referred to as the Act of Free Choice. The referendum was recognised by the international community and the region became the Indonesian province of Irian Jaya. The province has been renamed as Papua since 2002.\n\nIn January 2003 President Megawati Sukarnoputri signed an order dividing Papua into three provinces: Central Irian Jaya (Irian Jaya Tengah), Papua (or East Irian Jaya, Irian Jaya Timur), and West Papua (Irian Jaya Barat). The formality of installing a local government for Jaraka in Irian Jaya Barat (West) took place in February 2003 and a governor was appointed in November; a government for Irian Jaya Tengah (Central Irian Jaya) was delayed from August 2003 due to violent local protests. The creation of this separate Central Irian Jaya Province was blocked by Indonesian courts, who declared it to be unconstitutional and in contravention of the Papua's special autonomy agreement. The previous division into two provinces was allowed to stand as an established fact.\n\nThe province of Papua is governed by a directly elected governor (currently Lukas Enembe) and a regional legislature, People's Representative Council of province of Papua (\"Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat Papua\"). A government organisation that only exists in Papua is the Papuan People's Council (Majelis Rakyat Papua) Papuan People's Council), which was formed by the Indonesian Government in 2005 as a coalition of Papuan tribal chiefs, tasked with arbitration and speaking on behalf of Papuan tribal customs.\n\nThe province of Papua is one of three provinces to have obtained special autonomy status, the others being Aceh and West Papua. According to Law 21/2001 on Special Autonomy Status \"(UU Nomor 21 Tahun 2001 tentang Otonomi khusus Papua),\" the provincial government of Papua is provided with authority within all sectors of administration, except for the five strategic areas of foreign affairs, security and defense, monetary and fiscal affairs, religion and justice. The provincial government is authorised to issue local regulations to further stipulate the implementation of the special autonomy, including regulating the authority of districts and municipalities within the province. Due to its special autonomy status, Papua province is provided with significant amount of special autonomy funds, which can be used to benefit its indigenous peoples. But the province has low fiscal capacity and it is highly dependent on unconditional transfers and the above-mentioned special autonomy fund, which accounted for about 55% of total revenues in 2008.\n\nAfter obtaining its special autonomy status, in order to allow the local population access to timber production benefits, the Papuan provincial government issued a number of decrees, enabling:\nBULLET::::- a Timber Logging Permit for Customary Communities, which enabled local people to carry out timber extraction in small concessions (250 to 1,000 hectares) for one year through a community-based or participatory community cooperative;\nBULLET::::- a Permit to Manage Customary Forests, which was a timber extraction permit for larger concessions (up to 2,000 hectares) for a maximum of 20 years;\nBULLET::::- logging companies had to pay compensations to local communities in addition to all other fees and taxes collected by the national government.\n\nAs of 2010 (following the separation of West Papua Province in 2003), the residual Papua Province consisted of 28 regencies (\"kabupaten\") and one autonomous city (\"kota\"); these regencies and the city are together subdivided as at 2018 into 560 districts (\"distriks\"), and thence into 5,521 \"villages\" (\"kelurahan\" and \"desa\"). In Papua, as well as in the province of West Papua, \"kecamatan\" are commonly referred to as \"distrik\".\n\nThe regencies (\"kabupaten\") and the city (\"kota\") are listed below with their areas and their populations at the 2010 Census and thw 2015 Intermediate Census.\n\n! Name  Area (km)  data-sort-type=\"number\" PopulationEstimate 2005  data-sort-type=\"number\" PopulationCensus 2010  data-sort-type=\"number\" PopulationCensus 2015  Capital  data-sort-type=\"number\" Number ofDistricts data-sort-type=\"number\" Number ofVillages HDI(2018)\n\nIn 2000, the present area of Papua Province originally consisted of nine regencies:\n\nBULLET::::- Biak Numfor, Jayapura, Jayawijaya, Merauke, Mimika, Nabire, Paniai, Puncak Jaya and Yapen Waropen\n\nOn 12 November 2002, the following nine additional regencies were created:\n\nBULLET::::- Keerom and Sarmi Regencies were split from Jayapura Regency\nBULLET::::- Bintang Mountains (Pegunungan Bintan), Tolikara and Yahukimo Regencies were split from Jayawijaya Regency\nBULLET::::- Asmat, Boven Digoel and Mappi Regencies were split from Merauke Regency (this larger area, the original Merauke Regency, is since 2013 planned to be created a new province under the name of South Papua (\"Papua Selatan\"))\nBULLET::::- Yapen Waropen Regency was split into Yapen Islands Regency (\"Kepulauan Yapen\") and Waropen Regency\n\nOn 8 January 2004, Supiori Regency was split from Biak Numfor Regency, bringing the total number of diregencies to nineteen.\n\nOn 15 March 2007, under Law No. 19/2007, the following two regencies were created:\n\nBULLET::::- Mamberamo Raya Regency was formed from parts of Sarmi and Waropen Regencies\nBULLET::::- Dogiyai Regency was similarly formed from the southern districts of Nabire Regency\n\nOn 4 January 2008, five other new regencies were created by Home Affairs Minister Mardiyanto who also installed five temporary regents. These five new regencies were:\n\nBULLET::::- 4 formerly from part of Jayawijaya Regency:\nBULLET::::- Central Mamberamo Regency with five districts, with Kobakma as the regental seat. Created by the Law No. 3/2008, the first regent was David Pagawak.\nBULLET::::- Yalimo Regency also has five districts, with Elelim as the regental capital. Created by the Law No. 4/2008, the first regent was Elia Ibrahim Loupatty.\nBULLET::::- Lanny Jaya Regency with ten districts, with Tiom as the regental capital. Created by the Law No.5/2008, the first regent was Pribadi Sukartono. The number of districts was subsequently increased to thirty-nine.\nBULLET::::- Nduga Regency with eight districts, with Kenyam as the regental capital. Created by the Law No. 6/2008, the first regent was Hans Dortheus. The number of districts was subsequently increased to thirty-two.\nBULLET::::- 1 formerly from part of Puncak Jaya Regency:\nBULLET::::- Puncak Regency also had eight districts, with Ilaga as the regental capital. Created by the Law No. 7/2008, the first regent was Simon Alom. The number of districts was subsequently increased to twenty-five.\n\nWithin 2008, Intan Jaya and Deiyai Regencies were split from Paniai Regency.\n\nOn 25 October 2013 the Indonesian House of Representatives (DPR) began reviewing draft laws on the establishment of 57 prospective regencies/cities (and 8 new provinces). This included two new provinces to be formed from parts of the existing Papua Province (and one new province from the existing West Papua Province), as well as the creation of seventeen new regencies and two new cities (independent municipalities). The new regencies will be:\n\nBULLET::::- Moyo, Muara Digul and Admi Korbay\nBULLET::::- Gili Menawa, Balin Senter, Bogaga, Puncak Trikora, Katengban, Okika, Yalimek, Ser Yahukimo Western Mountains, Mambera Hulu, Southwest Yahukimo, East Yahukimo and North Yahukimo\nBULLET::::- Northwest Yapen, East Yapen, Numfor Island and Ghondumi Sisare\n\nAnd the new cities will be the municipalities of:\nBULLET::::- Merauke and Lembah Baliem (Baliem Valley)\n\nThe two new provinces from parts of the existing Papua province have recently been approved by Indonesia's House of Representatives:\n\nBULLET::::- South Papua, and\nBULLET::::- Central Papua\n\nAnother new province, to be split from West Papua, will be Southwest Papua.\n\nThe proposed South Papua (\"Papua Selatan\") Province would cover an area of which is rich in natural resources. It will encompass four existing regencies:\n\nBULLET::::- Asmat, Boven Digoel, Mappi and Merauke\n\nAnd will thus equate closely to the \"original\" Merauke Regency prior to the splitting of that entity in 2002. Within the existing regencies, new regencies to be added are the following:\n\nBULLET::::- Moyo (from Boven Digoel Regency)\nBULLET::::- Muara Digul and Admi Korbay (both from Mappi Regency)\n\nAnd a new municipality of Merauke City (which is scheduled to be created from Merauke Regency). Following a visit to Papua by Joko Widodo in 2019, Minister of Home Affairs Tito Karnavian reported that the split have been discussed with and was accepted by Papua'a governor Lukas Enembe.\n\nAccording to a 20 January 2012 report in the \"Cenderawasih Pos Jakarta\", the central government is moving forward with the creation of \"Central Papua\". At that time it was envisaged that the new province would comprise ten existing regencies:\n\nBULLET::::- Supiori, Biak Numfor, Yapen Islands, Waropen, Nabire, Dogiyai, Deiyai, Intan Jaya, Paniai, and Mimika\n\nThe new Central Papua Province, and the residual Papua Province, would together include the new regencies.\n\nFirst of, for the residual Papua Province:\n\nBULLET::::- Gili Menawa (from Jayapura Regency)\nBULLET::::- Balin Senter (from Lanny Jaya Regency and Tolikara Regency)\nBULLET::::- Boboga (from Tolikara Regency)\nBULLET::::- Puncak Trikora (from Lanny Jaya Regency)\nBULLET::::- Katengban (from Bintang Mountains Regency)\nBULLET::::- Okika (from Jayawijaya Regency), and\nBULLET::::- Yalimek, Ser Yahukimo Western Mountains, Mambera Hulu, Southwest Yahukimo, East Yahukimo and North Yakuhimo (all six from Yahukimo Regency)\n\nAnd a new municipality of Lembah Baliem (Baliem Valley, created from Jayawijaya Regency)\n\nAnd for the new Central Papua Province:\n\nBULLET::::- Northwest Yapen and East Yapen (both from Yapen Islands Regency)\nBULLET::::- Numfor Island (from Biak Numfor Regency), and\nBULLET::::- Ghondumi Sisare (from Waropen Regency)\n\nThe city of Jayapura also has the status of an autonomous city, equal to a regency. It was founded on 7 March 1910 as \"Hollandia\" and is the capital. Since Indonesian administration the name of the city has been changed to Kotabaru, then to Sukarnopura before its current name, Jayapura. Jayapura is also the largest city of Papua Province, with a small but active tourism industry. It is built on a slope overlooking the bay. Cenderawasih University (\"UNCEN\") campus at Abepura houses the University Museum where some of the Asmat artifacts collected by Michael Rockefeller are stored. Both Tanjung Ria beach, near the market at Hamadi – site of 22 April 1944 Allied invasion during World War II – and the site of General Douglas MacArthur's World War II headquarters at Ifar Gunung have monuments commemorating the events.\n\nA central east–west mountain range dominates the geography of the island of New Guinea, over in total length. The western section is around long and across. The province contains the highest mountains between the Himalayas and the Andes, rising up to high, and ensuring a steady supply of rain from the tropical atmosphere. The tree line is around elevation and the tallest peaks contain permanent equatorial glaciers, increasingly melting due to a changing climate. Various other smaller mountain ranges occur both north and west of the central ranges. Except in high elevations, most areas possess a hot humid climate throughout the year, with some seasonal variation associated with the northeast monsoon season.\n\nThe southern and northern lowlands stretch for hundreds of kilometres and include lowland rainforests, extensive wetlands, savanna grasslands, and expanses of mangrove forest. The southern lowlands are the site of Lorentz National Park, also a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\n\nThe province's largest river is the Mamberamo located in the northern part of the province. The result is a large area of lakes and rivers known as the Lakes Plains region. The Baliem Valley, home of the Dani people, is a tableland above sea level in the midst of the central mountain range. Puncak Jaya, also known by its Dutch colonial name, \"Carstensz Pyramid\", is a limestone mountain peak above sea level. It is the highest peak of Oceania.\n\nThe following are some of the most well-known ethnic groups of Papua:\n\nBULLET::::- Amungme\nBULLET::::- Asmat\nBULLET::::- Bauzi\nBULLET::::- Dani\nBULLET::::- Kamoro\nBULLET::::- Kombai\nBULLET::::- Korowai\nBULLET::::- Mee\nBULLET::::- Sentani\nBULLET::::- Yali\nBULLET::::- Yei\n\nThe Yei (pronounced Yay) are sometimes known as the Jei, Je, Yei-nan people.\n\nThere are approximately 2,500 speakers of the Yei language. 40% Ethno Religionists- animistic tribal religion 60% Catholics and other Christians (blended with animistic beliefs & customs):\nThe Yei language is believed to have two dialects observed by a Wycliffe, SIL language survey in 2001. At home the Yei people speak their own language but use Indonesian for trade, wider communication and at school. Most Yei are literate in Indonesian.\n\nThere are elementary schools in each village. About 10–30% of children continue in middle school. Very few go to high school. \nThe nearest high school is in Merauke city.\nThey live primarily by hunting, fishing, and gardening short and long term crops in the lowlands. The Yei diet mainly consists of rice, vegetables, fish and roasted sago.\nWith their land at an altitude of less than 100 meters above sea level, the Yei people can best be accessed by vehicle on the road from Merauke or by motorized canoe up the Maro River. There is no airstrip or airplane access other than float plane which is currently available from Merauke through MAF by about a 15-minute flight to Toray.\nThe Poo and Bupul villages have a clinic but people still use traditional medicines.\nThere is very little infrastructure in the area: no telephones or toilets. At night electricity is run from a generator. There are single side-band radios (SSBs) in Bupul, Tanas, Poo, and Erambu villages, mainly used by the police and military force. Most villages get their drinking water from the Maro River, but some get it from wells or by collecting rain.\n\n \nThe population of Papua province has a fertility rate of 2.9 children per woman The population grew from the 1.94 million recorded in the 2000 Indonesia Census, to 2.83 million as recorded by the 2010 Census, and is officially estimated to be at about 3,347,100 in mid 2019. From the early 1990s until the mid 2010s, Papua had the highest population growth rate of all Indonesian provinces at over 3% annually. This was partly a result of birth rates, but mainly due to migration from other parts of Indonesia. An overwhelming percentage of these migrants came as part of a government-sponsored transmigration program.\n\nThe densest population center, other than the large coastal cities that house Indonesian bureaucratic and commercial apparatus, is located in and around the town of Wamena in the Baliem Valley of the Central Highlands.\n\nAccording to the 2010 census, 83.15% of the Papuans identified themselves as Christian with 65.48% being Protestant and 17.67% being Roman Catholic. 15.88% of the population was Muslim and less than 1% were Buddhist or Hindu. There is also substantial practice of animism, the traditional religion for many Papuans, with many blending animistic beliefs with other religions such as Christianity.\n\nIn 2011, Papuan caretaker governor Syamsul Arief Rivai claimed Papua's forests cover 42 million hectares with an estimated worth of Rp.700 trillion ($78 billion) and that if the forests were managed properly and sustainably, they could produce over 500 million cubic meters of logs per annum.\n\nThe Grasberg Mine, the world's largest gold mine and third largest copper mine, is located in the highlands near Puncak Jaya, the highest mountain in Papua.\n\nThe island has an estimated 16,000 species of plant, 124 genera of which are endemic. Papua's known forest fauna includes; marsupials (including possums, wallabies, tree-kangaroos, cuscuses); other mammals (including the endangered long-beaked echidna); bird species such as birds-of-paradise, cassowaries, parrots, and cockatoos; the world's longest lizards (Papua monitor); and the world's largest butterflies.\n\nThe waterways and wetlands of Papua are also home to salt and freshwater crocodile, tree monitors, flying foxes, osprey, bats and other animals; while the equatorial glacier fields remain largely unexplored.\n\nProtected areas within Papua province include the World Heritage Lorentz National Park, and the Wasur National Park, a Ramsar wetland of international importance.\n\nIn February 2006, a team of scientists exploring the Foja Mountains, Sarmi, discovered new species of birds, butterflies, amphibians, and plants, including possibly the largest-flowered species of rhododendron.\n\nEcological threats include logging-induced deforestation, forest conversion for plantation agriculture (including oil palm), smallholder agricultural conversion, the introduction and potential spread of alien species such as the crab-eating macaque which preys on and competes with indigenous species, the illegal species trade, and water pollution from oil and mining operations.\n\nBULLET::::- Asmat Swamp\nBULLET::::- List of earthquakes in Indonesia\nBULLET::::- List of rivers of Papua\nBULLET::::- Papua Conflict\n\nBULLET::::- King, Peter, \"West Papua Since Suharto: Independence, Autonomy, or Chaos?\". University of New South Wales Press, 2004, .\nBULLET::::- Languages and ethnic groups of Papua Province SIL Ethnologue\n"}
{"id": "15200", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15200", "title": "IMF (disambiguation)", "text": "IMF (disambiguation)\n\nThe IMF, or International Monetary Fund is an international organization.\n\nIMF may also refer to:\nBULLET::::- IMF (file format), a file format used in video games\nBULLET::::- Impossible Missions Force, a fictional secret espionage agency in the \"Mission: Impossible\" television and film series\nBULLET::::- International Music Feed, a music video television network\nBULLET::::- \"Internationale Medien und Film\", see Intermedia (production company)\n\nBULLET::::- Immunofluorescence Labeling, a method used in immunology and cytology\nBULLET::::- Individual Master File, the system used by the IRS to process tax transactions\nBULLET::::- Inframammary fold, in anatomy\nBULLET::::- Intern in Marriage and Family Therapy\nBULLET::::- Initial mass function, in stellar astronomy\nBULLET::::- Intelligent Message Filter, a Microsoft anti-spam technology for Exchange/Outlook\nBULLET::::- Intermolecular forces, non-bonding electrostatic forces between molecules\nBULLET::::- Interoperable Master Format, in cinema, a file-based master format for movies, standardized by SMPTE\nBULLET::::- Interplanetary magnetic field, in space\nBULLET::::- Intramuscular fat, in anatomy\n\nBULLET::::- International Myeloma Foundation, a non-profit serving patients with a cancer of plasma cells in the bone marrow\nBULLET::::- International Metalworkers' Federation, a global union federation\nBULLET::::- Internationale Maifestspiele Wiesbaden, International May Festival\n"}
{"id": "15201", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15201", "title": "Interdisciplinarity", "text": "Interdisciplinarity\n\nInterdisciplinarity or interdisciplinary studies involves the combining of two or more academic disciplines into one activity (e.g., a research project). It draws knowledge from several other fields like sociology, anthropology, psychology, economics etc. It is about creating something by thinking across boundaries. It is related to an \"interdiscipline\" or an \"interdisciplinary field,\" which is an organizational unit that crosses traditional boundaries between academic disciplines or schools of thought, as new needs and professions emerge. Large engineering teams are usually interdisciplinary, as a power station or mobile phone or other project requires the melding of several specialties. However, the term \"interdisciplinary\" is sometimes confined to academic settings.\n\nThe term \"interdisciplinary\" is applied within education and training pedagogies to describe studies that use methods and insights of several established disciplines or traditional fields of study. Interdisciplinarity involves researchers, students, and teachers in the goals of connecting and integrating several academic schools of thought, professions, or technologies—along with their specific perspectives—in the pursuit of a common task. The epidemiology of HIV/AIDS or global warming requires understanding of diverse disciplines to solve complex problems. \"Interdisciplinary\" may be applied where the subject is felt to have been neglected or even misrepresented in the traditional disciplinary structure of research institutions, for example, women's studies or ethnic area studies. Interdisciplinarity can likewise be applied to complex subjects that can only be understood by combining the perspectives of two or more fields.\n\nThe adjective \"interdisciplinary\" is most often used in educational circles when researchers from two or more disciplines pool their approaches and modify them so that they are better suited to the problem at hand, including the case of the team-taught course where students are required to understand a given subject in terms of multiple traditional disciplines. For example, the subject of land use may appear differently when examined by different disciplines, for instance, biology, chemistry, economics, geography, and politics.\n\nAlthough “interdisciplinary” and “interdisciplinarity” are frequently viewed as twentieth century terms, the concept has historical antecedents, most notably Greek philosophy. Julie Thompson Klein attests that \"the roots of the concepts lie in a number of ideas that resonate through modern discourse—the ideas of a unified science, general knowledge, synthesis and the integration of knowledge\", while Giles Gunn says that Greek historians and dramatists took elements from other realms of knowledge (such as medicine or philosophy) to further understand their own material. The building of Roman roads required men who understood surveying, material science, logistics and several other disciplines. Any broadminded humanist project involves interdisciplinarity, and history shows a crowd of cases, as seventeenth-century Leibniz's task to create a system of universal justice, which required linguistics, economics, management, ethics, law philosophy, politics, and even sinology.\n\nInterdisciplinary programs sometimes arise from a shared conviction that the traditional disciplines are unable or unwilling to address an important problem. For example, social science disciplines such as anthropology and sociology paid little attention to the social analysis of technology throughout most of the twentieth century. As a result, many social scientists with interests in technology have joined science, technology and society programs, which are typically staffed by scholars drawn from numerous disciplines. They may also arise from new research developments, such as nanotechnology, which cannot be addressed without combining the approaches of two or more disciplines. Examples include quantum information processing, an amalgamation of quantum physics and computer science, and bioinformatics, combining molecular biology with computer science. Sustainable development as a research area deals with problems requiring analysis and synthesis across economic, social and environmental spheres; often an integration of multiple social and natural science disciplines. Interdisciplinary research is also key to the study of health sciences, for example in studying optimal solutions to diseases. Some institutions of higher education offer accredited degree programs in Interdisciplinary Studies.\n\nAt another level, interdisciplinarity is seen as a remedy to the harmful effects of excessive specialization and isolation in information silos. On some views, however, interdisciplinarity is entirely indebted to those who specialize in one field of study—that is, without specialists, interdisciplinarians would have no information and no leading experts to consult. Others place the focus of interdisciplinarity on the need to transcend disciplines, viewing excessive specialization as problematic both epistemologically and politically. When interdisciplinary collaboration or research results in new solutions to problems, much information is given back to the various disciplines involved. Therefore, both disciplinarians and interdisciplinarians may be seen in complementary relation to one another.\n\nBecause most participants in interdisciplinary ventures were trained in traditional disciplines, they must learn to appreciate differing of perspectives and methods. For example, a discipline that places more emphasis on quantitative rigor may produce practitioners who are more scientific in their training than others; in turn, colleagues in \"softer\" disciplines who may associate quantitative approaches with difficulty grasp the broader dimensions of a problem and lower rigor in theoretical and qualitative argumentation. An interdisciplinary program may not succeed if its members remain stuck in their disciplines (and in disciplinary attitudes). Those who lack experience in interdisciplinary collaborations may also not fully appreciate the intellectual contribution of colleagues from those discipline . From the disciplinary perspective, however, much interdisciplinary work may be seen as \"soft\", lacking in rigor, or ideologically motivated; these beliefs place barriers in the career paths of those who choose interdisciplinary work. For example, interdisciplinary grant applications are often refereed by peer reviewers drawn from established disciplines; not surprisingly, interdisciplinary researchers may experience difficulty getting funding for their research. In addition, untenured researchers know that, when they seek promotion and tenure, it is likely that some of the evaluators will lack commitment to interdisciplinarity. They may fear that making a commitment to interdisciplinary research will increase the risk of being denied tenure.\n\nInterdisciplinary programs may also fail if they are not given sufficient autonomy. For example, interdisciplinary faculty are usually recruited to a joint appointment, with responsibilities in both an interdisciplinary program (such as women's studies) and a traditional discipline (such as history). If the traditional discipline makes the tenure decisions, new interdisciplinary faculty will be hesitant to commit themselves fully to interdisciplinary work. Other barriers include the generally disciplinary orientation of most scholarly journals, leading to the perception, if not the fact, that interdisciplinary research is hard to publish. In addition, since traditional budgetary practices at most universities channel resources through the disciplines, it becomes difficult to account for a given scholar or teacher's salary and time. During periods of budgetary contraction, the natural tendency to serve the primary constituency (i.e., students majoring in the traditional discipline) makes resources scarce for teaching and research comparatively far from the center of the discipline as traditionally understood. For these same reasons, the introduction of new interdisciplinary programs is often resisted because it is perceived as a competition for diminishing funds.\n\nDue to these and other barriers, interdisciplinary research areas are strongly motivated to become disciplines themselves. If they succeed, they can establish their own research funding programs and make their own tenure and promotion decisions. In so doing, they lower the risk of entry. Examples of former interdisciplinary research areas that have become disciplines, many of them named for their parent disciplines, include neuroscience, cybernetics, biochemistry and biomedical engineering. These new fields are occasionally referred to as \"interdisciplines\". On the other hand, even though interdisciplinary activities are now a focus of attention for institutions promoting learning and teaching, as well as organizational and social entities concerned with education, they are practically facing complex barriers, serious challenges and criticism. The most important obstacles and challenges faced by interdisciplinary activities in the past two decades can be divided into \"professional\", \"organizational\", and \"cultural\" obstacles.\nAn initial distinction should be made between interdisciplinary studies, which can be found spread across the academy today, and the study of interdisciplinarity, which involves a much smaller group of researchers. The former is instantiated in thousands of research centers across the US and the world. The latter has one US organization, the Association for Interdisciplinary Studies (founded in 1979), two international organizations, the International Network of Inter- and Transdisciplinarity (founded in 2010) and the Philosophy of/as Interdisciplinarity Network (founded in 2009), and one research institute devoted to the theory and practice of interdisciplinarity, the Center for the Study of Interdisciplinarity at the University of North Texas (founded in 2008). As of September 1, 2014, the Center for the Study of Interdisciplinarity has ceased to exist. This is the result of administrative decisions at the University of North Texas.\n\nAn interdisciplinary study is an academic program or process seeking to synthesize broad perspectives, knowledge, skills, interconnections, and epistemology in an educational setting. Interdisciplinary programs may be founded in order to facilitate the study of subjects which have some coherence, but which cannot be adequately understood from a single disciplinary perspective (for example, women's studies or medieval studies). More rarely, and at a more advanced level, interdisciplinarity may itself become the focus of study, in a critique of institutionalized disciplines' ways of segmenting knowledge.\n\nIn contrast, studies of interdisciplinarity raise to self-consciousness questions about how interdisciplinarity works, the nature and history of disciplinarity, and the future of knowledge in post-industrial society. Researchers at the Center for the Study of Interdisciplinarity have made the distinction between philosophy 'of' and 'as' interdisciplinarity, the former identifying a new, discrete area within philosophy that raises epistemological and metaphysical questions about the status of interdisciplinary thinking, with the latter pointing toward a philosophical practice that is sometimes called 'field philosophy'.\n\nPerhaps the most common complaint regarding interdisciplinary programs, by supporters and detractors alike, is the lack of synthesis—that is, students are provided with multiple disciplinary perspectives, but are not given effective guidance in resolving the conflicts and achieving a coherent view of the subject. Others have argued that the very idea of synthesis or integration of disciplines presupposes questionable politico-epistemic commitments. Critics of interdisciplinary programs feel that the ambition is simply unrealistic, given the knowledge and intellectual maturity of all but the exceptional undergraduate; some defenders concede the difficulty, but insist that cultivating interdisciplinarity as a habit of mind, even at that level, is both possible and essential to the education of informed and engaged citizens and leaders capable of analyzing, evaluating, and synthesizing information from multiple sources in order to render reasoned decisions.\n\nWhile much has been written on the philosophy and promise of interdisciplinarity in academic programs and professional practice, social scientists are increasingly interrogating academic discourses on interdisciplinarity, as well as how interdisciplinarity actually works—and does not—in practice. Some have shown, for example, that some interdisciplinary enterprises that aim to serve society can produce deleterious outcomes for which no one can be held to account.\n\nSince 1998, there has been an ascendancy in the value of interdisciplinary research and teaching and a growth in the number of bachelor's degrees awarded at U.S. universities classified as multi- or interdisciplinary studies. The number of interdisciplinary bachelor's degrees awarded annually rose from 7,000 in 1973 to 30,000 a year by 2005 according to data from the National Center of Educational Statistics (NECS). In addition, educational leaders from the Boyer Commission to Carnegie's President Vartan Gregorian to Alan I. Leshner, CEO of the American Association for the Advancement of Science have advocated for interdisciplinary rather than disciplinary approaches to problem solving in the 21st century. This has been echoed by federal funding agencies, particularly the National Institutes of Health under the direction of Elias Zerhouni, who has advocated that grant proposals be framed more as interdisciplinary collaborative projects than single researcher, single discipline ones.\n\nAt the same time, many thriving longstanding bachelor's in interdisciplinary studies programs in existence for 30 or more years, have been closed down, in spite of healthy enrollment. Examples include Arizona International (formerly part of the University of Arizona), the School of Interdisciplinary Studies at Miami University, and the Department of Interdisciplinary Studies at Wayne State University; others such as the Department of Interdisciplinary Studies at Appalachian State University, and George Mason University's New Century College, have been cut back. Stuart Henry has seen this trend as part of the hegemony of the disciplines in their attempt to recolonize the experimental knowledge production of otherwise marginalized fields of inquiry. This is due to threat perceptions seemingly based on the ascendancy of interdisciplinary studies against traditional academia.\n\nThere are many examples of when a particular idea, almost on the same period, arises in different disciplines. One case is the shift from the approach of focusing on \"specialized segments of attention\" (adopting one particular perspective), to the idea of \"instant sensory awareness of the whole\", an attention to the \"total field\", a \"sense of the whole pattern, of form and function as a unity\", an \"integral idea of structure and configuration\". This has happened in painting (with cubism), physics, poetry, communication and educational theory. According to Marshall McLuhan, this paradigm shift was due to the passage from an era shaped by mechanization, which brought sequentiality, to the era shaped by the instant speed of electricity, which brought simultaneity.\n\nAn article in the \"Social Science Journal\" attempts to provide a simple, common-sense, definition of interdisciplinarity, bypassing the difficulties of defining that concept and obviating the need for such related concepts as transdisciplinarity, pluridisciplinarity, and multidisciplinarity:\"To begin with, a discipline can be conveniently defined as any comparatively self-contained and isolated domain of human experience which possesses its own community of experts. Interdisciplinarity is best seen as bringing together distinctive components of two or more disciplines. In academic discourse, interdisciplinarity typically applies to four realms: knowledge, research, education, and theory. Interdisciplinary knowledge involves familiarity with components of two or more disciplines. Interdisciplinary research combines components of two or more disciplines in the search or creation of new knowledge, operations, or artistic expressions. Interdisciplinary education merges components of two or more disciplines in a single program of instruction. Interdisciplinary theory takes interdisciplinary knowledge, research, or education as its main objects of study.\"In turn, interdisciplinary \"richness\" of any two instances of knowledge, research, or education can be ranked by weighing four variables: number of disciplines involved, the \"distance\" between them, the novelty of any particular combination, and their extent of integration.\n\nInterdisciplinary knowledge and research are important because:\nBULLET::::1. \"Creativity often requires interdisciplinary knowledge.\nBULLET::::2. Immigrants often make important contributions to their new field.\nBULLET::::3. Disciplinarians often commit errors which can be best detected by people familiar with two or more disciplines.\nBULLET::::4. Some worthwhile topics of research fall in the interstices among the traditional disciplines.\nBULLET::::5. Many intellectual, social, and practical problems require interdisciplinary approaches.\nBULLET::::6. Interdisciplinary knowledge and research serve to remind us of the unity-of-knowledge ideal.\nBULLET::::7. Interdisciplinarians enjoy greater flexibility in their research.\nBULLET::::8. More so than narrow disciplinarians, interdisciplinarians often treat themselves to the intellectual equivalent of traveling in new lands.\nBULLET::::9. Interdisciplinarians may help breach communication gaps in the modern academy, thereby helping to mobilize its enormous intellectual resources in the cause of greater social rationality and justice.\nBULLET::::10. By bridging fragmented disciplines, interdisciplinarians might play a role in the defense of academic freedom.\"\n\n\"The modern mind divides, specializes, thinks in categories: the Greek instinct was the opposite, to take the widest view, to see things as an organic whole [...]. The Olympic games were designed to test the arete of the whole man, not a merely specialized skill [...]. The great event was the pentathlon, if you won this, you were a man. Needless to say, the Marathon race was never heard of until modern times: the Greeks would have regarded it as a monstrosity.\"\"Previously, men could be divided simply into the learned and the ignorant, those more or less the one, and those more or less the other. But your specialist cannot be brought in under either of these two categories. He is not learned, for he is formally ignorant of all that does not enter into his specialty; but neither is he ignorant, because he is 'a scientist,' and 'knows' very well his own tiny portion of the universe. We shall have to say that he is a learned ignoramus, which is a very serious matter, as it implies that he is a person who is ignorant, not in the fashion of the ignorant man, but with all the petulance of one who is learned in his own special line.\"\"It is the custom among those who are called \"practical\" men to condemn any man capable of a wide survey as a visionary: no man is thought worthy of a voice in politics unless he ignores or does not know nine tenths of the most important relevant facts.\"\n\nBULLET::::- Commensurability (philosophy of science)\nBULLET::::- Domon group\nBULLET::::- Encyclopedism\nBULLET::::- Holism\nBULLET::::- Holism in science\nBULLET::::- Intellectual synthesis\nBULLET::::- Integrative learning\nBULLET::::- Interdiscipline\nBULLET::::- Interprofessional education\nBULLET::::- Methodology\nBULLET::::- Science of team science\nBULLET::::- Social ecological model\nBULLET::::- Science and technology studies (STS)\nBULLET::::- Synoptic philosophy\nBULLET::::- Systems theory\nBULLET::::- Periodic table of human sciences in Tinbergen's four questions\nBULLET::::- Transdisciplinarity\n\nBULLET::::- Association for Integrative Studies\nBULLET::::- Center for the Study of Interdisciplinarity\nBULLET::::- Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in the Arts (University of Manchester)\nBULLET::::- College for Interdisciplinary Studies, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada\nBULLET::::- Frodeman, R., Klein, J.T., and Mitcham, C. \"Oxford Handbook of Interdisciplinarity\". Oxford University Press, 2010.\nBULLET::::- The Evergreen State College, Olympia, Washington\nBULLET::::- Gram Vikas (2007) Annual Report, p. 19.\nBULLET::::- Hang Seng Centre for Cognitive Studies\nBULLET::::- Indiresan, P.V. (1990) \"Managing Development: Decentralisation, Geographical Socialism And Urban Replication\". India: Sage\nBULLET::::- Interdisciplinary Arts Department, Columbia College Chicago\nBULLET::::- Interdisciplinarity and tenure\nBULLET::::- Interdisciplinary Studies Project, Harvard University School of Education, Project Zero\nBULLET::::- Klein, Julie Thompson (1996) \"Crossing Boundaries: Knowledge, Disciplinarities, and Interdisciplinarities\" (University Press of Virginia)\nBULLET::::- Klein, Julie Thompson (2006) \"Resources for interdisciplinary studies.\" \"Change\", (Mark/April). 52–58\nBULLET::::- Kockelmans, Joseph J. editor (1979) \"Interdisciplinarity and Higher Education\", The Pennsylvania State University Press .\nBULLET::::- Gerhard Medicus Interdisciplinarity in Human Sciences (Documents No. 6, 7 and 8 in English)\nBULLET::::- Moran, Joe. (2002). Interdisciplinarity.\nBULLET::::- NYU Gallatin School of Individualized Study, New York, NY\nBULLET::::- Poverty Action Lab (accessed on 4 November 2008)\nBULLET::::- Rhoten, D. (2003). A multi-method analysis of the social and technical conditions for interdisciplinary collaboration.\nBULLET::::- School of Social Ecology at the University of California, Irvine\nBULLET::::- Siskin, L.S. & Little, J.W. (1995). The Subjects in Question. Teachers College Press. about the departmental organization of high schools and efforts to change that.\nBULLET::::- Stiglitz, Joseph (2002) Globalisation and its Discontents, United States of America, W.W. Norton and Company\nBULLET::::- Sumner, A and M. Tribe (2008) International Development Studies: Theories and Methods in Research and Practice, London: Sage\nBULLET::::- Thorbecke, Eric. (2006) \"The Evolution of the Development Doctrine, 1950–2005\". UNU-WIDER Research Paper No. 2006/155. United Nations University, World Institute for Development Economics Research\nBULLET::::- Trans- & inter-disciplinary science approaches- A guide to on-line resources on integration and trans- and inter-disciplinary approaches.\nBULLET::::- Truman State University's Interdisciplinary Studies Program\nBULLET::::- Peter Weingart and Nico Stehr, eds. 2000. \"Practicing Interdisciplinarity\" (University of Toronto Press)\nBULLET::::- Peter Weingart and Britta Padberg, eds. 2014. \"University Experiments in Interdisciplinarity - Obstacles and Opportunities\", Bielefeld: transcript Verlag\n\nBULLET::::- \"National Science Foundation Workshop Report: Interdisciplinary Collaboration in Innovative Science and Engineering Fields\"\nBULLET::::- \"Rethinking Interdisciplnarity\" online conference, organized by the Institut Nicod, CNRS, Paris [broken]\nBULLET::::- Center for the Study of Interdisciplinarity at the University of North Texas\nBULLET::::- \"Labyrinthe. Atelier interdisciplinaire\", a journal (in French), with a special issue on \"La Fin des Disciplines?\"\nBULLET::::- \"Rupkatha Journal on Interdisciplinary Studies in Humanities: An Online Open Access E-Journal\", publishing articles on a number of areas\nBULLET::::- Article about interdisciplinary modeling (in French with an English abstract)\nBULLET::::- Wolf, Dieter. Unity of Knowledge, an interdisciplinary project\nBULLET::::- Soka University of America has no disciplinary departments and emphasizes interdisciplinary concentrations in the Humanities, Social and Behavioral Sciences, International Studies, and Environmental Studies.\nBULLET::::- SystemsX.ch - The Swiss Initiative in Systems Biology\nBULLET::::- Interdisciplinarity at Wikispaces - creative explorations of the term interdisciplinarity and its interactions with gender studies\n"}
{"id": "15205", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15205", "title": "Insertion sort", "text": "Insertion sort\n\nInsertion sort is a simple sorting algorithm that builds the final sorted array (or list) one item at a time. It is much less efficient on large lists than more advanced algorithms such as quicksort, heapsort, or merge sort. However, insertion sort provides several advantages:\n\nBULLET::::- Simple implementation: Jon Bentley shows a three-line C version, and a five-line optimized version\nBULLET::::- Efficient for (quite) small data sets, much like other quadratic sorting algorithms\nBULLET::::- More efficient in practice than most other simple quadratic (i.e., O(\"n\")) algorithms such as selection sort or bubble sort\nBULLET::::- Adaptive, i.e., efficient for data sets that are already substantially sorted: the time complexity is O(\"kn\") when each element in the input is no more than places away from its sorted position\nBULLET::::- Stable; i.e., does not change the relative order of elements with equal keys\nBULLET::::- In-place; i.e., only requires a constant amount O(1) of additional memory space\nBULLET::::- Online; i.e., can sort a list as it receives it\n\nWhen people manually sort cards in a bridge hand, most use a method that is similar to insertion sort.\n\nInsertion sort iterates, consuming one input element each repetition, and growing a sorted output list. At each iteration, insertion sort removes one element from the input data, finds the location it belongs within the sorted list, and inserts it there. It repeats until no input elements remain.\n\nSorting is typically done in-place, by iterating up the array, growing the sorted list behind it. At each array-position, it checks the value there against the largest value in the sorted list (which happens to be next to it, in the previous array-position checked). If larger, it leaves the element in place and moves to the next. If smaller, it finds the correct position within the sorted list, shifts all the larger values up to make a space, and inserts into that correct position.\n\nThe resulting array after \"k\" iterations has the property where the first \"k\" + 1 entries are sorted (\"+1\" because the first entry is skipped). In each iteration the first remaining entry of the input is removed, and inserted into the result at the correct position, thus extending the result:\n\nbecomes\n\nwith each element greater than \"x\" copied to the right as it is compared against \"x\".\n\nThe most common variant of insertion sort, which operates on arrays, can be described as follows:\nBULLET::::1. Suppose there exists a function called \"Insert\" designed to insert a value into a sorted sequence at the beginning of an array. It operates by beginning at the end of the sequence and shifting each element one place to the right until a suitable position is found for the new element. The function has the side effect of overwriting the value stored immediately after the sorted sequence in the array.\nBULLET::::2. To perform an insertion sort, begin at the left-most element of the array and invoke \"Insert\" to insert each element encountered into its correct position. The ordered sequence into which the element is inserted is stored at the beginning of the array in the set of indices already examined. Each insertion overwrites a single value: the value being inserted.\n\nPseudocode of the complete algorithm follows, where the arrays are zero-based:\n\nThe outer loop runs over all the elements except the first one, because the single-element prefix codice_1 is trivially sorted, so the invariant that the first codice_2 entries are sorted is true from the start. The inner loop moves element codice_3 to its correct place so that after the loop, the first codice_4 elements are sorted. Note that the codice_5-operator in the test must use short-circuit evaluation, otherwise the test might result in an array bounds error, when codice_6 and it tries to evaluate codice_7 (i.e. accessing codice_8 fails).\n\nAfter expanding the codice_9 operation in-place as codice_10 (where codice_11 is a temporary variable), a slightly faster version can be produced that moves codice_3 to its position in one go and only performs one assignment in the inner loop body:\n\nThe new inner loop shifts elements to the right to clear a spot for codice_13.\n\nThe algorithm can also be implemented in a recursive way. The recursion just replaces the outer loop, calling itself and storing successively smaller values of \"n\" on the stack until \"n\" equals 0, where the function then returns back up the call chain to execute the code after each recursive call starting with \"n\" equal to 1, with \"n\" increasing by 1 as each instance of the function returns to the prior instance. The initial call would be \"insertionSortR(A, length(A)-1)\".\n\nIt does not make the code any shorter, it also doesn't reduce the execution time, but it increases the additional memory consumption from to (at the deepest level of recursion the stack contains references to the array, each with accompanying value of variable from down to 1).\n\nThe best case input is an array that is already sorted. In this case insertion sort has a linear running time (i.e., O(\"n\")). During each iteration, the first remaining element of the input is only compared with the right-most element of the sorted subsection of the array.\n\nThe simplest worst case input is an array sorted in reverse order. The set of all worst case inputs consists of all arrays where each element is the smallest or second-smallest of the elements before it. In these cases every iteration of the inner loop will scan and shift the entire sorted subsection of the array before inserting the next element. This gives insertion sort a quadratic running time (i.e., O(\"n\")).\n\nThe average case is also quadratic, which makes insertion sort impractical for sorting large arrays. However, insertion sort is one of the fastest algorithms for sorting very small arrays, even faster than quicksort; indeed, good quicksort implementations use insertion sort for arrays smaller than a certain threshold, also when arising as subproblems; the exact threshold must be determined experimentally and depends on the machine, but is commonly around ten.\n\nExample:\nThe following table shows the steps for sorting the sequence {3, 7, 4, 9, 5, 2, 6, 1}. In each step, the key under consideration is underlined. The key that was moved (or left in place because it was biggest yet considered) in the previous step is marked with an asterisk.\n\nInsertion sort is very similar to selection sort. As in selection sort, after \"k\" passes through the array, the first \"k\" elements are in sorted order. However, the fundamental difference between the two algorithms is that for selection sort these are the \"k\" smallest elements of the unsorted input, while in insertion sort they are simply the first \"k\" elements of the input. The primary advantage of insertion sort over selection sort is that selection sort must always scan all remaining elements to find the absolute smallest element in the unsorted portion of the list, while insertion sort requires only a single comparison when the (\"k\" + 1)-st element is greater than the \"k\"-th element; when this is frequently true (such as if the input array is already sorted or partially sorted), insertion sort is distinctly more efficient compared to selection sort. On average (assuming the rank of the (\"k\" + 1)-st element rank is random), insertion sort will require comparing and shifting half of the previous \"k\" elements, meaning that insertion sort will perform about half as many comparisons as selection sort on average. In the worst case for insertion sort (when the input array is reverse-sorted), insertion sort performs just as many comparisons as selection sort. However, a disadvantage of insertion sort over selection sort is that it requires more writes due to the fact that, on each iteration, inserting the (\"k\" + 1)-st element into the sorted portion of the array requires many element swaps to shift all of the following elements, while only a single swap is required for each iteration of selection sort. In general, insertion sort will write to the array O(\"n\") times, whereas selection sort will write only O() times. For this reason selection sort may be preferable in cases where writing to memory is significantly more expensive than reading, such as with EEPROM or flash memory.\n\nWhile some divide-and-conquer algorithms such as quicksort and mergesort outperform insertion sort for larger arrays, non-recursive sorting algorithms such as insertion sort or selection sort are generally faster for very small arrays (the exact size varies by environment and implementation, but is typically between 7 and 50 elements). Therefore, a useful optimization in the implementation of those algorithms is a hybrid approach, using the simpler algorithm when the array has been divided to a small size.\n\nD. L. Shell made substantial improvements to the algorithm; the modified version is called Shell sort. The sorting algorithm compares elements separated by a distance that decreases on each pass. Shell sort has distinctly improved running times in practical work, with two simple variants requiring O(\"n\") and O(\"n\") running time.\n\nIf the cost of comparisons exceeds the cost of swaps, as is the case for example with string keys stored by reference or with human interaction (such as choosing one of a pair displayed side-by-side), then using \"binary insertion sort\" may yield better performance. Binary insertion sort employs a binary search to determine the correct location to insert new elements, and therefore performs ⌈log \"n\"⌉ comparisons in the worst case, which is O(\"n\" log \"n\"). The algorithm as a whole still has a running time of O(\"n\") on average because of the series of swaps required for each insertion.\n\nThe number of swaps can be reduced by calculating the position of multiple elements before moving them. For example, if the target position of two elements is calculated before they are moved into the proper position, the number of swaps can be reduced by about 25% for random data. In the extreme case, this variant works similar to merge sort.\n\nA variant named \"binary merge sort\" uses a \"binary insertion sort\" to sort groups of 32 elements, followed by a final sort using merge sort. It combines the speed of insertion sort on small data sets with the speed of merge sort on large data sets.\n\nTo avoid having to make a series of swaps for each insertion, the input could be stored in a linked list, which allows elements to be spliced into or out of the list in constant time when the position in the list is known. However, searching a linked list requires sequentially following the links to the desired position: a linked list does not have random access, so it cannot use a faster method such as binary search. Therefore, the running time required for searching is O(\"n\"), and the time for sorting is O(\"n\"). If a more sophisticated data structure (e.g., heap or binary tree) is used, the time required for searching and insertion can be reduced significantly; this is the essence of heap sort and binary tree sort.\n\nIn 2006 Bender, Martin Farach-Colton, and Mosteiro published a new variant of insertion sort called \"library sort\" or \"gapped insertion sort\" that leaves a small number of unused spaces (i.e., \"gaps\") spread throughout the array. The benefit is that insertions need only shift elements over until a gap is reached. The authors show that this sorting algorithm runs with high probability in O(\"n\" log \"n\") time.\n\nIf a skip list is used, the insertion time is brought down to O(log \"n\"), and swaps are not needed because the skip list is implemented on a linked list structure. The final running time for insertion would be O(\"n\" log \"n\").\n\n\"List insertion sort\" is a variant of insertion sort. It reduces the number of movements.\n\nIf the items are stored in a linked list, then the list can be sorted with O(1) additional space. The algorithm starts with an initially empty (and therefore trivially sorted) list. The input items are taken off the list one at a time, and then inserted in the proper place in the sorted list. When the input list is empty, the sorted list has the desired result.\n\nThe algorithm below uses a trailing pointer for the insertion into the sorted list. A simpler recursive method rebuilds the list each time (rather than splicing) and can use O(\"n\") stack space.\n\nBULLET::::- – graphical demonstration\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- – implementations of insertion sort in various programming languages\n"}
{"id": "15207", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15207", "title": "Ig Nobel Prize", "text": "Ig Nobel Prize\n\nThe Ig Nobel Prize ( ) is a satiric prize awarded annually since 1991 to celebrate ten unusual or trivial achievements in scientific research, its stated aim being to \"honor achievements that first make people laugh, and then make them think.\" The name of the award is a pun on the Nobel Prize, which it parodies, and the word \"ignoble\".\n\nOrganized by the scientific humor magazine \"Annals of Improbable Research\" (AIR), the Ig Nobel Prizes are presented by Nobel laureates in a ceremony at the Sanders Theater, Harvard University, and are followed by the winners’ public lectures at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.\n\nThe Ig Nobels were created in 1991 by Marc Abrahams, editor and co-founder of the \"Annals of Improbable Research\", editor-in-chief of the \"Journal of Irreproducible Results\" and master of ceremonies at all subsequent awards ceremonies. Awards were presented at that time for discoveries \"that cannot, or should not, be reproduced\". Ten prizes are awarded each year in many categories, including the Nobel Prize categories of physics, chemistry, physiology/medicine, literature, and peace, but also other categories such as public health, engineering, biology, and interdisciplinary research. The Ig Nobel Prizes recognize genuine achievements, with the exception of three prizes awarded in the first year to fictitious scientists Josiah S. Carberry, Paul DeFanti, and Thomas Kyle.\n\nThe awards are sometimes criticism via satire, as in the two awards given for homeopathy research, prizes in \"science education\" to the Kansas State Department of Education and Colorado State Board of Education for their stance regarding the teaching of evolution, and the prize awarded to \"Social Text\" after the Sokal affair. Most often, however, they draw attention to scientific articles that have some humorous or unexpected aspect. Examples range from the discovery that the presence of humans tends to sexually arouse ostriches, to the statement that black holes fulfill all the technical requirements for being the location of Hell, to research on the \"five-second rule\", a tongue-in-cheek belief that food dropped on the floor will not become contaminated if it is picked up within five seconds.\n\nSir Andre Geim, who had been awarded an Ig Nobel Prize in 2000 for levitating a frog by magnetism, was awarded a Nobel Prize in physics in 2010 for his work with the electromagnetic properties of graphene. He is the only individual, as of 2019, to have received both a Nobel and an Ig Nobel.\n\nThe prizes are mostly presented by Nobel laureates, originally at a ceremony in a lecture hall at MIT, but now in the Sanders Theater at Harvard University. The event contains a number of running jokes, including Miss Sweetie Poo, a little girl who repeatedly cries out, \"Please stop: I'm bored\", in a high-pitched voice if speakers go on too long. The awards ceremony is traditionally closed with the words: \"If you didn't win a prize—and especially if you did—better luck next year!\"\n\nThe ceremony is co-sponsored by the Harvard Computer Society, the Harvard–Radcliffe Science Fiction Association and the Harvard–Radcliffe Society of Physics Students.\n\nThrowing paper planes onto the stage is a long-standing tradition. For many years Professor Roy J. Glauber swept the stage clean of the airplanes as the official \"Keeper of the Broom.\" Glauber could not attend the 2005 awards because he was traveling to Stockholm to claim a genuine Nobel Prize in Physics.\n\nThe \"Parade of Ignitaries\" into the hall includes supporting groups. At the 1997 ceremonies, a team of \"cryogenic sex researchers\" distributed a pamphlet titled \"Safe Sex at Four Kelvin.\" Delegates from the Museum of Bad Art are often on hand to display some pieces from their collection.\n\nThe ceremony is recorded and broadcast on National Public Radio in the US and is shown live over the Internet. The recording is broadcast every year, on the Friday after U.S. Thanksgiving, on the public radio program \"Science Friday\". In recognition of this, the audience chants the name of the radio show's host, Ira Flatow.\n\nTwo books have been published with write-ups on some winners: \"The Ig Nobel Prize\", and \"The Ig Nobel Prize 2\" which was later retitled \"The Man Who Tried to Clone Himself\".\n\nAn Ig Nobel Tour has been an annual part of National Science week in the United Kingdom since 2003. The tour has also traveled to Australia several times, Aarhus University in Denmark in April 2009, Italy and The Netherlands.\n\nA September 2009 article in \"The National\" titled \"A noble side to Ig Nobels\" says that, although the Ig Nobel Awards are veiled criticism of trivial research, history shows that trivial research sometimes leads to important breakthroughs. For instance, in 2006, a study showing that one of the malaria mosquitoes (\"Anopheles gambiae\") is attracted equally to the smell of Limburger cheese and the smell of human feet earned the Ig Nobel Prize in the area of biology. As a direct result of these findings, traps baited with this cheese have been placed in strategic locations in some parts of Africa to combat the epidemic of malaria.\n\nBULLET::::- List of Ig Nobel Prize winners\nBULLET::::- Darwin Awards – an award for enriching the human gene pool by idiotic self-destruction\nBULLET::::- Golden Raspberry Awards – awards for bad movies\nBULLET::::- Bookseller/Diagram Prize for Oddest Title of the Year – a book prize\nBULLET::::- Pigasus Award – exposing parapsychological, paranormal, or psychic frauds\nBULLET::::- Golden Fleece Award – award for waste of government funds; often awarded for government-paid research considered frivolous or wasteful\nBULLET::::- Journal of Irreproducible Results – publishes intentionally humorous \"research\"\n\nBULLET::::- Ig Nobel home page\nBULLET::::- List of past winners, with reasons for prize\nBULLET::::- TED Talk: A science award that makes you laugh, then think\n"}
{"id": "15208", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15208", "title": "Isaac Albéniz", "text": "Isaac Albéniz\n\nIsaac Manuel Francisco Albéniz y Pascual (; 29 May 1860 – 18 May 1909) was a Spanish virtuoso pianist, composer, and conductor. He is one of the foremost composers of the Post-Romantic era who also had a significant influence on his contemporaries and younger composers. He is best known for his piano works based on Spanish folk music idioms.\n\nTranscriptions of many of his pieces, such as \"Asturias (Leyenda)\", \"Granada\", \"Sevilla\", \"Cadiz\", \"Córdoba\", \"Cataluña\", \"Mallorca\", and \"Tango in D\", are important pieces for classical guitar, though he never composed for the guitar. The personal papers of Albéniz are preserved, among other institutions, in the \"Biblioteca de Catalunya\".\n\nBorn in Camprodon, province of Girona, to Ángel Albéniz (a customs official) and his wife, Dolors Pascual, Albéniz was a child prodigy who first performed at the age of four. At age seven, after apparently taking lessons from Antoine François Marmontel, he passed the entrance examination for piano at the Conservatoire de Paris, but he was refused admission because he was believed to be too young. By the time he had reached 12, he had made many attempts to run away from home.\n\nHis concert career began at the age of nine when his father toured both Isaac and his sister, Clementina, throughout northern Spain. A popular myth is that at the age of twelve Albéniz stowed away in a ship bound for Buenos Aires. He then found himself in Cuba, then to the United States, giving concerts in New York and San Francisco and then travelled to Liverpool, London and Leipzig. By age 15, he had already given concerts worldwide. This story is not entirely false, Albéniz did travel the world as a performer; however, he was accompanied by his \"father\", who as a customs agent was required to travel frequently. This can be attested by comparing Isaac's concert dates with his father's travel itinerary.\n\nIn 1876, after a short stay at the Leipzig Conservatory, he went to study at the Royal Conservatory of Brussels after King Alfonso's personal secretary, Guillermo Morphy, obtained him a royal grant. Count Morphy thought highly of Albéniz, who would later dedicate \"Sevilla\" to Morphy's wife when it premiered in Paris in January 1886.\n\nIn 1880 Albéniz went to Budapest, Hungary, to study with Franz Liszt, only to find out that Liszt was in Weimar, Germany.\n\nIn 1883 he met the teacher and composer Felip Pedrell, who inspired him to write Spanish music such as the \"Chants d'Espagne\". The first movement (Prelude) of that suite, later retitled after the composer's death as \"Asturias (Leyenda)\", is probably most famous today as part of the classical guitar repertoire, even though it was originally composed for piano. (Many of Albéniz's other compositions were also transcribed for guitar, notably by Francisco Tárrega.) At the 1888 Barcelona Universal Exposition, the piano manufacturer Érard sponsored a series of 20 concerts featuring Albéniz's music.\nThe apex of Albéniz's concert career is considered to be 1889 to 1892 when he had concert tours throughout Europe. During the 1890s Albéniz lived in London and Paris. For London he wrote some musical comedies which brought him to the attention of the wealthy Francis Money-Coutts, 5th Baron Latymer. Money-Coutts commissioned and provided him with librettos for the opera \"Henry Clifford\" and for a projected trilogy of Arthurian operas. The first of these, \"Merlin\" (1898–1902), was thought to have been lost but has recently been reconstructed and performed. Albéniz never completed \"Lancelot\" (only the first act is finished, as a vocal and piano score), and he never began \"Guinevere\", the final part.\n\nIn 1900 he started to suffer from Bright's disease and returned to writing piano music. Between 1905 and 1908 he composed his final masterpiece, \"Iberia\" (1908), a suite of twelve piano \"impressions\".\n\nIn 1883 the composer married his student Rosina Jordana. They had two children who lived into adulthood: Laura (a painter) and Alfonso (who played for Real Madrid in the early 1900s before embarking on a career as a diplomat). Another child, Blanca, died in 1886, and two other children died in infancy. His great-granddaughter is Cécilia Attias, former wife of Nicolas Sarkozy.\n\nAlbéniz died from his kidney disease on 18 May 1909 at age 48 in Cambo-les-Bains, in Labourd, south-western France. Only a few weeks before his death, the government of France awarded Albéniz its highest honor, the Grand-Croix de la Légion d'honneur. He is buried at the Montjuïc Cemetery, Barcelona.\n\nAlbéniz's early works were mostly \"salon style\" music. Albéniz's first published composition, \"Marcha Militar\", appeared in 1868. A number of works written before this are now lost. He continued composing in traditional styles ranging from Jean-Philippe Rameau, Johann Sebastian Bach, Ludwig van Beethoven, Frédéric Chopin and Franz Liszt until the mid-1880s. He also wrote at least five zarzuelas, of which all but two are now lost.\n\nPerhaps the best source on the works is Albéniz himself. He is quoted as commenting on his earlier period works as:There are among them a few things that are not completely worthless. The music is a bit infantile, plain, spirited; but in the end, the people, our Spanish people, are something of all that. I believe that the people are right when they continue to be moved by \"Córdoba, Mallorca\", by the copla of the \"Sevillanas\", by the \"Serenata\", and \"Granada\". In all of them I now note that there is less musical science, less of the grand idea, but more colour, sunlight, flavour of olives. That music of youth, with its little sins and absurdities that almost point out the sentimental affectation ... appears to me like the carvings in the Alhambra, those peculiar arabesques that say nothing with their turns and shapes, but which are like the air, like the sun, like the blackbirds or like the nightingales of its gardens. They are more valuable than all else of Moorish Spain, which though we may not like it, is the true Spain.\n\nDuring the late 1880s, the strong influence of Spanish style is evident in Albéniz's music. In 1883 Albéniz met the teacher and composer Felipe Pedrell. Pedrell was a leading figure in the development of nationalist Spanish music. In his book \"The Music of Spain\", Gilbert Chase describes Pedrell's influence on Albéniz: \"What Albéniz derived from Pedrell was above all a spiritual orientation, the realization of the wonderful values inherent in Spanish music.\" Felipe Pedrell inspired Albéniz to write Spanish music such as the \"Suite española\", Op. 47, noted for its delicate, intricate melody and abrupt dynamic changes.\n\nIn addition to the Spanish spirit infused in Albéniz's music, he incorporated other qualities as well. In her biography of Albéniz, Pola Baytelman discerns four characteristics of the music from the middle period as follows:\n\n1. The dance rhythms of Spain, of which there are a wide variety. 2. The use of cante jondo, which means deep or profound singing. It is the most serious and moving variety of flamenco or Spanish gypsy song, often dealing with themes of death, anguish, or religion. 3. The use of exotic scales also associated with flamenco music. The Phrygian mode is the most prominent in Albéniz's music, although he also used the Aeolian and Mixolydian modes as well as the whole-tone scale. 4. The transfer of guitar idioms into piano writing. \n\nFollowing his marriage, Albéniz settled in Madrid, Spain and produced a substantial quantity of music in a relatively short period. By 1886 he had written over 50 piano pieces. Albéniz biographer Walter A. Clark says that pieces from this period received enthusiastic reception in the composer's many concerts. Chase describes music from this period,\n\nTaking the guitar as his instrumental model, and drawing his inspiration largely from the peculiar traits of Andalusian folk musicbut without using actual folk themesAlbéniz achieves a stylization of Spanish traditional idioms that while thoroughly artistic, gives a captivating impression of spontaneous improvisation... \"Córdoba\" is the piece that best represents the style of Albéniz in this period, with its hauntingly beautiful melody, set against the acrid dissonances of the plucked accompaniment imitating the notes of the Moorish guslas. Here is the heady scent of jasmines amid the swaying palm trees, the dream fantasy of an Andalusian \"Arabian Nights\" in which Albéniz loved to let his imagination dwell.\n\nWhile Albéniz's crowning achievement, \"Iberia\", was written in the last years of his life in France, many of its preceding works are well-known and of great interest. The five pieces in \"Chants d'Espagne\", (\"Songs of Spain\", published in 1892) are a solid example of the compositional ideas he was exploring in the \"middle period\" of his life. The suite shows what Albéniz biographer Walter Aaron Clark describes as the \"first flowering of his unique creative genius\", and the beginnings of compositional exploration that became the hallmark of his later works. This period also includes his operatic works\"Merlin, Henry Clifford\", and \"Pepita Jiménez\". His orchestral works of this period include \"Spanish Rhapsody\" (1887) and \"Catalonia\" (1899), dedicated to Ramon Casas, who had painted his full-length portrait in 1894.\n\nAs one of the leading composers of his era, Albéniz's influences on both contemporary composers and on the future of Spanish music are profound. As a result of his extended stay in France and the friendship he formed with numerous composers there, his composition technique and harmonic language has influenced aspiring younger composers such as Claude Debussy and Maurice Ravel. His activities as conductor, performer and composer significantly raised the profile of Spanish music abroad and encouraged Spanish music and musicians in his own country.\n\nAlbéniz's works have become an important part of the repertoire of the classical guitar, many of which have been transcribed by Francisco Tárrega, Miguel Llobet and others. \"Asturias (Leyenda)\" in particular is heard most often on the guitar, as are \"Granada\", \"Sevilla\", \"Cadiz\", \"Cataluña\", \"Córdoba\", \"Mallorca\", and \"Tango in D\". Gordon Crosskey and Cuban-born guitarist Manuel Barrueco have both made solo guitar arrangements of all the eight-movements in \"Suite española\". Selections from \"Iberia\" have rarely been attempted on solo guitar but have been very effectively performed by guitar ensembles, such as the performance by John Williams and Julian Bream of \"Iberia's \" opening \"Evocation\". The Doors incorporated \"Asturias\" into their song \"Spanish Caravan\"; also, Iron Maiden's \"To Tame a Land\" uses the introduction of the piece for the song bridge. More recently, a guitar version of \"Granada\" functions as something of a love theme in Woody Allen's 2008 film \"Vicky Cristina Barcelona\". The 2008 horror film \"Mirrors\" incorporates the theme from \"Asturias\" into its score.\n\nIn 1997 the \"Fundación Isaac Albéniz\" was founded to promote Spanish music and musicians and to act as a research centre for Albéniz and Spanish music in general.\n\nA film about his life entitled \"Albéniz\" was made in 1947. It was produced in Argentina.\n\nReferences\n\nSources\n\nBULLET::::- Alarcón Hernández, Joana; et al. \"Isaac Albéniz, artistes i mecenes\". Barcelona: Museu Diocesà de Barcelona, 2009.\nBULLET::::- Albéniz, Isaac. \"Chants d'Espagne\", G. Henle Verlag, Berlin, 2004.\nBULLET::::- Albéniz, Isaac. \"Impresiones y diarios de viaje\". [Madrid]: Fundación Isaac Albéniz, DL 1990.\nBULLET::::- Amat Cortes, Joan. \"Isaac Albéniz, un català universal\". [Barcelona]: Cevagraf, DL 1998.\nBULLET::::- Aviñoa, Xosé. \"Albéniz\". Madrid; Barcelona [etc.]: Daimon, cop. 1986.\nBULLET::::- Aviñoa, Xosé. \"La música i el Modernisme\". Barcelona: Curial, 1985. (Biblioteca de cultura catalana (Curial Edicions Catalanes); 58).\nBULLET::::- Aviñoa, Xosé. \"Modernisme i Modernistes – Musica i Modernisme: Definició i Període\". Lunwerg editores, 2001.\nBULLET::::- Baytelman, Pola. \"Isaac Albéniz: Chronological List and Thematic Catalog of His Piano Works\", Harmonie Park Press, Michigan 1993.\nBULLET::::- Clark, Walter Aaron. \"Isaac Albéniz: A Guide to Research\", Garland Publishing Inc. New York & London, 1998.\nBULLET::::- Ericourt, Daniel; Erickson, Robert. P. \"MasterClasses in Spanish Piano Music\", Hinshaw Music, Chapel Hill North Carolina, 1984.\nBULLET::::- Gauthier, André. \"Albéniz\". Madrid: Espasa Calpe, 1978. (Clásicos de la música).\nBULLET::::- Guerra y Alarcón, Antonio. \"Isaac Albéniz. Notas crítico-biográficas de tan eminente pianista\". [S.l.]: Fundación Isaac Albéniz, DL 1990.\nBULLET::::- Heras, Antonio de las. \"Vida de Albéniz\". Barcelona: Ediciones Patria, [1942].\nBULLET::::- Iglesias, Antonio. \"Isaac Albéniz : su obra para piano\". 2 vols. Madrid: Alpuerto, DL 1987.\nBULLET::::- Jean-Aubry, G. \"Isaac Albéniz 1860–1909\", in \"The Musical Times\", Vol 58, No. 898, Musical Times Publications Ltd., December 1917 pgs 535–538.\nBULLET::::- Kalfa, Jacqueline. \"Isaac Albéniz (1860–1909) : la vocation de l'Espagne\". Paris: Séguier, 2000. (Carré Musique; 4).\nBULLET::::- Marco, Thomas. \"Spanish Music in the Twentieth Century\". 1993.\nBULLET::::- Martorell, Oriol; Valls, Manuel. \"Síntesi històrica de la música catalana\". Sant Cugat del Vallès: Els llibres de la frontera, 1985.\nBULLET::::- Montero Alonso, José. \"Albéniz, España en \"suite\"\". Madrid: Editorial Silex, 1988.\nBULLET::::- Morales, Luisa; Clark, Walter A. \"Antes de Iberia : de Masarnau a Albéniz : actas del Symposium FIMTE 2008 = Pre-Iberia : from Masarnau to Albéniz : proceedings of FIMTE Symposium 2008\". Garrucha: Leal; [Granada]: Centro de Documentación Musical de Andalucía, cop. 2009. (Series FIMTE; 3).\nBULLET::::- Pedrell, Felip. \"Concierto de Albéniz\". Madrid: Fundación Isaac Albéniz, 1990.\nBULLET::::- Pérez Senz, Javier. \"Isaac Albéniz, 1860–1909. Cents anys : un geni romàntic\". Barcelona: Institut de Cultura, Departament de Cultura i Mitjans de Comunicació, 2008. (Quaderns de l'Auditori; 7).\nBULLET::::- Reverter, Arturo. \"Albéniz-Arbós, historia de una amistad\". Madrid: Scherzo, 1989.\nBULLET::::- Romero, Justo. \"Isaac Albéniz\". Barcelona: Península, 2002. (Guías Scherzo; 14).\nBULLET::::- Ruiz Albéniz, Victor. \"Isaac Albéniz\". Madrid: Comisaría General de Música, 1948.\nBULLET::::- Salazar, Adolfo. \"Isaac Albéniz y los albores del renacimiento musical en España\", en \"Revista de Occidente\", t. 12 (Madrid, 1926), pp. 99–107.\nBULLET::::- Sempronio. \"Retrats de Ramon Casas\". Barcelona: Edicions Polígrafa, 1970.\nBULLET::::- Torres, Jacinto. \"Las claves Madrileñas de Isaac Albéniz\". Imprenta Artesanal de Madrid, 2009.\nBULLET::::- Torres Mulas, Jacinto. \"Catálogo sistemático descriptivo de las obras musicales de Isaac Albéniz\". Madrid : Instituto de Bibliografía Musical, DL 2001.\nBULLET::::- Villalba, Luis. \"Imagen distanciada de un compositor-pianista\". Madrid: Fundación Isaac Albéniz, 1990.\nBULLET::::- \"Albéniz : edición conmemorativa del centenario de Isaac Albéniz 1909–2009\". [Madrid]: Ministerio de Cultura, Sociedad Cultural de Conmemoraciones Culturales, DL 2009.\nBULLET::::- \"Albéniz : leyendas y verdades : Conde Duque. Sala de las Bóvedas del 11 de noviembre de 2009 al 31 de enero de 2010\". Madrid: Centro Cultural del Conde Duque. Ayuntamiento de Madrid, Sociedad Estatal de Conmemoraciones Culturales, 2009.\n\nBULLET::::- Albéniz Foundation\nBULLET::::- Personal papers of Isaac Albéniz in the Biblioteca de Catalunya\nBULLET::::- En torno a Isaac Albéniz y su \"Iberia\" by Antonio Iglesias, Antonio Fernández-Cid (ref)\nBULLET::::- Facsimiles (La Biblioteca Virtual Miguel de Cervantes)\nBULLET::::- Improvisación nº 1, Improvisación nº 2, Improvisación nº 3 (ref – La Biblioteca Virtual Miguel de Cervantes)\nBULLET::::- Photos (Gallica)\nBULLET::::- \"L'escola pianística catalana (Enregistraments històrics) \"(la mà de guido , LMG3060)\nBULLET::::- \"The Catalan Piano Tradition\" (VAI Audio, 1001)\nBULLET::::- \"Rollos de Pianola (Obras de Albéniz, Granados, Turina, Ocón, Chapí, Alonso y Otros)\" (Almaviva, DS – 0141)\nBULLET::::- Tango, arranged by Mischa Elman for violin and piano (from the Sibley Music Library Digital Scores Collection)\n"}
{"id": "15210", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15210", "title": "ITU-R", "text": "ITU-R\n\nThe ITU Radiocommunication Sector (ITU-R) is one of the three sectors (divisions or units) of the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and is responsible for radio communication. \n\nIts role is to manage the international radio-frequency spectrum and satellite orbit resources and to develop standards for radiocommunication systems with the objective of ensuring the effective use of the spectrum.\n\nITU is required, according to its Constitution, to allocate spectrum and register frequency allocation, orbital positions and other parameters of satellites, “in order to avoid harmful interference between radio stations of different countries”. The international spectrum management system is therefore based on regulatory procedures for frequency coordination, notification and registration.\n\nITU-R has a permanent secretariat, the Radiocommunication Bureau, based at the ITU HQ in Geneva, Switzerland. The elected Director of the Bureau is Mr. Mario Maniewicz; he was first elected by the ITU membership to the Directorship in 2018.\n\nThe CCIR—Comité consultatif international pour la radio, Consultative Committee on International Radio or International Radio Consultative Committee—was founded in 1927.\n\nIn 1932 the CCIR and several other organizations (including the original ITU, which had been founded as the International Telegraph Union in 1865) merged to form what would in 1934 become known as the International Telecommunication Union. In 1992, the CCIR became the ITU-R.\n\nBULLET::::- ITU-T\nBULLET::::- Rec. 601\nBULLET::::- Rec. 709\nBULLET::::- Global Standards Collaboration\nBULLET::::- Radio science#ITU-R\n\n"}
{"id": "15214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15214", "title": "Irish Civil War", "text": "Irish Civil War\n\nThe Irish Civil War (; 28 June 1922 – 24 May 1923) was a conflict that followed the Irish War of Independence and accompanied the establishment of the Irish Free State, an entity independent from the United Kingdom but within the British Empire.\n\nThe civil war was waged between two opposing groups, the pro-treaty Provisional Government and the anti-treaty IRA, over the Anglo-Irish Treaty. The forces of the Provisional Government (which became the Free State in December 1922) supported the Treaty, while the anti-treaty opposition saw it as a betrayal of the Irish Republic (which had been proclaimed during the Easter Rising). Many of those who fought on both sides in the conflict had been members of the Irish Republican Army (Old IRA) during the War of Independence.\n\nThe Civil War was won by the pro-treaty Free State forces, who benefited from substantial quantities of weapons provided by the British Government. The conflict may have claimed more lives than the War of Independence that preceded it, and left Irish society divided and embittered for generations. Today, two of the main political parties in the Republic of Ireland, Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael, are direct descendants of the opposing sides of the war.\n\nThe Anglo-Irish Treaty was agreed to end the 1919–1921 Irish War of Independence between the Irish Republic and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. The treaty provided for a self-governing Irish state, having its own army and police. The Treaty also allowed Northern Ireland (the six north-eastern countiesFermanagh, Antrim, Tyrone, Londonderry, Armagh and Down where the majority population was of the Protestant religion) to opt out of the new state and return to the United Kingdomwhich it did immediately. However, rather than creating the independent republic favoured by most nationalists, the Irish Free State would be an autonomous dominion of the British Empire with the British monarch as head of state, in the same manner as Canada and Australia. The British suggested dominion status in secret correspondence even before treaty negotiations began, but Sinn Féin leader Éamon de Valera rejected the dominion. The treaty also stipulated that members of the new Irish Oireachtas (parliament) would have to take the following \"Oath of Allegiance\"\n\nThis oath was highly objectionable to many Irish Republicans. Furthermore, the partition of Ireland, which had already been decided by the Westminster parliament in the Government of Ireland Act 1920, was effectively confirmed in the Anglo-Irish treaty. The most contentious areas of the Treaty for the IRA were the disestablishment of the Irish Republic declared in 1919, the abandonment of the First Dáil, the status of the Irish Free State as a dominion in the British Commonwealth and the British retention of the strategic Treaty Ports on Ireland's south western and north western coasts which were to remain occupied by the Royal Navy. All these issues were the cause of a split in the IRA and ultimately civil war.\n\nMichael Collins, the republican leader who had led the Irish negotiating team, argued that the treaty gave \"not the ultimate freedom that all nations aspire and develop, but the freedom to achieve freedom\". However, anti-treaty militants in 1922 believed that the treaty would never deliver full Irish independence.\n\nThe split over the treaty was deeply personal. Many of the leaders on both sides had been close friends and comrades during the War of Independence. This made their disagreement over the treaty all the more bitter. Michael Collins later said that Éamon de Valera had sent him as plenipotentiary to negotiate the treaty because he knew that the British would not concede an independent Irish republic and wanted Collins to take the blame for the compromise settlement. He said that he felt deeply betrayed when de Valera refused to stand by the agreement that the plenipotentiaries had negotiated with David Lloyd George and Winston Churchill. De Valera, for his part, was furious that Collins and Arthur Griffith had signed the treaty without consulting him or the Irish cabinet as instructed.\n\nDáil Éireann (the parliament of the Irish Republic) narrowly passed the Anglo-Irish Treaty by 64 votes to 57 on 7 January 1922. Following the Treaty's ratification, in accordance with article 17 of the Treaty, the British-recognised Provisional Government of the Irish Free State was established. Its authority under the Treaty was to provide a \"provisional arrangement for the administration of Southern Ireland during the interval\" before the establishment of the Irish Free State. In accordance with the Treaty, the British Government transferred \"the powers and machinery requisite for the discharge of its duties\". Before the British Government transferred such powers, the members of the Provisional Government each \"signified in writing [their] acceptance of [the Treaty]\".\n\nUpon the Treaty's ratification, de Valera resigned as President of the Republic and failed to be re-elected by an even closer vote of 60–58. He challenged the right of the Dáil to approve the treaty, saying that its members were breaking their oath to the Irish Republic. Meanwhile he continued to promote a compromise whereby the new Irish Free State would be in \"external association\" with the British Commonwealth rather than be a member of it (the inclusion of republics within the Commonwealth of Nations was not formally implemented until 1949).\n\nIn early March, de Valera formed the Cumann na Poblachta ('Republican Association') party while remaining a member of Sinn Féin, and commenced a speaking tour of the more republican province of Munster on 17 March 1922. During the tour he made controversial speeches at Carrick on Suir, Lismore, Dungarvan and Waterford, saying at one point, \"If the Treaty were accepted, the fight for freedom would still go on, and the Irish people, instead of fighting foreign soldiers, will have to fight the Irish soldiers of an Irish government set up by Irishmen.\" At Thurles several days later he repeated this imagery, and added that the IRA \"would have to wade through the blood of the soldiers of the Irish Government, and perhaps through that of some members of the Irish Government to get their freedom.\" \n\nIn a letter to the \"Irish Independent\" on 23 March, de Valera accepted the accuracy of their report of his comment about \"wading\" through blood, but deplored that the newspaper had published it.\n\nMore seriously, many Irish Republican Army (IRA) officers were also against the treaty, and in March 1922 an ad hoc Army Convention repudiated the authority of the Dáil to accept the treaty. In contrast, the Minister of Defence, Richard Mulcahy, stated in the Dáil on 28 April that conditions in Dublin had prevented a Convention from being held, but that delegates had been selected and voted by ballot to accept the Oath. The anti-Treaty IRA formed their own \"Army Executive\", which they declared to be the real government of the country, despite the result of the 1921 general election. On 26 April Mulcahy summarised alleged illegal activities by many IRA men over the previous three months, whom he described as 'seceding volunteers', including hundreds of robberies. Yet this fragmenting army was the only police force on the ground following the disintegration of the Irish Republican Police and the disbanding of the Royal Irish Constabulary (RIC).\n\nBy putting ten questions to Mulcahy on 28 April, Seán McEntee argued that the Army Executive had acted continuously on its own to create a republic since 1917, had an unaltered constitution, had never fallen under the control of the Dáil, and that: \"\"the only body competent to dissolve the Volunteer Executive was a duly convened convention of the Irish Republican Army\"\" – not the Dáil. By accepting the treaty in January and abandoning the republic, the Dáil majority had effectively deserted the Army Executive. In his reply, Mulcahy rejected this interpretation. Then, in a debate on defence, McEntee suggested that supporting the Army Executive \"\"... even if it meant the scrapping of the Treaty and terrible and immediate war with England, would be better than the civil war which we are beginning at present apparently.\"\" McEntee's supporters added that the many robberies complained of by Mulcahy on 26 April were caused by the lack of payment and provision by the Dáil to the volunteers.\n\nCollins established an \"army re-unification committee\" to re-unite the IRA and organised an election pact with de Valera's anti-treaty political followers to campaign jointly in the Free State's first election in 1922 and form a coalition government afterwards. He also tried to reach a compromise with anti-treaty IRA leaders by agreeing to a republican-type constitution (with no mention of the British monarchy) for the new state. IRA leaders such as Liam Lynch were prepared to accept this compromise. However, the proposal for a republican constitution was vetoed by the British as being contrary to the terms of the treaty and they threatened military intervention in the Free State unless the treaty were fully implemented. Collins reluctantly agreed. This completely undermined the electoral pact between the pro- and anti-treaty factions, who went into the Irish general election on 18 June 1922 as hostile parties, both calling themselves Sinn Féin.\n\nThe Pro-Treaty Sinn Féin party won the election with 239,193 votes to 133,864 for Anti-Treaty Sinn Féin. A further 247,226 people voted for other parties, most of whom supported the Treaty. Labour's 132,570 votes were ambiguous with regard to the Treaty. According to Hopkinson, \"Irish labour and union leaders, while generally pro-Treaty, made little attempt to lead opinion during the Treaty conflict, casting themselves rather as attempted peacemakers.\" The election showed that a majority of the Irish electorate accepted the treaty and the foundation of the Irish Free State, but de Valera, his political followers and most of the IRA continued to oppose the treaty. De Valera is quoted as saying, \"the majority have no right to do wrong\".\n\nMeanwhile, under the leadership of Michael Collins and Arthur Griffith, the pro-treaty Provisional Government set about establishing the Irish Free State, and organised the National Army – to replace the IRA – and a new police force. However, since it was envisaged that the new army would be built around the IRA, Anti-Treaty IRA units were allowed to take over British barracks and take their arms. In practice, this meant that by the summer of 1922, the Provisional Government of Southern Ireland controlled only Dublin and some other areas like County Longford where the IRA units supported the treaty. Fighting ultimately broke out when the Provisional Government tried to assert its authority over well-armed and intransigent Anti-Treaty IRA units around the country – particularly a hardline group in Dublin.\n\nOn 14 April 1922, 200 Anti-Treaty IRA militants, led by Rory O'Connor, occupied the Four Courts and several other buildings in central Dublin, resulting in a tense stand-off. These anti-treaty Republicans wanted to spark a new armed confrontation with the British, which they hoped would unite the two factions of the IRA against their common enemy. However, for those who were determined to make the Free State into a viable, self-governing Irish state, this was an act of rebellion that would have to be put down by them rather than the British.\n\nArthur Griffith was in favour of using force against these men immediately, but Michael Collins, who wanted at all costs to avoid civil war, left the Four Courts garrison alone until late June 1922. By this point, the Pro-Treaty Sinn Féin party had secured a large majority in the general election, along with other parties that supported the Treaty. Collins was also coming under continuing pressure from London to assert his government's authority in Dublin.\n\nThe British Government at this time also lost patience with the situation in Dublin as a result of the assassination of Field Marshal Henry Hughes Wilson, a prominent security adviser to the Prime Minister of Northern Ireland James Craig, by IRA men on a street in London on 22 June 1922, with no responsibility for the act being publicly claimed by any IRA authority. Winston Churchill assumed that the Anti-Treaty IRA were responsible for the shooting and warned Collins that he would use British troops to attack the Four Courts unless the Provisional Government took action. In fact, the British cabinet actually resolved to attack the Four Courts themselves on 25 June, in an operation that would have involved tanks, howitzers and aeroplanes. However, on the advice of General Nevil Macready, who commanded the British garrison in Dublin, the plan was cancelled at the last minute. Macready's argument was that British involvement would have united Irish Nationalist opinion against the treaty, and instead Collins was given a last chance to clear the Four Courts himself.\n\nThe final straw for the Free State government came on 26 June, when the Four Courts republican garrison kidnapped JJ \"Ginger\" O'Connell in retaliation for the arrest of Leo Henderson, a general in the new National Army. Collins, after giving the Four Courts garrison a final (and according to Ernie O'Malley, only) ultimatum to leave the building on 27 June, decided to end the stand-off by bombarding the Four Courts garrison into surrender. The government then appointed Collins as Commander-in-Chief of the National Army. This attack was not the opening shot of the war, as skirmishes had taken place between pro- and anti-treaty IRA factions throughout the country when the British were handing over the barracks. However, this represented the 'point of no return', when all-out war was effectively declared and the Civil War officially began.\n\nCollins ordered Mulcahy to accept a British offer of two 18-pounder field artillery for use by the new army of the Free State, though General Macready gave just 200 shells of the 10,000 he had in store at Richmond barracks in Inchicore. The anti-treaty forces in the Four Courts, who possessed only small arms, surrendered after three days of bombardment and the storming of the building by Provisional Government troops (28–30 June 1922). Shortly before the surrender, a massive explosion destroyed the western wing of the complex, including the Irish Public Record Office (PRO), injuring many advancing Free State soldiers and destroying the records. Government supporters alleged that the building had been deliberately mined. Historians dispute whether the PRO was intentionally destroyed by mines laid by the Republicans on their evacuation, or whether the explosions occurred when their ammunition store was accidentally ignited by the bombardment. Coogan, however, asserts that two lorry-loads of gelignite was exploded in the PRO, leaving priceless manuscripts floating over the city for several hours afterward.\n\nPitched battles continued in Dublin until 5 July, as Anti-Treaty IRA units from the Dublin Brigade, led by Oscar Traynor, occupied O'Connell Street – provoking a week's more street fighting: costing both sides 65 killed and 280 wounded. Among the dead was Republican leader Cathal Brugha, who made his last stand after exiting the Granville Hotel. In addition, the Free State took over 500 Republican prisoners. The civilian casualties are estimated to have numbered well over 250. When the fighting in Dublin died down, the Free State government was left firmly in control of the Irish capital and the anti-treaty forces dispersed around the country, mainly to the south and west.\n\nThe outbreak of the Civil War forced pro- and anti-treaty supporters to choose sides. Supporters of the treaty came to be known as \"pro-treaty\" or Free State Army, legally the National Army, and were often called \"Staters\" by their opponents. The latter called themselves Republicans and were also known as \"anti-treaty\" forces, or Irregulars, a term preferred by the Free State side.\n\nThe Anti-Treaty IRA claimed that it was defending the Irish Republic declared in 1916 during the Easter Rising, confirmed by the First Dáil and invalidly set aside by those who accepted the compromise of the Free State. Éamon de Valera stated that he would serve as an ordinary IRA volunteer and left the leadership of the Anti-Treaty Republicans to Liam Lynch, the IRA Chief of Staff. De Valera, though the Republican 'President as of October 1922, had little control over military operations. Military operations were directed by Liam Lynch until he was killed on 10 April 1923, and then by Frank Aiken as of 20 April 1923.\nThe Civil War split the IRA. When the Civil War broke out, the Anti-Treaty IRA (concentrated in the south and west) outnumbered the pro-Free State forces by roughly 12,000 men to 8,000. Moreover, the Anti-Treaty ranks included many of the IRA's most experienced guerrilla fighters. The paper strength of the IRA in early 1922 was over 72,000 men, but most of them were recruited during the truce with the British and fought in neither the War of Independence nor the Civil War. According to Richard Mulcahy's estimate the anti-Treaty IRA at the beginning of the war, had 6,780 rifles and 12,900 men.\n\nHowever, the Anti-Treaty IRA lacked an effective command structure, a clear strategy and sufficient arms. As well as rifles they had a handful of machine guns and many of their fighters were armed only with shotguns or handguns. They also took a handful of armoured cars from British troops as they were evacuating the country. Finally, they had no artillery of any kind. As a result, they were forced to adopt a defensive stance throughout the war.\n\nBy contrast, the Free State government managed to expand its forces dramatically after the start of the war. Michael Collins and his commanders were able to build up an army that could overwhelm their opponents in the field. British supplies of artillery, aircraft, armoured cars, machine guns, small arms and ammunition were of much help to pro-treaty forces. The British delivered for instance, over 27,000 rifles, 250 machine guns and eight 18 pounder artillery pieces to the pro-Treaty forces between the outbreak of the Civil War and September 1922. The National Army amounted to 14,000 men by August 1922, was 38,000 strong by the end of 1922, and by the end of the war had grown to 55,000 men and 3,500 officers, far in excess of what the Irish state would need to maintain in peacetime.\n\nLike the anti-Treaty IRA, the Free State's National Army was initially rooted in the IRA that fought against the British. Collins' most ruthless officers and men were recruited from the Dublin Active Service Unit (the elite unit of the IRA's Dublin Brigade) and from Michael Collins' Intelligence Department and assassination unit, The Squad. In the new National Army, they were known as the Dublin Guard. Towards the end of the war, they were implicated in some notorious atrocities against anti-treaty guerrillas in County Kerry. Up to the outbreak of Civil War, it had been agreed that only men with service in the IRA could be recruited into the National Army. However, once the war began, all such restrictions were lifted. A 'National Call to Arms' issued on July 7 for recruitment on a six-month basis brought in thousands of new recruits. Many of the new army's recruits were veterans of the British Army in World War I, where they had served in disbanded Irish regiments of the British Army. Many others were raw recruits without any military experience. The fact that at least 50% of the other ranks had no military experience in turn led to ill-discipline becoming a major problem.\n\nA major problem for the National Army was a shortage of experienced officers. At least 20% of the National Army's officers had previously served as officers in the British Army while 50% of the rank-and-file of the National Army had served in the British Army in World War I. Former British Army officers were also recruited for their technical expertise. A number of the senior Free State commanders, such as Emmet Dalton, John T. Prout, and W.R.E. Murphy, had seen service as officers in World War I, Dalton and Murphy in the British Army and Prout in the US Army. The Republicans made much use of this fact in their propaganda — claiming that the Free State was only a proxy force for Britain itself. However, in fact, the majority of Free State soldiers were raw recruits without military experience, either in World War I or the Irish War of Independence. There were also a significant number of former members of the British Armed Forces on the Republican side, including such senior figures as Tom Barry, David Robinson and Erskine Childers.\n\nWith Dublin in pro-treaty hands, conflict spread throughout the country. The war started with the anti-treaty forces holding Cork, Limerick and Waterford as part of a self-styled Munster Republic. However, since the anti-treaty side were not equipped to wage conventional war, Liam Lynch was unable to take advantage of the Republicans' initial advantage in numbers and territory held. He hoped simply to hold the Munster Republic long enough to force Britain to re-negotiate the treaty.\n\nThe large towns in Ireland were all relatively easily taken by the Free State in August 1922. Michael Collins, Richard Mulcahy and Eoin O'Duffy planned a nationwide Free State offensive, dispatching columns overland to take Limerick in the west and Waterford in the south-east and seaborne forces to take counties Cork and Kerry in the south and Mayo in the west. In the south, landings occurred at Union Hall in Cork and Fenit, the port of Tralee, in Kerry. Limerick fell on 20 July, Waterford on the same day and Cork city on 10 August after a Free State force landed by sea at Passage West. Another seaborne expedition to Mayo in the west secured government control over that part of the country. While in some places the Republicans had put up determined resistance, nowhere were they able to defeat regular forces armed with artillery and armour. The only real conventional battle during the Free State offensive, the Battle of Killmallock, was fought when Free State troops advanced south from Limerick.\n\nGovernment victories in the major towns inaugurated a period of guerrilla warfare. After the fall of Cork, Liam Lynch ordered Anti-Treaty IRA units to disperse and form flying columns as they had when fighting the British. They held out in areas such as the western part of counties Cork and Kerry in the south, county Wexford in the east and counties Sligo and Mayo in the west. Sporadic fighting also took place around Dundalk, where Frank Aiken and the Fourth Northern Division of the Irish Republican Army were based, and Dublin, where small-scale but regular attacks were mounted on Free State troops.\n\nAugust and September 1922 saw widespread attacks on Free State forces in the territories that they had occupied in the July–August offensive, inflicting heavy casualties on them. Michael Collins was killed in an ambush by anti-treaty Republicans at Béal na mBláth, near his home in County Cork, in August 1922. Collins' death increased the bitterness of the Free State leadership towards the Republicans and probably contributed to the subsequent descent of the conflict into a cycle of atrocities and reprisals. Arthur Griffith, the Free State president, had also died of a brain haemorrhage ten days before, leaving the Free State government in the hands of W. T. Cosgrave and the Free State army under the command of General Richard Mulcahy. For a brief period, with rising casualties among its troops and its two principal leaders dead, it looked as if the Free State might collapse.\n\nHowever, as winter set in, the Republicans found it increasingly difficult to sustain their campaign, and casualty rates among National Army troops dropped rapidly. For instance, in County Sligo, 54 people died in the conflict, of whom all but eight had been killed by the end of September.\n\nIn the autumn and winter of 1922, Free State forces broke up many of the larger Republican guerrilla units – in Sligo, Meath and Connemara in the west, for example, and in much of Dublin city. Elsewhere, Anti-Treaty units were forced by lack of supplies and safe-houses to disperse into smaller groups, typically of nine to ten men. Despite these successes for the National Army, it took eight more months of intermittent warfare before the war was brought to an end.\n\nBy late 1922 and early 1923, the Anti-Treaty guerrillas' campaign had been reduced largely to acts of sabotage and destruction of public infrastructure such as roads and railways. It was also in this period that the Anti-Treaty IRA began burning the homes of Free State Senators and of many of the Anglo-Irish landed class.\n\nIn October 1922, Éamon de Valera and the anti-treaty TDs (Members of Parliament) set up their own \"Republican government\" in opposition to the Free State. However, by then the anti-treaty side held no significant territory and de Valera's government had no authority over the population.\n\nOn 27 September 1922, three months after the outbreak of war, the Free State's Provisional Government put before the Dáil an Army Emergency Powers Resolution proposing to extend the legislation for setting up military tribunals, transferring some of the Free State's judicial powers over Irish citizens accused of anti-government activities to the Army Council. The legislation, commonly referred to as the \"Public Safety Bill\", set up and empowered military tribunals to impose life imprisonment, as well as the death penalty, for 'aiding or abetting attacks' on states forces, possession of arms and ammunition or explosive 'without the proper authority' and 'looting destruction or arson'.\n\nThe final phase of the Civil War degenerated into a series of atrocities that left a lasting legacy of bitterness in Irish politics. The Free State began executing Republican prisoners on 17 November 1922, when five IRA men were shot by firing squad. They were followed on 24 November by the execution of acclaimed author and treaty negotiator Erskine Childers. In all, out of around 12,000 republican prisoners taken in the conflict, 81 were officially executed by the Free State during the Civil War.\n\nThe Anti-Treaty IRA in reprisal assassinated TD, Seán Hales. On 7 December 1922, the day after Hales's killing, four prominent Republicans (one from each province), who had been held since the first week of the war—Rory O'Connor, Liam Mellows, Richard Barrett and Joe McKelvey — were executed in revenge for the killing of Hales. In addition, Free State troops, particularly in County Kerry, where the guerrilla campaign was most bitter, began the summary execution of captured anti-treaty fighters. The most notorious example of this occurred at Ballyseedy, where nine Republican prisoners were tied to a landmine, which was detonated, killing eight and only leaving one, Stephen Fuller, who was blown clear by the blast, to escape.\nThe number of \"unauthorised\" executions of Republican prisoners during the war has been put as high as 153. Among the Republican reprisals were the assassination of Kevin O'Higgins's father and W. T. Cosgrave's uncle in February 1923.\n\nThe Anti-Treaty IRA were unable to maintain an effective guerrilla campaign, given the gradual loss of support. The Catholic Church also supported the Free State, deeming it the lawful government of the country, denouncing the Anti-Treaty IRA and refusing to administer the Sacraments to anti-treaty fighters. On 10 October 1922, the Catholic Bishops of Ireland issued a formal statement, describing the anti-treaty campaign as:\n\nChurchmen were appalled by the ruthlessness and cruelty. The Church's support for the Free State aroused bitter hostility among some republicans. Although the Catholic Church in independent Ireland has often been seen as a triumphalist Church, a recent study has found that it felt deeply insecure after these events.\n\nBy early 1923, the offensive capability of the Anti-Treaty IRA had been seriously eroded and when, in February 1923, the Republican leader Liam Deasy was captured by Free State forces, he called on the republicans to end their campaign and reach an accommodation with the Free State. The State's executions of Anti-Treaty prisoners, 34 of whom were shot in January 1923, also took its toll on the Republicans' morale.\n\nIn addition, the National Army's operations in the field were slowly but steadily breaking up the remaining Republican concentrations.\n\nMarch and April 1923 saw this progressive dismemberment of the Republican forces continue with the capture and sometimes killing of guerrilla columns. A National Army report of 11 April stated, \"Events of the last few days point to the beginning of the end as a far as the irregular campaign is concerned\".\n\nAs the conflict petered out into a \"de facto\" victory for the pro-treaty side, de Valera asked the IRA leadership to call a ceasefire, but they refused. The Anti-Treaty IRA executive met on 26 March in County Tipperary to discuss the war's future. Tom Barry proposed a motion to end the war, but it was defeated by 6 votes to 5. Éamon de Valera was allowed to attend, after some debate, but was given no voting rights.\n\nLiam Lynch, the Republican leader, was killed in a skirmish in the Knockmealdown Mountains in County Tipperary on 10 April. The National Army had extracted information from Republican prisoners in Dublin that the IRA Executive was in the area and as well as killing Lynch, they also captured senior Anti-Treaty IRA officers Dan Breen, Todd Andrews, Seán Gaynor and Frank Barrett in the operation.\n\nIt is often suggested that the death of Lynch allowed the more pragmatic Frank Aiken, who took over as IRA Chief of Staff, to call a halt to what seemed a futile struggle. Aiken's accession to IRA leadership was followed on 30 April by the declaration of a ceasefire on behalf of the anti-treaty forces. On 24 May 1923, Aiken followed this with an order to IRA volunteers to dump arms rather than surrender them or continue a fight that they were incapable of winning.\n\nÉamon de Valera supported the order, issuing a statement to Anti-Treaty fighters on 24 May:\n\nThe Free State government had started peace negotiations in early May, which broke down. The High Court of Justice in Ireland ruled on 31 July 1923 that a state of war no longer existed, and consequently the internment of republicans, permitted under common law only in wartime, was now illegal. Without a formal peace, holding 13,000 prisoners and worried that fighting could break out again at any time, the government enacted two Public Safety (Emergency Powers) Acts on 1 and 3 August 1923, to permit continued internment and other measures. Thousands of Anti-Treaty IRA members (including Éamon de Valera on 15 August) were arrested by the Free State forces in the weeks and months after the end of the war, when they had dumped their arms and returned home.\n\nA general election was held on 27 August 1923, which Cumann na nGaedheal, the pro-Free State party, won with about 40% of the first-preference vote. The Republicans, represented by Sinn Féin, won about 27% of the vote. Many of their candidates and supporters were still imprisoned before, during and after the election.\n\nIn October 1923, around 8,000 of the 12,000 Republican prisoners in Free State gaols went on a hunger strike. The strike lasted for 41 days and met little success (among those who died were Denny Barry and Andy O'Sullivan). However, most of the women prisoners were released shortly thereafter and the hunger strike helped concentrate the Republican movement on the prisoners and their associated organisations. In July, de Valera had recognised the Republican political interests lay with the prisoners and went so far as to say:\n\nAlthough the cause of the Civil War was the Treaty, as the war developed the Republicans sought to identify their actions with the traditional Republican cause of the \"men of no property\" and the result was that large Anglo-Irish landowners and some less well-off former Protestant Loyalists were attacked. A total of 192 \"stately homes\" of the old landed class and Free State politicians were destroyed by Republicans during the war.\n\nThe stated reason for such attacks was that some landowners had become Free State senators. In October 1922, a deputation of Southern Unionists met W. T. Cosgrave to offer their support to the Free State and some of them had received positions in the State's Upper house or Senate. Among the prominent senators whose homes were attacked were: Palmerstown House near Naas, which belonged to the Earl of Mayo, Moore Hall in Mayo, Horace Plunkett (who had helped to establish the rural co-operative schemes), and Senator Henry Guinness (which was unsuccessful). Also burned was Marlfield House in Clonmel, the home of Senator John Philip Bagwell, with its extensive library of historical documents. Bagwell was kidnapped and held in the Dublin Mountains, but later released when reprisals were threatened.\n\nHowever, in addition to their allegiance to the Free State, there were also other factors behind Republican animosity towards the old landed class. Many, but not all of these people, had supported the Crown forces during the War of Independence. This support was often largely moral, but sometimes it took the form of actively assisting the British in the conflict. Such attacks should have ended with the Truce of 11 July 1921, but they continued after the truce and escalated during the Civil War. In July 1922, Con Moloney, the anti-treaty IRA's Deputy Chief of Staff, ordered that unionist property should be seized to accommodate their men. The \"worst spell\" of attacks on former unionist property came in the early months of 1923, 37 \"big houses\" being burnt in January and February alone.\n\nThough the Wyndham Act of 1903 allowed tenants to buy land from their landlords, some small farmers, particularly in Mayo and Galway, simply occupied land belonging to political opponents during this period when the RIC had ceased to function. In 1919, senior Sinn Féin officials were sufficiently concerned at this unilateral action that they instituted Arbitration Courts to adjudicate disputes. Sometimes these attacks had sectarian overtones, although most Anti-Treaty IRA men made no distinction between Catholic and Protestant supporters of the Irish government.\n\nThe anti-Treaty IRA burnt an orphanage housing Protestant boys near Clifden, County Galway in June 1922, on the ground that it was \"pro-British\". The 60 orphans were taken to Devonport on board a Royal Navy destroyer.\n\nControversy continues to this day about the extent of intimidation of Protestants at this time. Many left Ireland during and after the Civil War. Dr Andy Bielenberg of UCC considers that about 41,000 who were not linked to the former British administration left Southern Ireland (which became the Irish Free State) between 1919 and 1923. He has found that a \"high-water mark\" of this 41,000 left between 1921 and 1923. In all, from 1911 to 1926, the Protestant population of the 26 counties fell from some 10.4% of the total population to 7.4%.\n\nThe Civil War attracted international attention which led to various groups expressing support and opposition to the anti-treaty side. The Communist Party of Great Britain in its journal \"The Communist\" wrote “The proletarians of the IRA have the future of Ireland in their hands. If the Irish Labour Party would only dare! A mass movement of the Irish workers in alliance with the IRA could establish a Workers' Republic now.” They were also supported by the Communist International (Comintern) which on 3 January 1923 passed a resolution stating it \"sends fraternal greetings to the struggling Irish national revolutionaries and feels assured that they will soon tread the only path that leads to real freedom – the path of Communism. The CI will assist all efforts to organise the struggle to combat this terror and to help the Irish workers and peasants to victory.\"\n\nThe majority of Irish-Americans supported the treaty, including those in Clann na Gael and Friends of Irish Freedom. However anti-treaty republicans had control of what was left of Clann na Gael and the American Association for the Recognition of the Irish Republic so they supported the anti-treaty side during the war.\n\nThe Civil War, though short, was bloody. It cost the lives of many public figures, including Michael Collins, Cathal Brugha, Arthur Griffith and Liam Lynch. Both sides carried out brutal acts: the anti-treaty forces murdered TDs and burned many historic homes, while the government executed anti-treaty prisoners, officially and unofficially.\n\nPrecise figures for the dead and wounded have yet to be calculated. The pro-treaty forces suffered between 800–1,000 fatalities. It has been suggested that the anti-treaty forces' death toll was higher. but the Republican roll of honour, complied in the 1920s lists 426 anti-Treaty IRA Volunteers killed between January 1922 and April 1924.\nThe most recent county-by-county research suggests a death toll of just under 2,000. For total combatant and civilian deaths, a minimum of 1,500 and a maximum of 4,000 have been suggested, though the latter figure is now generally estimated to be too high.\n\nThe Garda Síochána (new police force) was not involved in the war, which meant that it was well-placed to develop into an unarmed and politically neutral police service after the war. It had been disarmed by the Government in order to win public confidence in June–September 1922 and in December 1922, the IRA issued a General Order not to fire on the Civil Guard. The Criminal Investigation Department, or CID, a 350-strong, armed, plain-clothed Police Corps that had been established during the conflict for the purposes of counter-insurgency, was disbanded in October 1923, shortly after the conflict's end.\n\nThe economic costs of the war were also high. As their forces abandoned their fixed positions in July–August 1922, the Republicans burned many of the administrative buildings and businesses that they had been occupying. In addition, their subsequent guerrilla campaign caused much destruction and the economy of the Free State suffered a hard blow in the earliest days of its existence as a result. The material damage caused by the war to property came to over £30 million. Particularly damaging to the Free State's economy was the systematic destruction of railway infrastructure and roads by the Republicans. In addition, the cost to the Free State of waging the war came to another £17 million. By September 1923, Deputy Hogan estimated the cost at £50 million. The new State ended 1923 with a budget deficit of over £4 million. This weakened financial situation meant that the new state could not pay its share of Imperial debt under the treaty. This adversely affected the boundary negotiations in 1924–25, in which the Free State government acquiesced that border with Northern Ireland would remain unchanged in exchange for forgiveness of the Imperial debt. Further, the state undertook to pay for damage caused to property between the truce of July 1921 and the end of the Civil War; W. T. Cosgrave told the Dáil:\n\nThe fact that the Irish Civil War was fought between Irish Nationalist factions meant that the sporadic conflict in Northern Ireland ended. Collins and Sir James Craig signed an agreement to end it on 30 March 1922, but, despite this, Collins covertly supplied arms to the Northern IRA until a week before his death in August 1922. Because of the Irish Civil War, Northern Ireland was able to consolidate its existence and the partition of Ireland was confirmed for the foreseeable future. The continuing war also confirmed the northern Unionists' existing stance against the ethos of all shades of nationalism. This might have led to open hostilities between North and South had the Irish Civil War not broken out. Indeed, the Ulster Special Constabulary (the \"B-Specials\") that had been established in 1920 (on the foundation of Northern Ireland) was expanded in 1922 rather than being demobilised.\n\nIn the event, it was only well after their defeat in the Civil War that anti-treaty Irish Republicans seriously considered whether to take armed action against British rule in Northern Ireland (the first serious suggestion to do this came in the late 1930s). The northern units of the IRA largely supported the Free State side in the Civil War because of Collins's policies, and over 500 of them joined the new Free State's National Army.\n\nThe cost of the war and the budget deficit it caused was a difficulty for the new Free State and affected the Boundary Commission negotiations of 1925, which were to determine the border with Northern Ireland. The Free State agreed to waive its claim to predominantly Nationalist areas in Northern Ireland and in return its agreed share of the Imperial debt under the 1921 Treaty was not paid.\nIn 1926, having failed to persuade the majority of the Anti-Treaty IRA or the anti-treaty party of Sinn Féin to accept the new status quo as a basis for an evolving Republic, a large faction led by de Valera and Aiken left to resume constitutional politics and to found the Fianna Fáil party. Whereas Fianna Fáil was to become the dominant party in Irish politics, Sinn Féin became a small, isolated political party. The IRA, then much more numerous and influential than Sinn Féin, remained associated with Fianna Fáil (though not directly) until banned by de Valera in 1935.\n\nIn 1927, Fianna Fáil members took the Oath of Allegiance and entered the Dáil, effectively recognising the legitimacy of the Free State. The Free State was already moving towards independence by this point. Under the Statute of Westminster 1931, the British Parliament gave up its right to legislate for members of the British Commonwealth. When elected to power in 1932, Fianna Fáil under de Valera set about dismantling what they considered to be objectionable features of the treaty, abolishing the Oath of Allegiance, removing the power of the Office of Governor General (British representative in Ireland) and abolishing the Senate, which was dominated by former Unionists and pro-treaty Nationalists. In 1937, they passed a new constitution, which made a President the head of state, did not mention any allegiance to the British monarch, and which included a territorial claim to Northern Ireland. The following year, Britain returned without conditions the seaports that it had kept under the terms of the treaty. When the Second World War broke out in 1939, the Free State was able to demonstrate its independence by remaining neutral throughout the war, although Dublin did to some extent tacitly support the Allies. Finally, in 1948, a coalition government, containing elements of both sides in the Civil War (pro-treaty Fine Gael and anti-treaty Clann na Poblachta) left the British Commonwealth and renamed the Free State the Republic of Ireland. By the 1950s, the issues over which the Civil War had been fought were largely settled.\n\nAs with most civil wars, the internecine conflict left a bitter legacy, which continues to influence Irish politics to this day. The two largest political parties in the republic through most of its history (until the 2011 Irish General Election) were Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael, the descendants respectively of the anti-treaty and pro-treaty forces of 1922. Until the 1970s, almost all of Ireland's prominent politicians were veterans of the Civil War, a fact which poisoned the relationship between Ireland's two biggest parties. Examples of Civil War veterans include: Republicans Éamon de Valera, Frank Aiken, Todd Andrews and Seán Lemass; and Free State supporters W. T. Cosgrave, Richard Mulcahy and Kevin O'Higgins. Moreover, many of these men's sons and daughters also became politicians, meaning that the personal wounds of the civil war were felt over three generations. In the 1930s, after Fianna Fáil took power for the first time, it looked possible for a while that the Civil War might break out again between the IRA and the pro-Free State Blueshirts. Fortunately, this crisis was averted, and by the 1950s violence was no longer prominent in politics in the Republic of Ireland.\n\nHowever, the breakaway IRA continued (and continues in various forms) to exist. It was not until 1948 that the IRA renounced military attacks on the forces of the southern Irish state when it became the Republic of Ireland. After this point, the organisation dedicated itself primarily to the end of British rule in Northern Ireland. The IRA Army Council still makes claim to be the legitimate Provisional Government of the Irish Republic declared in 1918 and annulled by the Anglo-Irish Treaty of 1921.\n\nBULLET::::- Free State Intelligence Department – Oriel House\n\n\n\nBULLET::::- Historical artefacts from the Irish Civil War\nBULLET::::- The Irish Story archive on the Irish Civil War\nBULLET::::- North Kerry in the Irish Civil War\nBULLET::::- The final siege of Limerick City from 7 July until 21 July 1922, on the Limerick Leader web site.\nBULLET::::- The Dáil Treaty Debates 1921–22.\nBULLET::::- List of National Army soldiers killed in action\nBULLET::::- War Memorials of the Civil War\nBULLET::::- Map of Europe during Irish Civil War at omniatlas.com\n"}
{"id": "15215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15215", "title": "Internet Explorer", "text": "Internet Explorer\n\nInternet Explorer (formerly Microsoft Internet Explorer and Windows Internet Explorer, commonly abbreviated IE or MSIE) is a series of graphical web browsers developed by Microsoft and included in the Microsoft Windows line of operating systems, starting in 1995. It was first released as part of the add-on package Plus! for Windows 95 that year. Later versions were available as free downloads, or in service packs, and included in the original equipment manufacturer (OEM) service releases of Windows 95 and later versions of Windows. The browser is discontinued, but still maintained.\n\nInternet Explorer was once the most widely used web browser, attaining a peak of about 95% usage share by 2003. This came after Microsoft used bundling to win the first browser war against Netscape, which was the dominant browser in the 1990s. Its usage share has since declined with the launch of Firefox (2004) and Google Chrome (2008), and with the growing popularity of operating systems such as Android and iOS that do not support Internet Explorer. \n\nEstimates for Internet Explorer's market share are about 1.7% across all platforms, or by StatCounter's numbers ranked 8th. On desktop, the only platform on which it has ever had significant share (e.g., excluding mobile and Xbox) it is ranked 5th at 3.67%, with Microsoft Edge, its successor, ranking 4th with a 4.57% market share. Edge first overtook Internet Explorer in terms of market share in August 2019. IE and Edge combined rank third, after Firefox, previously being second after Chrome. However, other sources place IE in 3rd with a 6.81% market share after Firefox.\n\nMicrosoft spent over per year on Internet Explorer in the late 1990s, with over 1,000 people involved in the project by 1999.\n\nVersions of Internet Explorer for other operating systems have also been produced, including an Xbox 360 version called Internet Explorer for Xbox and for platforms Microsoft no longer supports: Internet Explorer for Mac and Internet Explorer for UNIX (Solaris and HP-UX), and an embedded OEM version called Pocket Internet Explorer, later rebranded Internet Explorer Mobile made for Windows CE, Windows Phone and previously, based on Internet Explorer 7 for Windows Phone 7.\n\nOn March 17, 2015, Microsoft announced that Microsoft Edge would replace Internet Explorer as the default browser on its Windows 10 devices (while support for older Windows has since been announced, Edge still has lower share than IE's, that is in decline). This effectively makes Internet Explorer 11 the last release (however IE 8, 9, and 10 also receive security updates as of 2019). Internet Explorer, however, remains on Windows 10 and Windows Server 2019 primarily for enterprise purposes. Since January 12, 2016, only Internet Explorer 11 has official support for consumers; Internet Explorer 10 also has extended support to January 2020 on certain platforms. Support varies based on the operating system's technical capabilities and its support lifecycle.\n\nThe browser has been scrutinized throughout its development for use of third-party technology (such as the source code of Spyglass Mosaic, used without royalty in early versions) and security and privacy vulnerabilities, and the United States and the European Union have alleged that integration of Internet Explorer with Windows has been to the detriment of fair browser competition.\n\nThe Internet Explorer project was started in the summer of 1994 by Thomas Reardon, who, according to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Review of 2003, used source code from Spyglass, Inc. Mosaic, which was an early commercial web browser with formal ties to the pioneering National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) Mosaic browser. In late 1994, Microsoft licensed Spyglass Mosaic for a quarterly fee plus a percentage of Microsoft's non-Windows revenues for the software. Although bearing a name similar to NCSA Mosaic, Spyglass Mosaic had used the NCSA Mosaic source code sparingly.\n\nThe first version, dubbed Microsoft Internet Explorer, was installed as part of the \"Internet Jumpstart Kit\" in Microsoft Plus! for Windows 95 and Plus!. The Internet Explorer team began with about six people in early development. Internet Explorer 1.5 was released several months later for Windows NT and added support for basic table rendering. By including it free of charge with their operating system, they did not have to pay royalties to Spyglass Inc, resulting in a lawsuit and a US$8 million settlement on January 22, 1997.\n\nMicrosoft was sued by Synet Inc. in 1996, over the trademark infringement.\n\nBULLET::::- Internet Explorer 2\nBULLET::::- Internet Explorer 3\nBULLET::::- Internet Explorer 4\nBULLET::::- Internet Explorer 5\nBULLET::::- Internet Explorer 6\nBULLET::::- Internet Explorer 7\nBULLET::::- Internet Explorer 8\nBULLET::::- Internet Explorer 9\nBULLET::::- Internet Explorer 10\n\nInternet Explorer 11 is featured in Windows 8.1, which was released on October 17, 2013. It includes an incomplete mechanism for syncing tabs. It is a major update to its developer tools, enhanced scaling for high DPI screens, HTML5 prerender and prefetch, hardware-accelerated JPEG decoding, closed captioning, HTML5 full screen, and is the first Internet Explorer to support WebGL and Google's protocol SPDY (starting at v3). This version of IE has features dedicated to Windows 8.1, including cryptography (WebCrypto), adaptive bitrate streaming (Media Source Extensions) and Encrypted Media Extensions.\n\nInternet Explorer 11 was made available for Windows 7 users to download on November 7, 2013, with Automatic Updates in the following weeks.\n\nInternet Explorer 11's user agent string now identifies the agent as \"Trident\" (the underlying layout engine) instead of \"MSIE\". It also announces compatibility with Gecko (the layout engine of Firefox).\n\nMicrosoft claimed that Internet Explorer 11, running the WebKit SunSpider JavaScript Benchmark, was the fastest browser as of October 15, 2013.\n\nInternet Explorer 11 will be made available for Windows Server 2012 and Windows Embedded 8 Standard in the spring of 2019.\n\nMicrosoft Edge, officially unveiled on January 21, 2015, has replaced Internet Explorer as the default browser on Windows 10. Internet Explorer is still installed in Windows 10 in order to maintain compatibility with older websites and intranet sites that require ActiveX and other Microsoft legacy web technologies.\n\nAccording to Microsoft, development of new features for Internet Explorer has ceased. However, it will continue to be maintained as part of the support policy for the versions of Windows with which it is included.\n\nInternet Explorer has been designed to view a broad range of web pages and provide certain features within the operating system, including Microsoft Update. During the heyday of the browser wars, Internet Explorer superseded Netscape only when it caught up technologically to support the progressive features of the time.\n\nInternet Explorer, using the Trident layout engine:\n\nBULLET::::- Supports HTML 4.01, parts of HTML5, CSS Level 1, Level 2 and Level 3, XML 1.0, and DOM Level 1, with minor implementation gaps.\nBULLET::::- Fully supports XSLT 1.0 as well as an obsolete Microsoft dialect of XSLT often referred to as \"WD-xsl\", which was loosely based on the December 1998 W3C Working Draft of XSL. Support for XSLT 2.0 lies in the future: semi-official Microsoft bloggers have indicated that development is underway, but no dates have been announced.\nBULLET::::- Almost full conformance to CSS 2.1 has been added in the Internet Explorer 8 release. The trident rendering engine in Internet Explorer 9 in 2011, scored highest in the official W3C conformance test suite for CSS 2.1 of all major browsers.\nBULLET::::- Supports XHTML in Internet Explorer 9 (Trident version 5.0). Prior versions can render XHTML documents authored with HTML compatibility principles and served with a codice_1 MIME-type.\nBULLET::::- Supports a subset of SVG in Internet Explorer 9 (Trident version 5.0), excluding SMIL, SVG fonts and filters.\n\nInternet Explorer uses DOCTYPE sniffing to choose between standards mode and a \"quirks mode\" in which it deliberately mimicks nonstandard behaviours of old versions of MSIE for HTML and CSS rendering on screen (Internet Explorer always uses standards mode for printing). It also provides its own dialect of ECMAScript called JScript.\n\nInternet Explorer was criticised by Tim Berners-Lee for its limited support for SVG, which is promoted by W3C.\n\nInternet Explorer has introduced an array of proprietary extensions to many of the standards, including HTML, CSS, and the DOM. This has resulted in a number of web pages that appear broken in standards-compliant web browsers and has introduced the need for a \"quirks mode\" to allow for rendering improper elements meant for Internet Explorer in these other browsers.\n\nInternet Explorer has introduced a number of extensions to the DOM that have been adopted by other browsers. \n\nThese include the innerHTML property, which provides access to the HTML string within an element, which was part of IE 5 and was standardized as part of HTML 5 roughly 15 years later after all other browsers implemented it for compatibility, the XMLHttpRequest object, which allows the sending of HTTP request and receiving of HTTP response, and may be used to perform AJAX, and the designMode attribute of the contentDocument object, which enables rich text editing of HTML documents. Some of these functionalities were not possible until the introduction of the W3C DOM methods. Its Ruby character extension to HTML is also accepted as a module in W3C XHTML 1.1, though it is not found in all versions of W3C HTML.\n\nMicrosoft submitted several other features of IE for consideration by the W3C for standardization. These include the 'behaviour' CSS property, which connects the HTML elements with JScript behaviours (known as HTML Components, HTC); HTML+TIME profile, which adds timing and media synchronization support to HTML documents (similar to the W3C XHTML+SMIL), and the VML vector graphics file format. However, all were rejected, at least in their original forms; VML was subsequently combined with PGML (proposed by Adobe and Sun), resulting in the W3C-approved SVG format, one of the few vector image formats being used on the web, which IE did not support until version 9.\n\nOther non-standard behaviours include: support for vertical text, but in a syntax different from W3C CSS3 candidate recommendation, support for a variety of image effects and page transitions, which are not found in W3C CSS, support for obfuscated script code, in particular JScript.Encode, as well as support for embedding EOT fonts in web pages.\n\nSupport for favicons was first added in Internet Explorer 5. Internet Explorer supports favicons in PNG, static GIF and native Windows icon formats. In Windows Vista and later, Internet Explorer can display native Windows icons that have embedded PNG files.\n\nInternet Explorer makes use of the accessibility framework provided in Windows. Internet Explorer is also a user interface for FTP, with operations similar to that of Windows Explorer. Pop-up blocking and tabbed browsing were added respectively in Internet Explorer 6 and Internet Explorer 7. Tabbed browsing can also be added to older versions by installing MSN Search Toolbar or Yahoo Toolbar.\n\nInternet Explorer caches visited content in the Temporary Internet Files folder to allow quicker access (or offline access) to previously visited pages. The content is indexed in a database file, known as Index.dat. Multiple Index.dat files exist which index different content—visited content, web feeds, visited URLs, cookies, etc.\n\nPrior to IE7, clearing the cache used to clear the index but the files themselves were not reliably removed, posing a potential security and privacy risk. In IE7 and later, when the cache is cleared, the cache files are more reliably removed, and the index.dat file is overwritten with null bytes.\n\nCaching has been improved in IE9.\n\nInternet Explorer is fully configurable using Group Policy. Administrators of Windows Server domains (for domain-joined computers) or the local computer can apply and enforce a variety of settings on computers that affect the user interface (such as disabling menu items and individual configuration options), as well as underlying security features such as downloading of files, zone configuration, per-site settings, ActiveX control behaviour and others. Policy settings can be configured for each user and for each machine. Internet Explorer also supports Integrated Windows Authentication.\n\nInternet Explorer uses a componentized architecture built on the Component Object Model (COM) technology. It consists of several major components, each of which is contained in a separate Dynamic-link library (DLL) and exposes a set of COM programming interfaces hosted by the Internet Explorer main executable, :\nBULLET::::- is the protocol handler for HTTP, HTTPS and FTP. It handles all network communication over these protocols.\nBULLET::::- is responsible for MIME-type handling and download of web content, and provides a thread-safe wrapper around WinInet.dll and other protocol implementations.\nBULLET::::- houses the Trident rendering engine introduced in Internet Explorer 4, which is responsible for displaying the pages on-screen and handling the Document Object Model of the web pages. MSHTML.dll parses the HTML/CSS file and creates the internal DOM tree representation of it. It also exposes a set of APIs for runtime inspection and modification of the DOM tree. The DOM tree is further processed by a layout engine which then renders the internal representation on screen.\nBULLET::::- contains the user interface and window of IE in Internet Explorer 7 and above.\nBULLET::::- provides the navigation, local caching and history functionalities for the browser.\nBULLET::::- is responsible for rendering the browser user interface such as menus and toolbars.\n\nInternet Explorer does not include any native scripting functionality. Rather, exposes an API that permits a programmer to develop a scripting environment to be plugged-in and to access the DOM tree. Internet Explorer 8 includes the bindings for the Active Scripting engine, which is a part of Microsoft Windows and allows any language implemented as an Active Scripting module to be used for client-side scripting. By default, only the JScript and VBScript modules are provided; third party implementations like ScreamingMonkey (for ECMAScript 4 support) can also be used. Microsoft also makes available the Microsoft Silverlight runtime (not supported in Windows RT) that allows CLI languages, including DLR-based dynamic languages like IronPython and IronRuby, to be used for client-side scripting.\n\nInternet Explorer 8 introduces some major architectural changes, called \"Loosely Coupled IE\" (LCIE). LCIE separates the main window process (frame process) from the processes hosting the different web applications in different tabs (tab processes). A frame process can create multiple tab processes, each of which can be of a different integrity level; each tab process can host multiple web sites. The processes use asynchronous Inter-Process Communication to synchronize themselves. Generally, there will be a single frame process for all web sites. In Windows Vista with Protected Mode turned on, however, opening privileged content (such as local HTML pages) will create a new tab process as it will not be constrained by Protected Mode.\n\nInternet Explorer exposes a set of Component Object Model (COM) interfaces that allows add-ons to extend the functionality of the browser. Extensibility is divided into two types: Browser extensibility and content extensibility. Browser extensibility involves adding context menu entries, toolbars, menu items or Browser Helper Objects (BHO). BHOs are used to extend the feature set of the browser, whereas the other extensibility options are used to expose that feature in the user interface. Content extensibility adds support for non-native content formats. It allows Internet Explorer to handle new file formats and new protocols, e.g. WebM or SPDY. In addition, web pages can integrate widgets known as ActiveX controls which run on Windows only but have vast potentials to extend the content capabilities; Adobe Flash Player and Microsoft Silverlight are examples. Add-ons can be installed either locally, or directly by a web site.\n\nSince malicious add-ons can compromise the security of a system, Internet Explorer implements several safeguards. Internet Explorer 6 with Service Pack 2 and later feature an Add-on Manager for enabling or disabling individual add-ons, complemented by a \"No Add-Ons\" mode. Starting with Windows Vista, Internet Explorer and its BHOs run with restricted privileges and are isolated from the rest of the system. Internet Explorer 9 introduced a new component – Add-on Performance Advisor. Add-on Performance Advisor shows a notification when one or more of installed add-ons exceed a pre-set performance threshold. The notification appears in the Notification Bar when the user launches the browser. Windows 8 and Windows RT introduce a Metro-style version of Internet Explorer that is entirely sandboxed and does not run add-ons at all. In addition, Windows RT cannot download or install ActiveX controls at all; although existing ones bundled with Windows RT still run in the traditional version of Internet Explorer.\n\nInternet Explorer itself can be hosted by other applications via a set of COM interfaces. This can be used to embed the browser functionality inside a computer program or create Internet Explorer shells.\n\nInternet Explorer uses a zone-based security framework that groups sites based on certain conditions, including whether it is an Internet- or intranet-based site as well as a user-editable whitelist. Security restrictions are applied per zone; all the sites in a zone are subject to the restrictions.\n\nInternet Explorer 6 SP2 onwards uses the \"Attachment Execution Service\" of Microsoft Windows to mark executable files downloaded from the Internet as being potentially unsafe. Accessing files marked as such will prompt the user to make an explicit trust decision to execute the file, as executables originating from the Internet can be potentially unsafe. This helps in preventing accidental installation of malware.\n\nInternet Explorer 7 introduced the phishing filter, that restricts access to phishing sites unless the user overrides the decision. With version 8, it also blocks access to sites known to host malware. Downloads are also checked to see if they are known to be malware-infected.\n\nIn Windows Vista, Internet Explorer by default runs in what is called \"Protected Mode\", where the privileges of the browser itself are severely restricted—it cannot make any system-wide changes. One can optionally turn this mode off but this is not recommended. This also effectively restricts the privileges of any add-ons. As a result, even if the browser or any add-on is compromised, the damage the security breach can cause is limited.\n\nPatches and updates to the browser are released periodically and made available through the Windows Update service, as well as through Automatic Updates. Although security patches continue to be released for a range of platforms, most feature additions and security infrastructure improvements are only made available on operating systems which are in Microsoft's mainstream support phase.\n\nOn December 16, 2008, Trend Micro recommended users switch to rival browsers until an emergency patch was released to fix a potential security risk which \"could allow outside users to take control of a person's computer and steal their passwords\". Microsoft representatives countered this recommendation, claiming that \"0.02% of internet sites\" were affected by the flaw. A fix for the issue was released the following day with the Security Update for Internet Explorer KB960714, on Microsoft Windows Update.\n\nIn 2010, Germany's Federal Office for Information Security, known by its German initials, BSI, advised \"temporary use of alternative browsers\" because of a \"critical security hole\" in Microsoft's software that could allow hackers to remotely plant and run malicious code on Windows PCs. \n\nIn 2011, a report by Accuvant, funded by Google, rated the security (based on sandboxing) of Internet Explorer worse than Google Chrome but better than Mozilla Firefox.\n\nA more recent browser security white paper comparing Google Chrome, Microsoft Edge, and Internet Explorer 11 by X41 D-Sec in 2017 came to similar conclusions, also based on sandboxing and support of legacy web technologies.\n\nInternet Explorer has been subjected to many security vulnerabilities and concerns: much of the spyware, adware, and computer viruses across the Internet are made possible by exploitable bugs and flaws in the security architecture of Internet Explorer, sometimes requiring nothing more than viewing of a malicious web page in order to install themselves. This is known as a \"drive-by install\". There are also attempts to trick the user into installing malicious software by misrepresenting the software's true purpose in the description section of an ActiveX security alert.\n\nA number of security flaws affecting IE originated not in the browser itself, but ActiveX-based add-ons used by it. Because the add-ons have the same privilege as IE, the flaws can be as critical as browser flaws. This has led to the ActiveX-based architecture being criticized for being fault-prone. By 2005, some experts maintained that the dangers of ActiveX have been overstated and there were safeguards in place. In 2006, new techniques using automated testing found more than a hundred vulnerabilities in standard Microsoft ActiveX components. Security features introduced in Internet Explorer 7 mitigated some of these vulnerabilities.\n\nIn 2008, Internet Explorer had a number of published security vulnerabilities. According to research done by security research firm Secunia, Microsoft did not respond as quickly as its competitors in fixing security holes and making patches available. The firm also reported 366 vulnerabilities in ActiveX controls, an increase from the previous year.\n\nAccording to an October 2010 report in \"The Register\", researcher Chris Evans had detected a known security vulnerability which, then dating back to 2008, had not been fixed for at least 600 days. Microsoft says that it had known about this vulnerability but it was of very low severity as the victim web site must be configured in a special way for this attack to be feasible at all.\n\nIn December 2010, researchers were able to bypass the \"Protected Mode\" feature in Internet Explorer.\n\nIn an advisory on January 14, 2010, Microsoft said that attackers targeting Google and other U.S. companies used software that exploits a security hole, which had already been patched, in Internet Explorer. The vulnerability affected Internet Explorer 6 on Windows XP and Server 2003, IE6 SP1 on Windows 2000 SP4, IE7 on Windows Vista, XP, Server 2008 and Server 2003, and IE8 on Windows 7, Vista, XP, Server 2003, and Server 2008 (R2).\n\nThe German government warned users against using Internet Explorer and recommended switching to an alternative web browser, due to the major security hole described above that was exploited in Internet Explorer. The Australian and French Government issued a similar warning a few days later.\n\nOn April 26, 2014, Microsoft issued a security advisory relating to CVE-2014-1776 (use-after-free vulnerability in Microsoft Internet Explorer 6 through 11), a vulnerability that could allow \"remote code execution\" in Internet Explorer versions 6 to 11. On April 28, 2014, the United States Department of Homeland Security's United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT) released an advisory stating that the vulnerability could result in \"the complete compromise\" of an affected system. US-CERT recommended reviewing Microsoft's suggestions to mitigate an attack or using an alternate browser until the bug is fixed. The UK National Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-UK) published an advisory announcing similar concerns and for users to take the additional step of ensuring their antivirus software is up-to-date. Symantec, a cyber security firm, confirmed that \"the vulnerability crashes Internet Explorer on Windows XP\". The vulnerability was resolved on May 1, 2014, with a security update.\n\nThe adoption rate of Internet Explorer seems to be closely related to that of Microsoft Windows, as it is the default web browser that comes with Windows. Since the integration of Internet Explorer 2.0 with Windows 95 OSR 1 in 1996, and especially after version 4.0's release in 1997, the adoption was greatly accelerated: from below 20% in 1996, to about 40% in 1998, and over 80% in 2000. This made Microsoft the winner in the infamous 'first browser war' against Netscape. Netscape Navigator was the dominant browser during 1995 and until 1997, but rapidly lost share to IE starting in 1998, and eventually slipped behind in 1999. The integration of IE with Windows led to a lawsuit by AOL, Netscape's owner, accusing Microsoft of unfair competition. The infamous case was eventually won by AOL but by then it was too late, as Internet Explorer had already become the dominant browser.\n\nInternet Explorer peaked during 2002 and 2003, with about 95% share. Its first notable competitor after beating Netscape was Firefox from Mozilla, which itself was an offshoot from Netscape.\n\nFirefox 1.0 had surpassed Internet Explorer 5 in early 2005, with Firefox 1.0 at roughly 8 percent market share.\n\nApproximate usage over time based on various usage share counters averaged for the year overall, or for the fourth quarter, or for the last month in the year depending on availability of reference.\n\nAccording to StatCounter Internet Explorer's marketshare fell below 50% in September 2010. In May 2012, Google Chrome overtook Internet Explorer as the most used browser worldwide, according to StatCounter.\n\nBrowser Helper Objects are also used by many search engine companies and third parties for creating add-ons that access their services, such as search engine toolbars. Because of the use of COM, it is possible to embed web-browsing functionality in third-party applications. Hence, there are a number of Internet Explorer shells, and a number of content-centric applications like RealPlayer also use Internet Explorer's web browsing module for viewing web pages within the applications.\n\nWhile a major upgrade of Internet Explorer can be uninstalled in a traditional way if the user has saved the original application files for installation, the matter of uninstalling the version of the browser that has shipped with an operating system remains a controversial one.\n\nThe idea of removing a stock install of Internet Explorer from a Windows system was proposed during the \"United States v. Microsoft Corp.\" case. One of Microsoft's arguments during the trial was that removing Internet Explorer from Windows may result in system instability. Indeed, programs that depend on libraries installed by IE, including Windows help and support system, fail to function without IE. Before Windows Vista, it was not possible to run Windows Update without IE because the service used ActiveX technology, which no other web browser supports.\n\nThe popularity of Internet Explorer has led to the appearance of malware abusing its name. On January 28, 2011, a fake Internet Explorer browser calling itself \"Internet Explorer – Emergency Mode\" appeared. It closely resembles the real Internet Explorer, but has fewer buttons and no search bar. If a user attempts to launch any other browser such as Google Chrome, Mozilla Firefox, Opera, Safari or the real Internet Explorer, this browser will be loaded instead. It also displays a fake error message, claiming that the computer is infected with malware and Internet Explorer has entered \"Emergency Mode\". It blocks access to legitimate sites such as Google if the user tries to access them.\n\nBULLET::::- Bing Bar\nBULLET::::- History of the web browser\nBULLET::::- List of web browsers\nBULLET::::- Month of bugs\nBULLET::::- Web 2.0\nBULLET::::- Windows Filtering Platform\nBULLET::::- Winsock\n\n\nBULLET::::- Internet Explorer Architecture\n"}
{"id": "15220", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15220", "title": "Imprecise language", "text": "Imprecise language\n\nOften, informal, spoken language, \"everyday language\" is less precise than any more formal or academic languages.\n\nLanguage might be said to be imprecise because it exhibits one or more of the following features:\nBULLET::::- ambiguity – when a word or phrase pertains to its having more than one meaning in the language to which the word belongs.\nBULLET::::- vagueness – when borderline cases interfere with an interpretation\nBULLET::::- equivocation – the misleading use of a term with more than one meaning or sense (by glossing over which meaning is intended at a particular time)\nBULLET::::- accent – when the use of bold or italics causes confusion over the meaning of a statement\nBULLET::::- amphiboly – when a sentence may be interpreted in more than one way due to ambiguous sentence structure.\n\nWhile imprecise language is not desirable in various scientific fields, it may be helpful, illustrative or discussion-stimulative in other contexts. Imprecision in a discourse may or may not be the intention of the author(s) or speaker(s). The role of imprecision may depend on audience, end goal, extended context and subject matter. Relevant players and real stakes will also bear on truth-grounds of statements.\n"}
{"id": "15221", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15221", "title": "Intel 80188", "text": "Intel 80188\n\nThe Intel 80188 microprocessor was a variant of the Intel 80186. The 80188 had an 8-bit external data bus instead of the 16-bit bus of the 80186; this made it less expensive to connect to peripherals. The 16-bit registers and the one megabyte address range were unchanged, however. It had a throughput of 1 million instructions per second.\n\nThe 80188 series was generally intended for embedded systems, as microcontrollers with external memory. Therefore, to reduce the number of chips required, it included features such as clock generator, interrupt controller, timers, wait state generator, DMA channels, and external chip select lines.\nWhile the N80188 was compatible with the 8087 numerics co-processor, the 80C188 was not. It didn't have the ESC control codes integrated.\n\nThe initial clock rate of the 80188 was 6 MHz, but due to more hardware available for the microcode to use, especially for address calculation, many individual instructions ran faster than on an 8086 at the same clock frequency. For instance, the common \"register+immediate\" addressing mode was significantly faster than on the 8086, especially when a memory location was both (one of the) operand(s) and the destination. Multiply and divide also showed great improvement, being several times as fast as on the original 8086 and multi-bit shifts were done almost four times as quickly as in the 8086.\n\nAlong with hundreds of other processor models, Intel discontinued the 80188 processor 30 March 2006, after a life of about 24 years.\n\nBULLET::::- Intel 80186/80188 images and descriptions at cpu-collection.de\nBULLET::::- Scan of the Intel 80188 data book at datasheetarchive.com\n"}
{"id": "15222", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15222", "title": "IEEE 802.2", "text": "IEEE 802.2\n\nIEEE 802.2 is the original name of the ISO/IEC 8802-2 standard which defines logical link control (LLC) as the upper portion of the data link layer of the OSI Model. The original standard developed by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) in collaboration with the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) was adopted by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) in 1998, but it still remains an integral part of the family of IEEE 802 standards for local and metropolitan networks.\n\nLLC is a software component that provides a uniform interface to the user of the data link service, usually the network layer. LLC may offer three types of services:\nBULLET::::- Unacknowledged connectionless mode services (mandatory)\nBULLET::::- Connection mode services (optional)\nBULLET::::- Acknowledged connectionless mode services (optional)\n\nConversely, the LLC uses the services of the media access control (MAC), which is dependent on the specific transmission medium (Ethernet, Token Ring, FDDI, 802.11, etc.). Using LLC is compulsory for all IEEE 802 networks with the exception of Ethernet. It is also used in Fiber Distributed Data Interface (FDDI) which is not part of the IEEE 802 family.\n\nThe IEEE 802.2 sublayer adds some control information to the message created by the upper layer and passed to the LLC for transmission to another node on the same data link. The resulting packet is generally referred to as \"LLC protocol data unit (PDU)\" and the additional information added by the LLC sublayer is the \"LLC HEADER\". The LLC Header consist of \"DSAP\" (\"Destination Service Access Point\"), \"SSAP\" (\"Source Service Access Point\") and the \"Control\" field.\n\nThe two 8-bit fields DSAP and SSAP allow to multiplex various upper layer protocols above LLC. However, many protocols use the Subnetwork Access Protocol (SNAP) extension which allows using EtherType values to specify the protocol being transported atop IEEE 802.2. It also allows vendors to define their own protocol value spaces.\n\nThe 8 or 16 bit HDLC-style Control field serves to distinguish communication mode, to specify a specific operation and to facilitate connection control and flow control (in connection mode) or acknowledgements (in acknowledged connectionless mode).\n\nIEEE 802.2 provides two connectionless and one connection-oriented operational modes:\nBULLET::::- Type 1 is an unacknowledged connectionless mode for a datagram service. It allows for sending frames\nBULLET::::- to a single destination (point-to-point or unicast transfer),\nBULLET::::- to multiple destinations on the same network (multicast),\nBULLET::::- or to all stations of the network (broadcast).\nThe use of multicasts and broadcasts reduce network traffic when the same information needs to be propagated to all stations of the network. However the Type 1 service provides no guarantees regarding the order of the received frames compared to the order in which they have been sent; the sender does not even get an acknowledgment that the frames have been received.\nBULLET::::- Type 2 is a connection-oriented operational mode. Sequence numbering ensures that the frames received are guaranteed to be in the order they have been sent, and no frames are lost.\nBULLET::::- Type 3 is an acknowledged connectionless service. It supports point-to-point communication only.\n\nEach device conforming the IEEE 802.2 standard must support service type 1. Each network node is assigned an LLC Class according to which service types it supports:\n\n!rowspan=\"2\" LLCClass\n!colspan=\"3\" Supported Service Types\n!style=\"text-align:center;\" 1\n!style=\"text-align:center;\" 2\n!style=\"text-align:center;\" 3\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" I\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" X\n\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" II\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" X\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" X\n\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" III\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" X\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" X\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" IV\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" X\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" X\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" X\n\nAny 802.2 LLC PDU has the following format:\n!colspan=\"3\"802.2 LLC Header\n!rowspan=\"2\"Information\n!DSAP address\n!SSAP address\n!Control\n8 bits\n8 bits\n8 or 16 bits\nmultiple of 8 bits\n\nWhen Subnetwork Access Protocol (SNAP) extension is used, it is located at the start of the Information field:\n!colspan=\"3\"802.2 LLC Header\n!colspan=\"2\"SNAP extension\n!rowspan=\"2\"Upper layer data\n!DSAP\n!SSAP\n!Control\n!OUI\n!Protocol ID\n8 bits\n8 bits\n8 or 16 bits\n24 bits\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\"16 bits\nmultiple of 8 bits\n\nThe 802.2 header includes two eight-bit address fields, called service access points (SAP) or collectively LSAP in the OSI terminology:\nBULLET::::- SSAP (Source SAP) is an 8-bit long field that represents the logical address of the network layer entity that has created the message.\nBULLET::::- DSAP (Destination SAP) is an 8-bit long field that represents the logical addresses of the network layer entity intended to receive the message.\n\nAlthough the LSAP fields are 8 bits long, the low-order bit is reserved for special purposes, leaving only 128 values available for most purposes.\n\nThe low-order bit of the DSAP indicates whether it contains an individual or a group address:\nBULLET::::- if the low-order bit is 0, the remaining 7 bits of the DSAP specify an individual address, which refers to a single local service access point (LSAP) to which the packet should be delivered. and\nBULLET::::- if the low-order bit is 1, the remaining 7 bits of the DSAP specify a group address, which refers to a group of LSAPs to which the packet should be delivered.\n\nThe low-order bit of the SSAP indicates whether the packet is a command or response packet:\nBULLET::::- if it's 0, the packet is a command packet, and\nBULLET::::- if it's 1, the packet is a response packet.\nThe remaining 7 bits of the SSAP specify the LSAP (always an individual address) from which the packet was transmitted.\n\nLSAP numbers are globally assigned by the IEEE to uniquely identify well established international standards.\n\n+ Individual LSAP addresses\n!colspan=\"2\" Value\n!rowspan=\"2\" Meaning\n! Dec !! Hex\n\n+ Group DSAP addresses (not valid for SSAP)\n!colspan=\"2\" Value\n!rowspan=\"2\" Meaning\n! Dec !! Hex\n\nThe protocols or families of protocols which have assigned one or more SAPs may operate directly on top of 802.2 LLC. Other protocols may use the Subnetwork Access Protocol (SNAP) with IEEE 802.2 which is indicated by the hexadecimal value 0xAA (or 0xAB, if the source of a response) in SSAP and DSAP. The SNAP extension allows using EtherType values or private protocol ID spaces in all IEEE 802 networks. It can be used both in datagram and in connection-oriented network services.\n\nEthernet (IEEE 802.3) networks are an exception; the IEEE 802.3x-1997 standard explicitly allowed using of the Ethernet II framing, where the 16-bit field after the MAC addresses does not carry the length of the frame followed by the IEEE 802.2 LLC header, but the EtherType value followed by the upper layer data. With this framing only datagram services are supported on the data link layer.\n\nAlthough IPv4 has been assigned an LSAP value of 6 (0x6) and ARP has been assigned an LSAP value of 152 (0x98), IPv4 is almost never directly encapsulated in 802.2 LLC frames without SNAP headers. Instead, the Internet standard RFC 1042 is usually used for encapsulating IPv4 traffic in 802.2 LLC frames with SNAP headers on FDDI and on IEEE 802 networks other than Ethernet. Ethernet networks typically use Ethernet II framing with EtherType 0x800 for IP and 0x806 for ARP.\n\nThe IPX protocol used by Novell NetWare networks supports an additional Ethernet frame type, 802.3 raw, ultimately supporting four frame types on Ethernet (802.3 raw, 802.2 LLC, 802.2 SNAP, and Ethernet II) and two frame types on FDDI and other (non-Ethernet) IEEE 802 networks (802.2 LLC and 802.2 SNAP).\n\nIt is possible to use diverse framings on a single network. It is possible to do it even for the same upper layer protocol, but in such a case the nodes using unlike framings cannot directly communicate with each other.\n\nFollowing the destination and source SAP fields is a control field. IEEE 802.2 was conceptually derived from HDLC, and has the same three types of PDUs:\nBULLET::::- Unnumbered format PDUs, or U-format PDUs, with an 8-bit control field, which are intended for connectionless applications;\nBULLET::::- Information transfer format PDUs, or I-format PDUs, with a 16-bit control and sequence numbering field, which are intended to be used in connection-oriented applications;\nBULLET::::- Supervisory format PDUs, or S-format PDUs, with a 16-bit control field, which are intended to be used for supervisory functions at the LLC (Logical Link Control) layer.\n\nTo carry data in the most-often used unacknowledged connectionless mode the U-format is used. It is identified by the value '11' in lower two bits of the single-byte control field.\n"}
{"id": "15223", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15223", "title": "Invertebrate", "text": "Invertebrate\n\nInvertebrates are animals that neither possess nor develop a vertebral column (commonly known as a \"backbone\" or \"spine\"), derived from the notochord. This includes all animals apart from the subphylum Vertebrata. Familiar examples of invertebrates include arthropods (insects, arachnids, crustaceans, and myriapods), mollusks (chitons, snails, bivalves, squids, and octopuses), annelids (earthworms and leeches), and cnidarians (hydras, jellyfishes, sea anemones, and corals).\n\nThe majority of animal species are invertebrates; one estimate puts the figure at 97%. Many invertebrate taxa have a greater number and variety of species than the entire subphylum of Vertebrata.\n\nSome so-called invertebrates, such as the Tunicata and Cephalochordata are more closely related to vertebrates than to other invertebrates. This makes the invertebrates paraphyletic, so the term has little meaning in taxonomy.\n\nThe word \"invertebrate\" comes from the Latin word \"vertebra\", which means a joint in general, and sometimes specifically a joint from the spinal column of a vertebrate. The jointed aspect of \"vertebra\" is derived from the concept of turning, expressed in the root \"verto\" or \"vorto\", to turn. The prefix \"in-\" means \"not\" or \"without\".\n\nThe term \"invertebrates\" is not always precise among non-biologists since it does not accurately describe a taxon in the same way that Arthropoda, Vertebrata or Manidae do. Each of these terms describes a valid taxon, phylum, subphylum or family. \"Invertebrata\" is a term of convenience, not a taxon; it has very little circumscriptional significance except within the Chordata. The Vertebrata as a subphylum comprises such a small proportion of the Metazoa that to speak of the kingdom Animalia in terms of \"Vertebrata\" and \"Invertebrata\" has limited practicality. In the more formal taxonomy of Animalia other attributes that logically should precede the presence or absence of the vertebral column in constructing a cladogram, for example, the presence of a notochord. That would at least circumscribe the Chordata. However, even the notochord would be a less fundamental criterion than aspects of embryological development and symmetry or perhaps bauplan.\n\nDespite this, the concept of \"invertebrates\" as a taxon of animals has persisted for over a century among the laity, and within the zoological community and in its literature it remains in use as a term of convenience for animals that are not members of the Vertebrata. The following text reflects earlier scientific understanding of the term and of those animals which have constituted it. According to this understanding, invertebrates do not possess a skeleton of bone, either internal or external. They include hugely varied body plans. Many have fluid-filled, hydrostatic skeletons, like jellyfish or worms. Others have hard exoskeletons, outer shells like those of insects and crustaceans. The most familiar invertebrates include the Protozoa, Porifera, Coelenterata, Platyhelminthes, Nematoda, Annelida, Echinodermata, Mollusca and Arthropoda. Arthropoda include insects, crustaceans and arachnids.\n\nBy far the largest number of described invertebrate species are insects. The following table lists the number of described extant species for major invertebrate groups as estimated in the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species\", 2014.3.\n! Invertebrate group\n! Latin name\n! Image\n! Estimated number ofdescribed species\n\nThe IUCN estimates that 66,178 extant vertebrate species have been described, which means that over 95% of the described animal species in the world are invertebrates.\n\nThe trait that is common to all invertebrates is the absence of a vertebral column (backbone): this creates a distinction between invertebrates and vertebrates. The distinction is one of convenience only; it is not based on any clear biologically homologous trait, any more than the common trait of having wings functionally unites insects, bats, and birds, or than not having wings unites tortoises, snails and sponges. Being animals, invertebrates are heterotrophs, and require sustenance in the form of the consumption of other organisms. With a few exceptions, such as the Porifera, invertebrates generally have bodies composed of differentiated tissues. There is also typically a digestive chamber with one or two openings to the exterior.\n\nThe body plans of most multicellular organisms exhibit some form of symmetry, whether radial, bilateral, or spherical. A minority, however, exhibit no symmetry. One example of asymmetric invertebrates includes all gastropod species. This is easily seen in snails and sea snails, which have helical shells. Slugs appear externally symmetrical, but their pneumostome (breathing hole) is located on the right side. Other gastropods develop external asymmetry, such as Glaucus atlanticus that develops asymmetrical cerata as they mature. The origin of gastropod asymmetry is a subject of scientific debate.\n\nOther examples of asymmetry are found in fiddler crabs and hermit crabs. They often have one claw much larger than the other. If a male fiddler loses its large claw, it will grow another on the opposite side after moulting. Sessile animals such as sponges are asymmetrical alongside coral colonies (with the exception of the individual polyps that exhibit radial symmetry); alpheidae claws that lack pincers; and some copepods, polyopisthocotyleans, and monogeneans which parasitize by attachment or residency within the gill chamber of their fish hosts).\n\nNeurons differ in invertebrates from mammalian cells. Invertebrates cells fire in response to similar stimuli as mammals, such as tissue trauma, high temperature, or changes in pH. The first invertebrate in which a neuron cell was identified was the medicinal leech, \"Hirudo medicinalis.\"\n\nLearning and memory using nociceptors in the sea hare, \"Aplysia\" has been described. Mollusk neurons are able to detect increasing pressures and tissue trauma.\n\nNeurons have been identified in a wide range of invertebrate species, including annelids, molluscs, nematodes and arthropods.\n\nOne type of invertebrate respiratory system is the open respiratory system composed of spiracles, tracheae, and tracheoles that terrestrial arthropods have to transport metabolic gases to and from tissues. The distribution of spiracles can vary greatly among the many orders of insects, but in general each segment of the body can have only one pair of spiracles, each of which connects to an atrium and has a relatively large tracheal tube behind it. The tracheae are invaginations of the cuticular exoskeleton that branch (anastomose) throughout the body with diameters from only a few micrometres up to 0.8 mm. The smallest tubes, tracheoles, penetrate cells and serve as sites of diffusion for water, oxygen, and carbon dioxide. Gas may be conducted through the respiratory system by means of active ventilation or passive diffusion. Unlike vertebrates, insects do not generally carry oxygen in their haemolymph.\n\nA tracheal tube may contain ridge-like circumferential rings of taenidia in various geometries such as loops or helices. In the head, thorax, or abdomen, tracheae may also be connected to air sacs. Many insects, such as grasshoppers and bees, which actively pump the air sacs in their abdomen, are able to control the flow of air through their body. In some aquatic insects, the tracheae exchange gas through the body wall directly, in the form of a gill, or function essentially as normal, via a plastron. Note that despite being internal, the tracheae of arthropods are shed during moulting (ecdysis).\n\nLike vertebrates, most invertebrates reproduce at least partly through sexual reproduction. They produce specialized reproductive cells that undergo meiosis to produce smaller, motile spermatozoa or larger, non-motile ova. These fuse to form zygotes, which develop into new individuals. Others are capable of asexual reproduction, or sometimes, both methods of reproduction.\n\nSocial behavior is widespread in invertebrates, including cockroaches, termites, aphids, thrips, ants, bees, Passalidae, Acari, spiders, and more. Social interaction is particularly salient in eusocial species but applies to other invertebrates as well.\n\nInsects recognize information transmitted by other insects.\n\nThe term invertebrates covers several phyla. One of these are the sponges (Porifera). They were long thought to have diverged from other animals early. They lack the complex organization found in most other phyla. Their cells are differentiated, but in most cases not organized into distinct tissues. Sponges typically feed by drawing in water through pores. Some speculate that sponges are not so primitive, but may instead be secondarily simplified. The Ctenophora and the Cnidaria, which includes sea anemones, corals, and jellyfish, are radially symmetric and have digestive chambers with a single opening, which serves as both the mouth and the anus. Both have distinct tissues, but they are not organized into organs. There are only two main germ layers, the ectoderm and endoderm, with only scattered cells between them. As such, they are sometimes called diploblastic.\n\nThe Echinodermata are radially symmetric and exclusively marine, including starfish (Asteroidea), sea urchins, (Echinoidea), brittle stars (Ophiuroidea), sea cucumbers (Holothuroidea) and feather stars (Crinoidea).\n\nThe largest animal phylum is also included within invertebrates: the Arthropoda, including insects, spiders, crabs, and their kin. All these organisms have a body divided into repeating segments, typically with paired appendages. In addition, they possess a hardened exoskeleton that is periodically shed during growth. Two smaller phyla, the Onychophora and Tardigrada, are close relatives of the arthropods and share these traits. The Nematoda or roundworms, are perhaps the second largest animal phylum, and are also invertebrates. Roundworms are typically microscopic, and occur in nearly every environment where there is water. A number are important parasites. Smaller phyla related to them are the Kinorhyncha, Priapulida, and Loricifera. These groups have a reduced coelom, called a pseudocoelom. Other invertebrates include the Nemertea or ribbon worms, and the Sipuncula.\n\nAnother phylum is Platyhelminthes, the flatworms. These were originally considered primitive, but it now appears they developed from more complex ancestors. Flatworms are acoelomates, lacking a body cavity, as are their closest relatives, the microscopic Gastrotricha. The Rotifera or rotifers, are common in aqueous environments. Invertebrates also include the Acanthocephala or spiny-headed worms, the Gnathostomulida, Micrognathozoa, and the Cycliophora.\n\nAlso included are two of the most successful animal phyla, the Mollusca and Annelida. The former, which is the second-largest animal phylum by number of described species, includes animals such as snails, clams, and squids, and the latter comprises the segmented worms, such as earthworms and leeches. These two groups have long been considered close relatives because of the common presence of trochophore larvae, but the annelids were considered closer to the arthropods because they are both segmented. Now, this is generally considered convergent evolution, owing to many morphological and genetic differences between the two phyla.\n\nAmong lesser phyla of invertebrates are the Hemichordata, or acorn worms, and the Chaetognatha, or arrow worms. Other phyla include Acoelomorpha, Brachiopoda, Bryozoa, Entoprocta, Phoronida, and Xenoturbellida.\n\nInvertebrates can be classified into several main categories, some of which are taxonomically obsolescent or debatable, but still used as terms of convenience. Each however appears in its own article at the following links.\n\nBULLET::::- Sponges (\"Porifera\")\nBULLET::::- Comb jellies (\"Ctenophora\")\nBULLET::::- Hydras, jellyfishes, sea anemones, and corals (\"Cnidaria\")\nBULLET::::- Starfishes, sea urchins, sea cucumbers (\"Echinodermata\")\nBULLET::::- Flatworms (\"Platyhelminthes\")\nBULLET::::- Round or threadworms (\"Nematoda\")\nBULLET::::- Earthworms and leeches (\"Annelida\")\nBULLET::::- Insects, arachnids, crustaceans, and myriapods (\"Arthropoda\")\nBULLET::::- Chitons, snails, bivalves, squids, and octopuses (\"Mollusca\")\n\nThe earliest animal fossils appear to be those of invertebrates. 665-million-year-old fossils in the Trezona Formation at Trezona Bore, West Central Flinders, South Australia have been interpreted as being early sponges. Some paleontologists suggest that animals appeared much earlier, possibly as early as 1 billion years ago. Trace fossils such as tracks and burrows found in the Tonian era indicate the presence of triploblastic worms, like metazoans, roughly as large (about 5 mm wide) and complex as earthworms.\n\nAround 453 MYA, animals began diversifying, and many of the important groups of invertebrates diverged from one another. Fossils of invertebrates are found in various types of sediment from the Phanerozoic. Fossils of invertebrates are commonly used in stratigraphy.\n\nCarl Linnaeus divided these animals into only two groups, the Insecta and the now-obsolete Vermes (worms). Jean-Baptiste Lamarck, who was appointed to the position of \"Curator of Insecta and Vermes\" at the Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle in 1793, both coined the term \"invertebrate\" to describe such animals and divided the original two groups into ten, by splitting Arachnida and Crustacea from the Linnean Insecta, and Mollusca, Annelida, Cirripedia, Radiata, Coelenterata and Infusoria from the Linnean Vermes. They are now classified into over 30 phyla, from simple organisms such as sea sponges and flatworms to complex animals such as arthropods and molluscs.\n\nInvertebrates are animals \"without\" a vertebral column. This has led to the conclusion that \"in\"vertebrates are a group that deviates from the normal, vertebrates. This has been said to be because researchers in the past, such as Lamarck, viewed vertebrates as a \"standard\": in Lamarck's theory of evolution, he believed that characteristics acquired through the evolutionary process involved not only survival, but also progression toward a \"higher form\", to which humans and vertebrates were closer than invertebrates were. Although goal-directed evolution has been abandoned, the distinction of invertebrates and vertebrates persists to this day, even though the grouping has been noted to be \"hardly natural or even very sharp.\" Another reason cited for this continued distinction is that Lamarck created a precedent through his classifications which is now difficult to escape from. It is also possible that some humans believe that, they themselves being vertebrates, the group deserves more attention than invertebrates. In any event, in the 1968 edition of \"Invertebrate Zoology\", it is noted that \"division of the Animal Kingdom into vertebrates and invertebrates is artificial and reflects human bias in favor of man's own relatives.\" The book also points out that the group lumps a vast number of species together, so that no one characteristic describes all invertebrates. In addition, some species included are only remotely related to one another, with some more related to vertebrates than other invertebrates (see Paraphyly).\n\nFor many centuries, invertebrates were neglected by biologists, in favor of big vertebrates and \"useful\" or charismatic species. Invertebrate biology was not a major field of study until the work of Linnaeus and Lamarck in the 18th century. During the 20th century, invertebrate zoology became one of the major fields of natural sciences, with prominent discoveries in the fields of medicine, genetics, palaeontology, and ecology. The study of invertebrates has also benefited law enforcement, as arthropods, and especially insects, were discovered to be a source of information for forensic investigators.\n\nTwo of the most commonly studied model organisms nowadays are invertebrates: the fruit fly \"Drosophila melanogaster\" and the nematode \"Caenorhabditis elegans\". They have long been the most intensively studied model organisms, and were among the first life-forms to be genetically sequenced. This was facilitated by the severely reduced state of their genomes, but many genes, introns, and linkages have been lost. Analysis of the starlet sea anemone genome has emphasised the importance of sponges, placozoans, and choanoflagellates, also being sequenced, in explaining the arrival of 1500 ancestral genes unique to animals. Invertebrates are also used by scientists in the field of aquatic biomonitoring to evaluate the effects of water pollution and climate change.\n\nBULLET::::- Invertebrate zoology, classification of animals body symmetry\nBULLET::::- Invertebrate paleozoology\nBULLET::::- Marine invertebrates\nBULLET::::- Pain in invertebrates\n\nBULLET::::- Hyman, L. H. 1940. \"The Invertebrates\" (6 volumes) New York : McGraw-Hill. A classic work.\nBULLET::::- Anderson, D. T. (Ed.). (2001). \"Invertebrate zoology\" (2nd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.\nBULLET::::- Brusca, R. C., & Brusca, G. J. (2003). \"Invertebrates\" (2nd ed.). Sunderland, Mass. : Sinauer Associates.\nBULLET::::- Miller, S.A., & Harley, J.P. (1996). \"Zoology\" (4th ed.). Boston: WCB/McGraw-Hill.\nBULLET::::- Ruppert, E. E., Fox, R. S., & Barnes, R. D. (2004). \"Invertebrate zoology: a functional evolutionary approach\". Belmont, CA: Thomas-Brooks/Cole.\nBULLET::::- Adiyodi, K.G. & Adyiodi, R.G. (Eds) 1983- . \"Reproductive Biology of Invertebrates\". Wiley, New York. (Many volumes.)\nBULLET::::- Giese, A.G. & Pearse, J.S. (Eds) 1974- . \"Reproduction of Marine Invertebrates\". Academic Press, New York. (Many volumes.)\nBULLET::::- \"Advances in Invertebrate Reproduction\". Elsevier Science, Amsterdam. (Five volumes.)\n\nBULLET::::- Buglife (UK)\nBULLET::::- \"African Invertebrates\"\n"}
{"id": "15225", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15225", "title": "Ivar Aasen", "text": "Ivar Aasen\n\nIvar Andreas Aasen (; 5 August 1813 – 23 September 1896) was a Norwegian philologist, lexicographer, playwright, and poet. He is best known for having assembled from dialects one of the two official written versions of the Norwegian language, Nynorsk.\n\nAasen was born at Åsen in Ørsta (then Ørsten), in the district of Sunnmøre, on the west coast of Norway. His father, a peasant with a small farm, Ivar Jonsson, died in 1826. The younger Ivar was brought up to farmwork, but he assiduously cultivated all his leisure in reading. An early interest of his was botany. When he was eighteen, he opened an elementary school in his native parish. In 1833 he entered the household of Hans Conrad Thoresen, the husband of the eminent writer Magdalene Thoresen, in Herøy (then Herø), and there he picked up the elements of Latin. Gradually, and by dint of infinite patience and concentration, the young peasant mastered many languages, and began the scientific study of their structure. Ivar single-handedly created a new language for Norway to become the \"literary\" language.\n\nAbout 1846 he had freed himself from all the burden of manual labour, and could occupy his thoughts with the dialect of his native district, Sunnmøre; his first publication was a small collection of folk songs in the Sunnmøre dialect (1843). His remarkable abilities now attracted general attention, and he was helped to continue his studies undisturbed. His \"Grammar of the Norwegian Dialects\" (, 1848) was the result of much labour, and of journeys taken to every part of the country. Aasen's famous \"Dictionary of the Norwegian Dialects\" () appeared in its original form in 1850, and from this publication dates all the wide cultivation of the popular language in Norwegian, since Aasen really did no less than construct, out of the different materials at his disposal, a popular language or definite \"folke-maal\" (people's language) for Norway. By 1853, he had created the norm for utilizing his new language, which he called Landsmaal, meaning country language. With certain modifications, the most important of which were introduced later by Aasen himself, but also through a latter policy aiming to merge this Norwegian language with Dano-Norwegian, this language has become \"Nynorsk\" (\"New Norwegian\"), the second of Norway's two official languages (the other being \"Bokmål\", the Dano-Norwegian descendant of the Danish language used in Norway in Aasen's time). An unofficial variety of Norwegian more close to Aasen's language is still found in Høgnorsk (\"High Norwegian\"). Today, some consider Nynorsk on equal footing with bokmål, as bokmål tends to be used more in radio and television and most newspapers, whereas New Norse (Nynorsk) is used equally in government work as well as approximately 17% of schools. Although it is not as common as its brother language, it needs to be looked upon as a viable language, as a large minority of Norwegians use it as their primary language including many scholars and authors. New Norse is both a written and spoken language.\nAasen composed poems and plays in the composite dialect to show how it should be used; one of these dramas, \"The Heir\" (1855), was frequently acted, and may be considered as the pioneer of all the abundant dialect-literature of the last half-century of the 1800s, from Vinje to Garborg. In 1856, he published \"Norske Ordsprog\", a treatise on Norwegian proverbs. Aasen continuously enlarged and improved his grammars and his dictionary. He lived very quietly in lodgings in Oslo (then Christiania), surrounded by his books and shrinking from publicity, but his name grew into wide political favour as his ideas about the language of the peasants became more and more the watch-word of the popular party. In 1864, he published his definitive grammar of Nynorsk and in 1873 he published the definitive dictionary.\n\nQuite early in his career, in 1842, he had begun to receive a grant to enable him to give his entire attention to his philological investigations; and the Storting (Norwegian parliament), conscious of the national importance of his work, treated him in this respect with more and more generosity as he advanced in years. He continued his investigations to the last, but it may be said that, after the 1873 edition of his \"Dictionary\" (with a new title: ), he added but little to his stores. Aasen holds perhaps an isolated place in literary history as the one man who has invented, or at least selected and constructed, a language which has pleased so many thousands of his countrymen that they have accepted it for their schools, their sermons and their songs. He died in Christiania on 23 September 1896, and was buried with public honours.\n\nIvar Aasen-tunet, an institution devoted to the Nynorsk language, opened in June 2000. The building in Ørsta was designed by Norwegian architect Sverre Fehn. Their web page includes most of Aasens' texts, numerous other examples of Nynorsk literature (in Nettbiblioteket, the Internet Library), and some articles, including some in English, about language history in Norway.\n\n\"Språkåret 2013\" (The Language Year 2013) celebrated Ivar Aasen's 200 year anniversary, as well as the 100 year anniversary of Det Norske Teateret. The year's main focus was to celebrate linguistic diversity in Norway. In a poll released in connection with the celebration, 56% of Norwegians said they held positive views of Aasen, while 7% held negative views. On Aasen's 200 anniversary, 5 August 2013, \"Bergens Tidende\", which is normally published mainly in bokmål, published an edition fully in nynorsk in memory of Aasen.\n\nAasen published a wide range of material, some of it released posthumously.\n\n! Title !! Translated title !! Publication date !! Type !! class=unsortable Notes\n\n\nBULLET::::- Christian Sinding's musical setting of three Aasen poems Score from Sibley Music Library Digital Scores collections\nBULLET::::- Monument honoring Ivar Aasen by Paul Fjelde\nBULLET::::- The Ivar Aasen Centre Official Website\nBULLET::::- \"Haraldshaugen\" by Ivar Aasen\n"}
{"id": "15226", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15226", "title": "Irredentism", "text": "Irredentism\n\nIrredentism is any political or popular movement that seeks to claim or reclaim and occupy a land that the movement's members consider to be a \"lost\" (or \"unredeemed\") territory from their nation's past.\n\nMany states formalize their irredentist claims by including them in their constitutional documents, or through other means of legal enshrinement. Such territorial claims are justified on the basis of real or imagined national notions of historic territorial, religious or ethnic affiliations. Irredentist policies may be advocated by nationalist and pan-nationalist movements and have been a feature of identity politics, and of cultural, and political geography. Irredentism may operate as a device for a government to redirect their citizens' discontent against outsiders.\n\nThe word (from Italian \"irredento\" for \"unredeemed\") was coined in Italy from the phrase \"Italia irredenta\" (\"unredeemed Italy\"). This originally referred to rule by Austria-Hungary over territories mostly or partly inhabited by ethnic Italians, such as Trentino, Trieste, Gorizia, Istria, Fiume and Dalmatia during the 19th and early 20th centuries.\n\nAn area that may be subjected to a potential claim is sometimes called an \"irredenta\"; but not all irredentas are necessarily involved in irredentism.\n\nA common way to express a claim to adjacent territories on the grounds of historical or ethnic association is by using the adjective \"Greater\" as a prefix to the country name. This conveys the image of national territory at its maximum conceivable extent with the country \"proper\" at its core. The use of \"Greater\" does not always convey an irredentistic meaning.\n\nThe Afghan border with Pakistan, known as the Durand Line, was agreed to by Afghanistan and British India in 1893. The Pashtun tribes inhabiting the border areas were divided between what have become two nations; Afghanistan never accepted the still-porous border and clashes broke out in the 1950s and 1960s between Afghanistan and Pakistan over the issue. All Afghan governments of the past century have declared, with varying intensity, a long-term goal of re-uniting all Pashtun-dominated areas under Afghan rule, although no other country in the world accepts Afghanistan’s unilateral claim that the Durand Line is in dispute. Afghan claims over Pakistani territory have negatively affected Afghanistan–Pakistan relations.\n\nArgentina has claimed land that used to be part of, or was associated with, the Spanish territory of the Viceroyalty of the Rio de la Plata. The viceroyalty began to dissolve into separate independent states in the early 19th century, one of which later became Argentina. The claims included, amongst other areas, parts of what in 2019 were Chile, Paraguay, Brazil, Uruguay and Bolivia. Some of these claims have been settled although others are still active. The active claims include part of the land border with Chile, a section of the Antarctic continent, and the British South Atlantic islands, including the Falklands.\n\nArgentina renews these claims periodically. It considers the Falkland archipelago to be part of the Tierra del Fuego Province, along with South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands. Its claim is included in the transitional provisions of the Constitution of Argentina as amended in 1994:\n\nThe concept of a United Armenia (classical , reformed: Միացյալ Հայաստան, translit. \"Miatsyal Hayastan\") refers to areas within the traditional Armenian homeland—the Armenian Highland—which are currently or have historically been mostly populated by Armenians. This incorporates claims to Western Armenia (eastern Turkey), Nagorno-Karabakh (Artsakh), the landlocked exclave Nakhichevan of Azerbaijan and the Javakheti (Javakhk) region of Georgia. Nagorno-Karabakh and Javakhk are overwhelmingly inhabited by Armenians. Western Armenia and Nakhichevan had significant Armenian populations in the early 20th century, but no longer do. The Armenian population of eastern Turkey was almost completely exterminated during the genocide of 1915, when the millennia-long Armenian presence in the area largely ended and Armenian cultural heritage was mainly destroyed by the Turkish government. The territorial claims to Turkey are often seen as the ultimate goal of the recognition of the Armenian Genocide and the hypothetical reparations of the genocide.\n\nThe most recent Armenian irredentist movement, the Karabakh movement that began in 1988, sought to unify Nagorno-Karabakh with then-Soviet Armenia. As a result of the subsequent war with Azerbaijan, the Armenian forces have established effective control over most of Nagorno-Karabakh and the surrounding districts, thus succeeding in \"de facto\" unification of Armenia and Karabakh.\n\nUnited Bengal is a political ideology of a Unified Bengali-speaking Nation in South Asia. The ideology was developed by Bengali Nationalists after the First Partition of Bengal in 1905. The British-ruled Bengal Presidency was divided into Western Bengal and Eastern Bengal and Assam to weaken the Independence Movement; after much protest, Bengal was reunited in 1911.\n\nThe second attempt by the British to partition Bengal along communal lines was in 1947. The United Bengal proposal was the bid made by Prime Minister of Bengal Huseyn Shaheed Suhrawardy and Sarat Chandra Bose to found a united and independent nation-state of Bengal. The proposal was floated as an alternative to the partition of Bengal on communal lines. The initiative failed due to British diplomacy and communal conflict between Bengali Muslims and Bengali Hindus that eventually led to the Second Partition of Bengal.\n\nThe 2009 constitution of Bolivia states that the country has an \"unrenounceable right over the territory that gives it access to the Pacific Ocean and its maritime space\". This is understood as territory that Bolivia and Peru ceded to Chile after the War of the Pacific, which left Bolivia as a landlocked country.\n\nThe preamble to the Constitution of the People's Republic of China states, \"Taiwan is part of the sacred territory of the People's Republic of China (PRC). It is the lofty duty of the entire Chinese people, including our compatriots in Taiwan, to accomplish the great task of reunifying the motherland.\" The PRC claim to sovereignty over Taiwan is generally based on the theory of the succession of states, with the PRC claiming that it is the successor state to the Republic of China.\n\nHowever, the Communist Party of China has never controlled Taiwan. The Government of the Republic of China formerly administered both mainland China and Taiwan but has been administering primarily Taiwan only since the Chinese Civil War in which it fought the armed forces of the Communist Party of China. While the official name of the state remains 'Republic of China', the country is commonly called 'Taiwan', as Taiwan makes up 99% of the controlled territory of the ROC.\n\nIn fact, the ruling Qing Dynasty of China ceded Taiwan and the Pescadores to Japan in perpetuity in the Treaty of Shimonoseki in 1895, along with the Liaodong Peninsula. The Republic of Formosa or Democratic State of Taiwan was a short-lived republic that then existed on the island of Taiwan for about five months in 1895 in the period between the formal cession of Taiwan to the Empire of Japan and 'de facto' Japanese occupation and control. Japan then established a colony on Taiwan that existed until control of Taiwan was ceded to the Nationalist Government of the Republic of China in 1945.\n\nArticle 4 of the Constitution of the Republic of China originally stated that \"[t]he territory of the Republic of China within its existing national boundaries shall not be altered except by a resolution of the National Assembly\" Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, the Government of the Republic of China on Taiwan maintained itself to be the legitimate ruler of Mainland China as well. As part of its current policy of continuing the 'status quo', the ROC has not renounced claims over the territories currently controlled by the People's Republic of China, Mongolia, Russia, Myanmar and some Central Asian states. However, Taiwan does not actively pursue these claims in practice; the remaining claims that Taiwan is actively seeking are of uninhabited islands: the Senkaku Islands, whose sovereignty is also asserted by Japan and the PRC. As far as the Paracel Islands and Spratly Islands in the East Sea [called by Vietnam] or South China Sea [called by China] are concerned, Vietnam has repeatedly claimed its sovereignty over these islands, rejecting China's so-called “Nine Dash Line” claim.\n\nArticle 1 of the Constitution of the Union of the Comoros begins: \"The Union of the Comoros is a republic, composed of the autonomous islands of Mohéli, Mayotte, Anjouan, and Grande Comore.\" Mayotte, geographically a part of the Comoro Islands, was the only island of the four to vote against independence from France (independence losing 37%–63%) in the referendum held December 22, 1974. Mayotte is currently a department of the French Republic.\n\nAll of the European colonies on the Indian subcontinent which were not part of the British Raj have been annexed by India since it gained its independence from the British Empire. An example of such territories was the 1961 Indian annexation of Goa. An example of annexation of a territory from the British Raj was the Indian integration of Junagadh.\n\nAkhand Bharat, literally Undivided India or Whole India, is an irredentist call to reunite Pakistan and Bangladesh (and for some Sri Lanka, Maldives, Nepal and Bhutan) with India to form an \"Undivided India\" as it existed before partition in 1947 during the British Raj (and before that, during other periods of political unity in South Asia when most of the Indian Subcontinent was under the rule of one power, such as during the Maurya Empire, the Gupta Empire, the Mughal Empire or the Maratha Empire). The call for \"Akhanda Bharata\" has often been raised by mainstream Indian nationalistic cultural and political organizations such as the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). Other major Indian political parties such as the Indian National Congress, while maintaining positions against the partition of India on religious grounds, do not necessarily subscribe to a call to reunite South Asia in the form of Akhanda Bharata.\n\nThe region of Kashmir in north India has been the issue of a territorial dispute between India and Pakistan since 1947, the Kashmir conflict. Multiple wars have been fought over the issue, the first one immediately upon independence and partition in 1947 itself. To stave off a Pakistani and tribal invasion, Maharaja Hari Singh of the princely state of Jammu and Kashmir signed the Instrument of Accession with India. Kashmir has remained divided in three parts, administered by India, Pakistan and China, since then. However, on the basis of the instrument of accession, India continues to claim the entire Kashmir region as its integral part. All modern Indian political parties support the return of the entirety of Kashmir to India, and all official maps of India show the entire Kashmir (including parts under Pakistani or Chinese administration after 1947) as an integral part of India.\n\nIndonesia claimed all territories of the former Dutch East Indies, and previously viewed British plans to group the British Malaya and Borneo into a new independent federation of Malaysia as a threat to its objective to create a united state called Greater Indonesia. The Indonesian opposition of Malaysian formation has led to the Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation in the early 1960s. It also held Portuguese Timor (modern East Timor) from 1975 to 2002 based on irredentist claims.\n\nThe idea of uniting former British and Dutch colonial possessions in Southeast Asia actually has its roots in the early 20th century, as the concept of Greater Malay (\"Melayu Raya\") was coined in British Malaya espoused by students and graduates of Sultan Idris Training College for Malay Teachers in the late 1920s. Some political figures in Indonesia including Mohammad Yamin and Sukarno revived the idea in the 1950s and named the political union concept as Greater Indonesia.\n\nThe nation state of Israel was established in 1948. The United Nations General Assembly passed U.N. Resolution 181, otherwise known as the United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine, with 72% of the valid votes. Eventually, Israeli independence was achieved following the liquidation of the former British-administered Mandate of Palestine, the departure of the British and the \"Independence War\" between the Jews in ex-Mandatory Palestine and five Arab states' armies. The Jewish claim to Palestine as a Jewish homeland can be seen as an example of irredentist reclamation of what is considered lost Jewish land by Zionists. These claims are based on ancestral inhabitance (and in some periods sovereignty) in the land and the cultural/religious significance of it in the Hebrew Bible. The latter is particularly relevant to the Israeli claim to Jerusalem. Mandatory Palestine had sizable Jewish and Arab populations before the Second World War.\n\nJudea and Samaria, as they are called in the Bible, were part of the ancient Kingdom of Israel (designated the West Bank by Jordan in 1947) and the Gaza Strip, previously annexed by Jordan and occupied by Egypt respectively, were conquered and occupied by Israel in the Six-Day War in 1967. Israel withdrew from Gaza in August 2005; Judea and Samaria (West Bank) remain under Israeli control. Israel has never explicitly claimed sovereignty over any part of the West Bank apart from East Jerusalem, which it unilaterally annexed in 1980. However, the Israeli military supports and defends hundreds of thousands of Israeli citizens who have migrated to the West Bank, incurring criticism by some who otherwise support Israel. The United Nations Security Council, the United Nations General Assembly, and some countries and international organizations continue to regard Israel as occupying Gaza. \"(See Israeli-Occupied Territories)\"\nThe Israeli annexing instrument, the Jerusalem Law—one of the Basic Laws of Israel (Israel does not have a constitution)—declares Jerusalem, \"complete and united\", to be the capital of Israel. Article 3 of the Basic Law of the Palestinian Authority, which was ratified in 2002 by the Palestinian National Authority and serves as an interim constitution, claims that \"Jerusalem is the capital of Palestine\". \"De facto\", the Palestinian government administers the parts of the West Bank that Israel has granted it authority over from Ramallah, while the Gaza Strip is administered by the Hamas movement from Gaza.\n\nThe United States did not recognize Israeli sovereignty over East Jerusalem until 2017. In Jerusalem, the United States maintained two Consulates General as a diplomatic representation to the city of Jerusalem alone, separate from representation to the state of Israel. One of the Consulates General was established before the 1967 war, and the other in a recently constructed building on the Israeli side of Jerusalem. Moreover, Congress passed the Jerusalem Embassy Act in 1995 that says the US shall move its embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem, but allows the president to delay the move every year if it is deemed contrary to national security interests. From 1995 to 2017, every president delayed the move. However, President Donald Trump in December 2017 declared his intention to move the embassy to Jerusalem and in May 2018 the embassy officially did so.\n\nA number of Israelis and Jews regard the East Bank of the Jordan river (which is today the Kingdom of Jordan) as the eastern parts of the Land of Israel (following the revisionist idea) because, according to the Bible, the Israelite tribes of Menasseh, Gad, and Reuben settled on the east bank of the Jordan, and allege that the area was designated a Jewish national home by the League of Nations in the Mandate for Palestine based upon the recognized historical connection of the Jewish people to the land. Cited as an explicit basis not to create, but to reconstitute the historical homeland of the Jewish people as a nation-state roughly analogous to the former Kingdom of Israel subject to change by treaty, capitulation, grant, usage, sufferance or other lawful means, it forms a basis for claims of sovereign jurisdiction.\n\nSince their founding, both Korean states have disputed the legitimacy of the other. North Korea's constitution stresses the importance of reunification, but, while it makes no similar formal provision for administering the South, it effectively claims its territory as it does not diplomatically recognise the Republic of Korea, deeming it an \"entity occupying the Korean territory\".\n\nSouth Korea's constitution also claims jurisdiction over the entire Korean peninsula. It acknowledges the division of Korea only indirectly by requiring the president to work for reunification. The Committee for the Five Northern Korean Provinces, established in 1949, is the South Korean authority charged with the administration of Korean territory north of the Military Demarcation Line (i.e., North Korea), and consists of the governors of the five provinces, who are appointed by the President. However the body is purely symbolic and largely tasked with dealing with Northern defectors; if reunification were to occur the Committee would be dissolved and new administrators appointed by the Ministry of Unification.\n\nOther territories sometimes disputed to belong to Korea are Manchuria and Gando.\n\nPakistan has from its inception sought to have the territory of Kashmir incorporated into it. This singular demand has predominated Pakistan's policy strategy and decision-making as well as its diplomacy, throughout its existence. Pakistan's dispute with India over the territory of Kashmir stems from events leading up to the 1948 war between the 2 countries.\n\nThe Guayana Esequiba is a territory administered by Guyana but claimed by Venezuela. It was first included in the Viceroyalty of New Granada and the Captaincy General of Venezuela by Spain, but was later included in Essequibo by the Dutch and in British Guiana by the United Kingdom. Originally, parts of what is now eastern Venezuela were included in the disputed area. This territory of is the subject of a long-running boundary dispute inherited from the colonial powers and complicated by the independence of Guyana in 1966. The status of the territory is subject to the Treaty of Geneva, which was signed by the United Kingdom, Venezuela and British Guiana governments on February 17, 1966. This treaty stipulates that the parties will agree to find a practical, peaceful and satisfactory solution to the dispute.\n\nSome of the most violent irredentist conflicts of recent times in Europe flared up as a consequence of the break-up of the former Yugoslavian federal state in the early 1990s. The conflict erupted further south with the ethnic Albanian majority in Kosovo seeking to switch allegiance to the adjoining state of Albania.\n\nGreater Albania or \"Ethnic Albania\" as called by the Albanian nationalists themselves, is an irredentist concept of lands outside the borders of Albania which are considered part of a greater national homeland by most Albanians, based on claims on the present-day or historical presence of Albanian populations in those areas. The term incorporates claims to Kosovo, as well as territories in the neighbouring countries Montenegro, Greece, and North Macedonia. Albanians themselves mostly use the term \"ethnic Albania\" instead. According to the \"Gallup Balkan Monitor\" 2010 report, the idea of a Greater Albania was supported by the majority of Albanians in Albania (63%), Kosovo (81%) and North Macedonia (53%).\n\nIn 2012, as part of the celebrations for the 100th Anniversary of the Independence of Albania, Prime Minister Sali Berisha spoke of \"Albanian lands\" stretching from Preveza in Greece to Preševo in Serbia, and from the Macedonian capital of Skopje to the Montenegrin capital of Podgorica, angering Albania's neighbours. The comments were also inscribed on a parchment that will be displayed at a museum in the city of Vlore, where the country's independence from the Ottoman Empire was declared in 1912.\n\nBased on the territorial definition of a historic Bulgarian state, a \"Greater Bulgaria\" nationalist movement has been active for more than a century that would annex most of Macedonia, Thrace, and Moesia.\n\nThe idea of the natural borders of France is a political theory conceptualized primarily in the late 18th and early 19th centuries that focused on widening the borders primarily based on either practical reasons or the territory that was thought to be the maximum extent that the ancient Gauls inhabited. Under this theory France's eastern border would extend to the Rhine river and would require the annexation of Belgium, Luxembourg, 27,264 km² of German territory on the left bank of the Rhine river, and 10,545 km² of Dutch territory south of Waal and Merwede rivers. If implemented today France would increase its territory by 70,923 km² and increase its population by 25,170,400.\n\nAlthough the Finnish government is not actively pursuing any policy to reclaim lost territory, there is a growing movement in both Finland and the Republic of Karelia to restore the territory annexed by the Soviet Union following the Winter and Continuation Wars, including Petsamo and parts of Salla and Kuusamo. The idea of a Greater Finland first gained popularity and influence in 1917, but lost support after World War II.\n\nDuring the debate of what was then called the German Question (\"die deutsche Frage\") in the 19th century prior to the unification of Germany (1871), the term \"Großdeutschland\", \"Greater Germany\", referred to a possible German nation consisting of the states that later comprised the German Empire and Austria. The term \"Kleindeutschland\" \"Lesser Germany\" referred to a possible German state without Austria. The term was later used by Germans referring to Greater Germany, a state consisting of pre–World War I Germany, Austria and the Sudetenland.\n\nA main point of Nazi ideology was to reunify all Germans either born or living outside of Germany to create an \"all-German Reich\". These beliefs ultimately resulted in the Munich Agreement, which ceded to Germany areas of Czechoslovakia that were mainly inhabited by those of German descent, and the \"Anschluss\", which ceded the entire country of Austria to Germany; both events occurred in 1938.\n\nFollowing the Greek War of Independence in 1821–1832, Greece began to contest areas inhabited by Greeks, primarily against the Ottoman Empire. The Megali Idea (Great Idea) envisioned Greek incorporation of Greek-inhabited lands, but also historical lands in Asia Minor corresponding with the predominantly Greek and Orthodox Byzantine Empire and the dominions of the ancient Greeks.\n\nThe Greek quest began with the acquisition of Thessaly through the Convention of Constantinople in 1881, a failed war against Turkey in 1897 and the Balkan Wars (Macedonia, Epirus, some Aegean Islands). After World War I, Greece acquired Western Thrace from Bulgaria as per the Treaty of Neuilly-sur-Seine, but also Ionia/Smyrna and Eastern Thrace (excluding Constantinople) from the Ottoman Empire as ordained in the Treaty of Sèvres. Subsequently, Greece launched an unsuccessful campaign to further their gains in Asia Minor, but were halted by the Turkish revolution. The events culminated into the Great Fire of Smyrna, Population exchange between Greece and Turkey and Treaty of Lausanne (1923) which returned Eastern Thrace and Ionia to the newfound Turkish Republic. The events are known as the \"Asia Minor Catastrophe\" to Greeks. The Ionian Islands were ceded by Britain in 1864, and the Dodecanese by Italy in 1947.\n\nAnother concern of the Greeks is the incorporation of Cyprus which was ceded by the Ottomans to the British. As a result of the Cyprus Emergency the island gained independence as the Republic of Cyprus in 1960. The failed incorporation by Greece through coup d'état and the Turkish invasion of Cyprus in 1974 led to the formation of the mostly unrecognized Northern Cyprus and has culminated into the present-day Cyprus issue.\n\nThe Aegean islands of Imbros and Tenedos which were not ceded to Greece over the course of the 20th century and where the dominant Greek community has faced persecution are also of concern.\n\nThe restoration of the borders of Hungary to their state prior to World War I, in order to unite all ethnic Hungarians within the same country once again.\n\nThe Irish Free State achieved partial independence with a dominion status under the British Empire in 1922. This state did not include Northern Ireland, which comprised six counties in the north-east of the island of Ireland which remained in the United Kingdom. When the Constitution of Ireland was adopted in 1937 it provided that the name of the state is \"Ireland\" and this is considered the time that the Republic of Ireland became a fully fledged independent nation. In the constitution Articles 2 and 3 provided that \"[t]he national territory consists of the whole island of Ireland\", while stipulating that \"[p]ending the re-integration of the national territory\", the powers of the state were restricted to legislate only for the area which had formed part of the Irish Free State. Arising from the Northern Ireland peace process, the matter was mutually resolved as part of the Good Friday Agreement in 1998. Ireland's constitution was altered by referendum and its territorial claim to Northern Ireland was removed.\n\nThe amended constitution asserts that while it is the entitlement of \"every person born in the island of Ireland … to be part of the Irish Nation\" and to hold Irish citizenship, \"a united Ireland shall be brought about only by peaceful means with the consent of a majority of the people, democratically expressed, in both jurisdictions in the island\". A North/South Ministerial Council was created between the two jurisdictions and given executive authority. The advisory and consultative role of the government of Ireland in the government of Northern Ireland granted by the United Kingdom, that had begun with the 1985 Anglo-Irish Agreement, was maintained, although that Agreement itself was ended. The two states also settled the long-running dispute concerning their respective names: \"Ireland\" and the \"United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland\", with both governments agreeing to use those names.\n\nUnder the Irish republican theory of legitimism, the Irish Republic declared in 1916 was in existence from then on, denying the legitimacy of either the state of Ireland or the position of Northern Ireland within the United Kingdom. Through much of its history, this was the position of Sinn Féin; however, it effectively abandoned this stance after accepting the Good Friday Agreement. Small groups which split from Sinn Féin continue to adopt this stance, including Republican Sinn Féin, linked with the Continuity IRA, and the 32 County Sovereignty Movement, linked with the Real IRA.\n\nItaly's territorial claims were on the basis of re-establishing a Romanesque Empire, a fourth shore according to the concept of Mare Nostrum (Latin for 'Our Sea') and traditional ethnic borders. Evident in Italy's rapid takeover of surrounding territories under Fascist leader Benito Mussolini and claims following the collapsed 1915 Treaty of London and 1919 Treaty of Versailles which established feelings of betrayal. Mussolini and Hitler's similarities including a joint hatred towards the French and wanting to expand their territories brought the two leaders together, solidified in the Pact of Steel and later WW2. By 1942 Italy had conquered Abyssinia (modern day Ethiopia), Libya, much of Egypt, Tunisia, Kenya and Somalia. And – on the European continent – Istria, Dalmatia, Albania, Slovenia, Croatia, Macedonia, the Spanish island of Majorca and France's Corsica; Malta was also bombed. Underlying tensions remained with France, over its territories of Corsica, Nice and Savoy.\n\nSome Macedonian nationalists promoted the irredentist concept of a United Macedonia () among ethnic Macedonian nationalists, which involves territorial claims on the northern province of Macedonia in Greece, but also in Blagoevgrad Province (\"Pirin Macedonia\") in Bulgaria, Albania, and Serbia. The United Macedonia concept aims to unify the transnational region of Macedonia in the Balkans (which they claim as their homeland and which they assert was wrongfully divided under the Treaty of Bucharest in 1913), into a single state under Macedonian domination, with the Greek city of Thessaloniki (\"Solun\" in the Slavic languages) as its capital.\n\nThe Kingdom of Norway maintains some claim to territories lost at the dissolution of the Denmark–Norway union. The Old Kingdom of Norway, which was the Norwegian territories at its maximum extent, included Iceland, the settleable areas of Greenland, the Faroe Islands and Northern Isles (today part of Scotland). Under Danish sovereignty since they established a hegemonic position in the Kalmar Union, the territories were considered as Norwegian colonies. When in the Treaty of Kiel in 1814, Norway's territories were transferred from Denmark to Sweden, the territories of Iceland, Greenland, and the Faroe Islands were maintained by Denmark.\n\nIn 1919, Norway declared sovereignty over an area in Eastern Greenland in the Ihlen Declaration, which led to a dispute with Denmark that was not settled until 1933, by the Permanent Court of International Justice. Norway formerly included the provinces Jämtland, Härjedalen, Idre-Särna (lost since the Second Treaty of Brömsebro), and Bohuslän (lost since the Treaty of Roskilde), which were ceded to Sweden after Danish defeats in wars such as the Thirty Years' War and Second Northern War.\n\nKresy (\"Borderlands\") are the eastern lands that formerly belonged to Poland. In 1921, Polish troops crossed the Curzon Line and seized large Ukrainian and Belorussian territories, and also seized 7 percent of Lithuania's territory in 1920. These territories were re-annexed by the Soviet Union in 1939 under the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact, and include major cities, like Lviv (Ukraine), Vilnius (the capital of Lithuania), and Hrodna (Belarus). Even though \"Kresy\", or the \"Eastern Borderlands\", are no longer Polish territories, the area is still inhabited by a significant Polish minority, and the memory of the Polish \"Kresy\" is still cultivated. The attachment to the \"myth of Kresy\", the vision of the region as a peaceful, idyllic, rural land, has been criticized in Polish discourse.\n\nIn January, February and March 2012, the Centre for Public Opinion Research conducted a survey, asking Poles about their ties to the Kresy. It turned out that almost 15% of the population of Poland (4.3–4.6 million people) declared that they had either been born in the Kresy, or had a parent or a grandparent who came from that region. Numerous treasures of Polish culture remain and there are numerous Kresy-oriented organizations. There are Polish sports clubs (Pogoń Lwów, FK Polonia Vilnius), newspapers (Gazeta Lwowska, Kurier Wileński), radio stations (in Lviv and Vilnius), numerous theatres, schools, choirs and folk ensembles. Poles living in \"Kresy\" are helped by Fundacja Pomoc Polakom na Wschodzie, a Polish government-sponsored organization, as well as other organizations, such as The \"Association of Help of Poles in the East Kresy\" (see also Karta Polaka). Money is frequently collected to help those Poles who live in the \"Kresy\", and there are several annual events, such as a \"Christmas Package for a Polish Veteran in Kresy\", and \"Summer with Poland\", sponsored by the Association \"Polish Community\", in which Polish children from \"Kresy\" are invited to visit Poland. Polish language handbooks and films, as well as medicines and clothes are collected and sent to \"Kresy\". Books are most often sent to Polish schools which exist there—for example, in December 2010, The University of Wrocław organized an event called \"Become a Polish Santa Claus and Give a Book to a Polish Child in Kresy\". Polish churches and cemeteries (such as Cemetery of the Defenders of Lwów) are renovated with money from Poland.\n\nPortugal does not recognize Spanish sovereignty over the territory of Olivenza, ceded to Spain during the Napoleonic Wars.\n\nRomania lays claims to Greater Romania, which include Bessarabia and Bucovina as Moldova, since they were parts of Romania between 1918 and 1940. Moldovan language is the Soviet name for the Romanian language. There is some (but not universal) support by Moldovans for a peaceful and voluntary reunion with Romania, not least because (having joined the European Union), the economy has burgeoned and Romanian citizens have gained freedom of movement in Europe. Also Russian irredentism in Transnistria has caused alarm and resentment.\n\nThe annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation in 2014 was based on a claim of protecting ethnic Russians residing there. Crimea was part of the Russian Empire from 1783 to 1917, after which it enjoyed a few years of autonomy until it was made part of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (which was a part of the Soviet Union) from 1921 to 1954 and then transferred to Soviet Ukraine (which also was a part of the Soviet Union) in 1954. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Crimea still remained part of Ukraine until February 2014. Russia declared Crimea to be part of the Russian Federation in March 2014, and effective administration commenced. The Russian regional status is not currently recognised by the UN General Assembly and by many countries.\n\nRussian irredentism also includes southeastern and coastal Ukraine, known as \"Novorossiya\", a term from the Russian Empire.\n\nSerbian irredentism is manifested in \"Greater Serbia\". Used in the context of the Yugoslav wars, however, the Serbian struggle for Serbs to remain united in one country does not quite fit the term \"irredentism\". In the 19th century, Pan-Serbism sought to unite all of the Serb people across the Balkans, under Ottoman and Habsburg rule. Some intellectuals sought to unite all South Slavs (regardless of religion) into a Serbian state. Serbia had gained independence from the Ottoman Empire in 1878. Bosnia and Herzegovina, annexed by the Austrians in 1908, was viewed of as a part of the Serbian homeland. Serbia directed its territorial aspirations to the south, as the north and west was held by Austria. Macedonia was divided between Serbia and Greece after the Balkan Wars.\n\nIn 1914, aspirations were directed towards Austria-Hungary. A government policy sought to incorporate all Serb-inhabited areas, and other South Slavic areas, thereby laying the foundation of Yugoslavia. With the establishment of the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (later Yugoslavia), the Serbs now lived united in one country. During the breakup of Yugoslavia, the Serb political leadership in break-away Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina declared their territories to be part of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro).\n\nThe project of unification of Serb-inhabited areas in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina during the Yugoslav wars (see United Serb Republic) ultimately failed. The Croatian Operation Storm ended large-scale combat and captured most of the Republic of Serbian Krajina, while the Dayton Agreement ended the Bosnian War. Bosnia and Herzegovina was established as a federal republic, made up by two separate entities, one being Serb-inhabited Republika Srpska. There has since been calls by Bosnian Serb politicians for the secession of Republika Srpska, and possible unification with Serbia.\n\nAfter the Kosovo War (1998–99), Kosovo became a UN protectorate, still \"de jure\" part of Serbia. The Albanian-majority Kosovo assembly unilaterally declared the independence of Kosovo in 2008, and its status is since disputed.\n\nSpain maintains a claim on Gibraltar, a British Overseas Territory near the southernmost tip of the Iberian Peninsula, which has been British since the 18th Century.\n\nGibraltar was captured in 1704, during the War of the Spanish Succession (1701–1714). The Kingdom of Spain formally ceded the territory in perpetuity to the British Crown in 1713, under of the Treaty of Utrecht. Spain's territorial claim was formally reasserted by the Spanish dictator Francisco Franco in the 1960s and has been continued by successive Spanish governments. In 2002 an agreement in principle on joint sovereignty over Gibraltar between the governments of the United Kingdom and Spain was decisively rejected in a referendum. The British Government now refuses to discuss sovereignty without the consent of the Gibraltarians.\n\nIrredentism is acute in the Caucasus region. The Nagorno-Karabakh movement's original slogan of \"miatsum\" ('union') was explicitly oriented towards re-unification with Armenia as to the pre-Soviet status, feeding an Azerbaijani understanding of the conflict as a bilateral one between itself and an irredentist Armenia. According to Prof. Thomas Ambrosio, \"Armenia's successful irredentist project in the Nagorno-Karabakh region of Azerbaijan\" and \"From 1992 to the cease-fire in 1994, Armenia encountered a highly permissive or tolerant international environment that allowed its annexation of some 15 percent of Azerbaijani territory\".\n\nIn the view of Nadia Milanova, Nagorno-Karabakh represents a combination of separatism and irredentism. However, the area has historically been Armenian, known as the Kingdom of Artsakh or Khachen. When the Caucuses came under the rule of the Soviet Union, the land was given to Azerbaijan abruptly and arbitrarily due to pressure by Joseph Stalin, along with the ancient Armenian lands of Nakhichevan, to appease Turkey during 1919–1921.\nAzerbaijan's irredentism, on the other hand, is quite explicit in official statements of the Azerbaijani officials by claiming the UN member-state Republic of Armenia as Azerbaijani territory despite the absence of historical evidence of Azerbaijan existing as a separate state up until 1918. On his official meeting in Gyanja on 21 January 2014, President Ilham Aliyev said, \"The present-day Armenia is actually located on historical lands of Azerbaijan. Therefore, we will return to all our historical lands in the future. This should be known to young people and children. We must live, we live and we will continue to live with this idea.\"\n\nThe Assyrian homeland is a geographic and cultural region situated in Northern Mesopotamia that has been traditionally inhabited by Assyrian people. The area with the greatest concentration of Assyrians on earth is located in the Assyrian homeland, or the \"Assyrian Triangle\", a region which comprises the Nineveh plains, southern Hakkari and the Barwari regions. This is where some Assyrian groups seek to create an independent nation state. The land roughly mirrors the boundaries of ancient Assyria proper, and the later Achaemenid, Seleucid, Parthian, Roman and Sassanid provinces of Assyria (Athura/Assuristan) that was extant between the 25th century BC and 7th century AD.\n\nWhole Azerbaijan is a concept of the political and historical union of territories currently and historically inhabited by Azerbaijanis or historically controlled by them. Western Azerbaijan is an irredentist political concept that is used in Azerbaijan mostly to refer to Armenia. Azerbaijani statements claim that the territory of the modern Armenian republic were lands that once belonged to Azerbaijanis.\n\nPan-Iranism is an ideology that advocates solidarity and reunification of Iranian peoples living in the Iranian plateau and other regions that have significant Iranian cultural influence, including the Persians, Azerbaijanis, Ossetians, Kurds, Zazas, Tajiks of Tajikistan and Afghanistan, the Pashtuns and the Baloch of Pakistan. The first theoretician was Dr Mahmoud Afshar Yazdi.\n\nThe ideology of pan-Iranism is most often used in conjunction with the idea of forming a Greater Iran, which refers to the regions of the Caucasus, West Asia, Central Asia, and parts of South Asia that have significant Iranian cultural influence due to having been either long historically ruled by the various Iranian (Persian) empires (such as those of the Medes, Achaemenids, Parthians, Sassanians, Samanids, Timurids, Safavids, and Afsharids and the Qajar Empire), having considerable aspects of Persian culture in their own culture due to extensive contact with the various Empires based in Persia (e.g., those regions and peoples in the North Caucasus that were not under direct Iranian rule), or are simply nowadays still inhabited by a significant amount of Iranic-speaking people who patronize their respective cultures (as it goes for the western parts of South Asia, Bahrain and China). It roughly corresponds to the territory on the Iranian plateau and its bordering plains. It is also referred to as \"Greater Persia\", while the Encyclopædia Iranica uses the term \"Iranian Cultural Continent\".\n\nSaddam Hussein's Iraq aimed to annex Khuzestan Province of Iran during the Iran–Iraq War due to the Arab population living there.\n\nThe Lebanese nationalism incorporates irredentist views seeking to unify all the lands of ancient Phoenicia around present day Lebanon. This comes from the fact that present day Lebanon, the Mediterranean coast of Syria, and northern Israel is the area that roughly corresponds to ancient Phoenicia and as a result the majority of the Lebanese people identify with the ancient Phoenician population of that region. The proposed Greater Lebanese country includes Lebanon, Mediterranean coast of Syria, and northern Israel.\n\nThe French Mandate of Syria handed over the Sanjak of Alexandretta to Turkey which turned it into Hatay Province. Syria disputes this and still regards the region as belonging to Syria.\n\nThe Syrian Social Nationalist Party, which operates in Lebanon and Syria, works for the unification of most modern states of the Levant and beyond in a single state referred to as Greater Syria. The proposed Syrian country includes Israel, Syria, Jordan, and parts of Turkey, and has at times been expanded to include Iraq, Cyprus, and the Sinai peninsula.\n\nMisak-ı Millî is the set of six important decisions made by the last term of the Ottoman Parliament. Parliament met on 28 January 1920 and published their decisions on 12 February 1920. These decisions worried the occupying Allies, resulting in the Occupation of Constantinople by the British, French and Italian troops on 16 March 1920 and the establishment of a new Turkish nationalist parliament, the Grand National Assembly, in Ankara.\n\nThe Ottoman Minister of Internal Affairs, Damat Ferid Pasha, made the opening speech of parliament due to Mehmed VI's illness. A group of parliamentarians called \"Felâh-ı Vatan\" was established by Mustafa Kemal's friends to acknowledge the decisions taken at the Erzurum Congress and the Sivas Congress. Mustafa Kemal said \"It is the nation's iron fist that writes the Nation's Oath which is the main principle of our independence to the annals of history.\" Decisions taken by this parliament were used as the basis for the new Turkish Republic's claims in the Treaty of Lausanne.\n\nThe Greater and Lesser Tunbs are disputed by the United Arab Emirates against Iran.\n\nGreater Yemen is a theory giving Yemen claim to former territories that were held by various predecessor states that existed between the Himyarite period and 18th century. The areas claimed include parts of modern Saudi Arabia and Oman.\n\nWhen Hong Kong and Macau were British and Portuguese territories, respectively, China considered these two territories to be Chinese territories under British and Portuguese administration. Therefore, Hong Kong people and Macau people descended from Chinese immigrants were entitled to Hong Kong Special Administrative Region passport or Macao Special Administrative Region passport after the two territories became the special administrative regions.\n\nJapan claims the two southernmost islands of the Russian-administered Kuril Islands, the island chain north of Hokkaido, annexed by the Soviet Union following World War II. Japan also claims the South Korean-administered Liancourt Rocks, which are known as Takeshima in Japan and have been claimed since the end of the Second World War.\n\nThe 1909 Gando Convention addressed a territory dispute between China and Joseon Korea in China's favour. Both Korean states now accept the convention border as an administrative boundary. However, because the convention was made by the occupying Empire of Japan, South Korea has disputed its legality and some Koreans claim that Korea extends into \"de facto\" PRC territory, viz. Dandong and Liaoning. The most ambitious claims include all parts of Manchuria that the Goguryeo kingdom controlled.\n\nThe irredentist idea that advocates cultural and political solidarity of Mongols. The proposed territory usually includes the independent state of Mongolia, the Chinese regions of Inner Mongolia (Southern Mongolia) and Dzungaria (in Xinjiang), and the Russian subjects of Buryatia. Sometimes Tuva and the Altai Republic are included as well.\n\nSouth Asia too is another region in which armed irredentist movements have been active for almost a century. Most prominent amongst them are the Naga fight for Greater Nagaland, the Chin struggle for a unified Chinland, the Sri Lankan Tamil struggle for a return of their state under Tamil Eelam and other self-determinist movements by the ethnic indigenous peoples of the erstwhile Assam both under the British and post-British Assam under India. Other such movements include Beḻagāva border dispute on Maharashtra and Karnataka border with intentions to unite all Marathi speaking people under one state since the formation of the Karnataka state and dissolution of the bilingual Bombay state.\n\nGreater Bangladesh is an assumption of several Indian intellectuals that the neighbouring country of Bangladesh has an aspiration to unite all Bengali dominated regions under their flag. These include the states of West Bengal, Tripura and Assam as well as the Andaman Islands which are currently part of India and the Burmese State of Rakhine. The theory is principally based on a widespread belief amongst Indian masses that a large number of illegal Bangladeshi immigrants reside in Indian territory. It is alleged that illegal immigration is actively encouraged by some political groups in Bangladesh as well as the state of Bangladesh to convert large parts of India's northeastern states and West Bengal into Muslim-majority areas that would subsequently seek to separate from India and join Muslim-majority Bangladesh.\n\nScholars have reflected that under the guise of anti-Bangladeshi immigrant movement it is actually an anti-Muslim agenda pointed towards Bangladeshi Muslims by false propaganda and widely exaggerated claims on immigrant population. In 1998, Lieutenant General S.K. Sinha, then the Governor of Assam, claimed that massive illegal immigration from Bangladesh was directly linked with \"the long-cherished design of Greater Bangladesh\".\n\nThe call for creation of \"Akhanda Bharata\" or \"Akhand Hindustan\" has on occasion been raised by some Indian right wing Hindutvadi cultural and political organisations, such as the Hindu Mahasabha, Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), Vishwa Hindu Parishad, Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). The name of one organisation sharing this goal, the Akhand Hindustan Morcha, bears the term in its name. Other major Indian non-sectarian political parties, such as the Indian National Congress, maintain a position against the partition of India on religious grounds and do not subscribe to a call for Akhand Bharat.\n\nGreater Nepal involves the incorporation of the territories won by the Kingdom of Nepal at it greatest extent back to the Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal.\n\nPakistani irredentism involves the incorporations of Muslim majority lands of British India under Pakistan. This is most notable in the conflict in the Jammu and Kashmir state, a Muslim majority state in India.\n\nIrredentism is commonplace in Africa due to the political boundaries of former European colonial nation-states passing through ethnic boundaries, and recent declarations of independence after civil war. For example, some Ethiopian nationalist circles still claim the former Ethiopian province of Eritrea (internationally recognized as the independent State of Eritrea in 1993 after a 30-year civil war).\n\nIn North Africa, the prime examples of irredentism are the concepts of Greater Morocco and Greater Mauritania. While Mauritania has since relinquished any claims to territories outside its internationally recognized borders, Morocco continues to claim Western Sahara, which it refers to as its \"Southern Provinces\".\n\nGreater Somalia refers to the region in the Horn of Africa in which ethnic Somalis are and have historically represented the predominant population. The territory encompasses The Republic of Somalia, the Ogaden region in Ethiopia, the North Eastern Province in Kenya and southern and eastern Djibouti. Ogaden in eastern Ethiopia has seen military and civic movements seeking to make it part of Somalia. This culminated in the 1977–78 Ogaden War between the two neighbours where the Somali military offensive between July 1977 and March 1978 over the disputed Ethiopian region Ogaden ended when the Somali Armed Forces retreated back across the border and a truce was declared. The Kenyan Northern Frontier District also saw conflict during the Shifta War (1963–1967) when a secessionist conflict in which ethnic Somalis in the Lamu, Garissa, Wajir and Mandera counties (all except Lamu formed part of the former North Eastern Province, abolished in 2013), attempted to join with their fellow Somalis in a \"Greater Somalia\". There has been no similar conflicts in Djibouti, which was previously known as the \"French Somaliland\" during colonisation. Here the apparent struggles for unification manifested itself in political strife that ended when in a referendum to join France as opposed to the Somali Republic succeeded among rumours of widespread vote rigging. and the subsequent death of Somali nationalist Mahmoud Harbi, Vice President of the Government Council, who was killed in a plane crash two years later under suspicious circumstances.\nSome sources say that Somalia has also laid a claim to the Socotra archipelago, which is currently governed by Yemen.\n\nIn the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (1848) following the Mexican–American War (1845–48), Mexico ceded claims to what is now the Western and Southwestern United States to the United States (see Mexican Cession). The Cortina and Pizaña uprisings of 1859 and 1915 were influenced by irredentist ideas and the \"proximity of the international boundary\". The unsuccessful Pizaña uprising \"was the last major armed protest on the part of Texas-Americans\" (Tejanos). This 1915 uprising and the Plan of San Diego that preceded it marked the high point in Mexican irredentist sentiments.\n\nIn the early years of the Chicano Movement (\"El Movimiento\") in the 1960s and 1970s, some movement figures \"were political nationalists who advocated the secession of the Southwest from the Anglo republic of the United States of America, if not fully, at least locally with regard to Chicano self-determination in local governance, education and means of production\". For example, in the 1970s, Reies Tijerina and his group La Alianza, espoused various separatist, secessionist, or irredentist beliefs. The \"Plan Espiritual de Aztlán\", written during the First Chicano National Youth Conference in 1969, also stated \"the fundamental Chicano nationalist goal of reclaiming Aztlán\"—a reference to ancient Mexican myth—as \"the rightful homeland of the Chicanos\". However, \"Most Chicano nationalists ... did not express the extreme desire for secession from the United States, and the nationalism they expressed weighed more heavily toward the broadly cultural than the explicitly political.\"\n\nToday, there is virtually no Mexican-American support for \"separatist policies of self-determination\". \"Ethnonational irredentism by Mexicans in territories seized by the United States\" following the Mexican–American War \"declined after the failure of several attempted revolts at the end of the nineteenth century, in favor of internal ... struggles for immigrant and racial civil rights\" in the United States. Neither the Mexican government nor any significant Mexican-American group \"makes irredentist claims upon the United States\". In the modern era, there \"has been no evidence of irredentist sentiments among Mexican-Americans, even in such formerly Mexican territories as Southern California, ... nor of disloyalty to the United States, nor of active interest in the politics of Mexico\".\n\nBULLET::::- List of irredentist claims or disputes\nBULLET::::- Ethnic nationalism\nBULLET::::- Expansionism\nBULLET::::- Lebensraum\nBULLET::::- Separatism\nBULLET::::- Secession\nBULLET::::- Manifest Destiny\nBULLET::::- Pan-nationalism\nBULLET::::- Phyletism\nBULLET::::- Revanchism\nBULLET::::- Rump State\nBULLET::::- Status quo ante bellum\nBULLET::::- Territorial dispute\nBULLET::::- Willard, Charles Arthur 1996 — \"Liberalism and the Problem of Knowledge: A New Rhetoric for Modern Democracy\", Chicago: University of Chicago Press. , ;\n\n"}
{"id": "15227", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15227", "title": "Inuit languages", "text": "Inuit languages\n\nThe Inuit languages are a closely related group of indigenous American languages traditionally spoken across the North American Arctic and to some extent in the subarctic in Labrador. The related Yupik languages are spoken in western and southern Alaska and in the far east of Russia, but are severely endangered in Russia today and spoken only in a few villages on the Chukchi Peninsula. The Inuit live primarily in three countries: Greenland, Canada (specifically in the Nunatsiavut region of Labrador, the Nunavik region of Quebec, Nunavut, and the Northwest Territories), and the United States (specifically the coast of Alaska).\n\nThe total population of Inuit speaking their traditional languages is difficult to assess with precision, since most counts rely on self-reported census data that may not accurately reflect usage or competence. Greenland census estimates place the number of speakers of varieties of Inuit there at roughly 50,000, while Canadian estimates are at roughly 35,000. These two countries count the bulk of speakers of Inuit language variants, although about 7,500 Alaskans speak varieties of Inuit out of a population of over 13,000 Inuit.\n\nThe Inuit languages have a few hundred speakers in Russia. In addition, an estimated 7,000 Greenlandic Inuit live in Denmark, the largest group outside Greenland, Canada and Alaska. Thus, the global population of speakers of varieties of Inuit is on the order of nearly 100,000 people.\n\nThe traditional language of the Inuit is a system of closely interrelated dialects that are not readily comprehensible from one end of the Inuit world to the other, and some people do not think of it as a single language but rather as a group of languages. However, there are no clear criteria for breaking the Inuit language into specific member languages since it forms a dialect continuum. Each band of Inuit understands its neighbours, and most likely its neighbours' neighbours; but at some remove, comprehensibility drops to a very low level.\n\nAs a result, Inuit in different places use different words for its own variants and for the entire group of languages, and this ambiguity has been carried into other languages, creating a great deal of confusion over what labels should be applied to it.\n\nIn Greenland the official form of Inuit language, and the official language of the state, is called \"Kalaallisut\". In other languages, it is often called \"Greenlandic\" or some cognate term. The Eskimo languages of Alaska are called \"Inupiatun\", but the variants of the Seward Peninsula are distinguished from the other Alaskan variants by calling them \"Qawiaraq\", or for some dialects, \"Bering Strait Inupiatun\".\n\nIn Canada, the word \"Inuktitut\" is routinely used to refer to all Canadian variants of the Inuit traditional language, and it is under that name that it is recognised as one of the official languages of Nunavut and the Northwest Territories. However, one of the variants of western Nunavut is called \"Inuinnaqtun\" to distinguish itself from the dialects of eastern Canada, while the variants of the Northwest Territories are sometimes called \"Inuvialuktun\" and have in the past sometimes been called \"Inuktun\". In those dialects, the name is sometimes rendered as \"Inuktitun\" to reflect dialectal differences in pronunciation. The Inuit language of Quebec is called \"Inuttitut\" by its speakers, and often by other people, but this is a minor variation in pronunciation. In Labrador, the language is called \"Inuttut\" or, often in official documents, by the more descriptive name \"Labradorimiutut\". Furthermore, Canadians – both Inuit and non-Inuit – sometimes use the word \"Inuktitut\" to refer to \"all\" Inuit language variants, including those of Alaska and Greenland.\n\nThe phrase \"\"Inuit language\"\" is largely limited to professional discourse, since in each area, there is one or more conventional terms that cover all the local variants; or it is used as a descriptive term in publications where readers can't necessarily be expected to know the locally used words.\n\nAlthough many people refer to the Inuit language as \"Eskimo language\", this is a broad term that also includes the Yupik languages, and is in addition strongly discouraged in Canada and diminishing in usage elsewhere. See the article on \"Eskimo\" for more information on this word.\n\nThe language of the Inuit is an Eskimo–Aleut language. It is fairly closely related to the Yupik languages and more remotely to the Aleut language. These cousin languages are all spoken in Western Alaska and Eastern Chukotka, Russia. It is not discernibly related to other indigenous languages of the Americas or northeast Asia, although some have proposed that it is related to the Uralic languages such as Finnish and the Sami languages in the proposed \"Uralo-Siberian\" grouping, or even Indo-European languages as part of the hypothetical \"Nostratic\" superphylum. Some consider it a Paleosiberian language, although that is more a geographic than a linguistic grouping.\n\nEarly forms of the Inuit language were spoken by the Thule people, who overran the Dorset culture that had previously occupied Arctic America at the beginning of the 2nd millennium. By 1300, the Inuit and their language had reached western Greenland, and finally east Greenland roughly at the same time the Viking colonies in southern Greenland disappeared. It is generally believed that it was during this centuries-long eastward migration that the Inuit language became distinct from the Yupik languages spoken in Western Alaska and Chukotka.\n\nUntil 1902, a possible enclave of the Dorset, the \"Sadlermiut\" (in modern Inuktitut spelling \"Sallirmiut\"), existed on Southampton Island. Almost nothing is known about their language, but the few eyewitness accounts tell of them speaking a \"strange dialect\". This suggests that they also spoke an Eskimo–Aleut language, but one quite distinct from the forms spoken in Canada today.\n\nThe Yupik and Inuit languages are very similar syntactically and morphologically. Their common origin can be seen in a number of cognates:\n\n! English !! Central Yupik !! Iñupiatun !! North Baffin Inuktitut !! Kalaallisut\n\nThe western Alaskan variants retain a large number of features present in proto-Inuit language and in Yup'ik, enough so that they might be classed as Yup'ik languages if they were viewed in isolation from the larger Inuit world.\n\nThe Inuit languages are a fairly closely linked set of languages which can be broken up using a number of different criteria. Traditionally, Inuit describe dialect differences by means of place names to describe local idiosyncrasies in language: The dialect of Igloolik versus the dialect of Iqaluit, for example. However, political and sociological divisions are increasingly the principal criteria for describing different variants of the Inuit languages because of their links to different writing systems, literary traditions, schools, media sources and borrowed vocabulary. This makes any partition of the Inuit language somewhat problematic. This article will use labels that try to synthesise linguistic, sociolinguistic and political considerations in splitting up the Inuit dialect spectrum. This scheme is not the only one used or necessarily one used by Inuit themselves, but its labels do try to reflect the usages most seen in popular and technical literature.\n\nIn addition to the territories listed below, some 7,000 Greenlandic speakers are reported to live in mainland Denmark, and according to the 2001 census roughly 200 self-reported Inuktitut native speakers regularly live in parts of Canada which are outside traditional Inuit lands.\n\nOf the roughly 13,000 Alaskan Iñupiat, as few as 3000 may still be able to speak the Iñupiaq, with most of them over the age of 40. Alaskan Inupiat speak four distinct dialects:\n\nBULLET::::- Qawiaraq is spoken on the southern side of the Seward Peninsula and the Norton Sound area. In the past it was spoken in Chukotka, particularly Big Diomede island, but appears to have vanished in Russian areas through assimilation into Yupik, Chukchi and Russian-speaking communities. It is radically different in phonology from other Inuit language variants.\nBULLET::::- The Bering Strait dialect of Qawiaraq, which is considered to be separate by some.\nBULLET::::- Inupiatun (North Slope Iñupiaq) is spoken on the Alaska North Slope and in the Kotzebue Sound area.\nBULLET::::- The variants of the Kotzebue Sound area and the northwest of Alaska, called Malimiutun or Malimiut Inupiatun.\n\nThe Inuit languages are an official language in the Northwest Territories, and the official and dominant language of Nunavut; it enjoys a high level of official support in Nunavik, a semi-autonomous portion of Quebec; and is still spoken in some parts of Labrador. Generally, Canadians refer to all dialects spoken in Canada as \"Inuktitut\", but the terms \"Inuvialuktun\", \"Inuinnaqtun\", and \"Inuttut\" (also called \"Nunatsiavummiutut\" or \"Labradorimiutut\") have some currency in referring to the variants of specific areas.\n\nGreenland counts approximately 50,000 speakers of the Inuit languages, of whom over 90% speak west Greenlandic dialects at home.\nBULLET::::- Kalaallisut, or in English Greenlandic, is the name given to the standard dialect and official language of Greenland. This standard national language has been taught to all Greenlanders since schools were established, regardless of their native dialect. It reflects almost exclusively the language of western Greenland and has borrowed a great deal of vocabulary from Danish, while Canadian and Alaskan Inuit languages have tended to take vocabulary from English or sometimes French and Russian. It is written using the Latin script. The dialect of the Upernavik area in northwest Greenland is somewhat different in phonology from the standard dialect.\nBULLET::::- Tunumiit oraasiat, the Tunumiit dialect, (or Tunumiisut in Greenlandic, often East Greenlandic in other languages), is the dialect of eastern Greenland. It differs sharply from other Inuit language variants and has roughly 3000 speakers according to Ethnologue.\nBULLET::::- Inuktun (Or Avanersuarmiutut in Greenlandic) is the dialect of the area around Qaanaaq in northern Greenland. It is sometimes called the Thule dialect or North Greenlandic. This area is the northernmost settlement area of the Inuit and has a relatively small number of speakers. It is reputed to be fairly close to the North Baffin dialect, since a group of migratory Inuit from Baffin Island settled in the area during the 19th and early 20th centuries. It counts under 1000 speakers according to Ethnologue.\n\nGreenlandic was strongly supported by the Danish Christian mission (conducted by the Danish state church) in Greenland. Several major dictionaries were created, beginning with Poul Egedes's Dictionarium Grönlandico-danico-latinum (1750) and culminating with Samuel Kleinschmidt's (1871) \"Den grønlandske ordbog\" (Transl. \"The Greenlandic Dictionary\") that contained a Greenlandic grammatical system that has formed the basis of modern Greenlandic grammar. Together with the fact that until 1925 Danish was not taught in the public schools, these policies had the consequence that Greenlandic has always and continues to enjoy a very strong position in Greenland, both as a spoken as well as written language.\n\nEastern Canadian Inuit language variants have fifteen consonants and three vowels (which can be long or short).\n\nConsonants are arranged with five places of articulation: bilabial, alveolar, palatal, velar and uvular; and three manners of articulation: voiceless stops, voiced continuants, and nasals, as well as two additional sounds—voiceless fricatives. The Alaskan dialects have an additional manner of articulation, the \"retroflex\", which was present in proto-Inuit language. Retroflexes have disappeared in all the Canadian and Greenlandic dialects. In Natsilingmiutut, the voiced palatal stop derives from a former retroflex.\n\nAlmost all Inuit language variants have only three basic vowels and make a phonological distinction between short and long forms of all vowels. The only exceptions are at the extreme edges of the Inuit world: parts of Greenland, and in western Alaska.\n\nThe Inuit language, like other Eskimo–Aleut languages, has a very rich morphological system, in which a succession of different morphemes are added to root words (like verb endings in European languages) to indicate things that, in languages like English, would require several words to express. (See also: Agglutinative language and Polysynthetic language) All Inuit language words begin with a root morpheme to which other morphemes are suffixed. The language has hundreds of distinct suffixes, in some dialects as many as 700. Fortunately for learners, the language has a highly regular morphology. Although the rules are sometimes very complicated, they do not have exceptions in the sense that English and other Indo-European languages do.\n\nThis system makes words very long, and potentially unique. For example, in central Nunavut Inuktitut:\n\nThis long word is composed of a root word \"tusaa-\" \"to hear\" followed by five suffixes:\n!-tsiaq-\n\"well\"\n!-junnaq-\n\"be able to\"\n!-nngit-\n\"not\"\n!-tualuu-\n\"very much\"\n!-junga\n1st pers. singular present indicative non-specific\n\nThis sort of word construction is pervasive in the Inuit languages and makes it very unlike English. In one large Canadian corpus – the \"Nunavut Hansard\" – 92% of all words appear only once, in contrast to a small percentage in most English corpora of similar size. This makes the application of Zipf's law quite difficult in the Inuit language. Furthermore, the notion of a part of speech can be somewhat complicated in the Inuit languages. Fully inflected verbs can be interpreted as nouns. The word ilisaijuq can be interpreted as a fully inflected verb: \"he studies\", but can also be interpreted as a noun: \"student\". That said, the meaning is probably obvious to a fluent speaker, when put in context.\n\nThe morphology and syntax of the Inuit languages vary to some degree between dialects, and the article \"Inuit grammar\" describes primarily central Nunavut dialects, but the basic principles will generally apply to all of them and to some degree to Yupik languages as well.\n\nBoth the names of places and people tend to be highly prosaic when translated. \"Iqaluit\", for example, is simply the plural of the noun \"iqaluk\" \"fish\" (\"Arctic char\", \"salmon\" or \"trout\" depending on dialect). \"Igloolik\" (\"Iglulik\") means \"place with houses\", a word that could be interpreted as simply \"town\"; \"Inuvik\" is \"place of people\"; \"Baffin Island\", \"Qikiqtaaluk\" in Inuktitut, translates approximately to \"big island\".\n\nAlthough practically all Inuit have legal names based on southern naming traditions, at home and among themselves they still use native naming traditions. There too, names tend to consist of highly prosaic words. The Inuit traditionally believed that by adopting the name of a dead person or a class of things, they could take some of their characteristics or powers, and enjoy a part of their identity. (This is why they were always very willing to accept European names: they believed that this made them equal to the Europeans.)\n\nCommon native names in Canada include \"Ujarak\" (rock), \"Nuvuk\" (headland), \"Nasak\" (hat, or hood), \"Tupiq\" or \"Tupeq\" in Kalaallisut (tent), and \"Qajaq\" (kayak). Inuit also use animal names, traditionally believing that by using those names, they took on some of the characteristics of that animal: \"Nanuq\" or \"Nanoq\" in Kalaallisut (polar-bear), \"Uqalik\" or \"Ukaleq\" in Kalaallisut (Arctic hare), and \"Tiriaq\" or \"Teriaq\" in Kalaallisut (ermine) are favourites. In other cases, Inuit are named after dead people or people in traditional tales, by naming them after anatomical traits those people are believed to have had. Examples include \"Itigaituk\" (has no feet), \"Anana\" or \"Anaana\" (mother), \"Piujuq\" (beautiful) and \"Tulimak\" (rib). Inuit may have any number of names, given by parents and other community members.\n\nIn the 1920s, changes in lifestyle and serious epidemics like tuberculosis made the government of Canada interested in tracking the Inuit of Canada's Arctic. Traditionally Inuit names reflect what is important in Inuit culture: environment, landscape, seascape, family, animals, birds, spirits. However these traditional names were difficult for non-Inuit to parse. Also, the agglutinative nature of Inuit language meant that names seemed long and were difficult for southern bureaucrats and missionaries to pronounce.\n\nThus, in the 1940s, the Inuit were given disc numbers, recorded on a special leather ID tag, like a dog tag. They were required to keep the tag with them always. (Some tags are now so old and worn that the number is polished out.) The numbers were assigned with a letter prefix that indicated location (E = east), community, and then the order in which the census-taker saw the individual. In some ways this state renaming was abetted by the churches and missionaries, who viewed the traditional names and their calls to power as related to shamanism and paganism.\n\nThey encouraged people to take Christian names. So a young woman who was known to her relatives as \"Lutaaq, Pilitaq, Palluq, or Inusiq\" and had been baptised as \"Annie\" was under this system to become Annie E7-121. People adopted the number-names, their family members' numbers, etc., and learned all the region codes (like knowing a telephone area code).\n\nUntil Inuit began studying in the south, many did not know that numbers were not normal parts of Christian and English naming systems. Then in 1969, the government started Project Surname, headed by Abe Okpik, to replace number-names with patrilineal \"family surnames\". But contemporary Inuit carvers and graphic artists still use their disk number as their signature on their works of art.\n\nA popular belief exists that the Inuit have an unusually large number of words for snow. This is not accurate, and results from a misunderstanding of the nature of polysynthetic languages. In fact, the Inuit have only a few base roots for snow: 'qanniq-' ('qanik-' in some dialects), which is used most often like the verb \"to snow\", and 'aput', which means \"snow\" as a substance. Parts of speech work very differently in the Inuit language than in English, so these definitions are somewhat misleading.\n\nThe Inuit languages can form very long words by adding more and more descriptive affixes to words. Those affixes may modify the syntactic and semantic properties of the base word, or may add qualifiers to it in much the same way that English uses adjectives or prepositional phrases to qualify nouns (e.g. \"falling snow\", \"blowing snow\", \"snow on the ground\", \"snow drift\", etc.)\n\nThe \"fact\" that there are many Inuit words for snow has been put forward so often that it has become a journalistic cliché.\n\nThe Inuit use a base-20 counting system.\n\nBecause the Inuit languages are spread over such a large area, divided between different nations and political units and originally reached by Europeans of different origins at different times, there is no uniform way of writing the Inuit language.\n\nCurrently there are six \"standard\" ways to write the languages:\nBULLET::::1. ICI Standard Syllabics (Canada)\nBULLET::::2. ICI Standard Roman script (Canada)\nBULLET::::3. Nunatsiavut Roman script (Canada)\nBULLET::::4. Kotzebue dialect (Alaska) of the Inupiaq\nBULLET::::5. North Slope dialect of Inupiaq)\nBULLET::::6. Greenlandic\n\nThough all except the syllabics use the Latin alphabet, all of them are a bit different from each other.\n\nThe Canadian national organization Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami adopted Inuktut Qaliujaaqpait, a unified orthography for all varieties of Inuktitut, in September 2019. It is based on the Latin alphabet without diacritics.\nMost Inuktitut in Nunavut and Nunavik is written using a script called Inuktitut syllabics, based on Canadian Aboriginal syllabics. The western part of Nunavut and the Northwest Territories use Latin alphabet usually identified as Inuinnaqtun. In Alaska, two other Latin alphabets are used. Nunatsiavut uses an alphabet devised by German-speaking Moravian missionaries, which included the letter \"kra\". Greenland's Latin alphabet was originally much like the one used in Nunatsiavut, but underwent a spelling reform in 1973 to bring the orthography in line with changes in pronunciation and better reflect the phonemic inventory of the language.\n\nInuktitut syllabics, used in Canada, is based on Cree syllabics, which was devised by the missionary James Evans based on Devanagari a Brahmi script. The present form of Canadian Inuktitut syllabics was adopted by the Inuit Cultural Institute in Canada in the 1970s. The Inuit in Alaska, the Inuvialuit, Inuinnaqtun speakers, and Inuit in Greenland and Labrador use Latin alphabets.\n\nThough presented in syllabic form, syllabics is not a true syllabary, but an abugida, since syllables starting with the same consonant are written with graphically similar letters.\n\nAll of the characters needed for Inuktitut syllabics are available in the Unicode character repertoire, in the blocks Unified Canadian Aboriginal Syllabics.\n\nBULLET::::- Duncan Pryde\nBULLET::::- Inuit Sign Language\nBULLET::::- Yupik languages\nBULLET::::- Inupiaq language\n\nBULLET::::- Alia, Valerie (1994) \"Names, Numbers and Northern policy: Inuit, Project Surname and the Politics of Identity\". Halifax NS: Fernwood Publishing.\nBULLET::::- Collis, Dirmid R. F., ed. \"Arctic Languages: An Awakening\"  .\nBULLET::::- Dorais, Louis-Jacques (2010) \"The Language of the Inuit. Syntax, Semantics, and Society in the Arctic\". Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press.\nBULLET::::- Greenhorn, Beth Project Naming: Always On Our Minds, Library and Archives Canada, Canada.\nBULLET::::- Mallon, Mick Inuktitut Linguistics for Technocrats.\nBULLET::::- Mallon, Mick (1991) \"Introductory Inuktitut\" and \"Introductory Inuktitut Reference Grammar\". and .\nBULLET::::- Okpik, Abe. \"Disk Numbers.\" (Okpik received the Order of Canada for his work on Project Surname)\nBULLET::::- Project Naming Website.\nBULLET::::- Spalding, Alex (1998) \"Inuktitut: A Multi-dialectal Outline Dictionary (with an Aivilingmiutaq base)\". .\nBULLET::::- Spalding, Alex (1992) \"Inuktitut: a Grammar of North Baffin Dialects\". .\n\nBULLET::::- Nunavut Living Dictionary\nBULLET::::- Interactive IñupiaQ Dictionary\nBULLET::::- Oqaasileriffik Language database\nBULLET::::- Textbook\n\nBULLET::::- A Brief History of Inuktitut Writing Culture\nBULLET::::- Inuktitut Syllabarium\nBULLET::::- Our Language, Our Selves\nBULLET::::- Alt.folkore.urban on Eskimo words for snow.\nBULLET::::- Report of the third Danish Chukotka expedition with information on the Chukotka Yupik\n\nBULLET::::- Code Charts\n"}
{"id": "15229", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15229", "title": "Ibn Battuta", "text": "Ibn Battuta\n\nIbn Battuta (; ; fully: ; Arabic: ; 24 February 13041368 or 1369) was a Muslim Berber Moroccan scholar, and explorer who widely travelled the medieval world. Over a period of thirty years, Ibn Battuta visited most of the Islamic world and many non-Muslim lands, including Central Asia, Southeast Asia, India and China. Near the end of his life, he dictated an account of his journeys, titled \"A Gift to Those Who Contemplate the Wonders of Cities and the Marvels of Traveling\".\n\nAll that is known about Ibn Battuta's life comes from the autobiographical information included in the account of his travels, which records that he was of Berber descent, born into a family of Islamic legal scholars in Tangier, Morocco, on 25 February 1304, during the reign of the Marinid dynasty. His family belonged to a Berber tribe known as the Lawata. As a young man, he would have studied at a Sunni Maliki madh'hab (Islamic jurisprudence school), the dominant form of education in North Africa at that time. Maliki Muslims requested Ibn Battuta serve as their religious judge as he was from an area where it was practised.\n\nIn June 1325, at the age of twenty-one, Ibn Battuta set off from his hometown on a \"hajj\", or pilgrimage, to Mecca, a journey that would ordinarily take sixteen months. He would not see Morocco again for twenty-four years.\n\nI set out alone, having neither fellow-traveller in whose companionship I might find cheer, nor caravan whose part I might join, but swayed by an overmastering impulse within me and a desire long-cherished in my bosom to visit these illustrious sanctuaries. So I braced my resolution to quit my dear ones, female and male, and forsook my home as birds forsake their nests. My parents being yet in the bonds of life, it weighed sorely upon me to part from them, and both they and I were afflicted with sorrow at this separation.\nHe travelled to Mecca overland, following the North African coast across the sultanates of Abd al-Wadid and Hafsid. The route took him through Tlemcen, Béjaïa, and then Tunis, where he stayed for two months. For safety, Ibn Battuta usually joined a caravan to reduce the risk of being robbed. He took a bride in the town of Sfax, the first in a series of marriages that would feature in his travels.\n\nIn the early spring of 1326, after a journey of over , Ibn Battuta arrived at the port of Alexandria, at the time part of the Bahri Mamluk empire. He met two ascetic pious men in Alexandria. One was Sheikh Burhanuddin who is supposed to have foretold the destiny of Ibn Battuta as a world traveller saying \"It seems to me that you are fond of foreign travel. You will visit my brother Fariduddin in India, Rukonuddin in Sind and Burhanuddin in China. Convey my greetings to them\". Another pious man Sheikh Murshidi interpreted the meaning of a dream of Ibn Battuta that he was meant to be a world traveller.\n\nHe spent several weeks visiting sites in the area, and then headed inland to Cairo, the capital of the Mamluk Sultanate and an important city. After spending about a month in Cairo, he embarked on the first of many detours within the relative safety of Mamluk territory. Of the three usual routes to Mecca, Ibn Battuta chose the least-travelled, which involved a journey up the Nile valley, then east to the Red Sea port of Aydhab. Upon approaching the town, however, a local rebellion forced him to turn back.\n\nIbn Battuta returned to Cairo and took a second side trip, this time to Mamluk-controlled Damascus. During his first trip he had encountered a holy man who prophesied that he would only reach Mecca by travelling through Syria. The diversion held an added advantage; because of the holy places that lay along the way, including Hebron, Jerusalem, and Bethlehem, the Mamluk authorities spared no efforts in keeping the route safe for pilgrims. Without this help many travellers would be robbed and murdered.\n\nAfter spending the Muslim month of Ramadan in Damascus, he joined a caravan travelling the south to Medina, site of the Mosque of the Islamic prophet Muhammad. After four days in the town, he journeyed on to Mecca, where upon completing his pilgrimage he took the honorific status of \"El-Hajji\". Rather than returning home, Ibn Battuta decided to continue on, choosing as his next destination the Ilkhanate, a Mongol Khanate, to the northeast.\n\nOn 17 November 1326, following a month spent in Mecca, Ibn Battuta joined a large caravan of pilgrims returning to Iraq across the Arabian Peninsula. The group headed north to Medina and then, travelling at night, turned northeast across the Najd plateau to Najaf, on a journey that lasted about two weeks. In Najaf, he visited the mausoleum of Ali, the Fourth Caliph.\n\nThen, instead of continuing on to Baghdad with the caravan, Ibn Battuta started a six-month detour that took him into Persia. From Najaf, he journeyed to Wasit, then followed the river Tigris south to Basra. His next destination was the town of Isfahan across the Zagros Mountains in Persia. He then headed south to Shiraz, a large, flourishing city spared the destruction wrought by Mongol invaders on many more northerly towns. Finally, he returned across the mountains to Baghdad, arriving there in June 1327. Parts of the city were still ruined from the damage inflicted by Hulago Khan's invading army in 1258.\n\nIn Baghdad, he found Abu Sa'id, the last Mongol ruler of the unified Ilkhanate, leaving the city and heading north with a large retinue. Ibn Battuta joined the royal caravan for a while, then turned north on the Silk Road to Tabriz, the first major city in the region to open its gates to the Mongols and by then an important trading centre as most of its nearby rivals had been razed by the Mongol invaders.\n\nIbn Battuta left again for Baghdad, probably in July, but first took an excursion northwards along the river Tigris. He visited Mosul, where he was the guest of the Ilkhanate governor, and then the towns of Cizre (Jazirat ibn 'Umar) and Mardin in modern-day Turkey. At a hermitage on a mountain near Sinjar, he met a Kurdish mystic who gave him some silver coins. Once back in Mosul, he joined a \"feeder\" caravan of pilgrims heading south to Baghdad, where they would meet up with the main caravan that crossed the Arabian Desert to Mecca. Ill with diarrhoea, he arrived in the city weak and exhausted for his second \"hajj\".\n\nIbn Battuta remained in Mecca for some time (the \"Rihla\" suggests about three years, from September 1327 until autumn 1330). Problems with chronology, however, lead commentators to suggest that he may have left after the 1328 \"hajj\".\n\nAfter the \"hajj\" in either 1328 or 1330, he made his way to the port of Jeddah on the Red Sea coast. From there he followed the coast in a series of boats making slow progress against the prevailing south-easterly winds. Once in Yemen he visited Zabīd and later the highland town of Ta'izz, where he met the Rasulid dynasty king \"(Malik)\" Mujahid Nur al-Din Ali. Ibn Battuta also mentions visiting Sana'a, but whether he actually did so is doubtful. In all likelihood, he went directly from Ta'izz to the important trading port of Aden, arriving around the beginning of 1329 or 1331.\n\nFrom Aden, Ibn Battuta embarked on a ship heading for Zeila on the coast of Somalia. He then moved on to Cape Guardafui further down the Somalia seaboard, spending about a week in each location. Later he would visit Mogadishu, the then pre-eminent city of the \"Land of the Berbers\" (بلد البربر \"Balad al-Barbar\", the medieval Arabic term for the Horn of Africa).\n\nWhen Ibn Battuta arrived in 1331, Mogadishu stood at the zenith of its prosperity. He described it as \"an exceedingly large city\" with many rich merchants, noted for its high-quality fabric that was exported to other countries, including Egypt. Ibn Battuta added that the city was ruled by a Somali Sultan, Abu Bakr ibn Sayx 'Umar, who was originally from Berbera in northern Somalia and spoke both Somali (referred to by Battuta as \"Mogadishan\", the Benadir dialect of Somali) and Arabic with equal fluency. The Sultan also had a retinue of wazirs (ministers), legal experts, commanders, royal eunuchs, and assorted hangers-on at his beck and call.\n\nIbn Battuta continued by ship south to the Swahili Coast, a region then known in Arabic as the \"Bilad al-Zanj\" (\"Land of the Zanj\"), with an overnight stop at the island town of Mombasa. Although relatively small at the time, Mombasa would become important in the following century. After a journey along the coast, Ibn Battuta next arrived in the island town of Kilwa in present-day Tanzania, which had become an important transit centre of the gold trade. He described the city as \"one of the finest and most beautifully built towns; all the buildings are of wood, and the houses are roofed with \"dīs\" reeds\".\n\nIbn Battuta recorded his visit to the Kilwa Sultanate in 1330, and commented favorably on the humility and religion of its ruler, Sultan al-Hasan ibn Sulaiman, a descendant of the legendary Ali ibn al-Hassan Shirazi. He further wrote that the authority of the Sultan extended from Malindi in the north to Inhambane in the south and was particularly impressed by the planning of the city, believing it to be the reason for Kilwa's success along the coast. During this period, he described the construction of the Palace of Husuni Kubwa and a significant extension to the Great Mosque of Kilwa, which was made of coral stones and was the largest Mosque of its kind. With a change in the monsoon winds, Ibn Battuta sailed back to Arabia, first to Oman and the Strait of Hormuz then on to Mecca for the \"hajj\" of 1330 (or 1332).\n\nAfter his third pilgrimage to Mecca, Ibn Battuta decided to seek employment with the Muslim Sultan of Delhi, Muhammad bin Tughluq. In the autumn of 1330 (or 1332), he set off for the Seljuk controlled territory of Anatolia with the intention of taking an overland route to India. He crossed the Red Sea and the Eastern Desert to reach the Nile valley and then headed north to Cairo. From there he crossed the Sinai Peninsula to Palestine and then travelled north again through some of the towns that he had visited in 1326. From the Syrian port of Latakia, a Genoese ship took him (and his companions) to Alanya on the southern coast of modern-day Turkey.\n\nHe then journeyed westwards along the coast to the port of Antalya. In the town he met members of one of the semi-religious \"fityan\" associations. These were a feature of most Anatolian towns in the 13th and 14th centuries. The members were young artisans and had at their head a leader with the title of \"Akhis\". The associations specialised in welcoming travellers. Ibn Battuta was very impressed with the hospitality that he received and would later stay in their hospices in more than 25 towns in Anatolia. From Antalya Ibn Battuta headed inland to Eğirdir which was the capital of the Hamidids. He spent Ramadan (June 1331 or May 1333) in the city.\n\nFrom this point the itinerary across Anatolia in the \"Rihla\" is confused. Ibn Battuta describes travelling westwards from Eğirdir to Milas and then skipping eastward past Eğirdir to Konya. He then continues travelling in an easterly direction, reaching Erzurum from where he skips back to Birgi which lies north of Milas. Historians believe that Ibn Battuta visited a number of towns in central Anatolia, but not in the order that he describes.\n\nFrom Sinope he took a sea route to the Crimean Peninsula, arriving in the Golden Horde realm. He went to the port town of Azov, where he met with the emir of the Khan, then to the large and rich city of Majar. He left Majar to meet with Uzbeg Khan's travelling court (\"Orda\"), which was at the time near Beshtau mountain. From there he made a journey to Bolghar, which became the northernmost point he reached, and noted its unusually (for a subtropics dweller) short nights in summer. Then he returned to the Khan's court and with it moved to Astrakhan.\n\nIbn Battuta recorded that while in Bolghar he wanted to travel further north into the land of darkness. The land is snow-covered throughout (northern Siberia) and the only means of transport is dog-drawn sled. There lived a mysterious people who were reluctant to show themselves. They traded with southern people in a peculiar way. Southern merchants brought various goods and placed them in an open area on the snow in the night, then returned to their tents. Next morning they came to the place again and found their merchandise taken by the mysterious people, but in exchange they found fur-skins which could be used for making valuable coats, jackets, and other winter garments. The trade was done between merchants and the mysterious people without seeing each other. As Ibn Battuta was not a merchant and saw no benefit of going there he abandoned the travel to this land of darkness.\nWhen they reached Astrakhan, Öz Beg Khan had just given permission for one of his pregnant wives, Princess Bayalun, a daughter of Byzantine emperor Andronikos III Palaiologos, to return to her home city of Constantinople to give birth. Ibn Battuta talked his way into this expedition, which would be his first beyond the boundaries of the Islamic world.\n\nArriving in Constantinople towards the end of 1332 (or 1334), he met the Byzantine emperor Andronikos III Palaiologos. He visited the great church of Hagia Sophia and spoke with an Eastern Orthodox priest about his travels in the city of Jerusalem. After a month in the city, Ibn Battuta returned to Astrakhan, then arrived in the capital city Sarai al-Jadid and reported the accounts of his travels to Sultan Öz Beg Khan (r. 1313–1341). Then he continued past the Caspian and Aral Seas to Bukhara and Samarkand, where he visited the court of another Mongolian king, Tarmashirin (r. 1331–1334) of the Chagatai Khanate. From there, he journeyed south to Afghanistan, then crossed into India via the mountain passes of the Hindu Kush. In the \"Rihla\", he mentions these mountains and the history of the range in slave trading. He wrote,\n\nIbn Battuta and his party reached the Indus River on 12 September 1333. From there, he made his way to Delhi and became acquainted with the sultan, Muhammad bin Tughluq.\n\nMuhammad bin Tughluq was renowned as the wealthiest man in the Muslim world at that time. He patronized various scholars, Sufis, qadis, viziers and other functionaries in order to consolidate his rule. As with Mamluk Egypt, the Tughlaq Dynasty was a rare vestigial example of Muslim rule in Asia after the Mongol invasion. On the strength of his years of study in Mecca, Ibn Battuta was appointed a \"qadi\", or judge, by the sultan. However, he found it difficult to enforce Islamic law beyond the sultan's court in Delhi, due to lack of Islamic appeal in India.\n\nIt is uncertain by which route Ibn Battuta entered the Indian subcontinent. He may have entered via the Khyber Pass and Peshawar, or further south. He crossed the Sutlej river near the city of Pakpattan, in modern-day Pakistan, where he paid obeisance at the shrine of Baba Farid, before crossing southwest into Rajput country. From the Rajput Kingdom of Sarsatti, Battuta visited Hansi in India, describing it as \"among the most beautiful cities, the best constructed and the most populated; it is surrounded with a strong wall, and its founder is said to be one of the great infidel kings, called Tara\". Upon his arrival in Sindh, Ibn Battuta mentions the Indian rhinoceros that lived on the banks of the Indus.\n\nThe Sultan was erratic even by the standards of the time and for six years Ibn Battuta veered between living the high life of a trusted subordinate and falling under suspicion of treason for a variety of offences. His plan to leave on the pretext of taking another \"hajj\" was stymied by the Sultan. The opportunity for Battuta to leave Delhi finally arose in 1341 when an embassy arrived from Yuan dynasty China asking for permission to rebuild a Himalayan Buddhist temple popular with Chinese pilgrims.\n\nIbn Battuta was given charge of the embassy but en route to the coast at the start of the journey to China, he and his large retinue were attacked by a group of bandits. Separated from his companions, he was robbed and nearly lost his life. Despite this setback, within ten days he had caught up with his group and continued on to Khambhat in the Indian state of Gujarat. From there, they sailed to Calicut (now known as Kozhikode), where Portuguese explorer Vasco da Gama would land two centuries later. While in Calicut, Battuta was the guest of the ruling Zamorin. While Ibn Battuta visited a mosque on shore, a storm arose and one of the ships of his expedition sank. The other ship then sailed without him only to be seized by a local Sumatran king a few months later.\n\nAfraid to return to Delhi and be seen as a failure, he stayed for a time in southern India under the protection of Jamal-ud-Din, ruler of the small but powerful Nawayath sultanate on the banks of the Sharavathi river next to the Arabian Sea. This area is today known as Hosapattana and lies in the Honavar administrative district of Uttara Kannada. Following the overthrow of the sultanate, Ibn Battuta had no choice but to leave India. Although determined to continue his journey to China, he first took a detour to visit the Maldive Islands where he worked as a judge.\nHe spent nine months on the islands, much longer than he had intended. As a \"Chief Qadi\", his skills were highly desirable in the formerly Buddhist nation that had recently converted to Islam. Half-kidnapped into staying, he became chief judge and married into the royal family of Omar I. He became embroiled in local politics and left when his strict judgments in the laissez-faire island kingdom began to chafe with its rulers. In the \"Rihla\" he mentions his dismay at the local women going about with no clothing above the waist, and the locals taking no notice when he complained. From the Maldives, he carried on to Sri Lanka and visited Sri Pada and Tenavaram temple.\n\nIbn Battuta's ship almost sank on embarking from Sri Lanka, only for the vessel that came to his rescue to suffer an attack by pirates. Stranded onshore, he worked his way back to the Madurai kingdom in India. Here he spent some time in the court of the short-lived Madurai Sultanate under Ghiyas-ud-Din Muhammad Damghani, from where he returned to the Maldives and boarded a Chinese junk, still intending to reach China and take up his ambassadorial post.\n\nHe reached the port of Chittagong in modern-day Bangladesh intending to travel to Sylhet to meet Shah Jalal, who became so renowned that Ibn Battuta, then in Chittagong, made a one-month journey through the mountains of Kamaru near Sylhet to meet him. On his way to Sylhet, Ibn Battuta was greeted by several of Shah Jalal's disciples who had come to assist him on his journey many days before he had arrived. At the meeting in 1345 CE, Ibn Battuta noted that Shah Jalal was tall and lean, fair in complexion and lived by the mosque in a cave, where his only item of value was a goat he kept for milk, butter, and yogurt. He observed that the companions of the Shah Jalal were foreign and known for their strength and bravery. He also mentions that many people would visit the Shah to seek guidance. Ibn Battuta went further north into Assam, then turned around and continued with his original plan.\n\nIn 1345, Ibn Battuta travelled on to Samudra Pasai Sultanate in present-day Aceh, Northern Sumatra, where he notes in his travel log that the ruler of Samudra Pasai was a pious Muslim named Sultan Al-Malik Al-Zahir Jamal-ad-Din, who performed his religious duties with utmost zeal and often waged campaigns against animists in the region. The island of Sumatra, according to Ibn Battuta, was rich in camphor, areca nut, cloves, and tin.\n\nThe \"madh'hab\" he observed was Imam Al-Shafi‘i, whose customs were similar to those he had previously seen in coastal India, especially among the Mappila Muslims, who were also followers of Imam Al-Shafi‘i. At that time Samudra Pasai marked the end of Dar al-Islam, because no territory east of this was ruled by a Muslim. Here he stayed for about two weeks in the wooden walled town as a guest of the sultan, and then the sultan provided him with supplies and sent him on his way on one of his own junks to China.\n\nIbn Battuta first sailed to Malacca on the Malay Peninsula which he called \"Mul Jawi\". He met the ruler of Malacca and stayed as a guest for three days.\n\nIbn Battuta then sailed to a state called Kaylukari in the land of Tawalisi, where he met Urduja, a local princess. Urduja was a brave warrior, and her people are opponents of the Yuan dynasty. She was described as an \"idolater\", but could write the phrase Bismillah in Islamic calligraphy. The locations of Kaylukari and Tawalisi are disputed. Kaylukari might referred to Po Klong Garai in Champa (now southern Vietnam), and Urduja might be an aristocrat of Champa or the Trần dynasty. Filipinos widely believe that Kaylukari was in present-day Pangasinan Province of the Philippines. In modern times, Urduja has been featured in Filipino textbooks and films as a national heroine. Numerous other locations have been proposed, ranging from Java to somewhere in Guangdong Province, China. However, Sir Henry Yule and William Henry Scott consider both Tawilisi and Urduja to be entirely fictitious. (See Tawalisi for details.)\n\nFrom Kaylukari, Ibn Battuta finally reached Quanzhou in Fujian Province, China.\n\nIn the year 1345 Ibn Battuta arrived at Quanzhou in China's Fujian province, then under the rule of the Mongols. One of the first things he noted was that Muslims referred to the city as \"Zaitun\" (meaning olive), but Ibn Battuta could not find any olives anywhere. He mentioned local artists and their mastery in making portraits of newly arrived foreigners; these were for security purposes. Ibn Battuta praised the craftsmen and their silk and porcelain; as well as fruits such as plums and watermelons and the advantages of paper money.\n\nHe described the manufacturing process of large ships in the city of Quanzhou. He also mentioned Chinese cuisine and its usage of animals such as frogs, pigs and even dogs which were sold in the markets, and noted that the chickens in China were larger than those in the west. Scholars however have pointed out numerous errors given in Ibn Battuta's account of China, for example confusing the Yellow River with the Grand Canal and other waterways, as well as believing that porcelain was made from coal.\n\nIn Quanzhou, Ibn Battuta was welcomed by the head of the local Muslim merchants (possibly a fānzhǎng or \"Leader of Foreigners\" ）and Sheikh al-Islam (Imam), who came to meet him with flags, drums, trumpets and musicians. Ibn Battuta noted that the Muslim populace lived within a separate portion in the city where they had their own mosques, bazaars and hospitals. In Quanzhou, he met two prominent Persians, Burhan al-Din of Kazerun and Sharif al-Din from Tabriz (both of whom were influential figures noted in the \"Yuan History\" as \"A-mi-li-ding\" and \"Sai-fu-ding\", respectively). While in Quanzhou he ascended the \"Mount of the Hermit\" and briefly visited a well-known Taoist monk in a cave.\n\nHe then travelled south along the Chinese coast to Guangzhou, where he lodged for two weeks with one of the city's wealthy merchants.\n\nFrom Guangzhou he went north to Quanzhou and then proceeded to the city of Fuzhou, where he took up residence with Zahir al-Din and was proud to meet Kawam al-Din and a fellow countryman named Al-Bushri of Ceuta, who had become a wealthy merchant in China. Al-Bushri accompanied Ibn Battuta northwards to Hangzhou and paid for the gifts that Ibn Battuta would present to the Mongolian Emperor Togon-temür of the Yuan Dynasty.\n\nIbn Battuta said that Hangzhou was one of the largest cities he had ever seen, and he noted its charm, describing that the city sat on a beautiful lake surrounded by gentle green hills. He mentions the city's Muslim quarter and resided as a guest with a family of Egyptian origin. During his stay at Hangzhou he was particularly impressed by the large number of well-crafted and well-painted Chinese wooden ships, with coloured sails and silk awnings, assembling in the canals. Later he attended a banquet of the Yuan Mongol administrator of the city named Qurtai, who according to Ibn Battuta, was very fond of the skills of local Chinese conjurers. Ibn Battuta also mentions locals who worship the Solar deity.\n\nHe described floating through the Grand Canal on a boat watching crop fields, orchids, merchants in black-silk, and women in flowered-silk and priests also in silk. In Beijing, Ibn Battuta referred to himself as the long-lost ambassador from the Delhi Sultanate and was invited to the Yuan imperial court of Togon-temür (who according to Ibn Battuta was worshipped by some people in China). Ibn Batutta noted that the palace of Khanbaliq was made of wood and that the ruler's \"head wife\" (Empress Gi) held processions in her honour.\n\nIbn Battuta also wrote he had heard of \"the rampart of Yajuj and Majuj\" that was \"sixty days' travel\" from the city of Zeitun (Quanzhou); Hamilton Alexander Rosskeen Gibb notes that Ibn Battuta believed that the Great Wall of China was built by Dhul-Qarnayn to contain Gog and Magog as mentioned in the Quran. However, Ibn Battuta, who asked about the wall in China, could find no one who had either seen it or knew of anyone who had seen it.\n\nIbn Battuta travelled from Beijing to Hangzhou, and then proceeded to Fuzhou. Upon his return to Quanzhou, he soon boarded a Chinese junk owned by the Sultan of Samudera Pasai Sultanate heading for Southeast Asia, whereupon Ibn Battuta was unfairly charged a hefty sum by the crew and lost much of what he had collected during his stay in China.\n\nBattuta claimed that the Mongol Khan (Qan) had interned with him in his grave, six slave soldiers and four girl slaves. Silver, gold, weapons, and carpets were put into the grave.\n\nAfter returning to Quanzhou in 1346, Ibn Battuta began his journey back to Morocco. In Kozhikode, he once again considered throwing himself at the mercy of Muhammad bin Tughluq in Delhi, but thought better of it and decided to carry on to Mecca. On his way to Basra he passed through the Strait of Hormuz, where he learned that Abu Sa'id, last ruler of the Ilkhanate Dynasty had died in Persia. Abu Sa'id's territories had subsequently collapsed due to a fierce civil war between the Persians and Mongols.\n\nIn 1348, Ibn Battuta arrived in Damascus with the intention of retracing the route of his first \"hajj\". He then learned that his father had died 15 years earlier and death became the dominant theme for the next year or so. The Black Death had struck and he was on hand as it spread through Syria, Palestine, and Arabia. After reaching Mecca he decided to return to Morocco, nearly a quarter of a century after leaving home. On the way he made one last detour to Sardinia, then in 1349, returned to Tangier by way of Fez, only to discover that his mother had also died a few months before.\n\nAfter a few days in Tangier, Ibn Battuta set out for a trip to the Muslim-controlled territory of al-Andalus on the Iberian Peninsula. King Alfonso XI of Castile and León had threatened to attack Gibraltar, so in 1350, Ibn Battuta joined a group of Muslims leaving Tangier with the intention of defending the port. By the time he arrived, the Black Death had killed Alfonso and the threat of invasion had receded, so he turned the trip into a sight-seeing tour, travelling through Valencia and ending up in Granada.\n\nAfter his departure from al-Andalus he decided to travel through Morocco. On his return home, he stopped for a while in Marrakech, which was almost a ghost town following the recent plague and the transfer of the capital to Fez.\n\nOnce more Ibn Battuta returned to Tangier, but only stayed for a short while. In 1324, two years before his first visit to Cairo, the West African Malian \"Mansa\", or king of kings, Musa had passed through the same city on his own \"hajj\" and caused a sensation with a display of extravagant riches brought from his gold-rich homeland. Although Ibn Battuta never mentioned this visit specifically, when he heard the story it may have planted a seed in his mind as he then decided to cross the Sahara and visit the Muslim kingdoms on its far side.\n\nIn the autumn of 1351, Ibn Battuta left Fez and made his way to the town of Sijilmasa on the northern edge of the Sahara in present-day Morocco. There he bought a number of camels and stayed for four months. He set out again with a caravan in February 1352 and after 25 days arrived at the dry salt lake bed of Taghaza with its salt mines. All of the local buildings were made from slabs of salt by the slaves of the Masufa tribe, who cut the salt in thick slabs for transport by camel. Taghaza was a commercial centre and awash with Malian gold, though Ibn Battuta did not form a favourable impression of the place, recording that it was plagued by flies and the water was brackish.\n\nAfter a ten-day stay in Taghaza, the caravan set out for the oasis of Tasarahla (probably Bir al-Ksaib) where it stopped for three days in preparation for the last and most difficult leg of the journey across the vast desert. From Tasarahla, a Masufa scout was sent ahead to the oasis town of Oualata, where he arranged for water to be transported a distance of four days travel where it would meet the thirsty caravan. Oualata was the southern terminus of the trans-Saharan trade route and had recently become part of the Mali Empire. Altogether, the caravan took two months to cross the of desert from Sijilmasa.\n\nFrom there, Ibn Battuta travelled southwest along a river he believed to be the Nile (it was actually the river Niger), until he reached the capital of the Mali Empire. There he met \"Mansa\" Suleyman, king since 1341. Ibn Battuta disapproved of the fact that female slaves, servants and even the daughters of the sultan went about exposing parts of their bodies not befitting a Muslim. He left the capital in February accompanied by a local Malian merchant and journeyed overland by camel to Timbuktu. Though in the next two centuries it would become the most important city in the region, at that time it was a small city and relatively unimportant. It was during this journey that Ibn Battuta first encountered a hippopotamus. The animals were feared by the local boatmen and hunted with lances to which strong cords were attached. After a short stay in Timbuktu, Ibn Battuta journeyed down the Niger to Gao in a canoe carved from a single tree. At the time Gao was an important commercial center.\n\nAfter spending a month in Gao, Ibn Battuta set off with a large caravan for the oasis of Takedda. On his journey across the desert, he received a message from the Sultan of Morocco commanding him to return home. He set off for Sijilmasa in September 1353, accompanying a large caravan transporting 600 female slaves, and arrived back in Morocco early in 1354.\n\nIbn Battuta's itinerary gives scholars a glimpse as to when Islam first began to spread into the heart of west Africa.\nAfter returning home from his travels in 1354, and at the suggestion of the Marinid ruler of Morocco, Abu Inan Faris, Ibn Battuta dictated an account in Arabic of his journeys to Ibn Juzayy, a scholar whom he had previously met in Granada. The account is the only source for Ibn Battuta's adventures. The full title of the manuscript may be translated as \"A Masterpiece to Those Who Contemplate the Wonders of Cities and the Marvels of Travelling\" (, \"Tuḥfat an-Nuẓẓār fī Gharāʾib al-Amṣār wa ʿAjāʾib al-Asfār\"). However, it is often simply referred to as \"TheTravels\" (, \"Rihla\"), in reference to a standard form of Arabic literature.\n\nThere is no indication that Ibn Battuta made any notes or had any journal during his twenty-nine years of travelling. When he came to dictate an account of his experiences he had to rely on memory and manuscripts produced by earlier travellers. Ibn Juzayy did not acknowledge his sources and presented some of the earlier descriptions as Ibn Battuta's own observations. When describing Damascus, Mecca, Medina and some other places in the Middle East, he clearly copied passages from the account by the Andalusian Ibn Jubayr which had been written more than 150 years earlier. Similarly, most of Ibn Juzayy's descriptions of places in Palestine were copied from an account by the 13th-century traveller Muhammad al-Abdari.\n\nScholars do not believe that Ibn Battuta visited all the places he described and argue that in order to provide a comprehensive description of places in the Muslim world, he relied on hearsay evidence and made use of accounts by earlier travellers. For example, it is considered very unlikely that Ibn Battuta made a trip up the Volga River from New Sarai to visit Bolghar and there are serious doubts about a number of other journeys such as his trip to Sana'a in Yemen, his journey from Balkh to Bistam in Khorasan and his trip around Anatolia.\n\nIbn Battuta's claim that a Maghrebian called \"Abu'l Barakat the Berber\" converted the Maldives to Islam is contradicted by an entirely different story which says that the Maldives were converted to Islam after miracles were performed by a Tabrizi named Maulana Shaikh Yusuf Shams-ud-din according to the Tarikh, the official history of the Maldives.\n\nSome scholars have also questioned whether he really visited China. Ibn Battuta may have plagiarized entire sections of his descriptions of China lifted from works by other authors like \"Masalik al-absar fi mamalik al-amsar\" by Shihab al-Umari, Sulaiman al-Tajir, and possibly from Al Juwayni, Rashid al din and an Alexander romance. Furthermore, Ibn Battuta's description and Marco Polo's writings share extremely similar sections and themes, with some of the same commentary, e.g. it is unlikely that the 3rd Caliph Uthman ibn Affan had someone with the exact identical name in China who was encountered by Ibn Battuta.\n\nHowever, even if the \"Rihla\" is not fully based on what its author personally witnessed, it provides an important account of much of the 14th-century world. Sex slaves were used by Ibn Battuta such as in Delhi. He wedded several women, divorced at least some of them, and in Damascus, Malabar, Delhi, Bukhara, and the Maldives had children by them or by sex slaves. Ibn Battuta insulted Greeks as \"enemies of Allah\", drunkards and \"swine eaters\", while at the same time in Ephesus he purchased and used a Greek girl who was one of his many slave girls in his \"harem\" through Byzantium, Khorasan, Africa, and Palestine. It was two decades before he again returned to find out what happened to one of his wives and child in Damascus.\n\nIbn Battuta often experienced culture shock in regions he visited where the local customs of recently converted peoples did not fit in with his orthodox Muslim background. Among the Turks and Mongols, he was astonished at the freedom and respect enjoyed by women and remarked that on seeing a Turkish couple in a bazaar one might assume that the man was the woman's servant when he was in fact her husband. He also felt that dress customs in the Maldives, and some sub-Saharan regions in Africa were too revealing.\n\nLittle is known about Ibn Battuta's life after completion of his \"Rihla\" in 1355. He was appointed a judge in Morocco and died in 1368 or 1369.\n\nIbn Battuta's work was unknown outside the Muslim world until the beginning of the 19th century, when the German traveller-explorer Ulrich Jasper Seetzen (1767–1811) acquired a collection of manuscripts in the Middle East, among which was a 94-page volume containing an abridged version of Ibn Juzayy's text. Three extracts were published in 1818 by the German orientalist Johann Kosegarten. A fourth extract was published the following year. French scholars were alerted to the initial publication by a lengthy review published in the \"Journal de Savants\" by the orientalist Silvestre de Sacy.\n\nThree copies of another abridged manuscript were acquired by the Swiss traveller Johann Burckhardt and bequeathed to the University of Cambridge. He gave a brief overview of their content in a book published posthumously in 1819. The Arabic text was translated into English by the orientalist Samuel Lee and published in London in 1829.\n\nIn the 1830s, during the French occupation of Algeria, the Bibliothèque Nationale (BNF) in Paris acquired five manuscripts of Ibn Battuta's travels, in which two were complete. One manuscript containing just the second part of the work is dated 1356 and is believed to be Ibn Juzayy's autograph. The BNF manuscripts were used in 1843 by the Irish-French orientalist Baron de Slane to produce a translation into French of Ibn Battuta's visit to the Sudan. They were also studied by the French scholars Charles Defrémery and Beniamino Sanguinetti. Beginning in 1853 they published a series of four volumes containing a critical edition of the Arabic text together with a translation into French. In their introduction Defrémery and Sanguinetti praised Lee's annotations but were critical of his translation which they claimed lacked precision, even in straightforward passages.\n\nIn 1929, exactly a century after the publication of Lee's translation, the historian and orientalist Hamilton Gibb published an English translation of selected portions of Defrémery and Sanguinetti's Arabic text. Gibb had proposed to the Hakluyt Society in 1922 that he should prepare an annotated translation of the entire \"Rihla\" into English. His intention was to divide the translated text into four volumes, each volume corresponding to one of the volumes published by Defrémery and Sanguinetti. The first volume was not published until 1958. Gibb died in 1971, having completed the first three volumes. The fourth volume was prepared by Charles Beckingham and published in 1994. Defrémery and Sanguinetti's printed text has now been translated into number of other languages.\n\nBULLET::::- List of places visited by Ibn Battuta\n\nBULLET::::- .\n\nBULLET::::- . The text of these volumes has been used as the source for translations into other languages.\nBULLET::::- .\n\nBULLET::::- . First published in 1986, .\n\nBULLET::::- . Reissued several times. Extracts are available on the Fordham University site.\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- . This volume was translated by Beckingham after Gibb's death in 1971. A separate index was published in 2000.\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- . A translation of an abridged manuscript. The text is discussed in Defrémery & Sanguinetti (1853) Volume 1 pp. xvi–xvii.\nBULLET::::- . First published in 1981. pp. 279–304 contain a translation of Ibn Battuta's account of his visit to West Africa.\nBULLET::::- . Includes the text of Ibn Battuta's account of his visit to China. The translation is from the French text of Defrémery & Sanguinetti (1858) Volume 4.\n\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- . Contains an introduction by Mackintosh-Smith and then an abridged version (around 40 percent of the original) of the translation by H.A.R. Gibb and C.E. Beckingham (1958–1994).\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\n\nBULLET::::- Travels In Asia And Africa 1325–1354 — Gibb's 1929 translation from the Internet Archive\nBULLET::::- A Tangerine in Delhi — \"Saudi Aramco World\" article by Tim Mackintosh-Smith (March/April 2006).\nBULLET::::- The Longest Hajj: The Journeys of Ibn Battuta — \"Saudi Aramco World\" article by Douglas Bullis (July/August 2000).\nBULLET::::- Google Books — link to a 2004 reissue of Gibb's 1929 translation.\nBULLET::::- French text from Defrémery and Sanguinetti (1853–1858) with an introduction and footnotes by Stéphane Yérasimos published in 1982: Volume 1, Volume 2, Volume 3.\n"}
{"id": "15231", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15231", "title": "Integrated Services Digital Network", "text": "Integrated Services Digital Network\n\nIntegrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) is a set of communication standards for simultaneous digital transmission of voice, video, data, and other network services over the traditional circuits of the public switched telephone network. It was first defined in 1988 in the CCITT red book. Prior to ISDN, the telephone system was viewed as a way to transport voice, with some special services available for data. The key feature of ISDN is that it integrates speech and data on the same lines, adding features that were not available in the classic telephone system. The ISDN standards define several kinds of access interfaces, such as Basic Rate Interface (BRI), Primary Rate Interface (PRI), Narrowband ISDN (N-ISDN), and Broadband ISDN (B-ISDN).\n\nISDN is a circuit-switched telephone network system, which also provides access to packet switched networks, designed to allow digital transmission of voice and data over ordinary telephone copper wires, resulting in potentially better voice quality than an analog phone can provide. It offers circuit-switched connections (for either voice or data), and packet-switched connections (for data), in increments of 64 kilobit/s. In some countries, ISDN found major market application for Internet access, in which ISDN typically provides a maximum of 128 kbit/s bandwidth in both upstream and downstream directions. Channel bonding can achieve a greater data rate; typically the ISDN B-channels of three or four BRIs (six to eight 64 kbit/s channels) are bonded.\n\nISDN is employed as the network, data-link and physical layers in the context of the OSI model. In common use, ISDN is often limited to usage to Q.931 and related protocols, which are a set of signaling protocols establishing and breaking circuit-switched connections, and for advanced calling features for the user. They were introduced in 1986.\n\nIn a videoconference, ISDN provides simultaneous voice, video, and text transmission between individual desktop videoconferencing systems and group (room) videoconferencing systems. ISDN uses the H.320 standard for audio coding and video coding, including audio codecs such as G.711 (PCM) and G.728 (CELP), and discrete cosine transform (DCT) video codecs such as H.261 and H.263.\n\n\"Integrated services\" refers to ISDN's ability to deliver at minimum two simultaneous connections, in any combination of data, voice, video, and fax, over a single line. Multiple devices can be attached to the line, and used as needed. That means an ISDN line can take care of what were expected to be most people's complete communications needs (apart from broadband Internet access and entertainment television) at a much higher transmission rate, without forcing the purchase of multiple analog phone lines. It also refers to integrated switching and transmission in that telephone switching and carrier wave transmission are integrated rather than separate as in earlier technology.\n\nThe entry level interface to ISDN is the Basic Rate Interface (BRI), a 128 kbit/s service delivered over a pair of standard telephone copper wires. The 144 kbit/s overall payload rate is divided into two 64 kbit/s bearer channels ('B' channels) and one 16 kbit/s signaling channel ('D' channel or data channel). This is sometimes referred to as 2B+D.\n\nThe interface specifies the following network interfaces:\nBULLET::::- The \"U interface\" is a two-wire interface between the exchange and a \"network terminating unit\", which is usually the demarcation point in non-North American networks.\nBULLET::::- The \"T interface\" is a serial interface between a computing device and a \"terminal adapter\", which is the digital equivalent of a modem.\nBULLET::::- The \"S interface\" is a four-wire bus that ISDN consumer devices plug into; the S & T reference points are commonly implemented as a single interface labeled 'S/T' on a Network termination 1 (NT1).\nBULLET::::- The \"R interface\" defines the point between a non-ISDN device and a terminal adapter (TA) which provides translation to and from such a device.\n\nBRI-ISDN is very popular in Europe but is much less common in North America. It is also common in Japan — where it is known as INS64.\n\nThe other ISDN access available is the Primary Rate Interface (PRI), which is carried over T-carrier (T1) with 24 time slots (channels) in North America, and over E-carrier (E1) with 32 channels in most other countries. Each channel provides transmission at a 64 kbit/s data rate.\n\nWith the E1 carrier, the available channels are divided into 30 bearer (\"B\") channels, one data (\"D\") channel, and one timing and alarm channel. This scheme is often referred to as 30B+2D.\nIn North America, PRI service is delivered via T1 carriers with only one data channel, often referred to as 23B+D, and a total data rate of 1544 kbit/s. Non-Facility Associated Signalling (NFAS) allows two or more PRI circuits to be controlled by a single D channel, which is sometimes called \"23B+D + n*24B\". D-channel backup allows for a second D channel in case the primary fails. NFAS is commonly used on a Digital Signal 3 (DS3/T3).\n\nPRI-ISDN is popular throughout the world, especially for connecting private branch exchanges to the public switched telephone network (PSTN).\n\nEven though many network professionals use the term \"ISDN\" to refer to the lower-bandwidth BRI circuit, in North America BRI is relatively uncommon whilst PRI circuits serving PBXs are commonplace.\n\nThe bearer channel (B) is a standard 64 kbit/s voice channel of 8 bits sampled at 8 kHz with G.711 encoding. B-channels can also be used to carry data, since they are nothing more than digital channels.\n\nEach one of these channels is known as a DS0.\n\nMost B channels can carry a 64kbit/s signal, but some were limited to 56K because they traveled over RBS lines. This was commonplace in the 20th century, but has since become less so.\n\nX.25 can be carried over the B or D channels of a BRI line, and over the B channels of a PRI line. X.25 over the D channel is used at many point-of-sale (credit card) terminals because it eliminates the modem setup, and because it connects to the central system over a B channel, thereby eliminating the need for modems and making much better use of the central system's telephone lines.\n\nX.25 was also part of an ISDN protocol called \"Always On/Dynamic ISDN\", or AO/DI. This allowed a user to have a constant multi-link PPP connection to the internet over X.25 on the D channel, and brought up one or two B channels as needed.\n\nIn theory, Frame Relay can operate over the D channel of BRIs and PRIs, but it is seldom, if ever, used.\n\nThere is a second viewpoint: that of the telephone industry, where ISDN is a core technology. A telephone network can be thought of as a collection of wires strung between switching systems. The common electrical specification for the signals on these wires is T1 or E1. Between telephone company switches, the signaling is performed via SS7. Normally, a PBX is connected via a T1 with robbed bit signaling to indicate on-hook or off-hook conditions and MF and DTMF tones to encode the destination number. ISDN is much better because messages can be sent much more quickly than by trying to encode numbers as long (100 ms per digit) tone sequences. This results in faster call setup times. Also, a greater number of features are available and fraud is reduced.\n\nISDN is also used as a smart-network technology intended to add new services to the public switched telephone network (PSTN) by giving users direct access to end-to-end circuit-switched digital services and as a backup or failsafe circuit solution for critical use data circuits.\n\nISDN is used heavily by the broadcast industry as a reliable way of switching low-latency, high-quality, long-distance audio circuits. In conjunction with an appropriate codec using MPEG or various manufacturers' proprietary algorithms, an ISDN BRI can be used to send stereo bi-directional audio coded at 128 kbit/s with 20 Hz – 20 kHz audio bandwidth, although commonly the G.722 algorithm is used with a single 64 kbit/s B channel to send much lower latency mono audio at the expense of audio quality. Where very high quality audio is required multiple ISDN BRIs can be used in parallel to provide a higher bandwidth circuit switched connection. BBC Radio 3 commonly makes use of three ISDN BRIs to carry 320 kbit/s audio stream for live outside broadcasts. ISDN BRI services are used to link remote studios, sports grounds and outside broadcasts into the main broadcast studio. ISDN via satellite is used by field reporters around the world. It is also common to use ISDN for the return audio links to remote satellite broadcast vehicles.\n\nIn many countries, such as the UK and Australia, ISDN has displaced the older technology of equalised analogue landlines, with these circuits being phased out by telecommunications providers. Use of IP-based streaming codecs such as Comrex ACCESS and ipDTL is becoming more widespread in the broadcast sector, using broadband internet to connect remote studios.\n\nISDN-BRI never gained popularity as a general use telephone access technology in Canada and the US, and remains a niche product. The service was seen as \"a solution in search of a problem\", and the extensive array of options and features were difficult for customers to understand and use. ISDN has long been known by derogatory backronyms highlighting these issues, such as It Still Does Nothing, Innovations Subscribers Don't Need, and I Still Don't kNow.\n\nOnce the term \"broadband Internet access\" came to be associated with data rates incoming to the customer at 256 kbit/s or more, and alternatives like ADSL grew in popularity, the consumer market for BRI did not develop. Its only remaining advantage is that, while ADSL has a functional distance limitation and can use ADSL loop extenders, BRI has a greater limit and can use repeaters. As such, BRI may be acceptable for customers who are too remote for ADSL. Widespread use of BRI is further stymied by some small North American CLECs such as CenturyTel having given up on it and not providing Internet access using it. However, AT&T in most states (especially the former SBC/SWB territory) will still install an ISDN BRI line anywhere a normal analog line can be placed and the monthly charge is roughly $55.\n\nISDN-BRI is currently primarily used in industries with specialized and very specific needs. High-end videoconferencing hardware can bond up to 8 B-channels together (using a BRI circuit for every 2 channels) to provide digital, circuit-switched video connections to almost anywhere in the world. This is very expensive, and is being replaced by IP-based conferencing, but where cost concern is less of an issue than predictable quality and where a QoS-enabled IP does not exist, BRI is the preferred choice.\n\nMost modern non-VoIP PBXs use ISDN-PRI circuits. These are connected via T1 lines with the central office switch, replacing older analog two-way and direct inward dialing (DID) trunks. PRI is capable of delivering Calling Line Identification (CLID) in both directions so that the telephone number of an extension, rather than a company's main number, can be sent. It is still commonly used in recording studios and some radio programs, when a voice-over actor or host is in one studio (possibly telecommuting from home), but the director and producer are in a studio at another location. The ISDN protocol delivers channelized, not-over-the-Internet service, powerful call setup and routing features, faster setup and tear down, superior audio fidelity as compared to POTS (plain old telephone service), lower delay and, at higher densities, lower cost.\n\nIn 2013, Verizon announced it would no longer take orders for ISDN service in the Northeastern United States.\n\nOn April 19, 1988, Norwegian telecommunications company Telenor began offering nationwide ISDN services trademarked INS Net 64, and INS Net 1500, a fruition of NTT's independent research and trial from the 1970s of what it referred to the INS (Information Network System).\n\nTelstra provides the business customer with the ISDN services. There are five types of ISDN services which are ISDN2, ISDN2 Enhanced, ISDN10, ISDN20 and ISDN30. Telstra changed the minimum monthly charge for voice and data calls. In general, there are two group of ISDN service types; The Basic Rate services – ISDN 2 or ISDN 2 Enhanced. Another group of types are the Primary Rate services, ISDN 10/20/30. Telstra announced that the new sales of ISDN product would be unavailable as of 31 January 2018. The final exit date of ISDN service and migration to the new service would be confirmed by 2022.\n\nBharat Sanchar Nigam Limited, Reliance Communications and Bharti Airtel are the largest communication service providers, and offer both ISDN BRI and PRI services across the country. Reliance Communications and Bharti Airtel uses the DLC technology for providing these services. With the introduction of broadband technology, the load on bandwidth is being absorbed by ADSL. ISDN continues to be an important backup network for point-to-point leased line customers such as banks, Eseva Centers, Life Insurance Corporation of India, and SBI ATMs.\n\nOn April 19, 1988, Japanese telecommunications company NTT began offering nationwide ISDN services trademarked INS Net 64, and INS Net 1500, a fruition of NTT's independent research and trial from the 1970s of what it referred to the INS (Information Network System).\n\nPreviously, in April 1985, Japanese digital telephone exchange hardware made by Fujitsu was used to experimentally deploy the world's first I interface ISDN. The I interface, unlike the older and incompatible Y interface, is what modern ISDN services use today.\n\nSince 2000, NTT's ISDN offering have been known as FLET's ISDN, incorporating the \"FLET's\" brand that NTT uses for all of its ISP offerings.\n\nIn Japan, the number of ISDN subscribers dwindled as alternative technologies such as ADSL, cable Internet access, and fiber to the home gained greater popularity. On November 2, 2010, NTT announced plans to migrate their backend from PSTN to the IP network from around 2020 to around 2025. For this migration, ISDN services will be retired, and fiber optic services are recommended as an alternative.\n\nIn the United Kingdom, British Telecom (BT) provides ISDN2e (BRI) as well as ISDN30 (PRI). Until April 2006, they also offered services named Home Highway and Business Highway, which were BRI ISDN-based services that offered integrated analogue connectivity as well as ISDN. Later versions of the Highway products also included built-in USB sockets for direct computer access. Home Highway was bought by many home users, usually for Internet connection, although not as fast as ADSL, because it was available before ADSL and in places where ADSL does not reach.\n\nIn early 2015, BT announced their intention to retire the UK's ISDN infrastructure by 2025.\n\nFrance Telecom offers ISDN services under their product name Numeris (2 B+D), of which a professional Duo and home Itoo version is available. ISDN is generally known as RNIS in France and has widespread availability. The introduction of ADSL is reducing ISDN use for data transfer and Internet access, although it is still common in more rural and outlying areas, and for applications such as business voice and point-of-sale terminals.\n\nIn Germany, ISDN was very popular with an installed base of 25 million channels (29% of all subscriber lines in Germany as of 2003 and 20% of all ISDN channels worldwide). Due to the success of ISDN, the number of installed analog lines was decreasing. Deutsche Telekom (DTAG) offered both BRI and PRI. Competing phone companies often offered ISDN only and no analog lines. However, these operators generally offered free hardware that also allows the use of POTS equipment, such as NTBAs with integrated terminal adapters. Because of the widespread availability of ADSL services, ISDN was primarily used for voice and fax traffic.\n\nUntil 2007 ISDN (BRI) and ADSL/VDSL were often bundled on the same line, mainly because the combination of DSL with an analog line had no cost advantage over a combined ISDN-DSL line. This practice turned into an issue for the operators when vendors of ISDN technology stopped manufacturing it and spare parts became hard to come by. Since then phone companies started introducing cheaper xDSL-only products using VoIP for telephony, also in an effort to reduce their costs by operating separate data & voice networks.\n\nSince approximately 2010, most german operators are offering more and more VoIP on top of DSL lines and ceased offering ISDN lines. As from 2018 on, new ISDN lines are not available anymore in Germany, existing ISDN lines are phased out from 2016 onwards and existing customers are encouraged to move to DSL-based VoIP products.\nDeutsche Telekom expected to complete this phase-out by 2018 but postponed the date to 2020, other provides like Vodafone estimate to have their phase-out completed by 2022.\n\nOTE, the incumbent telecommunications operator, offers ISDN BRI (BRA) services in Greece. Following the launch of ADSL in 2003, the importance of ISDN for data transfer began to decrease and is today limited to niche business applications with point-to-point requirements.\n\nA study of the German Department of Science shows the following spread of ISDN-channels per 1,000 inhabitants in the year 2005:\nBULLET::::- Norway 401\nBULLET::::- Denmark 339\nBULLET::::- Germany 333\nBULLET::::- Switzerland 331\nBULLET::::- Japan 240\nBULLET::::- United Kingdom 160\nBULLET::::- Finland 160\nBULLET::::- Sweden 135\nBULLET::::- Italy 105\nBULLET::::- France 85\nBULLET::::- Spain 58\nBULLET::::- United States 47\n\nIn ISDN, there are two types of channels, \"B\" (for \"bearer\") and \"D\" (for \"data\"). \"B channels\" are used for data (which may include voice), and \"D channels\" are intended for signaling and control (but can also be used for data).\n\nThere are two ISDN implementations. Basic Rate Interface (BRI), also called basic rate access (BRA) — consists of two B channels, each with bandwidth of 64 kbit/s, and one D channel with a bandwidth of 16 kbit/s. Together these three channels can be designated as 2B+D. Primary Rate Interface (PRI), also called primary rate access (PRA) in Europe — contains a greater number of B channels and a D channel with a bandwidth of 64 kbit/s. The number of B channels for PRI varies according to the nation: in North America and Japan it is 23B+1D, with an aggregate bit rate of 1.544 Mbit/s (T1); in Europe, India and Australia it is 30B+2D, with an aggregate bit rate of 2.048 Mbit/s (E1). Broadband Integrated Services Digital Network (BISDN) is another ISDN implementation and it is able to manage different types of services at the same time. It is primarily used within network backbones and employs ATM.\n\nAnother alternative ISDN configuration can be used in which the B channels of an ISDN BRI line are bonded to provide a total duplex bandwidth of 128 kbit/s. This precludes use of the line for voice calls while the internet connection is in use. The B channels of several BRIs can be bonded, a typical use is a 384K videoconferencing channel.\n\nUsing bipolar with eight-zero substitution encoding technique, call data is transmitted over the data (B) channels, with the signaling (D) channels used for call setup and management. Once a call is set up, there is a simple 64 kbit/s synchronous bidirectional data channel (actually implemented as two simplex channels, one in each direction) between the end parties, lasting until the call is terminated. There can be as many calls as there are bearer channels, to the same or different end-points. Bearer channels may also be multiplexed into what may be considered single, higher-bandwidth channels via a process called B channel BONDING, or via use of Multi-Link PPP \"bundling\" or by using an H0, H11, or H12 channel on a PRI.\n\nThe D channel can also be used for sending and receiving X.25 data packets, and connection to X.25 packet network, this is specified in X.31. In practice, X.31 was only commercially implemented in the UK, France, Japan and Germany.\n\nA set of \"reference points\" are defined in the ISDN standard to refer to certain points between the telco and the end user ISDN equipment.\nBULLET::::- R – defines the point between a non-ISDN terminal equipment 2 (TE2) device and a \"terminal adapter\" (TA) which provides translation to and from such a device\nBULLET::::- S – defines the point between the ISDN terminal equipment 1 (TE1) or TA and a \"Network Termination Type 2\" (NT2) device\nBULLET::::- T – defines the point between the NT2 and network termination 1 (NT1) devices.\n\nMost NT-1 devices can perform the functions of the NT2 as well, and so the S and T reference points are generally collapsed into the S/T reference point.\n\nIn North America, the NT1 device is considered customer premises equipment (CPE) and must be maintained by the customer, thus, the U interface is provided to the customer. In other locations, the NT1 device is maintained by the telco, and the S/T interface is provided to the customer. In India, service providers provide U interface and an NT1 may be supplied by Service provider as part of service offering.\n\nAmong the kinds of data that can be moved over the 64 kbit/s channels are pulse-code modulated voice calls, providing access to the traditional voice PSTN. This information can be passed between the network and the user end-point at call set-up time. In North America, ISDN is now used mostly as an alternative to analog connections, most commonly for Internet access. Some of the services envisioned as being delivered over ISDN are now delivered over the Internet instead. In Europe, and in Germany in particular, ISDN has been successfully marketed as a phone with features, as opposed to a POTS phone with few or no features. Meanwhile, features that were first available with ISDN (such as Three-Way Calling, Call Forwarding, Caller ID, etc.) are now commonly available for ordinary analog phones as well, eliminating this advantage of ISDN. Another advantage of ISDN was the possibility of multiple simultaneous calls (one call per B channel), e.g. for big families, but with the increased popularity and reduced prices of mobile telephony this has become less interesting as well, making ISDN unappealing to the private customer. However, ISDN is typically more reliable than POTS, and has a significantly faster call setup time compared with POTS, and IP connections over ISDN typically have some 30–35ms round trip time, as opposed to 120–180ms (both measured with otherwise unused lines) over 56k or V.34/V.92 modems, making ISDN more reliable and more efficient for telecommuters.\n\nWhere an analog connection requires a modem, an ISDN connection requires a terminal adapter (TA). The function of an ISDN terminal adapter is often delivered in the form of a PC card with an S/T interface, and single-chip solutions seem to exist, considering the plethora of combined ISDN- and ADSL-routers.\n\nISDN is commonly used in radio broadcasting. Since ISDN provides a high quality connection this assists in delivering good quality audio for transmission in radio. Most radio studios are equipped with ISDN lines as their main form of communication with other studios or standard phone lines. Equipment made by companies such as Telos/Omnia (the popular Zephyr codec), Comrex, Tieline and others are used regularly by radio broadcasters. Almost all live sports broadcasts on radio are backhauled to their main studios via ISDN connections.\n\nThe following is an example of a Primary Rate (PRI) ISDN call showing the Q.921/LAPD and the Q.931/Network message intermixed (i.e. exactly what was exchanged on the D-channel). The call is originating from the switch where the trace was taken and goes out to some other switch, possibly an end-office LEC, who terminates the call.\n\nThe first line format is <time> <D-channel> <Transmitted/Received> <LAPD/ISDN message ID>. If the message is an ISDN level message, then a decoding of the message is attempted showing the various Information Elements that make up the message. All ISDN messages are tagged with an ID number relative to the switch that started the call (local/remote). Following this optional decoding is a dump of the bytes of the message in <offset> <hex> ... <hex> <ascii> ... <ascii> format.\n\nThe RR messages at the beginning prior to the call are the keep alive messages. SETUP message indicate the start of the call. Each message is acknowledged by the other side with a RR.\n\nBULLET::::- ISDN User Part (ISUP)\nBULLET::::- DSS1 (ETSI \"Euro-ISDN\", also used in many non-European countries)\nBULLET::::- DSS2 (Digital Subscriber Signalling System No. 2)\nBULLET::::- ETS 300 specification at ETSI\nBULLET::::- NI-1 (US National ISDN Phase 1)\nBULLET::::- NI-2 (US National ISDN Phase 2)\nBULLET::::- 4ESS (Lucent 4ESS specific protocol defined in AT&T TR 41459)\nBULLET::::- INS-NET 64/1500 (Japanese national/NTT carrier-specific protocol)\nBULLET::::- DACS used in the UK by British Telecom it uses non standard D channel signalling for pair gain\nBULLET::::- QSIG\nBULLET::::- Remote Operations Service Element protocol (ROSE)\nBULLET::::- Q.931\nBULLET::::- FTZ 1 TR 6 (obsolete German national protocol)\nBULLET::::- TS.013/TS.014 (obsolete Australian national protocol)\nBULLET::::- VN2/VN3/VN4 (obsolete French national protocols)\n\nSpecifications defining the physical layer and part of the data link layers of ISDN:\nBULLET::::- ISDN BRI: ITU-T I.430.\nBULLET::::- ISDN PRI: ITU-T I.431.\n\nFrom the point of view of the OSI architecture, an ISDN line has a stack of three protocols\nBULLET::::- physical layer\nBULLET::::- data link layer\nBULLET::::- network layer (the ISDN protocol, properly)\nBULLET::::- CAPI\nBULLET::::- ADSL\nBULLET::::- ATM\nBULLET::::- B-ISDN\nBULLET::::- Internet\nBULLET::::- IpDTL\nBULLET::::- H.320\nBULLET::::- ETSI\nBULLET::::- List of device bandwidths\n\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\n"}
{"id": "15235", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15235", "title": "Genomic imprinting", "text": "Genomic imprinting\n\nGenomic imprinting is an epigenetic phenomenon that causes genes to be expressed in a parent-of-origin-specific manner. Forms of genomic imprinting have been demonstrated in fungi, plants and animals. As of 2014, there are about 150 imprinted genes known in the mouse and about half that in humans.\n\nGenomic imprinting is an inheritance process independent of the classical Mendelian inheritance. It is an epigenetic process that involves DNA methylation and histone methylation without altering the genetic sequence. These epigenetic marks are established (\"imprinted\") in the germline (sperm or egg cells) of the parents and are maintained through mitotic cell divisions in the somatic cells of an organism.\n\nAppropriate imprinting of certain genes is important for normal development. Human diseases involving genomic imprinting include Angelman syndrome, Prader–Willi syndrome and male infertility.\n\nIn diploid organisms (like humans), the somatic cells possess two copies of the genome, one inherited from the father and one from the mother. Each autosomal gene is therefore represented by two copies, or alleles, with one copy inherited from each parent at fertilization. For the vast majority of autosomal genes, expression occurs from both alleles simultaneously. In mammals, however, a small proportion (<1%) of genes are imprinted, meaning that gene expression occurs from only one allele (some recent studies have questioned this assertion, claiming that the number of regions of parent-of-origin methylation in, for example, the human genome, is much larger than previously thought). The expressed allele is dependent upon its parental origin. For example, the gene encoding insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2/Igf2) is only expressed from the allele inherited from the father.\n\nThe term \"imprinting\" was first used to describe events in the insect \"Pseudococcus nipae\". In Pseudococcids (mealybugs) (Hemiptera, Coccoidea) both the male and female develop from a fertilised egg. In females, all chromosomes remain euchromatic and functional. In embryos destined to become males, one haploid set of chromosomes becomes heterochromatinised after the sixth cleavage division and remains so in most tissues; males are thus functionally haploid.\n\nThat imprinting might be a feature of mammalian development was suggested in breeding experiments in mice carrying reciprocal chromosomal translocations. Nucleus transplantation experiments in mouse zygotes in the early 1980s confirmed that normal development requires the contribution of both the maternal and paternal genomes. The vast majority of mouse embryos derived from parthenogenesis (called parthenogenones, with two maternal or egg genomes) and androgenesis (called androgenones, with two paternal or sperm genomes) die at or before the blastocyst/implantation stage. In the rare instances that they develop to postimplantation stages, gynogenetic embryos show better embryonic development relative to placental development, while for androgenones, the reverse is true. Nevertheless, for the latter, only a few have been described (in a 1984 paper).\n\nNo naturally occurring cases of parthenogenesis exist in mammals because of imprinted genes. However, in 2004, experimental manipulation by Japanese researchers of a paternal methylation imprint controlling the \"Igf2\" gene led to the birth of a mouse (named Kaguya) with two maternal sets of chromosomes, though it is not a true parthenogenone since cells from two different female mice were used. The researchers were able to succeed by using one egg from an immature parent, thus reducing maternal imprinting, and modifying it to express the gene Igf2, which is normally only expressed by the paternal copy of the gene.\n\nParthenogenetic/gynogenetic embryos have twice the normal expression level of maternally derived genes, and lack expression of paternally expressed genes, while the reverse is true for androgenetic embryos. It is now known that there are at least 80 imprinted genes in humans and mice, many of which are involved in embryonic and placental growth and development. Hybrid offspring of two species may exhibit unusual growth due to the novel combination of imprinted genes.\n\nVarious methods have been used to identify imprinted genes. In swine, Bischoff \"et al.\" 2009 compared transcriptional profiles using short-oligonucleotide microarrays to survey differentially expressed genes between parthenotes (2 maternal genomes) and control fetuses (1 maternal, 1 paternal genome). An intriguing study surveying the transcriptome of murine brain tissues revealed over 1300 imprinted gene loci (approximately 10-fold more than previously reported) by RNA-sequencing from F1 hybrids resulting from reciprocal crosses. The result however has been challenged by others who claimed that this is an overestimation by an order of magnitude due to flawed statistical analysis.\n\nIn domesticated livestock, single-nucleotide polymorphisms in imprinted genes influencing foetal growth and development have been shown to be associated with economically important production traits in cattle, sheep and pigs.\n\nAt the same time as the generation of the gynogenetic and androgenetic embryos discussed above, mouse embryos were also being generated that contained only small regions that were derived from either a paternal or maternal source. The generation of a series of such uniparental disomies, which together span the entire genome, allowed the creation of an imprinting map. Those regions which when inherited from a single parent result in a discernible phenotype contain imprinted gene(s). Further research showed that within these regions there were often numerous imprinted genes. Around 80% of imprinted genes are found in clusters such as these, called imprinted domains, suggesting a level of co-ordinated control. More recently, genome-wide screens to identify imprinted genes have used differential expression of mRNAs from control fetuses and parthenogenetic or androgenetic fetuses hybridized to expression arrays, allele-specific gene expression using SNP genotyping arrays, transcriptome sequencing, and in silico prediction pipelines.\n\nImprinting is a dynamic process. It must be possible to erase and re-establish imprints through each generation so that genes that are imprinted in an adult may still be expressed in that adult's offspring. (For example, the maternal genes that control insulin production will be imprinted in a male but will be expressed in any of the male's offspring that inherit these genes.) The nature of imprinting must therefore be epigenetic rather than DNA sequence dependent. In germline cells the imprint is erased and then re-established according to the sex of the individual, i.e. in the developing sperm (during spermatogenesis), a paternal imprint is established, whereas in developing oocytes (oogenesis), a maternal imprint is established. This process of erasure and reprogramming is necessary such that the germ cell imprinting status is relevant to the sex of the individual. In both plants and mammals there are two major mechanisms that are involved in establishing the imprint; these are DNA methylation and histone modifications.\n\nRecently, a new study has suggested a novel inheritable imprinting mechanism in humans that would be specific of placental tissue and that is independent of DNA methylation (the main and classical mechanism for genomic imprinting). Among the hypothetical explanations for this exclusively human phenomenon, two possible mechanisms have been proposed: either a histone modification that confers imprinting at novel placental-specific imprinted \"loci\" or, alternatively, a recruitment of DNMTs to these loci by a specific and unknown transcription factor that would be expressed during early trophoblast differentiation.\n\nThe grouping of imprinted genes within clusters allows them to share common regulatory elements, such as non-coding RNAs and differentially methylated regions (DMRs). When these regulatory elements control the imprinting of one or more genes, they are known as imprinting control regions (ICR). The expression of non-coding RNAs, such as \"Air\" on mouse chromosome 17 and KCNQ1OT1 on human chromosome 11p15.5, have been shown to be essential for the imprinting of genes in their corresponding regions.\n\nDifferentially methylated regions are generally segments of DNA rich in cytosine and guanine nucleotides, with the cytosine nucleotides methylated on one copy but not on the other. Contrary to expectation, methylation does not necessarily mean silencing; instead, the effect of methylation depends upon the default state of the region.\n\nThe control of expression of specific genes by genomic imprinting is unique to therian mammals (placental mammals and marsupials) and flowering plants. Imprinting of whole chromosomes has been reported in mealybugs (Genus: \"Pseudococcus\"). and a fungus gnat (\"Sciara\"). It has also been established that X-chromosome inactivation occurs in an imprinted manner in the extra-embryonic tissues of mice and all tissues in marsupials, where it is always the paternal X-chromosome which is silenced.\n\nThe majority of imprinted genes in mammals have been found to have roles in the control of embryonic growth and development, including development of the placenta. Other imprinted genes are involved in post-natal development, with roles affecting suckling and metabolism.\n\nA widely accepted hypothesis for the evolution of genomic imprinting is the \"parental conflict hypothesis\". Also known as the kinship theory of genomic imprinting, this hypothesis states that the inequality between parental genomes due to imprinting is a result of the differing interests of each parent in terms of the evolutionary fitness of their genes. The father's genes that encode for imprinting gain greater fitness through the success of the offspring, at the expense of the mother. The mother's evolutionary imperative is often to conserve resources for her own survival while providing sufficient nourishment to current and subsequent litters. Accordingly, paternally expressed genes tend to be growth-promoting whereas maternally expressed genes tend to be growth-limiting. In support of this hypothesis, genomic imprinting has been found in all placental mammals, where post-fertilisation offspring resource consumption at the expense of the mother is high; although it has also been found in oviparous birds where there is relatively little post-fertilisation resource transfer and therefore less parental conflict. A small number of imprinted genes are fast evolving under positive Darwinian selection possibly due to antagonistic co-evolution. The majority of imprinted genes display high levels of micro-synteny conservation and have undergone very few duplications in placental mammalian lineages.\n\nHowever, our understanding of the molecular mechanisms behind genomic imprinting show that it is the maternal genome that controls much of the imprinting of both its own and the paternally-derived genes in the zygote, making it difficult to explain why the maternal genes would willingly relinquish their dominance to that of the paternally-derived genes in light of the conflict hypothesis.\n\nAnother hypothesis proposed is that some imprinted genes act coadaptively to improve both fetal development and maternal provisioning for nutrition and care. In it a subset of paternally expressed genes are co-expressed in both the placenta and the mother's hypothalamus. This would come about through selective pressure from parent-infant coadaptation to improve infant survival. Paternally expressed 3 (Peg3) is a gene for which this hypothesis may apply.\n\nOthers have approached their study of the origins of genomic imprinting from a different side, arguing that natural selection is operating on the role of epigenetic marks as machinery for homologous chromosome recognition during meiosis, rather than on their role in differential expression. This argument centers on the existence of epigenetic effects on chromosomes that do not directly affect gene expression, but do depend on which parent the chromosome originated from. This group of epigenetic changes that depend on the chromosome's parent of origin (including both those that affect gene expression and those that do not) are called parental origin effects, and include phenomena such as paternal X inactivation in the marsupials, nonrandom parental chromatid distribution in the ferns, and even mating type switching in yeast. This diversity in organisms that show parental origin effects has prompted theorists to place the evolutionary origin of genomic imprinting before the last common ancestor of plants and animals, over a billion years ago.\n\nNatural selection for genomic imprinting requires genetic variation in a population. A hypothesis for the origin of this genetic variation states that the host-defense system responsible for silencing foreign DNA elements, such as genes of viral origin, mistakenly silenced genes whose silencing turned out to be beneficial for the organism. There appears to be an over-representation of retrotransposed genes, that is to say genes that are inserted into the genome by viruses, among imprinted genes. It has also been postulated that if the retrotransposed gene is inserted close to another imprinted gene, it may just acquire this imprint.\n\nImprinting may cause problems in cloning, with clones having DNA that is not methylated in the correct positions. It is possible that this is due to a lack of time for reprogramming to be completely achieved. When a nucleus is added to an egg during somatic cell nuclear transfer, the egg starts dividing in minutes, as compared to the days or months it takes for reprogramming during embryonic development. If time is the responsible factor, it may be possible to delay cell division in clones, giving time for proper reprogramming to occur.\n\nAn allele of the \"callipyge\" (from the Greek for \"beautiful buttocks\"), or CLPG, gene in sheep produces large buttocks consisting of muscle with very little fat. The large-buttocked phenotype only occurs when the allele is present on the copy of chromosome 18 inherited from a sheep's father and is \"not\" on the copy of chromosome 18 inherited from that sheep's mother.\n\nIn vitro fertilisation, including ICSI, is associated with an increased risk of imprinting disorders, with an odds ratio of 3.7 (95% confidence interval 1.4 to 9.7).\n\nEpigenetic deregulations at H19 imprinted gene in sperm have been observed associated with male infertility. Indeed, methylation loss at H19 imprinted gene has been observed associated with MTHFR gene promoter hypermethylation in semen samples from infertile males. \n\nThe first imprinted genetic disorders to be described in humans were the reciprocally inherited Prader-Willi syndrome and Angelman syndrome. Both syndromes are associated with loss of the chromosomal region 15q11-13 (band 11 of the long arm of chromosome 15). This region contains the paternally expressed genes SNRPN and NDN and the maternally expressed gene UBE3A.\nBULLET::::- Paternal inheritance of a deletion of this region is associated with Prader-Willi syndrome (characterised by hypotonia, obesity, and hypogonadism).\nBULLET::::- Maternal inheritance of the same deletion is associated with Angelman syndrome (characterised by epilepsy, tremors, and a perpetually smiling facial expression).\n\nDIRAS3 is a paternally expressed and maternally imprinted gene located on chromosome 1 in humans. Reduced DIRAS3 expression is linked to an increased risk of ovarian and breast cancers; in 41% of breast and ovarian cancers the protein encoded by DIRAS3 is not expressed, suggesting that it functions as a tumor suppressor gene Therefore, if uniparental disomy occurs and a person inherits both chromosomes from the mother, the gene will not be expressed and the individual is put at a greater risk for breast and ovarian cancer.\n\nOther conditions involving imprinting include Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, Silver-Russell syndrome, and pseudohypoparathyroidism.\n\nTransient neonatal diabetes mellitus can also involve imprinting.\n\nThe \"imprinted brain theory\" argues that unbalanced imprinting may be a cause of autism and psychosis.\n\nIn insects, imprinting affects entire chromosomes. In some insects the entire paternal genome is silenced in male offspring, and thus is involved in sex determination. The imprinting produces effects similar to the mechanisms in other insects that eliminate paternally inherited chromosomes in male offspring, including arrhenotoky.\n\nIn placental species, parent-offspring conflict can result in the evolution of strategies, such as genomic imprinting, for embryos to subvert maternal nutrient provisioning. Despite several attempts to find it, genomic imprinting has not been found in the platypus, reptiles, birds or fish. The absence of genomic imprinting in a placental reptile, the southern grass skink, is interesting as genomic imprinting was thought to be associated with the evolution of viviparity and placental nutrient transport.\n\nStudies in domestic livestock, such as dairy and beef cattle, have implicated imprinted genes (e.g. IGF2) in a range of economic traits, including dairy performance in Holstein-Friesian cattle.\n\nA similar imprinting phenomenon has also been described in flowering plants (angiosperms). During fertilization of the egg cell, a second, separate fertilization event gives rise to the endosperm, an extraembryonic structure that nourishes the embryo in a manner analogous to the mammalian placenta. Unlike the embryo, the endosperm is often formed from the fusion of two maternal cells with a male gamete. This results in a triploid genome. The 2:1 ratio of maternal to paternal genomes appears to be critical for seed development. Some genes are found to be expressed from both maternal genomes while others are expressed exclusively from the lone paternal copy. It has been suggested that these imprinted genes are responsible for the triploid block effect in flowering plants that prevents hybridization between diploids and autotetraploids.\n\nBULLET::::- Bookmarking\nBULLET::::- Metabolic imprinting\n\nBULLET::::- geneimprint.com\nBULLET::::- Imprinted Gene and Parent-of-origin Effect Database\nBULLET::::- J. Kimball's Imprinted Genes Site\nBULLET::::- Harwell Mouse Imprinting Map\n"}
{"id": "15236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15236", "title": "ICANN", "text": "ICANN\n\nThe Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN ) is a nonprofit organization responsible for coordinating the maintenance and procedures of several databases related to the namespaces and numerical spaces of the Internet, ensuring the network's stable and secure operation. ICANN performs the actual technical maintenance work of the Central Internet Address pools and DNS root zone registries pursuant to the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) function contract. The contract regarding the IANA stewardship functions between ICANN and the National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA) of the United States Department of Commerce ended on October 1, 2016, formally transitioning the functions to the global multistakeholder community.\n\nMuch of its work has concerned the Internet's global Domain Name System (DNS), including policy development for internationalization of the DNS system, introduction of new generic top-level domains (TLDs), and the operation of root name servers. The numbering facilities ICANN manages include the Internet Protocol address spaces for IPv4 and IPv6, and assignment of address blocks to regional Internet registries. ICANN also maintains registries of Internet Protocol identifiers.\n\nICANN's primary principles of operation have been described as helping preserve the operational stability of the Internet; to promote competition; to achieve broad representation of the global Internet community; and to develop policies appropriate to its mission through bottom-up, consensus-based processes.\n\nICANN's creation was announced publicly on September 17, 1998, and it formally came into being on September 30, 1998, incorporated in the U.S. state of California. Originally headquartered in Marina del Rey in the same building as the University of Southern California's Information Sciences Institute (ISI), its offices are now in the Playa Vista neighborhood of Los Angeles.\n\nBefore the establishment of ICANN, the IANA function of administering registries of Internet protocol identifiers (including the distributing top-level domains and IP addresses) was performed by Jon Postel, a Computer Science researcher who had been involved in the creation of ARPANET, first at UCLA and then at USC-ISI. In 1997 Postel testified before Congress that this had come about as a \"side task\" to this research work. The Information Sciences Institute was funded by the U.S. Department of Defense, as was SRI International's Network Information Center, which also performed some assigned name functions.\n\nAs the Internet grew and expanded globally, the U.S. Department of Commerce initiated a process to establish a new organization to perform the IANA functions. On January 30, 1998, the National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA), an agency of the U.S. Department of Commerce, issued for comment, \"A Proposal to Improve the Technical Management of Internet Names and Addresses.\" The proposed rule making, or \"Green Paper\", was published in the Federal Register on February 20, 1998, providing opportunity for public comment. NTIA received more than 650 comments as of March 23, 1998, when the comment period closed.\n\nThe Green Paper proposed certain actions designed to privatize the management of Internet names and addresses in a manner that allows for the development of competition and facilitates global participation in Internet management. The Green Paper proposed for discussion a variety of issues relating to DNS management including private sector creation of a new not-for-profit corporation (the \"new corporation\") managed by a globally and functionally representative board of directors. ICANN was formed in response to this policy. ICANN managed the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) under contract to the United States Department of Commerce (DOC) and pursuant to an agreement with the IETF.\n\nICANN was incorporated in California on September 30, 1998, with entrepreneur and philanthropist Esther Dyson as founding chairwoman. It is a nonprofit public benefit corporation \"organized under the California Nonprofit Public Benefit Corporation Law for charitable and public purposes.\" ICANN was established in California due to the presence of Jon Postel, who was a founder of ICANN and was set to be its first Chief Technology Officer prior to his unexpected death. ICANN formerly operated from the same Marina del Rey building where Postel formerly worked, which is home to an office of the Information Sciences Institute at the University of Southern California. However, ICANN's headquarters is now located in the nearby Playa Vista neighborhood of Los Angeles.\n\nPer its original by-laws, primary responsibility for policy formation in ICANN was to be delegated to three supporting organizations (Address Supporting Organization, Domain Name Supporting Organization, and Protocol Supporting Organization), each of which was to develop and recommend substantive policies and procedures for the management of the identifiers within their respective scope. They were also required to be financially independent from ICANN. As expected, the regional Internet registries and the IETF agreed to serve as the Address Supporting Organization and Protocol Supporting Organization respectively, and ICANN issued a call for interested parties to propose the structure and composition of the Domain Name Supporting Organization. In March 1999, the ICANN Board, based in part on the DNSO proposals received, decided instead on an alternate construction for the DNSO which delineated specific constituencies bodies within ICANN itself, thus adding primary responsibility for DNS policy development to ICANN's existing duties of oversight and coordination.\n\nOn July 26, 2006, the United States government renewed the contract with ICANN for performance of the IANA function for an additional one to five years. The context of ICANN's relationship with the U.S. government was clarified on September 29, 2006 when ICANN signed a new memorandum of understanding with the United States Department of Commerce (DOC). This document gave the DOC oversight over some of the ICANN operations.\n\nDuring July 2008, the DOC reiterated an earlier statement that it has \"no plans to transition management of the authoritative root zone file to ICANN\". The letter also stresses the separate roles of the IANA and VeriSign.\n\nOn September 30, 2009, ICANN signed an agreement with the DOC (known as the \"Affirmation of Commitments\") that confirmed ICANN's commitment to a multistakeholder governance model, but did not remove it from DOC oversight and control.\n\nOn March 10, 2016, ICANN and the DOC signed a historic, culminating agreement to finally remove ICANN and IANA from the control and oversight of the DOC. On October 1, 2016, ICANN was freed from U.S. government oversight.\n\nOn March 18, 2002, publicly elected At-Large Representative for North America board member Karl Auerbach sued ICANN in Superior Court in California to gain access to ICANN's accounting records without restriction. Auerbach won.\n\nDuring September and October 2003, ICANN played a crucial role in the conflict over VeriSign's \"wild card\" DNS service Site Finder. After an open letter from ICANN issuing an ultimatum to VeriSign, later endorsed by the Internet Architecture Board, the company voluntarily ended the service on October 4, 2003. After this action, VeriSign filed a lawsuit against ICANN on February 27, 2004, claiming that ICANN had exceeded its authority. By this lawsuit, VeriSign sought to reduce ambiguity about ICANN's authority. The antitrust component of VeriSign's claim was dismissed during August 2004. VeriSign's challenge that ICANN overstepped its contractual rights is currently outstanding. A proposed settlement already approved by ICANN's board would resolve VeriSign's challenge to ICANN in exchange for the right to increase pricing on .com domains. At the meeting of ICANN in Rome, which took place from March 2 to 6, 2004, ICANN agreed to ask approval of the U.S. Department of Commerce for the Waiting List Service of VeriSign.\n\nOn May 17, 2004, ICANN published a proposed budget for the year 2004–05. It included proposals to increase the openness and professionalism of its operations, and greatly increased its proposed spending from US$8.27 million to $15.83 million. The increase was to be funded by the introduction of new top-level domains, charges to domain registries, and a fee for some domain name registrations, renewals and transfers (initially USD 0.20 for all domains within a country-code top-level domain, and USD 0.25 for all others). The Council of European National Top Level Domain Registries (CENTR), which represents the Internet registries of 39 countries, rejected the increase, accusing ICANN of a lack of financial prudence and criticizing what it describes as ICANN's \"unrealistic political and operational targets\". Despite the criticism, the registry agreement for the top-level domains jobs and travel includes a US$2 fee on every domain the licensed companies sell or renew.\n\nAfter a second round of negotiations during 2004, the TLDs eu, , travel, jobs, mobi, and cat were introduced during 2005.\nOn February 28, 2006, ICANN's board approved a settlement with VeriSign in the lawsuit resulting from SiteFinder that involved allowing VeriSign (the registry) to raise its registration fees by up to 7% a year. This was criticised by a few members of the U.S. House of Representatives' Small Business Committee.\n\nDuring February 2007, ICANN began procedures to end accreditation of one of their registrars, RegisterFly amid charges and lawsuits involving fraud, and criticism of ICANN's management of the situation. ICANN has been the subject of criticism as a result of its handling of RegisterFly, and the harm caused to thousands of clients as a result of what has been termed ICANN's \"laissez faire attitude toward customer allegations of fraud\".\n\nOn May 23, 2008, ICANN issued enforcement notices against ten accredited registrars and announced this through a press release entitled \"'Worst Spam Offenders' Notified by ICANN, Compliance system working to correct Whois and other issues.\" This was largely in response to a report issued by KnujOn, called \"The 10 Worst Registrars\" in terms of spam advertised junk product sites and compliance failure. The mention of the word \"spam\" in the title of the ICANN memo is somewhat misleading since ICANN does not address issues of spam or email abuse. Website content and usage are not within ICANN's mandate. However, the KnujOn report details how various registrars have not complied with their contractual obligations under the Registrar Accreditation Agreement (RAA). The main point of the KnujOn research was to demonstrate the relationships between compliance failure, illicit product traffic, and spam. The report demonstrated that out of 900 ICANN accredited registrars, fewer than 20 held 90% of the web domains advertised in spam. These same registrars were also most frequently cited by KnujOn as failing to resolve complaints made through the Whois Data Problem Reporting System (WDPRS).\n\nOn June 26, 2008, the ICANN Board started a new process of TLD naming policy to take a \"significant step forward on the introduction of new generic top-level domains.\" This program envisions the availability of many new or already proposed domains, as well a new application and implementation process.\n\nOn October 1, 2008, ICANN issued breach notices against Joker and Beijing Innovative Linkage Technology Ltd. after further researching reports and complaints issued by KnujOn. These notices gave the registrars 15 days to fix their Whois investigation efforts.\n\nIn 2010, ICANN approved a major review of its policies with respect to accountability, transparency, and public participation by the Berkman Center for Internet and Society at Harvard University. This external review was an assistance of the work of ICANN's Accountability and Transparency Review team.\n\nOn February 3, 2011, ICANN announced that it had distributed the last batch of its remaining IPv4 addresses to the world's five regional Internet registries, the organizations that manage IP addresses in different regions. These registries began assigning the final IPv4 addresses within their regions until they ran out completely.\n\nOn June 20, 2011, the ICANN board voted to end most restrictions on the names of generic top-level domains (gTLD). Companies and organizations became able to choose essentially arbitrary top-level Internet domain names. The use of non-Latin characters (such as Cyrillic, Arabic, Chinese, etc.) is also allowed in gTLDs. ICANN began accepting applications for new gTLDS on January 12, 2012. The initial price to apply for a new gTLD was set at $185,000 and the annual renewal fee is $25,000.\n\nFollowing the 2013 NSA spying scandal, ICANN endorsed the Montevideo Statement, although no direct connection between these can be proven.\n\nOn October 1, 2016, ICANN ended its contract with the United States Department of Commerce National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA) and entered the private sector.\n\nThe EU attempts to enforce its GDPR (active since May 25, 2018) shall impact on ICANN operations, which the latter tried to fix through last-minute changes. The deadline coincided with French President Macron's hosting of megatech bosses such as Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg, Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella, Uber CEO Dara Khosrowshahi, IBM CEO Ginni Rometty, Intel CEO Brian Krzanich, Samsung President Young Sohn, and SAP CEO Bill McDermott.\n\nFrom its founding to the present, ICANN has been formally organized as a nonprofit corporation \"for charitable and public purposes\" under the California Nonprofit Public Benefit Corporation Law. It is managed by a 16-member board of directors composed of eight members selected by a nominating committee on which all the constituencies of ICANN are represented; six representatives of its Supporting Organizations, sub-groups that deal with specific sections of the policies under ICANN's purview; an at-large seat filled by an at-large organization; and the President / CEO, appointed by the board.\n\nThere are currently three supporting organizations: the Generic Names Supporting Organization (GNSO) deals with policy making on generic top-level domains (gTLDs); the Country Code Names Supporting Organization (ccNSO) deals with policy making on country-code top-level domains (ccTLDs); the Address Supporting Organization (ASO) deals with policy making on IP addresses.\n\nICANN also relies on some advisory committees and other advisory mechanisms to receive advice on the interests and needs of stakeholders that do not directly participate in the Supporting Organizations. These include the Governmental Advisory Committee (GAC), which is composed of representatives of a large number of national governments from all over the world; the At-Large Advisory Committee (ALAC), which is composed of individual Internet users from around the world selected by each of the Regional At-Large Organizations (RALO) and Nominating Committee; the Root Server System Advisory Committee, which provides advice on the operation of the DNS root server system; the Security and Stability Advisory Committee (SSAC), which is composed of Internet experts who study security issues pertaining to ICANN's mandate; and the Technical Liaison Group (TLG), which is composed of representatives of other international technical organizations that focus, at least in part, on the Internet.\n\nThe Governmental Advisory Committee has representatives from 112 states (108 UN members, the Holy See, Cook Islands, Niue and Taiwan), Hong Kong, Bermuda, Montserrat, the European Commission and the African Union Commission.\n\nIn addition the following organizations are GAC Observers:\n\nBULLET::::- African Telecommunications Union\nBULLET::::- Asia-Pacific Telecommunity\nBULLET::::- Caribbean Telecommunications Union (CTU)\nBULLET::::- Commonwealth Telecommunications Organisation (CTO)\nBULLET::::- Council of Europe\nBULLET::::- Economic Commission for Africa (ECA)\nBULLET::::- European Broadcasting Union\nBULLET::::- European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN)\nBULLET::::- European Space Agency\nBULLET::::- International Labour Office\nBULLET::::- International Telecommunication Union (ITU)\nBULLET::::- International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL)\nBULLET::::- International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement\nBULLET::::- Latin American Association of Telecom Regulatory Agencies (REGULATEL)\nBULLET::::- League of Arab States\nBULLET::::- New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD)\nBULLET::::- Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development\nBULLET::::- The Organization for Islamic Cooperation\nBULLET::::- Organization of American States\nBULLET::::- Organisation internationale de la Francophonie (OIF)\nBULLET::::- Pacific Islands Forum\nBULLET::::- Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC)\nBULLET::::- Inter-American Telecommunication Commission (CITEL)\nBULLET::::- International Criminal Court\nBULLET::::- United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)\nBULLET::::- Universal Postal Union\nBULLET::::- World Bank\nBULLET::::- World Health Organization (WHO)\nBULLET::::- World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO)\nBULLET::::- World Meteorological Organization\nBULLET::::- World Trade Organization\nBULLET::::- Moussa Guebre\nBULLET::::- Dan Kaminsky\nBULLET::::- Paul Kane\nBULLET::::- Norm Ritchie\nBULLET::::- Ondrej Sury\nBULLET::::- Bevil Wooding\nBULLET::::- Jiankang Yao\n\nIn the Memorandum of understanding that set up the relationship between ICANN and the U.S. government, ICANN was given a mandate requiring that it operate \"in a bottom up, consensus driven, democratic manner.\" However, the attempts that ICANN have made to establish an organizational structure that would allow wide input from the global Internet community did not produce results amenable to the current Board. As a result, the At-Large constituency and direct election of board members by the global Internet community were soon abandoned.\n\nICANN holds periodic public meetings rotated between continents for the purpose of encouraging global participation in its processes. Resolutions of the ICANN Board, preliminary reports, and minutes of the meetings, are published on the ICANN website, sometimes in real time. However, there are criticisms from ICANN constituencies including the Noncommercial Users Constituency (NCUC) and the At-Large Advisory Committee (ALAC) that there is not enough public disclosure and that too many discussions and decisions take place out of sight of the public.\n\nDuring the early 2000s, there had been speculation that the United Nations might assume control of ICANN, followed by a negative reaction from the U.S. government and worries about a division of the Internet. The World Summit on the Information Society in Tunisia during November 2005 agreed not to get involved in the day-to-day and technical operations of ICANN. However it also agreed to establish an international Internet Governance Forum, with a consultative role on the future governance of the Internet. ICANN's Government Advisory Committee is currently established to provide advice to ICANN regarding public policy issues and has participation by many of the world's governments.\n\nSome have attempted to argue that ICANN was never given the authority to decide policy, e.g., choose new TLDs or exclude other interested parties who refuse to pay ICANN's US$185,000 fee, but was to be a technical caretaker. Critics suggest that ICANN should not be allowed to impose business rules on market participants, and that all TLDs should be added on a first-come, first-served basis and the market should be the arbiter of who succeeds and who does not.\n\nOne task that ICANN was asked to do was to address the issue of domain name ownership resolution for generic top-level domains (gTLDs). ICANN's attempt at such a policy was drafted in close cooperation with the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), and the result has now become known as the Uniform Dispute Resolution Policy (UDRP). This policy essentially attempts to provide a mechanism for rapid, cheap and reasonable resolution of domain name conflicts, avoiding the traditional court system for disputes by allowing cases to be brought to one of a set of bodies that arbitrate domain name disputes. According to ICANN policy, domain registrants must agree to be bound by the UDRP—they cannot get a domain name without agreeing to this.\n\nExamination of the UDRP decision patterns has caused some to conclude that compulsory domain name arbitration is less likely to give a fair hearing to domain name owners asserting defenses under the First Amendment and other laws, compared to the federal courts of appeal in particular.\n\nIn 2013, the initial report of ICANN's Expert Working Group has recommended that the present form of Whois, a utility that allows anyone to know who has registered a domain name on the Internet, should be \"abandoned\". It recommends it be replaced with a system that keeps most registration information secret (or \"gated\") from most Internet users, and only discloses information for \"permissible purposes\". ICANN's list of permissible purposes includes domain name research, domain name sale and purchase, regulatory enforcement, personal data protection, legal actions, and abuse mitigation. Whois has been a key tool of investigative journalists interested in determining who was disseminating information on the Internet. The use of whois by the free press is not included in the list of permissible purposes in the initial report.\n\nSince its creation, ICANN has been the subject of criticism and controversy. In 2000, professor Michael Froomkin of the University of Miami School of Law argued that ICANN's relationship with the U.S. Department of Commerce is illegal, in violation of either the Constitution or federal statutes. In 2009, the new \"Affirmation of Commitments\" agreement between ICANN and the U.S. Department of Commerce, that aimed to create international oversight, ran into criticism.\n\nDuring December 2011, the Federal Trade Commission stated ICANN had long failed to provide safeguards that protect consumers from online swindlers.\n\nAlso during 2011, seventy-nine companies, including The Coca-Cola Company, Hewlett-Packard, Samsung and others, signed a petition against ICANN's new TLD program (sometimes referred to as a \"commercial landgrab\"), in a group organized by the Association of National Advertisers. As of September 2014, this group, the Coalition for Responsible Internet Domain Oversight, that opposes the rollout of ICANN's TLD expansion program, has been joined by 102 associations and 79 major companies. Partly as a response to this criticism, ICANN initiated an effort to protect trademarks in domain name registrations, which eventually culminated in the establishment of the Trademark Clearinghouse.\n\nOne controversial proposal, resulting from a September 2011 summit between India, Brazil, and South Africa (IBSA), would seek to move Internet governance into a \"UN Committee on Internet-Related Policy\" (UN-CIRP). The action was a reaction to a perception that the principles of the 2005 Tunis Agenda for the Information Society have not been met. The statement proposed the creation of a new political organization operating as a component of the United Nations to provide policy recommendations for the consideration of technical organizations such as ICANN and international bodies such as the ITU. Subsequent to public criticisms, the Indian government backed away from the proposal.\n\nOn October 7, 2013 the Montevideo Statement on the Future of Internet Cooperation was released by the managers of a number of organizations involved in coordinating the Internet's global technical infrastructure, loosely known as the \"I*\" (or \"I-star\") group. Among other things, the statement \"expressed strong concern over the undermining of the trust and confidence of Internet users globally due to recent revelations of pervasive monitoring and surveillance\" and \"called for accelerating the globalization of ICANN and IANA functions, towards an environment in which all stakeholders, including all governments, participate on an equal footing\". This desire to reduce United States association with the internet is considered a reaction to the ongoing NSA surveillance scandal. The statement was signed by the managers of the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), the Internet Engineering Task Force, the Internet Architecture Board, the World Wide Web Consortium, the Internet Society, and the five regional Internet address registries (African Network Information Center, American Registry for Internet Numbers, Asia-Pacific Network Information Centre, Latin America and Caribbean Internet Addresses Registry, and Réseaux IP Européens Network Coordination Centre).\n\nDuring October 2013, Fadi Chehadé, former President and CEO of ICANN, met with Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff in Brasilia. Upon Chehadé's invitation, the two announced that Brazil would host an international summit on Internet governance during April 2014. The announcement came after the 2013 disclosures of mass surveillance by the U.S. government, and President Rousseff's speech at the opening session of the 2013 United Nations General Assembly, where she strongly criticized the American surveillance program as a \"breach of international law\". The \"Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance (NET mundial)\" will include representatives of government, industry, civil society, and academia. At the IGF VIII meeting in Bali in October 2013 a commenter noted that Brazil intends the meeting to be a \"summit\" in the sense that it will be high level with decision-making authority. The organizers of the \"NET mundial\" meeting have decided that an online forum called \"/1net\", set up by the I* group, will be a major conduit of non-governmental input into the three committees preparing for the meeting in April.\n\nThe Obama administration that had joined critics of ICANN during 2011 announced in March 2014 that they intended to transition away from oversight of the IANA functions contract. The current contract that the United States Department of Commerce has with ICANN expired in 2015, in its place the NTIA will transition oversight of the IANA functions to the 'global multistakeholder community'.\n\nThe NetMundial Initiative is a plan for international governance of the Internet that was first proposed at the Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance (GMMFIG) conference (April 23–24, 2014)\nand later developed into the NetMundial Initiative by ICANN CEO Fadi Chehadé along with representatives of the World Economic Forum (WEF)\nand the Brazilian Internet Steering Committee (Comitê Gestor da Internet no Brasil), commonly referred to as \"CGI.br\".\n\nThe meeting produced a nonbinding statement in favor of consensus-based decision-making. It represented a compromise and did not harshly condemn mass surveillance or support net neutrality, despite initial endorsement for that from Brazil. The final resolution says ICANN should be controlled internationally by September 2015.\nA minority of governments, including Russia, China, Iran and India, were unhappy with the final resolution and wanted multilateral management for the Internet, rather than broader multistakeholder management.\n\nA month later, the Panel on Global Internet Cooperation and Governance Mechanisms (convened by the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) and the World Economic Forum (WEF) with assistance from The Annenberg Foundation), endorsed and included the NetMundial statement in its own report.\n\nDuring June 2014, France strongly attacked ICANN, saying ICANN is not a fit venue for Internet governance and that alternatives should be sought.\n\nICANN has received more than $60 million from gTLD auctions, and has accepted the controversial domain name \".sucks\" (referring to the primarily US slang for being inferior or objectionable). sucks domains are owned and controlled by the Vox Populi Registry which won the rights for .sucks gTLD in November 2014.\n\nThe .sucks domain registrar has been described as \"predatory, exploitive and coercive\" by the Intellectual Property Constituency that advises the ICANN board. When the .sucks registry announced their pricing model, \"most brand owners were upset and felt like they were being penalized by having to pay more to protect their brands.\" Because of the low utility of the \".sucks\" domain, most fees come from \"Brand Protection\" customers registering their trademarks to prevent domains being registered.\n\nCanadian brands had complained that they were being charged \"exorbitant\" prices to register their trademarks as premium names. FTC chair Edith Ramirez has written to ICANN to say the agency will take action against the .sucks owner if \"we have reason to believe an entity has engaged in deceptive or unfair practices in violation of Section 5 of the FTC Act\". The Register reported that intellectual property lawyers are infuriated that \"the dot-sucks registry was charging trademark holders $2,500 for .sucks domains and everyone else $10.\"\n\nU.S. Representative Bob Goodlatte has said that trademark holders are \"being shaken down\" by the registry's fees. Jay Rockefeller says that .sucks is \"a predatory shakedown scheme\" and \"Approving '.sucks', a gTLD with little or no public interest value, will have the effect of undermining the credibility ICANN has slowly been building with skeptical stakeholders.\"\n\nIn a long-running dispute, ICANN have so far declined to allow a Turkish company to purchase the .islam and .halal gTLDs, after the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation objected that the gTLDs should be administered by an organization that represents all the world’s 1.6 billion Muslims. After a number of attempts to resolve the issue the domains are still held \"on hold\".\n\nIn May 2019 Icann decided in favor of granting exclusive administration rights to amazon.com for the .amazon gTLD after a 7 year long dispute with the Amazon Cooperation Treaty Organization (ACTO).\nBULLET::::- Alternative DNS root\nBULLET::::- Domain name scams\nBULLET::::- Domain Name System\nBULLET::::- Domain name\nBULLET::::- Domain name registrar\nBULLET::::- Internationalized domain name\nBULLET::::- Top-level domain\nBULLET::::- Country code top-level domain\nBULLET::::- Generic top-level domain\nBULLET::::- Geographic top-level domain (GeoTLD)\nBULLET::::- IEEE Registration Authority\nBULLET::::- Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA)\nBULLET::::- InterNIC\nBULLET::::- List of ICANN meetings\nBULLET::::- List of United States quangos\nBULLET::::- Montevideo Statement on the Future of Internet Cooperation\nBULLET::::- NetMundial Initiative, a plan for governance of the Internet\nBULLET::::- Network Solutions\nBULLET::::- OneWebDay\nBULLET::::- OpenNIC\nBULLET::::- Trademark Clearinghouse\nBULLET::::- Uniform Domain-Name Dispute-Resolution Policy\nBULLET::::- WHOIS\n\nBULLET::::- Brito, Jerry. \"ICANN vs. the World.\" \"TIME\". March 5, 2011. Retrieved March 6, 2011.\nBULLET::::- Franda, Marcus, \"The Emergence of an International Regime\",\nBULLET::::- Wass, Erica, \"Addressing the World\",\nBULLET::::- Paré, Daniel J. \"Internet Governance in Transition\",\nBULLET::::- Mueller, Milton L. \"Ruling the Root\",\nBULLET::::- Froomkin, A. Michael Wrong Turn in Cyberspace: Using ICANN to Route Around the APA and the Constitution, 50 Duke Law Journal17 (2000)\n\nBULLET::::- ICANN DNS Operations\n"}
{"id": "15237", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15237", "title": "Iterative method", "text": "Iterative method\n\nIn computational mathematics, an iterative method is a mathematical procedure that uses an initial guess to generate a sequence of improving approximate solutions for a class of problems, in which the \"n\"-th approximation is derived from the previous ones. A specific implementation of an iterative method, including the termination criteria, is an algorithm of the iterative method. An iterative method is called convergent if the corresponding sequence converges for given initial approximations. A mathematically rigorous convergence analysis of an iterative method is usually performed; however, heuristic-based iterative methods are also common. \n\nIn contrast, direct methods attempt to solve the problem by a finite sequence of operations. In the absence of rounding errors, direct methods would deliver an exact solution (like solving a linear system of equations formula_1 by Gaussian elimination). Iterative methods are often the only choice for nonlinear equations. However, iterative methods are often useful even for linear problems involving many variables (sometimes of the order of millions), where direct methods would be prohibitively expensive (and in some cases impossible) even with the best available computing power.\n\nIf an equation can be put into the form \"f\"(\"x\") = \"x\", and a solution x is an attractive fixed point of the function \"f\", then one may begin with a point \"x\" in the basin of attraction of x, and let \"x\" = \"f\"(\"x\") for \"n\" ≥ 1, and the sequence {\"x\"} will converge to the solution x. Here \"x\" is the \"n\"th approximation or iteration of \"x\" and \"x\" is the next or \"n\" + 1 iteration of \"x\". Alternately, superscripts in parentheses are often used in numerical methods, so as not to interfere with subscripts with other meanings. (For example, \"x\" = \"f\"(\"x\").) If the function \"f\" is continuously differentiable, a sufficient condition for convergence is that the spectral radius of the derivative is strictly bounded by one in a neighborhood of the fixed point. If this condition holds at the fixed point, then a sufficiently small neighborhood (basin of attraction) must exist.\n\nIn the case of a system of linear equations, the two main classes of iterative methods are the stationary iterative methods, and the more general Krylov subspace methods.\n\nStationary iterative methods solve a linear system with an operator approximating the original one; and based on a measurement of the error in the result (the residual), form a \"correction equation\" for which this process is repeated. While these methods are simple to derive, implement, and analyze, convergence is only guaranteed for a limited class of matrices. \n\nAn \"iterative method\" is defined by\nand for a given linear system formula_3 with exact solution formula_4 the \"error\" by\nAn iterative method is called \"linear\" if there exists a matrix formula_6 such that\nand this matrix is called \"iteration matrix\".\nAn iterative method with a given iteration matrix formula_8 is called \"convergent\" if the following holds\n\nAn important theorem states that for a given iterative method and its iteration matrix formula_8 it is convergent if and only if its spectral radius formula_11 is smaller than unity, that is,\n\nThe basic iterative methods work by splitting the matrix formula_13 into\nand here the matrix formula_15 should be easily invertible.\nThe iterative methods are now defined as\nFrom this follows that the iteration matrix is given by\n\nBasic examples of stationary iterative methods use a splitting of the matrix formula_13 such as\nwhere formula_20 is only the diagonal part of formula_13, and formula_22 is the strict lower triangular part of formula_13.\nRespectively, formula_24 is the upper triangular part of formula_13.\nBULLET::::- Richardson method: formula_26\nBULLET::::- Jacobi method: formula_27\nBULLET::::- Damped Jacobi method: formula_28\nBULLET::::- Gauss–Seidel method: formula_29\nBULLET::::- Successive over-relaxation method (SOR): formula_30\nBULLET::::- Symmetric successive over-relaxation (SSOR): formula_31\nLinear stationary iterative methods are also called relaxation methods.\n\nKrylov subspace methods work by forming a basis of the sequence of successive matrix powers times the initial residual (the Krylov sequence). \nThe approximations to the solution are then formed by minimizing the residual over the subspace formed. \nThe prototypical method in this class is the conjugate gradient method (CG) which assumes that the system matrix formula_13 is symmetric positive-definite.\nFor symmetric (and possibly indefinite) formula_13 one works with the minimal residual method (MINRES).\nIn the case of not even symmetric matrices methods, such as the generalized minimal residual method (GMRES) and the biconjugate gradient method (BiCG), have been derived.\n\nSince these methods form a basis, it is evident that the method converges in \"N\" iterations, where \"N\" is the system size. However, in the presence of rounding errors this statement does not hold; moreover, in practice \"N\" can be very large, and the iterative process reaches sufficient accuracy already far earlier. The analysis of these methods is hard, depending on a complicated function of the spectrum of the operator.\n\nThe approximating operator that appears in stationary iterative methods can also be incorporated in Krylov subspace methods such as GMRES (alternatively, preconditioned Krylov methods can be considered as accelerations of stationary iterative methods), where they become transformations of the original operator to a presumably better conditioned one. The construction of preconditioners is a large research area.\n\nProbably the first iterative method for solving a linear system appeared in a letter of Gauss to a student of his. He proposed solving a 4-by-4 system of equations by repeatedly solving the component in which the residual was the largest. \n\nThe theory of stationary iterative methods was solidly established with the work of D.M. Young starting in the 1950s. The Conjugate Gradient method was also invented in the 1950s, with independent developments by Cornelius Lanczos, Magnus Hestenes and Eduard Stiefel, but its nature and applicability were misunderstood at the time. Only in the 1970s was it realized that conjugacy based methods work very well for partial differential equations, especially the elliptic type.\n\nBULLET::::- Closed-form expression\nBULLET::::- Non-linear least squares\nBULLET::::- Numerical analysis\nBULLET::::- Root-finding algorithm\n\nBULLET::::- Templates for the Solution of Linear Systems\nBULLET::::- Y. Saad: \"Iterative Methods for Sparse Linear Systems\", 1st edition, PWS 1996\n"}
{"id": "15238", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15238", "title": "International judicial institution", "text": "International judicial institution\n\nInternational judicial institutions can be divided into courts, arbitral tribunals and quasi-judicial institutions. Courts are permanent bodies, with near the same composition for each case. Arbitral tribunals, by contrast, are constituted anew for each case. Both courts and arbitral tribunals can make binding decisions. Quasi-judicial institutions, by contrast, make rulings on cases, but these rulings are not in themselves legally binding; the main example is the individual complaints mechanisms available under the various UN human rights treaties.\n\nInstitutions can also be divided into global and regional institutions.\n\nThe listing below incorporates both currently existing institutions, defunct institutions that no longer exist, institutions which never came into existence due to non-ratification of their constitutive instruments, and institutions which do not yet exist, but for which constitutive instruments have been signed. It does not include mere proposed institutions for which no instrument was ever signed.\n\nBULLET::::- International Court of Justice\nBULLET::::- International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea\nBULLET::::- International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia\nBULLET::::- International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda\nBULLET::::- International Criminal Court\nBULLET::::- International Military Tribunal (Defunct)\nBULLET::::- International Military Tribunal for the Far East (Defunct)\nBULLET::::- International Prize Court (Never established)\nBULLET::::- Permanent Court of International Justice (Defunct. Replaced by the International Court of Justice)\n\nBULLET::::- Permanent Court of Arbitration\nBULLET::::- WTO Appelate Body\nBULLET::::- WTO Dispute Settlement Panels\nBULLET::::- NAFTA Dispute Settlement Panels\nBULLET::::- International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes\nBULLET::::- Court of Arbitration for Sport\nBULLET::::- OSCE Court of Conciliation and Arbitration\n\nBULLET::::- Human Rights Committee\nBULLET::::- Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination\nBULLET::::- Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women\nBULLET::::- Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights\nBULLET::::- Committee on the Rights of the Child\nBULLET::::- Committee Against Torture\nBULLET::::- Committee on Migrant Workers\nBULLET::::- Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities\n\nBULLET::::- African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights\nBULLET::::- Court of Justice of the African Union (planned)\nBULLET::::- Court of Justice of the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa\nBULLET::::- Community Court of Justice of the Economic Community of West African States\nBULLET::::- East African Court of Justice\nBULLET::::- Southern African Development Community Tribunal\n\nBULLET::::- Inter-American Court of Human Rights\nBULLET::::- Central American Court of Justice\nBULLET::::- Court of Justice of the Andean Community\nBULLET::::- Caribbean Court of Justice\nBULLET::::- Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court\n\nBULLET::::- European Court of Justice\nBULLET::::- European General Court\nBULLET::::- European Court of Human Rights\nBULLET::::- Court of Justice of the European Free Trade Agreement States\nBULLET::::- Benelux Court of Justice\nBULLET::::- Economic Court of the Commonwealth of Independent States\nBULLET::::- European Nuclear Energy Tribunal (dormant)\nBULLET::::- Western European Union Tribunal (defunct)\nBULLET::::- European Tribunal in Matters of State Immunity (dormant)\n"}
{"id": "15239", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15239", "title": "International Prize Court", "text": "International Prize Court\n\nThe International Prize Court was an international court proposed at the beginning of the 20th century, to hear prize cases. An international agreement to create it, the \"Convention Relative to the Creation of an International Prize Court\", was made at the Second Hague Conference in 1907 but never came into force.\n\nThe capturing of prizes (enemy equipment, vehicles, and especially ships) during wartime is a tradition that goes back as far as organized warfare itself. The International Prize Court was to hear appeals from national courts concerning prize cases. Even as a draft, the convention was innovative for the time, in being both the first ever treaty for a truly international court (as opposed to a mere arbitral tribunal), and in providing individuals with access to the court, going against the prevailing doctrines of international law at the time, according to which only states had rights and duties under international law. The Convention was opposed, particularly by elements within the United States and the United Kingdom, as a violation of national sovereignty.\n\nThe 1907 convention was modified by the \"Additional Protocol to the Convention Relative to the Creation of an International Prize Court\", done at the Hague on October 18, 1910. The protocol was an attempt to resolve some concerns expressed by the United States at the court, which felt it to be in violation of its constitutional provision that provides for the U.S. Supreme Court being the final judicial authority. However, neither the convention nor the subsequent protocol ever entered into force, since only Nicaragua ratified the agreements. As a result, the court never came into existence.\n\nA number of ideas from the International Prize Court proposal can be seen in present day international courts, such as its provision for judges \"ad hoc\", later adopted in the Permanent Court of International Justice and the subsequent International Court of Justice.\n\nBULLET::::- Primary:\n\nBULLET::::- Secondary:\n"}
{"id": "15240", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15240", "title": "Imam", "text": "Imam\n\nImam (; '; plural: ') is an Islamic leadership position. \n\nIt is most commonly used as the title of a worship leader of a mosque and Muslim community among Sunni Muslims. In this context, imams may lead Islamic worship services, serve as community leaders, and provide religious guidance. In Yemen, the title was formerly given to the king of the country.\n\nFor Shi'a Muslims, the Imams are leaders of the Islamic community or ummah after the Prophet. The term is only applicable to the members of \"Ahl al-Bayt\", the family of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, designated as infallibles.\n\nThe Sunni branch of Islam does not have imams in the same sense as the Shi'a, an important distinction often overlooked by those outside of the Islamic religion. In everyday terms, the imam for Sunni Muslims is the one who leads Islamic formal (Fard) prayers, even in locations besides the mosque, whenever prayers are done in a group of two or more with one person leading (imam) and the others following by copying his ritual actions of worship. Friday sermon is most often given by an appointed imam. All mosques have an imam to lead the (congregational) prayers, even though it may sometimes just be a member from the gathered congregation rather than an officially appointed salaried person. The position of women as imams is controversial. The person that should be chosen, according to Hadith, is one who has most knowledge of the Quran and Sunnah (prophetic tradition) and is of good character.\n\nThe term is also used for a recognized religious scholar or authority in Islam, often for the founding scholars of the four Sunni madhhabs, or schools of jurisprudence (\"fiqh\"). It may also refer to the Muslim scholars who created the analytical sciences related to Hadith or it may refer to the heads of Muhammad's family in their generational times.\n\nThe Position of Imams In Turkey\n\nImams are appointed by the state to work at mosques and they are required to be graduates of an İmam Hatip high school or have a university degree in Theology. This is an official position regulated by the Presidency of Religious Affairs in Turkey and only males are appointed to this position while female officials under the same state organisation work as preachers and Qur'an course tutors, religious services experts. These officials are supposed to belong to the Hanafi school of the Sunni sect.\n\nA central figure in an Islamic movement is also called as an Imam like the Imam Nabhawi in Syria and Ahmad Raza Khan in India and Pakistan is also called as the Imam for Sunni Muslims.\n\nIn the Shi'a context, an imam is not only presented as the man of God \"par excellence\", but as participating fully in the names, attributes, and acts that theology usually reserves for God alone. Imams have a meaning more central to belief, referring to leaders of the community. Twelver and Ismaili Shi'a believe that these imams are chosen by God to be perfect examples for the faithful and to lead all humanity in all aspects of life. They also believe that all the imams chosen are free from committing any sin, impeccability which is called \"ismah\". These leaders must be followed since they are appointed by God.\n\nHere follows a list of the Twelvers imams:\n\n! Number !! Name<br>(Full/Kunya) !! Title<br>(Arabic/Turkish)!! Birth–Death<br>(CE/AH)!! Importance !! Birthplace (present day country) !! Place of death and burial\n1\nAli ibn Abu Talib<br>علي بن أبي طالب<hr>Abu al-Hassan or Abu al-Husayn<br> أبو الحسین or أبو الحسن\nAmir al-Mu'minin<br>(Commander of the Faithful)<hr>Birinci Ali\n600–661<hr>23 BH–40\nThe first imam and successor of Muhammad in Shia Islam; however, the Sunnis acknowledge him as the fourth Caliph as well. He holds a high position in almost all Sufi Muslim orders (Turuq); the members of these orders trace their lineage to Muhammad through him.\nMecca, Saudi Arabia\nAssassinated by Abd-al-Rahman ibn Muljam, a Kharijite in Kufa, who slashed him with a poisoned sword. Buried at the Imam Ali Mosque in Najaf, Iraq.\n2\nHassan ibn Ali<br>الحسن بن علي<hr>Abu Muhammad<br>أبو محمد\nal-Mujtaba<hr>İkinci Ali\n624–670\n----3–50\nHe was the eldest surviving grandson of Muhammad through Muhammad's daughter, Fatimah Zahra. Hasan succeeded his father as the caliph in Kufa, and on the basis of peace treaty with Muawiya I, he relinquished control of Iraq following a reign of seven months.\nMedina, Saudi Arabia\nPoisoned by his wife in Medina, Saudi Arabia. Buried in Jannat al-Baqi.\n3\nHusayn ibn Ali<br>الحسین بن علي<hr>Abu Abdillah<br>أبو عبدالله\nSayed al-Shuhada<hr>Üçüncü Ali\n626–680\n----4–61\nHe was a grandson of Muhammad. Husayn opposed the validity of Caliph Yazid I. As a result, he and his family were later killed in the Battle of Karbala by Yazid's forces. After this incident, the commemoration of Husayn ibn Ali has become a central ritual in Shia identity.\nMedina, Saudi Arabia\nKilled on Day of Ashura (10 Muharram) and beheaded at the Battle of Karbala. Buried at the Imam Husayn Shrine in Karbala, Iraq.\n4\nAli ibn al-Hussein<br>علي بن الحسین<hr>Abu Muhammad<br>أبو محمد\nal-Sajjad, Zain al-Abedin\n----Dördüncü Ali\n658-9 – 712\n----38–95\nAuthor of prayers in Sahifa al-Sajjadiyya, which is known as \"The Psalm of the Household of the Prophet.\"\nMedina, Saudi Arabia\nAccording to most Shia scholars, he was poisoned on the order of Caliph al-Walid I in Medina, Saudi Arabia. Buried in Jannat al-Baqi.\n5\nMuhammad ibn Ali<br>محمد بن علي<hr>Abu Ja'far<br>أبو جعفر\nal-Baqir al-Ulum<br>\n----Beşinci Ali\n----57–114\nSunni and Shia sources both describe him as one of the early and most eminent legal scholars, teaching many students during his tenure.\nMedina, Saudi Arabia\nAccording to some Shia scholars, he was poisoned by Ibrahim ibn Walid ibn 'Abdallah in Medina, Saudi Arabia on the order of Caliph Hisham ibn Abd al-Malik. Buried in Jannat al-Baqi.\n6\nJa'far ibn Muhammad<br>جعفر بن محمد<hr>Abu Abdillah<br>أبو عبدالله\nal-Sadiq\n<br>(the Trustworthy)\n----Altıncı Ali\n----83–148\nEstablished the Ja'fari jurisprudence and developed the Theology of Shia. He instructed many scholars in different fields, including Abu Hanifah and Malik ibn Anas in fiqh, Wasil ibn Ata and Hisham ibn Hakam in Islamic theology, and Jābir ibn Hayyān in science and alchemy.\nMedina, Saudi Arabia\nAccording to Shia sources, he was poisoned in Medina, Saudi Arabia on the order of Caliph Al-Mansur. Buried in Jannat al-Baqi.\n7\nMusa ibn Ja'far<br>موسی بن جعفر<hr>Abu al-Hassan I<br>أبو الحسن الأول\nal-Kazim\n----Yedinci Ali\n744–799\n----128–183\nLeader of the Shia community during the schism of Ismaili and other branches after the death of the former imam, Jafar al-Sadiq. He established the network of agents who collected khums in the Shia community of the Middle East and the Greater Khorasan.\nMedina, Saudi Arabia\nImprisoned and poisoned in Baghdad, Iraq on the order of Caliph Harun al-Rashid. Buried in the Kazimayn shrine in Baghdad.\n8\nAli ibn Musa<br>علي بن موسی<hr>\nal-Rida, Reza\n----Sekizinci Ali\n765–817\n----148–203\nMade crown-prince by Caliph Al-Ma'mun, and famous for his discussions with both Muslim and non-Muslim religious scholars.\nMedina, Saudi Arabia\nAccording to Shia sources, he was poisoned in Mashad, Iran on the order of Caliph Al-Ma'mun. Buried in the Imam Reza shrine in Mashad.\n9\nMuhammad ibn Ali<br>محمد بن علي<hr>Abu Ja'far<br>أبو جعفر\nal-Taqi, al-Jawad\n----Dokuzuncu Ali\n810–835\n----195–220\nFamous for his generosity and piety in the face of persecution by the Abbasid caliphate.\nMedina, Saudi Arabia\nPoisoned by his wife, Al-Ma'mun's daughter, in Baghdad, Iraq on the order of Caliph Al-Mu'tasim. Buried in the Kazmain shrine in Baghdad.\n10\nAli ibn Muhammad<br>علي بن محمد<hr>Abu al-Hassan III<br>أبو الحسن الثالث\nal-Hadi, al-Naqi\n----Onuncu Ali\n827–868\n----212–254\nStrengthened the network of deputies in the Shia community. He sent them instructions, and received in turn financial contributions of the faithful from the khums and religious vows.\nSurayya, a village near Medina, Saudi Arabia\nAccording to Shia sources, he was poisoned in Samarra, Iraq on the order of Caliph Al-Mu'tazz. Buried in the Al Askari Mosque in Samarra.\n11\nHassan ibn Ali<br>الحسن بن علي<hr>Abu Muhammad<br>أبو محمد\nal-Askari\n----Onbirinci Ali\n846–874\n----232–260\nFor most of his life, the Abbasid Caliph, Al-Mu'tamid, placed restrictions on him after the death of his father. Repression of the Shi'ite population was particularly high at the time due to their large size and growing power.\nMedina, Saudi Arabia\nAccording to Shia, he was poisoned on the order of Caliph Al-Mu'tamid in Samarra, Iraq. Buried in Al Askari Mosque in Samarra.\n12\nMuhammad ibn al-Hassan<br>محمد بن الحسن<hr>Abu al-Qasim<br>أبو القاسم\nal-Mahdi, Hidden Imam, al-Hujjah\n----Onikinci Ali\n868–unknown\n----255–unknown\nAccording to Twelver doctrine, he is the current imam and the promised Mahdi, a messianic figure who will return with Jesus. He will reestablish the rightful governance of Islam and replete the earth with justice and peace.\nSamarra, Iraq\nAccording to Shia doctrine, he has been living in the Occultation since 872, and will continue as long as God wills it.\n\nFatimah, also Fatimah al-Zahraa, daughter of Muhammed (615–632), is also considered infallible but not an Imam. The Shi'a believe that the last Imam, the 12th Imam Mahdi will one day emerge on Qiyamah.\n\nSee Imamah (Ismaili doctrine) and List of Ismaili imams for Ismaili imams.\n\nSee details under Zaidiyyah, Islamic history of Yemen and Imams of Yemen.\n\nAt times, imams have held both secular and religious authority. This was the case in Oman among the Kharijite or Ibadi sects. At times, the imams were elected. At other times the position was inherited, as with the Yaruba dynasty from 1624 and 1742. See List of rulers of Oman, the Rustamid dynasty: 776–909, Nabhani dynasty: 1154–1624, the Yaruba dynasty: 1624–1742, the Al Said: 1744–present for further information. The Imamate of Futa Jallon (1727-1896) was a Fulani state in West Africa where secular power alternated between two lines of hereditary Imams, or \"almami\".\nIn the Zaidi Shiite sect, imams were secular as well as spiritual leaders who held power in Yemen for more than a thousand years. In 897, a Zaidi ruler, al-Hadi ila'l-Haqq Yahya, founded a line of such imams, a theocratic form of government which survived until the second half of the 20th century. (See details under Zaidiyyah, History of Yemen, Imams of Yemen.)\n\nRuhollah Khomeini is officially referred to as Imam in Iran. Several Iranian places and institutions are named \"Imam Khomeini\", including a city, an international airport, a hospital, and a university.\n\nBULLET::::- Mufti\nBULLET::::- Women as imams\nBULLET::::- Imamate\nBULLET::::- Imam of Friday Prayer\n\n\nBULLET::::- Al-Islam Official website\n"}
{"id": "15242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15242", "title": "Instrument flight rules", "text": "Instrument flight rules\n\nInstrument flight rules (IFR) is one of two sets of regulations governing all aspects of civil aviation aircraft operations; the other is visual flight rules (VFR).\n\nThe U.S. Federal Aviation Administration's (FAA) \"Instrument Flying Handbook\" defines IFR as: \"Rules and regulations established by the FAA to govern flight under conditions in which flight by outside visual reference is not safe. IFR flight depends upon flying by reference to instruments in the flight deck, and navigation is accomplished by reference to electronic signals.\" It is also a term used by pilots and controllers to indicate the type of flight plan an aircraft is flying, such as an IFR or VFR flight plan.\n\nIt is possible and fairly straightforward, in relatively clear weather conditions, to fly a plane solely by reference to outside visual cues, such as the horizon to maintain orientation, nearby buildings and terrain features for navigation, and other aircraft to maintain separation. This is known as operating the aircraft under visual flight rules (VFR), and is the most common mode of operation for small aircraft. However, it is safe to fly VFR only when these outside references can be clearly seen from a sufficient distance; when flying through or above clouds, or in fog, rain, dust or similar low-level weather conditions, these references can be obscured. Thus, cloud ceiling and flight visibility are the most important variables for safe operations during all phases of flight.<ref name='NASA/CR-2000-210288'> \n</ref> The minimum weather conditions for ceiling and visibility for VFR flights are defined in FAR Part 91.155, and vary depending on the type of airspace in which the aircraft is operating, and on whether the flight is conducted during daytime or nighttime. However, typical daytime VFR minimums for most airspace is 3 statute miles of flight visibility and a distance from clouds of 500 feet below, 1,000 feet above, and 2,000 feet horizontally. Flight conditions reported as equal to or greater than these VFR minimums are referred to as visual meteorological conditions (VMC).\n\nAny aircraft operating under VFR must have the required equipment on board, as described in FAR Part 91.205 (which includes some instruments necessary for IFR flight). VFR pilots \"may\" use cockpit instruments as secondary aids to navigation and orientation, but are not required to; the view outside of the aircraft is the primary source for keeping the aircraft straight and level (orientation), flying to the intended destination (navigation), and not hitting anything (separation).\n\nVisual flight rules are generally simpler than instrument flight rules, and require significantly less training and practice. VFR provides a great degree of freedom, allowing pilots to go where they want, when they want, and allows them a much wider latitude in determining how they get there.\n\nWhen operation of an aircraft under VFR is not safe, because the visual cues outside the aircraft are obscured by weather, instrument flight rules must be used instead. IFR permits an aircraft to operate in instrument meteorological conditions (IMC), which is essentially any weather condition less than VMC but in which aircraft can still operate safely. Use of instrument flight rules is also required when flying in \"Class A\" airspace regardless of weather conditions. Class A airspace extends from 18,000 feet above mean sea level to flight level 600 (60,000 feet pressure altitude) above the contiguous 48 United States and overlying the waters within 12 miles thereof. Flight in Class A airspace requires pilots and aircraft to be instrument equipped and rated and to be operating under Instrument Flight Rules (IFR). In many countries commercial airliners and their pilots must operate under IFR as the majority of flights enter Class A airspace. Procedures and training are significantly more complex compared to VFR instruction, as a pilot must demonstrate competency in conducting an entire cross-country flight solely by reference to instruments.\n\nInstrument pilots must meticulously evaluate weather, create a detailed flight plan based around specific instrument departure, en route, and arrival procedures, and dispatch the flight.\n\nThe distance by which an aircraft avoids obstacles or other aircraft is termed \"separation\". The most important concept of IFR flying is that separation is maintained regardless of weather conditions. In controlled airspace, air traffic control (ATC) separates IFR aircraft from obstacles and other aircraft using a flight \"clearance\" based on route, time, distance, speed, and altitude. ATC monitors IFR flights on radar, or through aircraft position reports in areas where radar coverage is not available. Aircraft position reports are sent as voice radio transmissions. In the United States, a flight operating under IFR is required to provide position reports unless ATC advises a pilot that the plane is in radar contact. The pilot must resume position reports after ATC advises that radar contact has been lost, or that radar services are terminated.\n\nIFR flights in controlled airspace require an ATC \"clearance\" for each part of the flight. A clearance always specifies a \"clearance limit\", which is the farthest the aircraft can fly without a new clearance. In addition, a clearance typically provides a heading or route to follow, altitude, and communication parameters, such as frequencies and transponder codes.\n\nIn uncontrolled airspace, ATC clearances are unavailable. In some states a form of separation is provided to certain aircraft in uncontrolled airspace as far as is practical (often known under ICAO as an advisory service in class G airspace), but separation is not mandated nor widely provided.\n\nDespite the protection offered by flight in controlled airspace under IFR, the ultimate responsibility for the safety of the aircraft rests with the pilot in command, who can refuse clearances.\n\nIt is essential to differentiate between flight plan type (VFR or IFR) and weather conditions (VMC or IMC). While current and forecast weather may be a factor in deciding which type of flight plan to file, weather conditions themselves do not affect one's filed flight plan. For example, an IFR flight that encounters visual meteorological conditions (VMC) en route does not automatically change to a VFR flight, and the flight must still follow all IFR procedures regardless of weather conditions. In the US, weather conditions are forecast broadly as VFR, MVFR (Marginal Visual Flight Rules), IFR, or LIFR (Low Instrument Flight Rules).\n\nThe main purpose of IFR is the safe operation of aircraft in instrument meteorological conditions (IMC). The weather is considered to be MVFR or IMC when it does not meet the minimum requirements for visual meteorological conditions (VMC). To operate safely in IMC (\"actual instrument conditions\"), a pilot controls the aircraft relying on flight instruments and ATC provides separation.\n\nIt is important not to confuse IFR with IMC. A significant amount of IFR flying is conducted in Visual Meteorological Conditions (VMC). Anytime a flight is operating in VMC and in a volume of airspace in which VFR traffic can operate, the crew is responsible for seeing and avoiding VFR traffic; however, because the flight is conducted under Instrument Flight Rules, ATC still provides separation services from other IFR traffic, and can in many cases also advise the crew of the location of VFR traffic near the flight path.\n\nAlthough dangerous and illegal, a certain amount of VFR flying is conducted in IMC. A scenario is a VFR pilot taking off in VMC conditions, but encountering deteriorating visibility while en route. Continued VFR flight into IMC can lead to spatial disorientation of the pilot which is the cause of a significant number of general aviation crashes. VFR flight into IMC is distinct from \"VFR-on-top\", an IFR procedure in which the aircraft operates in VMC using a hybrid of VFR and IFR rules, and \"VFR over the top\", a VFR procedure in which the aircraft takes off and lands in VMC but flies above an intervening area of IMC. Also possible in many countries is \"Special VFR\" flight, where an aircraft is explicitly granted permission to operate VFR within the controlled airspace of an airport in conditions technically less than VMC; the pilot asserts they have the necessary visibility to fly despite the weather, must stay in contact with ATC, and cannot leave controlled airspace while still below VMC minimums.\n\nDuring flight under IFR, there are no visibility requirements, so flying through clouds (or other conditions where there is zero visibility outside the aircraft) is legal and safe. However, there are still minimum weather conditions that must be present in order for the aircraft to take off or to land; these vary according to the kind of operation, the type of navigation aids available, the location and height of terrain and obstructions in the vicinity of the airport, equipment on the aircraft, and the qualifications of the crew. For example, Reno-Tahoe International Airport (KRNO) in a mountainous region has significantly different instrument approaches for aircraft landing on the same runway surface, but from opposite directions. Aircraft approaching from the north must make visual contact with the airport at a higher altitude than when approaching from the south because of rapidly rising terrain south of the airport. This higher altitude allows a flight crew to clear the obstacle if a landing is aborted. In general, each specific instrument approach specifies the minimum weather conditions to permit landing.\n\nAlthough large airliners, and increasingly, smaller aircraft, carry their own terrain awareness and warning system (TAWS), these are primarily backup systems providing a last layer of defense if a sequence of errors or omissions causes a dangerous situation.\n\nBecause IFR flights often take place without visual reference to the ground, a means of navigation other than looking outside the window is required. A number of navigational aids are available to pilots, including ground-based systems such as DME/VORs and NDBs as well as the satellite-based GPS/GNSS system. Air traffic control may assist in navigation by assigning pilots specific headings (\"radar vectors\"). The majority of IFR navigation is given by ground- and satellite-based systems, while radar vectors are usually reserved by ATC for sequencing aircraft for a busy approach or transitioning aircraft from takeoff to cruise, among other things.\n\nAutopilot allows automatic piloting.\n\nModern flight management systems have evolved to allow a crew to plan a flight as to route and altitude and to specific time of arrival at specific locations. This capability is used in several trial projects experimenting with \"four-dimensional\" approach clearances for commercial aircraft, with time as the fourth dimension. These clearances allow ATC to optimize the arrival of aircraft at major airports, which increases airport capacity and uses less fuel providing monetary and environmental benefits to airlines and the public.\n\nBULLET::::- Required navigation performance (RNP)\nBULLET::::- ADS-B\n\nSpecific procedures allow IFR aircraft to transition safely through every stage of flight. These procedures specify how an IFR pilot should respond, even in the event of a complete radio failure, and loss of communications with ATC, including the expected aircraft course and altitude.\n\nDepartures are described in an IFR clearance issued by ATC prior to takeoff. The departure clearance may contain an assigned heading, one or more waypoints, and an initial altitude to fly. The clearance can also specify a departure procedure (DP) or standard instrument departure (SID) that should be followed unless \"NO DP\" is specified in the notes section of the filed flight plan.\n\nHere is an example of an IFR clearance for a Cessna aircraft traveling from Palo Alto airport (KPAO) to Stockton airport (KSCK).\n\nDetailed explanation:\n\nBULLET::::- \"Cessna 21756\": Verifies that only this specific aircraft is cleared.\n\nBULLET::::- \"cleared to Stockton Airport\": Clearance Limit: the farthest destination the aircraft is allowed to go under IFR (in most cases it is the destination airport).\n\nBULLET::::- \"via turn right heading zero-six-zero within one mile of the airport.\": The pilot is expected to execute the right turn to 060° magnetic heading without further ATC prompting within one mile of the departure airport.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Radar vectors San Jose\": The departure controller will provide directional guidance to the San Jose VOR.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Then as filed.\": After arriving at the San Jose VOR, the pilot will likely resume navigation without ATC prompts along the airways and intersections that were filed in their flight plan.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Maintain three thousand ...\": After takeoff, climb to an indicated altitude of 3000 feet above sea level.\n\nBULLET::::- \"... expect five thousand five minutes after departure.\": The next altitude assignment is probably going to be 5000 feet above sea level. However, pilots must follow actual ATC altitude assignments throughout the flight. This portion of the clearance provides a backup if communications are lost, allowing the flight to continue and climb to 5000 feet.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Departure frequency is one two one decimal three.\": After the aircraft is airborne and the tower controller tells the pilot to \"contact departure\", pilots are to contact the departure controller on this communication frequency.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Squawk four two six three.\": The pilot should set the aircraft's transponder code to 4263 so that ATC can positively identify the flight on radar.\n\nThe clearance scheme, used by ATC, can be easily remembered using the acronym\nBULLET::::- \"CRAFT\":Clearance Limit - Route - Altitudes - Frequencies - Transponder (Squawk)\n\nEn route flight is described by IFR charts showing navigation aids, fixes, and standard routes called \"airways\". Aircraft with appropriate navigational equipment such as GPS, are also often cleared for a \"direct-to\" routing, where only the destination, or a few navigational waypoints are used to describe the route that the flight will follow. ATC will assign altitudes in its initial clearance or amendments thereto, and navigational charts indicate minimum safe altitudes for airways.\n\nThe approach portion of an IFR flight may begin with a standard terminal arrival route (STAR), describing common routes to fly to arrive at an initial approach fix (IAF) from which an instrument approach commences. \nAn instrument approach terminates either by the pilot acquiring sufficient visual reference to proceed to the runway, or with a missed approach because the required visual reference is not seen in time.\n\nTo fly under IFR, a pilot must have an instrument rating and must be \"current\" (meet recency of experience requirements).\nIn the United States, to file and fly under IFR, a pilot must be instrument-rated and, within the preceding six months, have flown six instrument approaches, as well as holding procedures and course interception and tracking with navaids. Flight under IFR beyond six months after meeting these requirements is not permitted; however, currency may be reestablished within the next six months by completing the requirements above. Beyond the twelfth month, examination (\"instrument proficiency check\") by an instructor is required.\n\nPracticing instrument approaches can be done either in the instrument meteorological conditions or in visual meteorological conditions – in the latter case, a safety pilot is required so that the pilot practicing instrument approaches can wear a view-limiting device which restricts his field of view to the instrument panel. A safety pilot's primary duty is to observe and avoid other traffic.\n\nFor all ILS Cat II or Cat III approaches, additional crew training is required and a certain number of low visibility approaches must either be performed or simulated within a fixed time for pilots to be 'current' in performing them.\n\nIn the UK, an IR (UK restricted) - formerly the \"IMC rating\" - which permits flight under IFR in airspace classes B to G in instrument meteorological conditions, a non-instrument-rated pilot can also elect to fly under IFR in visual meteorological conditions outside controlled airspace. Compared to the rest of the world, the UK's flight crew licensing regime is somewhat unusual in its licensing for meteorological conditions and airspace, rather than flight rules.\n\nThe aircraft must be equipped and type-certified for instrument flight, and the related navigational equipment must have been inspected or tested within a specific period of time prior to the instrument flight.\n\nIn the United States, instruments required for IFR flight in addition to those that are required for VFR flight are: heading indicator, sensitive altimeter adjustable for barometric pressure, clock with a sweep-second pointer or digital equivalent, attitude indicator, radios and suitable avionics for the route to be flown, alternator or generator, gyroscopic rate-of-turn indicator that is either a turn coordinator or the turn and bank indicator. From 1999 single-engine helicopters could not be FAA-certified for IFR.\n\nBULLET::::- Acronyms and abbreviations in avionics\nBULLET::::- Airspace class\nBULLET::::- Approach plate\nBULLET::::- Autoland\nBULLET::::- Bárány chair\nBULLET::::- Distance measuring equipment\nBULLET::::- Flight instruments\nBULLET::::- Global Positioning System (GPS)\nBULLET::::- Helmet fire\nBULLET::::- Instrument landing system\nBULLET::::- Non-directional beacon\nBULLET::::- Transponder landing system\nBULLET::::- VHF omnidirectional range\n\nBULLET::::- FAA website\nBULLET::::- \"Instrument Procedures Handbook, 2015\" (FAA-H-8083-16A)\nBULLET::::- Hear audio of a US instrument rating checkride - Part 1\nBULLET::::- \"Blind Flying, January 1933, Popular Mechanics details on blind flying for that era\nBULLET::::- \"ATC Communication, A complete pilot-to-ATC communication reference\n"}
{"id": "15245", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15245", "title": "Ismail Khan", "text": "Ismail Khan\n\nMohammad Ismail Khan (PersianPashto: محمد اسماعیل خان) (born 1946) is a politician in Afghanistan, who served as Minister of Water and Energy from 2005 to 2013. He was previously the Governor of Herat Province. He is widely known as a warlord because of his rise to power during the Soviet–Afghan War when he controlled a large sized mujahideen force, mainly his fellow Tajiks from western Afghanistan. He is a key member of the political party Jamiat-e Islami and was a member of the now defunct United National Front party.\n\nKhan was born in or about 1946 in the Shindand District of Herat Province in Afghanistan. His family are Tajiks from the Chahar-Mahal neighbourhood of Shindand.\n\nIn early 1979 Ismail Khan was a Captain in the Afghan National Army based in the western city of Herat. In early March of that year, there was a protest in front of the Communist governor's palace against the arrests and assassinations being carried out in the countryside. The governor's troops opened fire on the demonstrators, who proceeded to storm the palace and hunt down Soviet advisers. The Herat garrison mutinied and joined the revolt, with Ismail Khan and other officers distributing all available weapons to the insurgents. Hundreds of civil workers and people not dressed in traditional Muslim clothes were murdered. A garrison of Soviet advisors was overtaken and all of its inhabitants: Soviet advisors along with their wives and children were massacred. The mob put severed heads of the victims on sticks and paraded them through the city of Herat. The government led by Nur Mohammed Taraki responded, pulverizing the city using Soviet supplied bombers and killing an estimated 24,000 citizens in less than a week. This event marked the opening salvo of the rebellion which led to the Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan in December 1979. Ismail Khan escaped to the countryside where he began to assemble a local rebel force.\n\nDuring the ensuing war, he became the leader of the western command of Burhanuddin Rabbani's Jamiat-e-Islami, political party associated with neighboring Pakistan's Jamaat-e-Islami. With Ahmad Shah Massoud, he was one of the most respected mujahideen leaders. In 1992, two years after the Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan, the mujahideen captured Herat and Ismail Khan became Governor.\n\nIn 1995, he successfully defended his province against the Taliban, in cooperation with defense minister Ahmad Shah Massoud. Khan even tried to attack the Taliban stronghold of Kandahar, but was repulsed. Later in September, an ally of the Jamiat, Uzbek General Abdul Rashid Dostum changed sides, and attacked Herat. Ismail Khan was forced to flee to neighboring Iran with 8,000 men and the Taliban took over Herat Province.\n\nTwo years later, while organizing opposition to the Taliban in Faryab area, he was betrayed and captured by Abdul Majid Rouzi who had defected to the Taliban along with Abdul Malik Pahlawan, then one of Dostum's deputies. Then in March 1999 he escaped from Kandahar prison. During the U.S. intervention in Afghanistan, he fought against the Taliban within the United Islamic Front for the Salvation of Afghanistan (Northern Alliance) and thus regained his position as Governor of Herat after they were victorious in December 2001.\n\nAfter returning to Herat, Ismail Khan quickly consolidated his control over the region. He took over control of the city from the local ulema and quickly established control over the trade route between Herat and Iran, a large source of revenue. As Emir of Herat, Ismail Khan exercised great autonomy, providing social welfare for Heratis, expanding his power into neighbouring provinces, and maintaining direct international contacts. Although hated by the educated in Herat and often accused of human rights abuses, Ismail Khan's regime provided security, paid government employees, and made investments in public services. However, during his tenure as governor, Ismail Khan was accused of ruling his province like a private fiefdom, leading to increasing tensions with the Afghan Transitional Administration. In particular, he refused to pass on to the government the revenues gained from custom taxes on goods from Iran and Turkmenistan.\n\nOn 13 August 2003, President Karzai removed Governor Ismail Khan from his command of the 4th Corps. This was announced as part of a programme removing the ability of officials to hold both civilian and military posts.\n\nIsmail Khan was ultimately removed from power in March 2004 due to pressure by neighbouring warlords and the central Afghan government. Various sources have presented different versions of the story, and the exact dynamics cannot be known with certainty. What is known is that Ismail Khan found himself at odds with a few regional commanders who, although theoretically his subordinates, attempted to remove him from power. Ismail Khan claims that these efforts began with a botched assassination attempt. Afterwards, these commanders moved their forces near Herat. Ismail Khan, unpopular with the Herati military class, was slow to mobilise his forces, perhaps waiting for the threat to Herat to become existential as a means to motivate his forces. However, the conflict was stopped with the intervention of International Security Assistance Force forces and soldiers of the Afghan National Army, freezing the conflict in its tracks. Ismail Khan's forces even fought skirmishes with the Afghan National Army, in which his son, Mirwais Sadiq was killed. Because Ismail Khan was contained by the Afghan National Army, the warlords who opposed him were quickly able to occupy strategic locations unopposed. Ismail Khan was forced to give up his governorship and to go to Kabul, where he served in Hamid Karzai's cabinet as the Minister of Energy.\n\nIn 2005 Ismail Khan became the Minister of Water and Energy.\n\nIn late 2012, the Government of Afghanistan accused Ismail Khan of illegally distributing weapons to his supporters. About 40 members of the country's Parliament requested Ismail Khan to answer their queries. The government believes that Khan is attempting to create some kind of disruption in the country.\n\nOn September 27, 2009, Ismail Khan survived a suicide blast that killed 4 of his bodyguards in Herat, in western Afghanistan. He was driving to Herat Airport when a powerful explosion occurred on the way there. Taliban spokesman, Zabiullah Mujahid, claimed responsibility and said the target was Khan.\n\nGuantanamo captive Abdul Razzaq Hekmati requested Ismail Khan's testimony, when he was called before a Combatant Status Review Tribunal. \nIsmail Khan, like Afghan Minister of Defense Rahim Wardak, was one of the high-profile Afghans that those conducting the Tribunals ruled were \"not reasonably available\" to give a statement on a captive's behalf because they could not be located.\n\nHekmati had played a key role in helping Ismail Khan escape from the Taliban in 1999.\nHekmati stood accused of helping Taliban leaders escape from the custody of Hamid Karzai's government.\n\nCarlotta Gall and Andy Worthington interviewed Ismail Khan for a new \"The New York Times\" article after Hekmati died of cancer in Guantanamo. \nAccording to the \"New York Times\"\nIsmail Khan said he personally buttonholed the American ambassador to tell him that Hekmati was innocent, and should be released. In contrast, Hekmati was told that the State Department had been unable to locate Khan.\n\nIsmail Khan is a controversial figure. Reporters Without Borders has charged him with muzzling the press and ordering attacks on journalists. Also Human Rights Watch has accused him of human rights abuses.\n\nNevertheless, he remains a popular figure for some in Afghanistan. Unlike other mujahideen commanders, Khan has not been linked to large-scale massacres and atrocities such as those committed after the capture of Kabul in 1992. Following news of his dismissal, rioting broke out in the streets of Herat, and President Karzai had to ask him to make a personal appeal for calm.\n\nBULLET::::- Official site of Amir Mohammad Ismail\nBULLET::::- BBC Profile: Ismail Khan\nBULLET::::- GlobalSecurity.org - General Mohammad Ismail Khan\n"}
{"id": "15250", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15250", "title": "Indigo", "text": "Indigo\n\nIndigo is a deep and rich color close to the color wheel blue (a primary color in the RGB color space), as well as to some variants of ultramarine. It is traditionally regarded as a color in the visible spectrum, as well as one of the seven colors of the rainbow: the color between violet and blue; however, sources differ as to its actual position in the electromagnetic spectrum.\n\nThe color indigo is named after the indigo dye derived from the plant \"Indigofera tinctoria\" and related species.\n\nThe first known recorded use of indigo as a color name in English was in 1289.\n\nSpecies of \"Indigofera\" were cultivated in East Asia, Egypt, India, and Peru in antiquity. The earliest direct evidence for the use of indigo dates to around 4000 BC and comes from Huaca Prieta, in contemporary Peru. Pliny the Elder mentions India as the source of the dye after which it was named. It was imported from there in small quantities via the Silk Road.\n\nThe Ancient Greek term for the dye was (\"Indian dye\"), which, adopted to Latin as \"indicum\" and via Portuguese gave rise to the modern word \"indigo\". \n\nSpanish explorers discovered an American species of indigo and began to cultivate the product in Guatemala. The English and French subsequently began to encourage indigo cultivation in their colonies in the West Indies.\n\nBlue dye can be made from two different types of plants: the indigo plant, which produces the best results, and from the woad plant \"Isatis tinctoria\", also known as pastel. For a long time woad was the main source of blue dye in Europe. Woad was replaced by true indigo as trade routes opened up, and both plant sources have now been largely replaced by synthetic dyes.\n\nThe Early Modern English word \"indigo\" referred to the dye, not to the color (hue) itself, and \"indigo\" is not traditionally part of the basic color-naming system. Modern sources place indigo in the electromagnetic spectrum between 420 and 450 nanometers, which lies on the short-wave side of color wheel (RGB) blue, towards (spectral) violet.\n\nHowever, the correspondence of this definition with colors of actual indigo dyes is disputed. Optical scientists Hardy and Perrin list indigo as between 445 and 464 nm wavelength, which occupies a spectrum segment from roughly the color wheel (RGB) blue extending to the long-wave side, towards azure.\n\nIsaac Newton introduced indigo as one of the seven base colors of his work. In the mid-1660s, when Newton bought a pair of prisms at a fair near Cambridge, the East India Company had begun importing indigo dye into England, supplanting the homegrown woad as source of blue dye. In a pivotal experiment in the history of optics, the young Newton shone a narrow beam of sunlight through a prism to produce a rainbow-like band of colors on the wall. In describing this optical spectrum, Newton acknowledged that the spectrum had a continuum of colors, but named seven: \"The originall or primary colours are Red, yellow, Green, Blew, & a violet purple; together with Orang, Indico, & an indefinite varietie of intermediate gradations.\" He linked the seven prismatic colors to the seven notes of a western major scale, as shown in his color wheel, with orange and indigo as the semitones. Having decided upon seven colors, he asked a friend to repeatedly divide up the spectrum that was projected from the prism onto the wall:\n\nI desired a friend to draw with a pencil lines cross the image, or pillar of colours, where every one of the seven aforenamed colours was most full and brisk, and also where he judged the truest confines of them to be, whilst I held the paper so, that the said image might fall within a certain compass marked on it. And this I did, partly because my own eyes are not very critical in distinguishing colours, partly because another, to whom I had not communicated my thoughts about this matter, could have nothing but his eyes to determine his fancy in making those marks.\n\nIndigo is therefore counted as one of the traditional colors of the rainbow, the order of which is given by the mnemonic \"Roy G. Biv\". James Clerk Maxwell and Hermann von Helmholtz accepted indigo as an appropriate name for the color flanking violet in the spectrum.\n\nLater scientists conclude that Newton named the colors differently from current usage.\nAccording to Gary Waldman, \"A careful reading of Newton's work indicates that the color he called indigo, we would normally call blue; his blue is then what we would name blue-green, cyan or light blue.\" If this is true, Newton's seven spectral colors would have been:\nRed: Orange: Yellow: Green: Blue: Indigo: Violet:\n\nThe human eye does not readily differentiate hues in the wavelengths between what we today call blue and violet. If this is where Newton meant indigo to lie, most individuals would have difficulty distinguishing indigo from its neighbors. According to Isaac Asimov, \"It is customary to list indigo as a color lying between blue and violet, but it has never seemed to me that indigo is worth the dignity of being considered a separate color. To my eyes it seems merely deep blue.\"\n\nModern color scientists typically divide the spectrum between violet and blue at about 450 nm, with no indigo.\n\nLike many other colors (orange, rose, and violet are the best-known), indigo gets its name from an object in the natural world—the plant named indigo once used for dyeing cloth (see also Indigo dye).\n\nThe color \"electric indigo\" is a bright and saturated color between the traditional indigo and violet. This is the brightest color indigo that can be approximated on a computer screen; it is a color located between the (primary) blue and the color violet of the RGB color wheel.\n\nThe web color \"blue violet\" or \"deep indigo\" is a tone of indigo brighter than pigment indigo, but not as bright as electric indigo.\n\nThe color \"pigment indigo\" is equivalent to the web color indigo and approximates the color indigo that is usually reproduced in pigments and colored pencils.\n\nThe color of indigo dye is a different color from either spectrum indigo or pigment indigo. This is the actual color of the dye. A vat full of this dye is a darker color, approximating the web color midnight blue.\n\nBelow are displayed these four major tones of indigo.\n\n\"Electric indigo\" is brighter than the pigment indigo reproduced below. When plotted on the CIE chromaticity diagram, this color is at 435 nanometers, in the middle of the portion of the spectrum traditionally considered indigo, i.e., between 450 and 420 nanometers. This color is only an approximation of spectral indigo, since actual spectral colors are outside the gamut of the sRGB color system.\nAt right is displayed the web color \"blue-violet\", a color intermediate in brightness between electric indigo and pigment indigo. It is also known as \"deep indigo\".\n\nThe color box at right displays the web color indigo, the color indigo as it would be reproduced by artists' paints as opposed to the brighter indigo above (electric indigo) that is possible to reproduce on a computer screen. Its hue is closer to violet than to indigo dye for which the color is named. Pigment indigo can be obtained by mixing 55% pigment cyan with about 45% pigment magenta.\n\nCompare the subtractive colors to the additive colors in the two primary color charts in the article on primary colors to see the distinction between electric colors as reproducible from light on a computer screen (additive colors) and the pigment colors reproducible with pigments (subtractive colors); the additive colors are significantly brighter because they are produced from light instead of pigment.\n\nWeb color indigo represents the way the color indigo was always reproduced in pigments, paints, or colored pencils in the 1950s. By the 1970s, because of the advent of psychedelic art, artists became accustomed to brighter pigments. Pigments called \"bright indigo\" or \"bright blue-violet\" (the pigment equivalent of the electric indigo reproduced in the section above) became available in artists' pigments and colored pencils.\n'Tropical Indigo' is the color that is called \"añil\" in the \"Guía de coloraciones\" (Guide to colorations) by Rosa Gallego and\nJuan Carlos Sanz, a color dictionary published in 2005 that is widely popular in the Hispanophone realm.\n\n\"Indigo dye\" is a greenish dark blue color.\n\nBULLET::::- Birds\nBULLET::::- Fungi\nBULLET::::- Snakes\n\nLiterature\n\nMarina Warner's novel \"Indigo\" (1992) is a retelling of Shakespeare's \"The Tempest\" and features the production of indigo dye by Sycorax.\n\nBULLET::::- IndiGo Airlines is an Indian budget airline that uses an indigo logo and operates only Airbus A320s.\nBULLET::::- Indigo Books and Music uses an indigo logo and has sometimes referred to the color as \"blue\" in advertising.\n\nBULLET::::- Electric indigo is sometimes used as a glow color for computer graphics lighting, possibly because it seems to change color from indigo to lavender when blended with white.\n\nBULLET::::- Guatemala, as of 1778, was considered one of the world's foremost providers of indigo.\nBULLET::::- In Mexico, indigo is known as \"añil\". After silver, and cochineal to produce red, \"añil\" was the most important product exported by historical Mexico.\nBULLET::::- The use of \"añil\" is survived in the Philippines, particularly in the Visayas and Mindanao. The powder dye is mixed with vinegar to be applied to the cheek of a person suffering from mumps.\n\nBULLET::::- Scientists discovered in 2008 that when a banana becomes ripe and ready to eat, it glows bright indigo under a black light. Some insects, as well as birds, see into the ultraviolet, because they are tetrachromats and can use this information to tell when a banana is ripe and ready to eat. The glow is the result of a chemical created as the green chlorophyll in the peel breaks down.\n\nThe French Army adopted dark blue indigo at the time of the French Revolution, as a replacement for the white uniforms previously worn by the Royal infantry regiments. In 1806, Napoleon decided to restore the white coats because of shortages of indigo dye imposed by the British continental blockade. However, the greater practicability of the blue color led to its retention, and indigo remained the dominant color of French military coats until 1914.\n\nThe spiritualist applications use electric indigo, because the color is positioned between blue and violet on the spectrum.\nBULLET::::- The color electric indigo is used in New Age philosophy to symbolically represent the sixth \"chakra\" (called \"Ajna\"), which is said to include the third eye. This \"chakra\" is believed to be related to intuition and gnosis (spiritual knowledge).\nBULLET::::- Alice A. Bailey used indigo as the \"second ray\", representing \"Love-Wisdom\", in her Seven Rays system classifying people into seven metaphysical psychological types.\nBULLET::::- Psychics often associate indigo paranormal auras with an interest in religion or with intense spirituality and intuition. Indigo children are said to have predominantly indigo auras. People with indigo auras are said to favor occupations such as computer analyst, animal caretaker, and counselor.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Baptisia\" (false indigo), a genus of flowering plants\nBULLET::::- Champaran Satyagraha, the first pacific rebellion of Mahatma Gandhi against the British Raj\nBULLET::::- \"Indigofera\", a genus of flowering plants\nBULLET::::- Indiglo, a brand name for a method of electroluminescence technology\nBULLET::::- Lists of colors\nBULLET::::- \"Persicaria tinctoria\", Japanese Indigo\nBULLET::::- Rainbow, indigo is usually the sixth listed color of the rainbow\nBULLET::::- Indigo dye, used in dyeing blue jeans their characteristic color\n"}
{"id": "15251", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15251", "title": "International Monetary Fund", "text": "International Monetary Fund\n\nThe International Monetary Fund (IMF), is an international organization headquartered in Washington, D.C., consisting of 189 countries working to foster global monetary cooperation, secure financial stability, facilitate international trade, promote high employment and sustainable economic growth, and reduce poverty around the world while periodically depending on World Bank for its resources. Formed in 1944 at the Bretton Woods Conference primarily by the ideas of Harry Dexter White and John Maynard Keynes, it came into formal existence in 1945 with 29 member countries and the goal of reconstructing the international payment system. It now plays a central role in the management of balance of payments difficulties and international financial crises. Countries contribute funds to a pool through a quota system from which countries experiencing balance of payments problems can borrow money. , the fund had XDR 477 billion (about US$667 billion).\n\nThrough the fund and other activities such as the gathering of statistics and analysis, surveillance of its members' economies, and the demand for particular policies, the IMF works to improve the economies of its member countries. The organization's objectives stated in the Articles of Agreement are: to promote international monetary co-operation, international trade, high employment, exchange-rate stability, sustainable economic growth, and making resources available to member countries in financial difficulty. IMF funds come from two major sources: quotas and loans. Quotas, which are pooled funds of member nations, generate most IMF funds. The size of a member's quota depends on its economic and financial importance in the world. Nations with larger economic importance have larger quotas. The quotas are increased periodically as a means of boosting the IMF's resources.\n\nThe current Managing Director (MD) and Chairwoman of the International Monetary Fund is Bulgarian Economist Kristalina Georgieva, who has held the post since 1 October 2019.\n\nGita Gopinath was appointed as Chief Economist of IMF from 1 October 2018. She received her PhD in economics from Princeton University. Prior to her IMF appointment she was economic adviser to the Chief Minister of Kerala, India.\n\nAccording to the IMF itself, it works to foster global growth and economic stability by providing policy advice and financing the members by working with developing nations helps them achieve macroeconomic stability and reduce poverty. The rationale for this is that private international capital markets function imperfectly and many countries have limited access to financial markets. Such market imperfections, together with balance-of-payments financing, provide the justification for official financing, without which many countries could only correct large external payment imbalances through measures with adverse economic consequences. The IMF provides alternate sources of financing.\n\nUpon the founding of the IMF, its three primary functions were: to oversee the fixed exchange rate arrangements between countries, thus helping national governments manage their exchange rates and allowing these governments to prioritize economic growth, and to provide short-term capital to aid the balance of payments. This assistance was meant to prevent the spread of international economic crises. The IMF was also intended to help mend the pieces of the international economy after the Great Depression and World War II. As well, to provide capital investments for economic growth and projects such as infrastructure.\n\nThe IMF's role was fundamentally altered by the floating exchange rates post-1971. It shifted to examining the economic policies of countries with IMF loan agreements to determine if a shortage of capital was due to economic fluctuations or economic policy. The IMF also researched what types of government policy would ensure economic recovery. A particular concern of the IMF was to prevent financial crisis, such as those in Mexico 1982, Brazil in 1987, East Asia in 1997–98 and Russia in 1998, from spreading and threatening the entire global financial and currency system. The challenge was to promote and implement policy that reduced the frequency of crises among the emerging market countries, especially the middle-income countries which are vulnerable to massive capital outflows. Rather than maintaining a position of oversight of only exchange rates, their function became one of surveillance of the overall macroeconomic performance of member countries. Their role became a lot more active because the IMF now manages economic policy rather than just exchange rates.\n\nIn addition, the IMF negotiates conditions on lending and loans under their policy of conditionality, which was established in the 1950s. Low-income countries can borrow on concessional terms, which means there is a period of time with no interest rates, through the Extended Credit Facility (ECF), the Standby Credit Facility (SCF) and the Rapid Credit Facility (RCF). Nonconcessional loans, which include interest rates, are provided mainly through Stand-By Arrangements (SBA), the Flexible Credit Line (FCL), the Precautionary and Liquidity Line (PLL), and the Extended Fund Facility. The IMF provides emergency assistance via the Rapid Financing Instrument (RFI) to members facing urgent balance-of-payments needs.\n\nThe IMF is mandated to oversee the international monetary and financial system and monitor the economic and financial policies of its member countries. This activity is known as surveillance and facilitates international co-operation. Since the demise of the Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates in the early 1970s, surveillance has evolved largely by way of changes in procedures rather than through the adoption of new obligations. The responsibilities changed from those of guardian to those of overseer of members' policies.\n\nThe Fund typically analyses the appropriateness of each member country's economic and financial policies for achieving orderly economic growth, and assesses the consequences of these policies for other countries and for the global economy.\n\nIn 1995 the International Monetary Fund began work on data dissemination standards with the view of guiding IMF member countries to disseminate their economic and financial data to the public. The International Monetary and Financial Committee (IMFC) endorsed the guidelines for the dissemination standards and they were split into two tiers: The General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) and the Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS).\n\nThe executive board approved the SDDS and GDDS in 1996 and 1997 respectively, and subsequent amendments were published in a revised \"Guide to the General Data Dissemination System\". The system is aimed primarily at statisticians and aims to improve many aspects of statistical systems in a country. It is also part of the World Bank Millennium Development Goals and Poverty Reduction Strategic Papers.\n\nThe primary objective of the GDDS is to encourage member countries to build a framework to improve data quality and statistical capacity building to evaluate statistical needs, set priorities in improving the timeliness, transparency, reliability and accessibility of financial and economic data. Some countries initially used the GDDS, but later upgraded to SDDS.\n\nSome entities that are not themselves IMF members also contribute statistical data to the systems:\nBULLET::::- Palestinian Authority – GDDS\nBULLET::::- Hong Kong – SDDS\nBULLET::::- Macau – GDDS\nBULLET::::- EU institutions:\nBULLET::::- the European Central Bank for the Eurozone – SDDS\nBULLET::::- Eurostat for the whole EU – SDDS, thus providing data from Cyprus (not using any DDSystem on its own) and Malta (using only GDDS on its own)\n\nIMF conditionality is a set of policies or conditions that the IMF requires in exchange for financial resources. The IMF does require collateral from countries for loans but also requires the government seeking assistance to correct its macroeconomic imbalances in the form of policy reform. If the conditions are not met, the funds are withheld. The concept of conditionality was introduced in a 1952 Executive Board decision and later incorporated into the Articles of Agreement.\n\nConditionality is associated with economic theory as well as an enforcement mechanism for repayment. Stemming primarily from the work of Jacques Polak, the theoretical underpinning of conditionality was the \"monetary approach to the balance of payments\".\n\nSome of the conditions for structural adjustment can include:\nBULLET::::- Cutting expenditures or raising revenues, also known as austerity.\nBULLET::::- Focusing economic output on direct export and resource extraction,\nBULLET::::- Devaluation of currencies,\nBULLET::::- Trade liberalisation, or lifting import and export restrictions,\nBULLET::::- Increasing the stability of investment (by supplementing foreign direct investment with the opening of domestic stock markets),\nBULLET::::- Balancing budgets and not overspending,\nBULLET::::- Removing price controls and state subsidies,\nBULLET::::- Privatization, or divestiture of all or part of state-owned enterprises,\nBULLET::::- Enhancing the rights of foreign investors vis-a-vis national laws,\nBULLET::::- Improving governance and fighting corruption.\n\nThese conditions are known as the Washington Consensus.\n\nThese loan conditions ensure that the borrowing country will be able to repay the IMF and that the country will not attempt to solve their balance-of-payment problems in a way that would negatively impact the international economy. The incentive problem of moral hazard—when economic agents maximise their own utility to the detriment of others because they do not bear the full consequences of their actions—is mitigated through conditions rather than providing collateral; countries in need of IMF loans do not generally possess internationally valuable collateral anyway.\n\nConditionality also reassures the IMF that the funds lent to them will be used for the purposes defined by the Articles of Agreement and provides safeguards that country will be able to rectify its macroeconomic and structural imbalances. In the judgment of the IMF, the adoption by the member of certain corrective measures or policies will allow it to repay the IMF, thereby ensuring that the resources will be available to support other members.\n\n, borrowing countries have had a very good track record for repaying credit extended under the IMF's regular lending facilities with full interest over the duration of the loan. This indicates that IMF lending does not impose a burden on creditor countries, as lending countries receive market-rate interest on most of their quota subscription, plus any of their own-currency subscriptions that are loaned out by the IMF, plus all of the reserve assets that they provide the IMF.\n\nThe IMF was originally laid out as a part of the Bretton Woods system exchange agreement in 1944. During the Great Depression, countries sharply raised barriers to trade in an attempt to improve their failing economies. This led to the devaluation of national currencies and a decline in world trade.\nThis breakdown in international monetary co-operation created a need for oversight. The representatives of 45 governments met at the Bretton Woods Conference in the Mount Washington Hotel in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, in the United States, to discuss a framework for postwar international economic co-operation and how to rebuild Europe.\n\nThere were two views on the role the IMF should assume as a global economic institution. American delegate Harry Dexter White foresaw an IMF that functioned more like a bank, making sure that borrowing states could repay their debts on time. Most of White's plan was incorporated into the final acts adopted at Bretton Woods. British economist John Maynard Keynes, on the other hand, imagined that the IMF would be a cooperative fund upon which member states could draw to maintain economic activity and employment through periodic crises. This view suggested an IMF that helped governments and to act as the United States government had during the New Deal to the great recession of the 1930s.\nThe IMF formally came into existence on 27 December 1945, when the first 29 countries ratified its Articles of Agreement. By the end of 1946 the IMF had grown to 39 members. On 1 March 1947, the IMF began its financial operations, and on 8 May France became the first country to borrow from it.\n\nThe IMF was one of the key organisations of the international economic system; its design allowed the system to balance the rebuilding of international capitalism with the maximisation of national economic sovereignty and human welfare, also known as embedded liberalism. The IMF's influence in the global economy steadily increased as it accumulated more members. The increase reflected in particular the attainment of political independence by many African countries and more recently the 1991 dissolution of the Soviet Union because most countries in the Soviet sphere of influence did not join the IMF.\n\nThe Bretton Woods exchange rate system prevailed until 1971, when the United States government suspended the convertibility of the US$ (and dollar reserves held by other governments) into gold. This is known as the Nixon Shock. The changes to the IMF articles of agreement reflecting these changes were ratified by the 1976 Jamaica Accords. Later in the 1970s, large commercial banks began lending to states because they were awash in cash deposited by oil exporters. The lending of the so-called money center banks led to the IMF changing its role in the 1980s after a world recession provoked a crisis that brought the IMF back into global financial governance.\n\nThe IMF provided two major lending packages in the early 2000s to Argentina (during the 1998–2002 Argentine great depression) and Uruguay (after the 2002 Uruguay banking crisis). However, by the mid-2000s, IMF lending was at its lowest share of world GDP since the 1970s.\n\nIn May 2010, the IMF participated, in 3:11 proportion, in the first Greek bailout that totalled €110 billion, to address the great accumulation of public debt, caused by continuing large public sector deficits. As part of the bailout, the Greek government agreed to adopt austerity measures that would reduce the deficit from 11% in 2009 to \"well below 3%\" in 2014. The bailout did not include debt restructuring measures such as a haircut, to the chagrin of the Swiss, Brazilian, Indian, Russian, and Argentinian Directors of the IMF, with the Greek authorities themselves (at the time, PM George Papandreou and Finance Minister Giorgos Papakonstantinou) ruling out a haircut.\n\nA second bailout package of more than €100 billion was agreed over the course of a few months from October 2011, during which time Papandreou was forced from office. The so-called Troika, of which the IMF is part, are joint managers of this programme, which was approved by the Executive Directors of the IMF on 15 March 2012 for XDR 23.8 billion and saw private bondholders take a haircut of upwards of 50%. In the interval between May 2010 and February 2012 the private banks of Holland, France and Germany reduced exposure to Greek debt from €122 billion to €66 billion.\n\n, the largest borrowers from the IMF in order were Greece, Portugal, Ireland, Romania, and Ukraine.\n\nOn 25 March 2013, a €10 billion international bailout of Cyprus was agreed by the Troika, at the cost to the Cypriots of its agreement: to close the country's second-largest bank; to impose a one-time bank deposit levy on Bank of Cyprus uninsured deposits. No insured deposit of €100k or less were to be affected under the terms of a novel bail-in scheme.\n\nThe topic of sovereign debt restructuring was taken up by the IMF in April 2013 for the first time since 2005, in a report entitled \"Sovereign Debt Restructuring: Recent Developments and Implications for the Fund's Legal and Policy Framework\". The paper, which was discussed by the board on 20 May, summarised the recent experiences in Greece, St Kitts and Nevis, Belize, and Jamaica. An explanatory interview with Deputy Director Hugh Bredenkamp was published a few days later, as was a deconstruction by Matina Stevis of the \"Wall Street Journal\".\n\nIn the October 2013 Fiscal Monitor publication, the IMF suggested that a capital levy capable of reducing Euro-area government debt ratios to \"end-2007 levels\" would require a very high tax rate of about 10%.\n\nThe Fiscal Affairs department of the IMF, headed at the time by Acting Director Sanjeev Gupta, produced a January 2014 report entitled \"Fiscal Policy and Income Inequality\" that stated that \"Some taxes levied on wealth, especially on immovable property, are also an option for economies seeking more progressive taxation ... Property taxes are equitable and efficient, but underutilized in many economies ... There is considerable scope to exploit this tax more fully, both as a revenue source and as a redistributive instrument.\"\n\nAt the end of March 2014, the IMF secured an $18 billion bailout fund for the provisional government of Ukraine in the aftermath of the 2014 Ukrainian revolution.\n\nNot all member countries of the IMF are sovereign states, and therefore not all \"member countries\" of the IMF are members of the United Nations. Amidst \"member countries\" of the IMF that are not member states of the UN are non-sovereign areas with special jurisdictions that are officially under the sovereignty of full UN member states, such as Aruba, Curaçao, Hong Kong, and Macau, as well as Kosovo. The corporate members appoint \"ex-officio\" voting members, who are listed below. All members of the IMF are also International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) members and vice versa.\n\nFormer members are Cuba (which left in 1964), and the Republic of China (Taiwan), which was ejected from the UN in 1980 after losing the support of then United States President Jimmy Carter and was replaced by the People's Republic of China. However, \"Taiwan Province of China\" is still listed in the official IMF indices.\n\nApart from Cuba, the other UN states that do not belong to the IMF are Andorra, Liechtenstein, Monaco and North Korea.\n\nThe former Czechoslovakia was expelled in 1954 for \"failing to provide required data\" and was readmitted in 1990, after the Velvet Revolution. Poland withdrew in 1950—allegedly pressured by the Soviet Union—but returned in 1986.\n\nAny country may apply to be a part of the IMF. Post-IMF formation, in the early postwar period, rules for IMF membership were left relatively loose. Members needed to make periodic membership payments towards their quota, to refrain from currency restrictions unless granted IMF permission, to abide by the Code of Conduct in the IMF Articles of Agreement, and to provide national economic information. However, stricter rules were imposed on governments that applied to the IMF for funding.\n\nThe countries that joined the IMF between 1945 and 1971 agreed to keep their exchange rates secured at rates that could be adjusted only to correct a \"fundamental disequilibrium\" in the balance of payments, and only with the IMF's agreement.\n\nMember countries of the IMF have access to information on the economic policies of all member countries, the opportunity to influence other members' economic policies, technical assistance in banking, fiscal affairs, and exchange matters, financial support in times of payment difficulties, and increased opportunities for trade and investment.\n\nThe Board of Governors consists of one governor and one alternate governor for each member country. Each member country appoints its two governors. The Board normally meets once a year and is responsible for electing or appointing executive directors to the Executive Board. While the Board of Governors is officially responsible for approving quota increases, special drawing right allocations, the admittance of new members, compulsory withdrawal of members, and amendments to the Articles of Agreement and By-Laws, in practice it has delegated most of its powers to the IMF's Executive Board.\n\nThe Board of Governors is advised by the International Monetary and Financial Committee and the Development Committee. The International Monetary and Financial Committee has 24 members and monitors developments in global liquidity and the transfer of resources to developing countries. The Development Committee has 25 members and advises on critical development issues and on financial resources required to promote economic development in developing countries. They also advise on trade and environmental issues.\n\nThe Board of Governors reports directly to the Managing Director of the IMF, Kristalina Georgieva.\n\n24 Executive Directors make up the Executive Board. The Executive Directors represent all 189 member countries in a geographically based roster. Countries with large economies have their own Executive Director, but most countries are grouped in constituencies representing four or more countries.\n\nFollowing the \"2008 Amendment on Voice and Participation\" which came into effect in March 2011, seven countries each appoint an Executive Director: the United States, Japan, China, Germany, France, the United Kingdom, and Saudi Arabia. The remaining 17 Directors represent constituencies consisting of 2 to 23 countries. This Board usually meets several times each week. The Board membership and constituency is scheduled for periodic review every eight years.\n! Country !! Region !! Number of Member(s) Represented !! Director !! Country with Most Votes\n\nThe IMF is led by a managing director, who is head of the staff and serves as Chairman of the Executive Board. The managing director is assisted by a First Deputy managing director and three other Deputy Managing Directors. Historically the IMF's managing director has been European and the president of the World Bank has been from the United States. However, this standard is increasingly being questioned and competition for these two posts may soon open up to include other qualified candidates from any part of the world. In August, 2019, the International Monetary Fund has removed the aged limit which is 65 or over for its managing director position.\n\nIn 2011 the world's largest developing countries, the BRIC nations, issued a statement declaring that the tradition of appointing a European as managing director undermined the legitimacy of the IMF and called for the appointment to be merit-based.\n\n! Nr\n! Dates\n! Name\n! Country of origin\n! Background\nPolitician, Economist, Lawyer, Economics Minister, Finance Minister\nIvar Rooth\nEconomist, Lawyer, Central Banker\nPer Jacobsson\nEconomist, Lawyer, Academic, League of Nations, BIS\nPierre-Paul Schweitzer\nLawyer, Businessman, Civil Servant, Central Banker\nPolitician, Economist, Academic, Finance Minister, Deputy Prime Minister, CPB\nJacques de Larosière\nBusinessman, Civil Servant, Central Banker\nEconomist, Civil Servant, Central Banker\nHorst Köhler\nPolitician, Economist, Civil Servant, EBRD, President\nRodrigo Rato\nPolitician, Businessman, Economics Minister, Finance Minister, Deputy Prime Minister\nPolitician, Economist, Lawyer, Businessman, Economics Minister, Finance Minister\nChristine Lagarde\nPolitician, Lawyer, Finance Minister\nPolitician, Economist\n\nPrevious managing director Dominique Strauss-Kahn was arrested in connection with charges of sexually assaulting a New York hotel room attendant and resigned on 18 May. The charges were later dropped. On 28 June 2011 Christine Lagarde was confirmed as managing director of the IMF for a five-year term starting on 5 July 2011. She was re-elected by consensus for a second five-year term, starting 5 July 2016, being the only candidate nominated for the post of Managing Director.\n\nVoting power in the IMF is based on a quota system. Each member has a number of basic votes (each member's number of basic votes equals 5.502% of the total votes), plus one additional vote for each special drawing right (SDR) of 100,000 of a member country's quota. The special drawing right is the unit of account of the IMF and represents a claim to currency. It is based on a basket of key international currencies. The basic votes generate a slight bias in favour of small countries, but the additional votes determined by SDR outweigh this bias. Changes in the voting shares require approval by a super-majority of 85% of voting power.\n\n!The table below shows quota and voting shares for the largest IMF members\nstyle=\"padding:0; border:none;\"\n!Rank!!IMF Member country!!Quota: millions of XDR!!Quota: percentage of the total!!Governor!! Alternate!! Number of votes!!Percentage out of total votes\n182,994.217.46Steven MnuchinJerome Powell831,40716.52\n230,820.56.48Taro AsoHaruhiko Kuroda309,6706.15\n330,482.96.41Zhou XiaochuanYi Gang306,2946.09\n426,634.45.60Jens WeidmannOlaf Scholz267,8095.32\n520,155.14.24Bruno Le MaireFrançois Villeroy de Galhau203,0164.03\n6 20,155.14.24Sajid JavidMark Carney203,0164.03\n715,070.03.17Giovanni TriaIgnazio Visco152,1653.02\n813,114.42.76Nirmala SitharamanShaktikanta Das132,6092.64\n912,903.72.71Anton SiluanovElvira S. Nabiullina130,5022.59\n1011,042.02.32Paulo GuedesRoberto Campos Neto111,8852.22\n1111,023.92.32Bill MorneauStephen Poloz111,7042.22\n129,992.62.10Ibrahim A. Al-AssafFahad Almubarak101,3912.02\n139,535.52.01Nadia CalviñoPablo Hernández de Cos96,8201.92\n148,912.71.87Arturo Herrera GutiérrezAlejandro Díaz de León90,5921.80\n158,736.51.84Klaas KnotHans Vijlbrief88,8301.77\n168,582.71.81Kim Dong-yeonLee Ju-yeol87,2921.73\n176,572.41.38Josh FrydenbergPhilip Gaetjens67,1891.34\n186,410.71.35Jan SmetsMarc Monbaliu65,5721.30\n195,771.11.21Thomas JordanEveline Widmer-Schlumpf59,1761.18\n204,648.40.98Perry WarjiyoMahendra Siregar47,9490.95\n\nIn December 2015, the United States Congress adopted a legislation authorising the 2010 Quota and Governance Reforms. As a result,\nBULLET::::- all 188 members' quotas will increase from a total of about XDR 238.5 billion to about XDR 477 billion, while the quota shares and voting power of the IMF's poorest member countries will be protected.\nBULLET::::- more than 6 percent of quota shares will shift to dynamic emerging market and developing countries and also from over-represented to under-represented members.\nBULLET::::- four emerging market countries (Brazil, China, India, and Russia) will be among the ten largest members of the IMF. Other top 10 members are the United States, Japan, Germany, France, the United Kingdom and Italy.\n\nThe IMF's quota system was created to raise funds for loans. Each IMF member country is assigned a quota, or contribution, that reflects the country's relative size in the global economy. Each member's quota also determines its relative voting power. Thus, financial contributions from member governments are linked to voting power in the organisation.\n\nThis system follows the logic of a shareholder-controlled organisation: wealthy countries have more say in the making and revision of rules. Since decision making at the IMF reflects each member's relative economic position in the world, wealthier countries that provide more money to the IMF have more influence than poorer members that contribute less; nonetheless, the IMF focuses on redistribution.\n\nQuotas are normally reviewed every five years and can be increased when deemed necessary by the Board of Governors. IMF voting shares are relatively inflexible: countries that grow economically have tended to become under-represented as their voting power lags behind. Currently, reforming the representation of developing countries within the IMF has been suggested. These countries' economies represent a large portion of the global economic system but this is not reflected in the IMF's decision making process through the nature of the quota system. Joseph Stiglitz argues, \"There is a need to provide more effective voice and representation for developing countries, which now represent a much larger portion of world economic activity since 1944, when the IMF was created.\" In 2008, a number of quota reforms were passed including shifting 6% of quota shares to dynamic emerging markets and developing countries.\n\nThe IMF's membership is divided along income lines: certain countries provide the financial resources while others use these resources. Both developed country \"creditors\" and developing country \"borrowers\" are members of the IMF. The developed countries provide the financial resources but rarely enter into IMF loan agreements; they are the creditors. Conversely, the developing countries use the lending services but contribute little to the pool of money available to lend because their quotas are smaller; they are the borrowers. Thus, tension is created around governance issues because these two groups, creditors and borrowers, have fundamentally different interests.\n\nThe criticism is that the system of voting power distribution through a quota system institutionalises borrower subordination and creditor dominance. The resulting division of the IMF's membership into borrowers and non-borrowers has increased the controversy around conditionality because the borrowers are interested in increasing loan access while creditors want to maintain reassurance that the loans will be repaid.\n\nA recent source revealed that the average overall use of IMF credit per decade increased, in real terms, by 21% between the 1970s and 1980s, and increased again by just over 22% from the 1980s to the 1991–2005 period. Another study has suggested that since 1950 the continent of Africa alone has received $300 billion from the IMF, the World Bank, and affiliate institutions.\n\nA study by Bumba Mukherjee found that developing democratic countries benefit more from IMF programs than developing autocratic countries because policy-making, and the process of deciding where loaned money is used, is more transparent within a democracy. One study done by Randall Stone found that although earlier studies found little impact of IMF programs on balance of payments, more recent studies using more sophisticated methods and larger samples \"usually found IMF programs improved the balance of payments\".\n\nThe Exceptional Access Framework was created in 2003 when John B. Taylor was Under Secretary of the US Treasury for International Affairs. The new Framework became fully operational in February 2003 and it was applied in the subsequent decisions on Argentina and Brazil. Its purpose was to place some sensible rules and limits on the way the IMF makes loans to support governments with debt problem—especially in emerging markets—and thereby move away from the bailout mentality of the 1990s. Such a reform was essential for ending the crisis atmosphere that then existed in emerging markets. The reform was closely related to, and put in place nearly simultaneously with, the actions of several emerging market countries to place collective action clauses in their bond contracts.\n\nIn 2010, the framework was abandoned so the IMF could make loans to Greece in an unsustainable and political situation.\n\nThe topic of sovereign debt restructuring was taken up by IMF staff in April 2013 for the first time since 2005, in a report entitled \"Sovereign Debt Restructuring: Recent Developments and Implications for the Fund's Legal and Policy Framework\". The paper, which was discussed by the board on 20 May, summarised the recent experiences in Greece, St Kitts and Nevis, Belize and Jamaica. An explanatory interview with Deputy Director Hugh Bredenkamp was published a few days later, as was a deconstruction by Matina Stevis of the \"Wall Street Journal\".\n\nThe staff was directed to formulate an updated policy, which was accomplished on 22 May 2014 with a report entitled \"The Fund's Lending Framework and Sovereign Debt: Preliminary Considerations\", and taken up by the Executive Board on 13 June. The staff proposed that \"in circumstances where a (Sovereign) member has lost market access and debt is considered sustainable ... the IMF would be able to provide Exceptional Access on the basis of a debt operation that involves an extension of maturities\", which was labelled a \"reprofiling operation\". These reprofiling operations would \"generally be less costly to the debtor and creditors—and thus to the system overall—relative to either an upfront debt reduction operation or a bail-out that is followed by debt reduction ... (and) would be envisaged only when both (a) a member has lost market access and (b) debt is assessed to be sustainable, but not with high probability ... Creditors will only agree if they understand that such an amendment is necessary to avoid a worse outcome: namely, a default and/or an operation involving debt reduction ... Collective action clauses, which now exist in most—but not all—bonds, would be relied upon to address collective action problems.\"\n\nGlobalization encompasses three institutions: global financial markets and transnational companies, national governments linked to each other in economic and military alliances led by the United States, and rising \"global governments\" such as World Trade Organization (WTO), IMF, and World Bank. Charles Derber argues in his book \"People Before Profit,\" \"These interacting institutions create a new global power system where sovereignty is globalized, taking power and constitutional authority away from nations and giving it to global markets and international bodies\". Titus Alexander argues that this system institutionalises global inequality between western countries and the Majority World in a form of global apartheid, in which the IMF is a key pillar.\n\nThe establishment of globalised economic institutions has been both a symptom of and a stimulus for globalisation. The development of the World Bank, the IMF regional development banks such as the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), and multilateral trade institutions such as the WTO signals a move away from the dominance of the state as the primary actor analysed in international affairs. Globalization has thus been transformative in terms of a reconceptualising of state sovereignty.\n\nFollowing United States President Bill Clinton's administration's aggressive financial deregulation campaign in the 1990s, globalisation leaders overturned long standing restrictions by governments that limited foreign ownership of their banks, deregulated currency exchange, and eliminated restrictions on how quickly money could be withdrawn by foreign investors.\n\nAn IMF report from May 2015 estimated that the world's governments directly and indirectly subsidise fossil fuel companies with $5.3tn (£3.4tn) a year. The measurement accounts for the unpaid costs that polluters impose on governments by the burning of coal, oil, and gas. The projected impacts of fossil fuel subsidies on populations—air pollution, health problems, floods, droughts, and storms driven by climate change—account for over half of the reported global expenditure.\n\nOverseas Development Institute (ODI) research undertaken in 1980 included criticisms of the IMF which support the analysis that it is a pillar of what activist Titus Alexander calls global apartheid.\nBULLET::::- Developed countries were seen to have a more dominant role and control over less developed countries (LDCs).\nBULLET::::- The Fund worked on the incorrect assumption that all payments disequilibria were caused domestically. The Group of 24 (G-24), on behalf of LDC members, and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) complained that the IMF did not distinguish sufficiently between disequilibria with predominantly external as opposed to internal causes. This criticism was voiced in the aftermath of the 1973 oil crisis. Then LDCs found themselves with payments deficits due to adverse changes in their terms of trade, with the Fund prescribing stabilisation programmes similar to those suggested for deficits caused by government over-spending. Faced with long-term, externally generated disequilibria, the G-24 argued for more time for LDCs to adjust their economies.\nBULLET::::- Some IMF policies may be anti-developmental; the report said that deflationary effects of IMF programmes quickly led to losses of output and employment in economies where incomes were low and unemployment was high. Moreover, the burden of the deflation is disproportionately borne by the poor.\nBULLET::::- The IMF's initial policies were based in theory and influenced by differing opinions and departmental rivalries. Critics suggest that its intentions to implement these policies in countries with widely varying economic circumstances were misinformed and lacked economic rationale.\n\nODI conclusions were that the IMF's very nature of promoting market-oriented approaches attracted unavoidable criticism. On the other hand, the IMF could serve as a scapegoat while allowing governments to blame international bankers. The ODI conceded that the IMF was insensitive to political aspirations of LDCs, while its policy conditions were inflexible.\n\nArgentina, which had been considered by the IMF to be a model country in its compliance to policy proposals by the Bretton Woods institutions, experienced a catastrophic economic crisis in 2001, which some believe to have been caused by IMF-induced budget restrictions—which undercut the government's ability to sustain national infrastructure even in crucial areas such as health, education, and security—and privatisation of strategically vital national resources. Others attribute the crisis to Argentina's misdesigned fiscal federalism, which caused subnational spending to increase rapidly. The crisis added to widespread hatred of this institution in Argentina and other South American countries, with many blaming the IMF for the region's economic problems. The current—as of early 2006—trend toward moderate left-wing governments in the region and a growing concern with the development of a regional economic policy largely independent of big business pressures has been ascribed to this crisis.\n\nIn 2006, a senior ActionAid policy analyst Akanksha Marphatia stated that IMF policies in Africa undermine any possibility of meeting the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) due to imposed restrictions that prevent spending on important sectors, such as education and health.\n\nIn an interview (2008-05-19), the former Romanian Prime Minister Călin Popescu-Tăriceanu claimed that \"Since 2005, IMF is constantly making mistakes when it appreciates the country's economic performances\". Former Tanzanian President Julius Nyerere, who claimed that debt-ridden African states were ceding sovereignty to the IMF and the World Bank, famously asked, \"Who elected the IMF to be the ministry of finance for every country in the world?\"\n\nFormer chief economist of IMF and former Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Governor Raghuram Rajan who predicted Financial crisis of 2007–08 criticised IMF for remaining a sideline player to the developed world. He criticised IMF for praising the monetary policies of the US, which he believed were wreaking havoc in emerging markets. He had been critical of the ultra-loose money policies of the Western nations and IMF.\n\nCountries such as Zambia have not received proper aid with long-lasting effects, leading to concern from economists. Since 2005, Zambia (as well as 29 other African countries) did receive debt write-offs, which helped with the country's medical and education funds. However, Zambia returned to a debt of over half its GDP in less than a decade. American economist William Easterly, sceptical of the IMF's methods, had initially warned that \"debt relief would simply encourage more reckless borrowing by crooked governments unless it was accompanied by reforms to speed up economic growth and improve governance,\" according to \"The Economist\".\n\nThe IMF has been criticised for being \"out of touch\" with local economic conditions, cultures, and environments in the countries they are requiring policy reform. The economic advice the IMF gives might not always take into consideration the difference between what spending means on paper and how it is felt by citizens. Countries charge that with excessive conditionality, they do not \"own\" the programs and the links are broken between a recipient country's people, its government, and the goals being pursued by the IMF.\n\nJeffrey Sachs argues that the IMF's \"usual prescription is 'budgetary belt tightening to countries who are much too poor to own belts'\". Sachs wrote that the IMF's role as a generalist institution specialising in macroeconomic issues needs reform. Conditionality has also been criticised because a country can pledge collateral of \"acceptable assets\" to obtain waivers—if one assumes that all countries are able to provide \"acceptable collateral\".\n\nOne view is that conditionality undermines domestic political institutions. The recipient governments are sacrificing policy autonomy in exchange for funds, which can lead to public resentment of the local leadership for accepting and enforcing the IMF conditions. Political instability can result from more leadership turnover as political leaders are replaced in electoral backlashes. IMF conditions are often criticised for reducing government services, thus increasing unemployment.\n\nAnother criticism is that IMF programs are only designed to address poor governance, excessive government spending, excessive government intervention in markets, and too much state ownership. This assumes that this narrow range of issues represents the only possible problems; everything is standardised and differing contexts are ignored. A country may also be compelled to accept conditions it would not normally accept had they not been in a financial crisis in need of assistance.\n\nOn top of that, regardless of what methodologies and data sets used, it comes to same the conclusion of exacerbating income inequality. With Gini coefficient, it became clear that countries with IMF programs face increased income inequality.\n\nIt is claimed that conditionalities retard social stability and hence inhibit the stated goals of the IMF, while Structural Adjustment Programs lead to an increase in poverty in recipient countries. The IMF sometimes advocates \"austerity programmes\", cutting public spending and increasing taxes even when the economy is weak, to bring budgets closer to a balance, thus reducing budget deficits. Countries are often advised to lower their corporate tax rate. In \"Globalization and Its Discontents\", Joseph E. Stiglitz, former chief economist and senior vice-president at the World Bank, criticises these policies. He argues that by converting to a more monetarist approach, the purpose of the fund is no longer valid, as it was designed to provide funds for countries to carry out Keynesian reflations, and that the IMF \"was not participating in a conspiracy, but it was reflecting the interests and ideology of the Western financial community.\"\n\nStiglitz concludes, \"Modern high-tech warfare is designed to remove physical contact: dropping bombs from 50,000 feet ensures that one does not 'feel' what one does. Modern economic management is similar: from one's luxury hotel, one can callously impose policies about which one would think twice if one knew the people whose lives one was destroying.\"\n\nThe researchers Eric Toussaint and Damien Millet argue that the IMF 's policies amount to a new form of colonization that does not need a military presence: \nInternational politics play an important role in IMF decision making. The clout of member states is roughly proportional to its contribution to IMF finances. The United States has the greatest number of votes and therefore wields the most influence. Domestic politics often come into play, with politicians in developing countries using conditionality to gain leverage over the opposition to influence policy.\n\nThe IMF is only one of many international organisations, and it is a generalist institution that deals only with macroeconomic issues; its core areas of concern in developing countries are very narrow. One proposed reform is a movement towards close partnership with other specialist agencies such as UNICEF, the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), and the United Nations Development Program (UNDP).\n\nJeffrey Sachs argues in \"The End of Poverty\" that the IMF and the World Bank have \"the brightest economists and the lead in advising poor countries on how to break out of poverty, but the problem is development economics\". Development economics needs the reform, not the IMF. He also notes that IMF loan conditions should be paired with other reforms—e.g., trade reform in developed nations, debt cancellation, and increased financial assistance for investments in basic infrastructure. IMF loan conditions cannot stand alone and produce change; they need to be partnered with other reforms or other conditions as applicable.\n\nThe scholarly consensus is that IMF decision-making is not simply technocratic, but also guided by political and economic concerns. The United States is the IMF's most powerful member, and its influence reaches even into decision-making concerning individual loan agreements. The United States has historically been openly opposed to losing what Treasury Secretary Jacob Lew described in 2015 as its \"leadership role\" at the IMF, and the United States' \"ability to shape international norms and practices\".\n\nReforms to give more powers to emerging economies were agreed by the G20 in 2010. The reforms could not pass, however, until they were ratified by the US Congress, since 85% of the Fund's voting power was required for the reforms to take effect, and the Americans held more than 16% of voting power at the time. After repeated criticism, the United States finally ratified the voting reforms at the end of 2015. The OECD countries maintained their overwhelming majority of voting share, and the United States in particular retained its share at over 16%.\n\nThe criticism of the US-and-Europe-dominated IMF has led to what some consider 'disenfranchising the world' from the governance of the IMF. Raúl Prebisch, the founding secretary-general of the UN Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), wrote that one of \"the conspicuous deficiencies of the general economic theory, from the point of view of the periphery, is its false sense of universality.\"\n\nThe role of the Bretton Woods institutions has been controversial since the late Cold War, because of claims that the IMF policy makers supported military dictatorships friendly to American and European corporations, but also other anti-communist and Communist regimes (such as Mobutu's Zaire and Ceaușescu's Romania, respectively). Critics also claim that the IMF is generally apathetic or hostile to human rights, and labour rights. The controversy has helped spark the anti-globalization movement.\n\nAn example of IMF's support for a dictatorship was its ongoing support for Mobutu's rule in Zaire, although its own envoy, Erwin Blumenthal, provided a sobering report about the entrenched corruption and embezzlement and the inability of the country to pay back any loans.\n\nArguments in favour of the IMF say that economic stability is a precursor to democracy; however, critics highlight various examples in which democratised countries fell after receiving IMF loans.\n\nA 2017 study found no evidence of IMF lending programs undermining democracy in borrowing countries. To the contrary, it found \"evidence for modest but definitively positive conditional differences in the democracy scores of participating and non-participating countries.\"\n\nA number of civil society organisations have criticised the IMF's policies for their impact on access to food, particularly in developing countries. In October 2008, former United States president Bill Clinton delivered a speech to the United Nations on World Food Day, criticising the World Bank and IMF for their policies on food and agriculture:\n\nThe FPIF remarked that there is a recurring pattern: \"the destabilization of peasant producers by a one-two punch of IMF-World Bank structural adjustment programs that gutted government investment in the countryside followed by the massive influx of subsidized U.S. and European Union agricultural imports after the WTO's Agreement on Agriculture pried open markets.\"\n\nA 2009 study concluded that the strict conditions resulted in thousands of deaths in Eastern Europe by tuberculosis as public health care had to be weakened. In the 21 countries to which the IMF had given loans, tuberculosis deaths rose by 16.6%.\n\nIn 2009, a book by Rick Rowden titled \"The Deadly Ideas of Neoliberalism: How the IMF has Undermined Public Health and the Fight Against AIDS\", claimed that the IMF's monetarist approach towards prioritising price stability (low inflation) and fiscal restraint (low budget deficits) was unnecessarily restrictive and has prevented developing countries from scaling up long-term investment in public health infrastructure. The book claimed the consequences have been chronically underfunded public health systems, leading to demoralising working conditions that have fuelled a \"brain drain\" of medical personnel, all of which has undermined public health and the fight against HIV/AIDS in developing countries.\n\nIn 2016, the IMF's research department published a report titled \"Neoliberalism: Oversold?\" which, while praising some aspects of the \"neoliberal agenda,\" claims that the organisation has been \"overselling\" fiscal austerity policies and financial deregulation, which they claim has exacerbated both financial crises and economic inequality around the world.\n\nIMF policies have been repeatedly criticised for making it difficult for indebted countries to say no to environmentally harmful projects that nevertheless generate revenues such as oil, coal, and forest-destroying lumber and agriculture projects. Ecuador, for example, had to defy IMF advice repeatedly to pursue the protection of its rainforests, though paradoxically this need was cited in the IMF argument to provide support to Ecuador. The IMF acknowledged this paradox in the 2010 report that proposed the IMF Green Fund, a mechanism to issue special drawing rights directly to pay for climate harm prevention and potentially other ecological protection as pursued generally by other environmental finance.\n\nWhile the response to these moves was generally positive possibly because ecological protection and energy and infrastructure transformation are more politically neutral than pressures to change social policy. Some experts voiced concern that the IMF was not representative, and that the IMF proposals to generate only US$200 billion a year by 2020 with the SDRs as seed funds, did not go far enough to undo the general incentive to pursue destructive projects inherent in the world commodity trading and banking systems—criticisms often levelled at the World Trade Organization and large global banking institutions.\n\nIn the context of the European debt crisis, some observers noted that Spain and California, two troubled economies within Europe and the United States, and also Germany, the primary and politically most fragile supporter of a euro currency bailout would benefit from IMF recognition of their leadership in green technology, and directly from Green Fund-generated demand for their exports, which could also improve their credit ratings.\n\nIMF supports women's empowerment and promotes their rights in countries with a significant gender gap.\n\nBoth Christine Lagarde and her two predecessors Strauss-Kahn and Rato have been investigated by the authorities and have either faced trial or are scheduled to go on trial for a variety of offences.\n\nLagarde had been accused of giving preferential treatment to businessman-turned-politician Bernard Tapie as he pursued a legal challenge against the French government. At the time, Lagarde was the French economic minister. Within hours of her conviction, in which she escaped any punishment, the fund's 24-member executive board put to rest any speculation that she might have to resign, praising her \"outstanding leadership\" and the \"wide respect\" she commands around the world.\n\nRato was arrested on 16 April 2015 for alleged fraud, embezzlement and money laundering. On 23 February 2017, the Audiencia Nacional found Rato guilty of embezzlement and sentenced to 4 years' imprisonment. In September 2018, the sentence was confirmed by the Supreme Court of Spain.\n\nIn March 2011, the Ministers of Economy and Finance of the African Union proposed to establish an African Monetary Fund.\n\nAt the 6th BRICS summit in July 2014 the BRICS nations (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) announced the BRICS Contingent Reserve Arrangement (CRA) with an initial size of US$100 billion, a framework to provide liquidity through currency swaps in response to actual or potential short-term balance-of-payments pressures.\n\nIn 2014, the China-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank was established.\n\n\"Life and Debt\", a documentary film, deals with the IMF's policies' influence on Jamaica and its economy from a critical point of view. \"Debtocracy\", a 2011 independent Greek documentary film, also criticises the IMF. Portuguese musician 's 1982 album \"\" is inspired by the IMF's intervention in Portugal through monitored stabilisation programs in 1977–78. In the 2015 film, \"Our Brand Is Crisis\", the IMF is mentioned as a point of political contention, where the Bolivian population fears its electoral interference.\n\nBULLET::::- BRICS Development Bank\nBULLET::::- Bank for International Settlements\nBULLET::::- Conditionality\nBULLET::::- Globalization\nBULLET::::- Group of Thirty\nBULLET::::- Group of Ten (economics)\nBULLET::::- International financial institutions\nBULLET::::- List of IMF people\nBULLET::::- Smithsonian Agreement\nBULLET::::- World Bank residual model\n { style=\"margin-left:13px; line-height:150%\"\n\n\nBULLET::::- deVries, Margaret Garritsen. \"The IMF in a Changing World, 1945–85\", International Monetary Fund, 1986.\nBULLET::::- James, H. \"International Monetary Cooperation since Bretton Woods\", Oxford, 1996.\nBULLET::::- Joicey, N. and Pickford, S. \"The International Monetary Fund and Global Economic Cooperation\" in Nicholas Bayne and Stephen Woolcock, \"The New Economic Diplomacy: Decision-Making and Negotiation in International Relations\", (Ashgate Publishing, 2011).\nBULLET::::- Keynes, J.M. \"The Collected Writings, Vol. XXVI. Activities 1941–1946: Shaping the Post-War World: Bretton Woods and Reparations\", Cambridge, 1980.\nBULLET::::- Moschella, M. \"Governing Risk: The IMF and Global Financial Crises\" (Palgrave Macmillan; 2010).\nBULLET::::- Skidelsky, R. \"John Maynard Keynes: Fighting for Britain\", London, 2000.\nBULLET::::- Truman, E. Strengthening IMF Surveillance: A Comprehensive Proposal, Policy Brief 10–29, Peterson Institute for International Economics, 2010.\nBULLET::::- Weiss, Martin A. \"The International Monetary Fund.\" (Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, 24 May 2018).\nBULLET::::- Woods, N. \"The Globalizers: The IMF, the World Bank, and Their Borrowers\", Ithaca, 2006\n\nBULLET::::- IMF Publications page\nBULLET::::- World Economic Outlook – quarterly staff periodical\nBULLET::::- recurrent Regional Economic Reports – published annually\nBULLET::::- biennial Global Financial Stability Report\nBULLET::::- Staff Discussion Notes – publication as and when desired\nBULLET::::- Fiscal Monitor publication as and when desired\nBULLET::::- Finance and Development – quarterly academic journal\nBULLET::::- IFIWatchNet (Web resource for analysis and commentary critical of the IMF and similar institutions)\nBULLET::::- \"IMF-Supported Macroeconomic Policies and the World Recession: A Look at Forty-One Borrowing Countries\", from the Center for Economic and Policy Research, October 2009\nBULLET::::- \"Proceedings and Documents of the United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference, Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, July 1–22, 1944\"\nBULLET::::- \"IMF's Effect on Third World Countries\" from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives\nBULLET::::- \"IMF and Ukraine found a compromise\"\n"}
{"id": "15252", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15252", "title": "Islands of the Clyde", "text": "Islands of the Clyde\n\nThe Islands of the Firth of Clyde are the fifth largest of the major Scottish island groups after the Inner and Outer Hebrides, Orkney and Shetland. They are situated in the Firth of Clyde between Ayrshire and Argyll and Bute. There are about forty islands and skerries, of which only four are inhabited and only nine larger than . The largest and most populous are Arran and Bute, and Great Cumbrae and Holy Island are also served by dedicated ferry routes. Unlike the four larger Scottish archipelagos, none of the isles in this group are connected to one another or to the mainland by bridges.\n\nThe geology and geomorphology of the area is complex and the islands and the surrounding sea lochs each have distinctive features. The influence of the Atlantic Ocean and the North Atlantic Drift create a mild, damp oceanic climate.\n\nThe larger islands have been continuously inhabited since Neolithic times, were influenced by the emergence of the kingdom of Dál Riata from 500 AD and then absorbed into the emerging Kingdom of Alba under Kenneth MacAlpin. They experienced Viking incursions during the Early Middle Ages and then became part of the Kingdom of Scotland in the 13th century. There is a diversity of wildlife, including three species of rare endemic tree.\n\nThe Highland Boundary Fault runs past Bute and through the northern part of Arran, so from a geological perspective some of the islands are in the Highlands and some in the Central Lowlands. As a result, Arran is sometimes referred to as \"Scotland in miniature\" and the island is a popular destination for geologists, who come to see intrusive igneous landforms such as sills and dykes as well as sedimentary and metasedimentary rocks ranging widely in age. Visiting in 1787, the geologist James Hutton found his first example of an unconformity there and this spot is one of the most famous places in the study of geology. A group of weakly metamorphosed rocks that form the Highland Border Complex lie discontinuously along the Highland Boundary Fault. One of the most prominent exposures is along Loch Fad on Bute. Ailsa Craig, which lies some south of Arran, has been quarried for a rare type of micro-granite containing riebeckite known as \"Ailsite\" which is used by Kays of Scotland to make curling stones. As of 2004, 60 to 70% of all curling stones in use were made from granite from the island.\n\nIn common with the rest of Scotland the Firth of Clyde was covered by ice sheets during the Pleistocene ice ages and the landscape is much affected by glaciation. Arran's highest peaks may have been nunataks at this time. After the last retreat of the ice sea level changes and the isostatic rise of land makes charting post glacial coastlines a complex task but the resultant clifflines behind raised beaches are a prominent feature of the entire coastline.\n\nThe soils of the islands reflect the diverse geology. Bute has the most productive land, and a pattern of deposits that is typical of the southwest of Scotland. There is a mixture of boulder clay and other glacial deposits in the eroded valleys, and raised beach and marine deposits elsewhere, especially to the south and west which result in a machair landscape in places, inland from the sandy bays, such as Stravanan.\n\nThe Firth of Clyde, in which these island lie, is north of the Irish Sea and has numerous branching inlets, some of them substantial features in their own right. These include Loch Goil, Loch Long, Gare Loch, Loch Fyne and the estuary of the River Clyde. In places the effect of glaciation on the seabed is pronounced. For example, the Firth is deep between Arran and Bute, although they are only apart. The islands are all exposed to wind and tide and various lighthouses, such as those on Ailsa Craig, Pladda and Davaar act as an aid to navigation.\n\nThe Firth of Clyde lies between 55 and 56 degrees north, at the same latitude as Labrador in Canada and north of the Aleutian Islands, but the influence of the North Atlantic Drift—the northern extension of the Gulf Stream—ameliorates the winter weather and the area enjoys a mild, damp oceanic climate. Temperatures are generally cool, averaging about in January and in July at sea level. Snow seldom lies at sea level and frosts are generally less frequent than the mainland. In common with most islands of the west coast of Scotland, rainfall is generally high at between per annum on Bute, the Cumbraes and in the south of Arran and per annum in the north of Arran. The Arran mountains are wetter still with the summits receiving over annually. May, June and July are the sunniest months, with upwards of 200 hours of bright sunshine being recorded on average, southern Bute benefiting from a particularly high level of sunny days.\n\nMesolithic humans arrived in the Firth of the Clyde during the fourth millennium BC, probably from Ireland. This was followed by a wave of Neolithic peoples using the same route and there is some evidence that the Firth of Clyde was a significant route via which mainland Scotland was colonised at this time. A particular style of megalithic structure developed in Argyll, the Clyde estuary and elsewhere in western Scotland that has become known as the Clyde cairn. They are rectangular or trapezoidal in shape with a small enclosing chamber faced with large slabs of stone set on end and sometimes subdivided into smaller compartments. A forecourt area may have been used for displays or rituals associated with the interment of the dead, who were placed inside the chambers. They are concentrated in Arran, Bute and Kintyre and it is likely that the Clyde cairns were the earliest forms of Neolithic monument constructed by incoming settlers although few of the 100 or so examples have been given a radiocarbon dating. An example at Monamore on Arran has been dated to 3160 BC, although it was almost certainly built earlier than that, possibly c. 4000BC. There are also numerous standing stones dating from prehistoric times, including six stone circles on Machrie Moor, Arran and other examples on Great Cumbrae and Bute.\n\nBronze Age settlers also constructed megaliths at various sites, many of them dating from the second millennium BC, although the chambered cairns were replaced by burial cists, found on for example, Inchmarnock. Settlement evidence, especially from the early part of this era is however poor. The Queen of the Inch necklace is an article of jewellery made of jet found on Bute that dates from circa 2000 BC. During the early Iron Age Brythonic culture held sway, there being no evidence that the Roman occupation of southern Scotland extended to these islands.\n\nDuring the 2nd century AD Irish influence was at work in the region and by the 6th century the kingdom of Dál Riata was established. Unlike the P-Celtic speaking Brythons, these Gaels spoke a form of Gaelic that still survives in the Hebrides. Through the efforts of Saint Ninian and others Christianity slowly supplanted Druidism. Dál Riata flourished from the time of Fergus Mór in the late fifth century until the Viking incursions that commenced in the late eighth century. Islands close to the shores of modern Ayrshire would have remained part of the Kingdom of Strathclyde during this period, whilst the main islands became part of the emerging Kingdom of Alba founded by Kenneth MacAlpin (Cináed mac Ailpín).\n\nThe Islands of the Clyde historically formed the border zone between the Norse \"Suðreyjar\" and Scotland. As such many of these islands fell under Norse hegemony between the 9th and 13th centuries.\n\nThe islands of the Clyde may well have formed the power base of Somhairle mac Giolla Brighde and his descendants by the last half of the 12th century. At about this time period, the authority of the Steward of Scotland seems to have encroached into the region; and there is reason to suspect that, by the turn of the 13th century, the islands were consumed by the expanding Stewart lordship. The western extension of Scottish authority appears to have been one of the factors behind a Norwegian invasion of the region in 1230, in which the invaders seized Rothesay Castle.\n\nIn 1263 Norwegian troops commanded by Haakon Haakonarson repeated the feat but the ensuing Battle of Largs between Scots and Norwegian forces, which took place on the shores of the Firth of Clyde, was inconclusive as a military contest. This marked an ultimately terminal weakening of Norwegian power in Scotland. Haakon retreated to Orkney, where he died in December 1263, entertained on his death bed by recitations of the sagas. Following this ill-fated expedition, all rights that the Norwegian Crown \"had of old therein\" in relation to the islands were yielded to the Kingdom of Scotland as a result of the 1266 Treaty of Perth.\n\nFrom the mid-thirteenth century to the present day all of the islands of the Clyde have remained part of Scotland.\n\nFrom the commencement of the early medieval period until 1387 all of these isles were part of the Diocese of Sodor and Man, based at Peel, on the Isle of Man. Thereafter, the seat of the Bishopric of the Isles was relocated to the north, firstly to Snizort on Skye and then Iona, a state of affairs which continued until the 16th century Scottish Reformation.\n\nThe century following 1750 was time of significant change. New forms of transport, industry and agriculture brought sweeping changes, and an end to traditional ways of life that had endured for centuries. The aftermath of the Battle of Culloden marked the beginning of the end for the clan system and whilst there were marked improvements in living standards for some, these transformations came at a cost for others. In the early 19th century Alexander, 10th Duke of Hamilton (1767–1852) embarked on a programme of clearances that had a devastating effect on Arran's population. Whole villages were removed and the Gaelic culture of the island dealt a terminal blow. A memorial to this early form of ethnic cleansing has been constructed on the shore at Lamlash, paid for by a Canadian descendant of the emigrants.\n\nFrom the 1850s to the late 20th century the Clyde Puffer, made famous by the \"Vital Spark\", was the workhorse of the islands, carrying all kinds of produce and products to and from the islands. The Caledonian Steam Packet Company (CSP) was formed in May 1889 to operate steamer services to and from Gourock for the Caledonian Railway and soon expanded by taking over rival steamer operators. David MacBrayne Ltd operated the Glasgow to Ardrishaig steamer service, as part of the \"Royal Route\" to Oban. During the 20th century many of the islands were developed as tourist resorts for Glaswegians who went \"Doon the Watter\", in parallel to mainland resorts such as Largs and Troon.\nIn 1973 CSP and MacBraynes commenced joint Clyde and West Highland operations under the new name of Caledonian MacBrayne. A publicly owned company, they serve Great Cumbrae, Arran and Bute as well as running mainland-to-mainland ferries across the firth. Private companies operate services from Arran to Holy Isle and from McInroy's Point (Gourock) to Hunter's Quay on the Cowal peninsula.\n\nThe majority of the islands at one time made up the traditional County of Bute. Today the islands are split more or less equally between the modern unitary authorities of Argyll and Bute and North Ayrshire with only Ailsa Craig and Lady Isle in South Ayrshire falling outwith these two council areas.\n\nThe following table gives a list of the islands of the Firth of Clyde with an area greater than 40 hectares (approximately 100 acres) plus adjacent smaller uninhabited islets, tidal islets only separated at higher stages of the tide, and skerries which are only exposed at lower stages of the tide.\n\nSix islands were inhabited in 2001 including Davaar and Sanda with 2 and 1 residents respectively. By the time of the 2011 census neither had a usually resident population.\n\n! Island\n! Gaelic Name\n! Location\n! Area (ha)\n! Population\n! Last inhabited\n! Highest point\n! Height (m)\n! Surrounding islets\n\n31\n\nSome islets lie remote from the larger islands and are listed separately here by location.\n\nGare Loch is a small loch which hosts the Faslane Naval Base, the home of the UK's Trident nuclear submarines. At its southern end, the loch opens into the Firth of Clyde, via the Rhu narrows. It contains two islets: Green Island and Perch Rock.\n\nThe Kilbrannan Sound, which lies between Arran and the Kintyre peninsula, contains several islets: An Struthlag, Cour Island, Eilean Carrach (Carradale), Eilean Carrach (Skipness), Eilean Grianain, Eilean Sunadale, Gull Isle, Island Ross and Thorn Isle. In the late 11th century Magnus Barefoot, King of Norway, made an arrangement with King Malcolm III of Scotland that he could take possession of land on the west coast around which a ship could sail. He had his longship dragged across the long isthmus in the north of Kintyre between East Loch Tarbert and West Loch Tarbert as part of a campaign to increase his possessions. Magnus declared that Kintyre had \"better land than the best of the Hebrides\", and by taking command of his ship's tiller and \"sailing\" across the isthmus he was able to claim the entire peninsula was an island, which remained under Norse rule for more than a dozen years as a result.\n\nLoch Fyne, which extends inland from the Sound of Bute is the longest of Scotland's sea lochs and contains several islets and skerries. These are Duncuan Island, Eilean Ardgaddan, Eilean a' Bhuic, Eilean Aoghainn, Eilean a' Chomhraig, Eilean an Dúnain, Eilean Buidhe (Ardmarnock), Eilean Buidhe (Portavadie), Eilean Fraoch, Eilean Math-ghamhna, Eilean Mór, Glas Eilean, Heather Island, Inverneil Island, Kilbride Island and Liath Eilean.\n\nThe North Ayrshire islets of Broad Rock, East Islet, Halftide Rock, High Rock and North Islet are all found surrounding Horse Isle. Lady Isle, which lies off the South Ayrshire coast near Troon once housed \"ane old chapell with an excellent spring of water\". However, in June 1821 someone set fire to the \"turf and pasture\", and permanently destroyed the island's grazing, with gales blowing much of the island's soil into the sea.\n\nNeither Loch Goil nor Loch Long, which are fjord-like arms of the firth to the north, contain islands.\n\nThe following are places along that shores of the Firth of Clyde that are not islands and have misleading names, \"eilean\" being Gaelic for \"island\": Eilean na Beithe, Portavadie; Eilean Beag, Cove; Eilean Dubh, Dalchenna, Loch Fyne; Eilean nan Gabhar, Melldalloch, Kyles of Bute; Barmore Island, just north of Tarbert, Kintyre; Eilean Aoidh, south of Portavadie; Eilean Leathan, Kilbrannan Sound just south of Torrisdale Bay; Island Muller, Kilbrannan Sound north of Campbeltown.\n\nThere are populations of red deer, red squirrel, badger, otter, adder and common lizard. Offshore there are harbour porpoises, basking sharks and various species of dolphin. Davaar is home to a population of wild goats.\n\nOver 200 species of bird have been recorded in the area including black guillemot, eider, peregrine falcon and the golden eagle. In 1981 there were 28 ptarmigan on Arran, but in 2009 it was reported that extensive surveys had been unable to record any. Similarly, the red-billed chough no longer breeds on the island.\n\nArran also has three rare endemic species of tree, the Arran Whitebeams. These are the Scottish or Arran whitebeam, the cut-leaved whitebeam and the Catacol whitebeam, which are amongst the most endangered tree species in the world. They are found in a protected national nature reserve, and are monitored by staff from Scottish Natural Heritage. Only 283 Arran whitebeam and 236 cut-leaved whitebeam were recorded as mature trees in 1980. The Catacol whitebeam was discovered in 2007 and steps have been taken to protect the two known specimens.\n\nThe Roman historian Tacitus refers to the \"Clota\" meaning the Clyde. The derivation is not certain but probably from the Brythonic \"Clouta\" which became \"Clut\" in Old Welsh. The name's literal meaning is \"wash\" but probably refers to the idea of a river goddess being \"the washer\" or \"strongly flowing one\". Bute's derivation is also uncertain. \"Bót\" is the Norse name and this is the Old Irish word for \"fire\", possibly a reference to signal fires. The etymology of Arran is no more clear—Haswell-Smith (2004) offers a Brythonic derivation and a meaning of \"high place\" although Watson (1926) suggests it may be pre-Celtic.\n\n! Island\n! Derivation\n! Language\n! Meaning\n! Modern Gaelic name\n! Alternative Derivations\n\nBULLET::::- Scottish island names\nBULLET::::- Rathlin Island\nBULLET::::- Sleeping Warrior\nBULLET::::- Arran Single Malt\nBULLET::::- Mount Stuart House\nBULLET::::- Cathedral of the Isles\nBULLET::::- Earl of Arran\nBULLET::::- Marquess of Bute\nBULLET::::- Mull of Kintyre test\n\nBULLET::::- Barrett, James H. \"The Norse in Scotland\" in Brink, Stefan (ed) (2008) \"The Viking World\". Abingdon. Routledge.\nBULLET::::- Coventry, Martin (2008) \"Castles of the Clans\". Musselburgh. Goblinshead.\nBULLET::::- Gillen, Con (2003) \"Geology and landscapes of Scotland\". Harpenden. Terra.\nBULLET::::- Hollander, Lee M (ed. & tr.) (1964) \"Heimskringla: History of the Kings of Norway.\" Austin. University of Texas Press.\nBULLET::::- Hunter, James (2000) \"Last of the Free: A History of the Highlands and Islands of Scotland\". Edinburgh. Mainstream.\nBULLET::::- Keay, J. & Keay, J. (1994) \"Collins Encyclopaedia of Scotland\". London. HarperCollins.\nBULLET::::- McDonald, Dan (1977) \"The Clyde Puffer\". Newton Abbot. David & Charles.\nBULLET::::- McKirdy, Alan Gordon, John & Crofts, Roger (2007) \"Land of Mountain and Flood: The Geology and Landforms of Scotland\". Edinburgh. Birlinn.\nBULLET::::- Murray, W.H (1973) \"The Islands of Western Scotland.\" London. Eyre Methuen.\nBULLET::::- Murray, W.H. (1977) \"The Companion Guide to the West Highlands of Scotland.\" London. Collins.\nBULLET::::- Noble, Gordon (2006) \"Neolithic Scotland: Timber, Stone, Earth and Fire.\" Edinburgh University Press.\nBULLET::::- Omand, Donald (ed.) (2006) \"The Argyll Book\". Edinburgh. Birlinn.\nBULLET::::- Ordnance Survey (2009) \"Get-a-map\". Retrieved 1–31 August 2010.\nBULLET::::- Watson, W. J (1994) \"The Celtic Place-Names of Scotland\". Edinburgh. Birlinn. . First published 1926.\n"}
{"id": "15253", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15253", "title": "International Bank Account Number", "text": "International Bank Account Number\n\nThe International Bank Account Number (IBAN) is an internationally agreed system of identifying bank accounts across national borders to facilitate the communication and processing of cross border transactions with a reduced risk of transcription errors. It was originally adopted by the European Committee for Banking Standards (ECBS) and later as an international standard under ISO 13616:1997. The current standard is ISO 13616:2007, which indicates SWIFT as the formal registrar. Initially developed to facilitate payments within the European Union, it has been implemented by most European countries and numerous countries in other parts of the world, mainly in the Middle East and the Caribbean. As of February 2016, 69 countries were using the IBAN numbering system.\n\nThe IBAN consists of up to 34 alphanumeric characters comprising a country code; two check digits; and a number that includes the domestic bank account number, branch identifier, and potential routing information. The check digits enable a check of the bank account number to confirm its integrity before submitting a transaction.\n\nBefore IBAN, differing national standards for bank account identification (i.e. bank, branch, routing codes, and account number) were confusing for some users. This often led to necessary routing information being missing from payments. Routing information as specified by ISO 9362 (also known as Business Identifier Codes (BIC code), SWIFT ID or SWIFT code, and SWIFT-BIC) does not require a specific format for the transaction so the identification of accounts and transaction types is left to agreements of the transaction partners. It also does not contain check digits, so errors of transcription were not detectable and it was not possible for a sending bank to validate the routing information prior to submitting the payment. Routing errors caused delayed payments and incurred extra costs to the sending and receiving banks and often to intermediate routing banks.\n\nIn 1997, to overcome these difficulties, the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) published ISO 13616:1997. This proposal had a degree of flexibility, which the European Committee for Banking Standards (ECBS) believed would make it unworkable, and they produced a \"slimmed down\" version of the standard which, amongst other things, permitted only upper-case letters and required that the IBAN for each country have a fixed length. ISO 13616:1997 was subsequently withdrawn and replaced by ISO 13616:2003. The standard was revised again in 2007 when it was split into two parts. ISO 13616-1:2007 \"specifies the elements of an international bank account number (IBAN) used to facilitate the processing of data internationally in data interchange, in financial environments as well as within and between other industries\" but \"does not specify internal procedures, file organization techniques, storage media, languages, etc. to be used in its implementation\". ISO 13616-2:2007 describes \"the Registration Authority (RA) responsible for the registry of IBAN formats that are compliant with ISO 13616-1 [and] the procedures for registering ISO 13616-compliant IBAN formats\". The official IBAN registrar under ISO 13616-2:2007 is SWIFT.\n\nIBAN imposes a flexible but regular format sufficient for account identification and contains validation information to avoid errors of transcription. It carries all the routing information needed to get a payment from one bank to another wherever it may be; it contains key bank account details such as country code, branch codes (known as sort codes in the UK and Ireland) and account numbers, and it contains \"check digits\" which can be validated at source according to a single standard procedure. Where used, IBANs have reduced trans-national money transfer errors to under 0.1% of total payments.\n\nThe IBAN consists of up to 34 alphanumeric characters, as follows:\nBULLET::::- country code using ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 – two letters,\nBULLET::::- check digits – two digits, and\nBULLET::::- Basic Bank Account Number (BBAN) – up to 30 alphanumeric characters that are country-specific.\n\nThe check digits enable a sanity check of the bank account number to confirm its integrity before submitting a transaction.\n\nThe IBAN should not contain spaces when transmitted electronically. When printed it is expressed in groups of four characters separated by a single space, the last group being of variable length as shown in the example below:\n\n! Country\n! IBAN formatting example\nBelgium\ncodice_1\nFrance\ncodice_2\nGermany\ncodice_3\nGreece\ncodice_4\nRomania\ncodice_5\nSaudi Arabia\ncodice_6\nSpain\ncodice_7\nSwitzerland\ncodice_8\nUnited Kingdom\ncodice_9\n\nPermitted IBAN characters are the digits \"0\" to \"9\" and the 26 Latin alphabetic characters \"A\" to \"Z\". This applies even in countries (e.g., Thailand) where these characters are not used in the national language.\n\nThe Basic Bank Account Number (BBAN) format is decided by the national central bank or designated payment authority of each country. There is no consistency between the formats adopted. The national authority may register its BBAN format with SWIFT, but is not obliged to do so. It may adopt IBAN without registration. SWIFT also acts as the registration authority for the SWIFT system, which is used by most countries that have not adopted IBAN. A major difference between the two systems is that under SWIFT there is no requirement that BBANs used within a country be of a pre-defined length.\n\nThe BBAN must be of a fixed length for the country and comprise case-insensitive alphanumeric characters. It includes the domestic bank account number, branch identifier, and potential routing information. Each country can have a different national routing/account numbering system, up to a maximum of 30 alphanumeric characters.\n\nThe check digits enable the sending bank (or its customer) to perform a sanity check of the routing destination and account number from a single string of data at the time of data entry. This check is guaranteed to detect any instances where a single character has been omitted, duplicated, mistyped or where two characters have been transposed. Thus routing and account number errors are virtually eliminated.\n\nOne of the design aims of the IBAN was to enable as much validation as possible to be done at the point of data entry. In particular, the computer program that accepts an IBAN will be able to validate:\nBULLET::::- Country code\nBULLET::::- Number of characters in the IBAN correspond to the number specified for the country code\nBULLET::::- BBAN format specified for the country code\nBULLET::::- Account number, bank code and country code combination is compatible with the check digits\n\nThe check digits are calculated using MOD-97-10 as per ISO/IEC 7064:2003 (abbreviated to \"mod-97\" in this article), which specifies a set of check character systems capable of protecting strings against errors which occur when people copy or key data. In particular, the standard states that the following can be detected:\nBULLET::::- All single substitution errors (the substitution of a single character for another, for example codice_10 for codice_11)\nBULLET::::- All or nearly all single (local) transposition errors (the transposition of two single characters, either adjacent or with one character between them, for example codice_12 or codice_13 for codice_14)\nBULLET::::- All or nearly all shift errors (shifts of the whole string to the left or right)\nBULLET::::- High proportion of double substitution errors (two separate single substitution errors in the same string, for example codice_15 for codice_16)\nBULLET::::- High proportion of all other errors\n\nThe underlying rules for IBANs is that the account-servicing financial institution should issue an IBAN, as there are a number of areas where different IBANs could be generated from the same account and branch numbers that would satisfy the generic IBAN validation rules. In particular cases where codice_17 is a valid check digit, codice_18 will not be a valid check digit, likewise, if codice_19 is a valid check digit, codice_20 will not be a valid check digit, similarly with codice_21 and codice_22.\n\nThe UN CEFACT TBG5 has published a free IBAN validation service in 32 languages for all 57 countries that have adopted the IBAN standard. They have also published the Javascript source code of the verification algorithm.\n\nAn English language IBAN checker for ECBS member country bank accounts is available on its website.\n\nAn IBAN is validated by converting it into an integer and performing a basic \"mod-97\" operation (as described in ISO 7064) on it. If the IBAN is valid, the remainder equals 1. The algorithm of IBAN validation is as follows:\n\nBULLET::::1. Check that the total IBAN length is correct as per the country. If not, the IBAN is invalid\nBULLET::::2. Move the four initial characters to the end of the string\nBULLET::::3. Replace each letter in the string with two digits, thereby expanding the string, where A = 10, B = 11, ..., Z = 35\nBULLET::::4. Interpret the string as a decimal integer and compute the remainder of that number on division by 97\n\nIf the remainder is 1, the check digit test is passed and the IBAN might be valid.\n\nExample (fictitious United Kingdom bank, sort code 12-34-56, account number 98765432):\n• IBAN: align=\"right\" 1234 5698 7654 32\n• Rearrange: align=\"right\"12345698765432\n• Convert to integer: align=\"right\"12345698765432\n• Compute remainder: align=\"right\"12345698765432 mod 97 = 1\n\nAccording to the ECBS \"generation of the IBAN shall be the exclusive responsibility of the bank/branch servicing the account\". The ECBS document replicates part of the ISO/IEC 7064:2003 standard as a method for generating check digits in the range 02 to 98. Check digits in the ranges 00 to 96, 01 to 97, and 03 to 99 will also provide validation of an IBAN, but the standard is silent as to whether or not these ranges may be used.\n\nThe preferred algorithm is:\n\nBULLET::::1. Check that the total IBAN length is correct as per the country. If not, the IBAN is invalid.\nBULLET::::2. Replace the two check digits by 00 (e.g., GB00 for the UK).\nBULLET::::3. Move the four initial characters to the end of the string.\nBULLET::::4. Replace the letters in the string with digits, expanding the string as necessary, such that A or a = 10, B or b = 11, and Z or z = 35. Each alphabetic character is therefore replaced by 2 digits\nBULLET::::5. Convert the string to an integer (i.e. ignore leading zeroes).\nBULLET::::6. Calculate \"mod-97\" of the new number, which results in the remainder.\nBULLET::::7. Subtract the remainder from 98, and use the result for the two check digits. If the result is a single digit number, pad it with a leading 0 to make a two-digit number.\n\nAny computer programming language or software package that is used to compute \"D\" mod \"97\" directly must have the ability to handle integers of more than 30 digits. In practice, this can only be done by software that either supports arbitrary-precision arithmetic or that can handle 220 bit (unsigned) integers, features that are often not standard. If the application software in use does not provide the ability to handle integers of this size, the modulo operation can be performed in a piece-wise manner (as is the case with the UN CEFACT TBG5 Javascript program).\n\nPiece-wise calculation can be done in many ways. One such way is as follows:\n\nBULLET::::1. Starting from the leftmost digit of \"D\", construct a number using the first 9 digits and call it \"N\".\nBULLET::::2. Calculate \"N\" mod \"97\".\nBULLET::::3. Construct a new 9-digit \"N\" by concatenating above result (step 2) with the next 7 digits of \"D\". If there are fewer than 7 digits remaining in \"D\" but at least one, then construct a new \"N\", which will have less than 9 digits, from the above result (step 2) followed by the remaining digits of \"D\"\nBULLET::::4. Repeat steps 2–3 until all the digits of \"D\" have been processed\n\nThe result of the final calculation in step 2 will be \"D\" mod 97 = \"N\" mod \"97\".\n\nIn this example, the above algorithm for \"D\" mod 97 will be applied to \"D\" = . (The digits are colour-coded to aid the description below.) If the result is one, the IBAN corresponding to \"D\" passes the check digit test.\n\nBULLET::::1. Construct \"N\" from the first 9 digits of D\nBULLET::::- \"N\" =\nBULLET::::2. Calculate \"N\" mod 97 = 70\nBULLET::::3. Construct a new 9-digit \"N\" from the above result (step 2) followed by the next 7 digits of \"D\".\nBULLET::::- \"N\" = 70\nBULLET::::4. Calculate \"N\" mod 97 = 29\nBULLET::::5. Construct a new 9-digit \"N\" from the above result (step 4) followed by the next 7 digits of \"D\".\nBULLET::::- \"N\" = 29\nBULLET::::6. Calculate \"N\" mod 97 = 24\nBULLET::::7. Construct a new \"N\" from the above result (step 6) followed by the remaining 5 digits of \"D\".\nBULLET::::- \"N\" = 24\nBULLET::::8. Calculate \"N\" mod 97 = 1\n\nFrom step 8, the final result is \"D\" mod 97 = 1 and the IBAN has passed this check digit test.\n\nInternational bank transactions use either an IBAN or the ISO 9362 Business Identifier Code system (BIC or SWIFT code) in conjunction with the BBAN (Basic Bank Account Number).\n\nThe banks of most countries in Europe publish account numbers using both the IBAN format and the nationally recognised identifiers, this being mandatory within the European Economic Area.\n\nDay-to-day administration of banking in British Overseas Territories varies from territory to territory; some, such as South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, have too small a population to warrant a banking system while others, such as Bermuda, have a thriving financial sector. The use of the IBAN is up to the local government—Gibraltar, being part of the European Union is required to use the IBAN, as are the Crown dependencies, which use the British clearing system, and the British Virgin Islands have chosen to do so. , no other British Overseas Territories have chosen to use the IBAN. Banks in the Caribbean Netherlands also do not use the IBAN.\n\nThe IBAN designation scheme was chosen as the foundation for electronic straight-through processing in the European Economic Area. The European Parliament mandated that a bank charge needs to be the same amount for domestic credit transfers as for cross-border credit transfers regulated in decision 2560/2001 (updated in 924/2009). This regulation took effect in 2003. Only payments in euro up to €12,500 to a bank account designated by its IBAN were covered by the regulation.\n\nThe Euro Payments regulation has been the foundation for the decision to create a Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA). The European Central Bank has created the TARGET2 interbank network that unifies the technical infrastructure of the 26 central banks of the European Union (although Sweden and the UK have opted out). SEPA is a self-regulatory initiative by the banking sector of Europe as represented in the European Payments Council (EPC). The European Union made the scheme mandatory through the Payment Services Directive published in 2007. Since January 2008, all countries must support SEPA credit transfer, and SEPA direct debit must be supported since November 2009. The regulation on SEPA payments increases the charge cap (same price for domestic payments as for cross-border payments) to €50,000.\n\nWith a further decision of the European Parliament, the IBAN scheme for bank accounts fully replaced the domestic numbering schemes from 31 December 2012. On 16 December 2010, the European Commission published proposed regulations that will make IBAN support mandatory for domestic credit transfer by 2013 and for domestic direct debit by 2014 (with a 12 and 24 months transition period respectively). Some countries have already replaced their traditional bank account scheme by IBAN. This includes Switzerland where IBAN was introduced for national credit transfer on 1 January 2006 and the support for the old bank account numbers has not been required from 1 January 2010.\n\nBased on a 20 December 2011 memorandum, the EU parliament resolved the mandatory dates for the adoption of the IBAN on 14 February 2012. From 1 February 2014, all national systems for credit transfer and direct debit must be abolished and replaced by an IBAN-based system. This will be extended to all cross-border SEPA transactions from 1 February 2016 (Article 5 Section 7). After these dates the IBAN will be sufficient to identify an account for home and foreign financial transactions in SEPA countries and banks will no longer be permitted to require that the customer supply the BIC for the beneficiary's bank.\n\nIn the run-up to the 1 February 2014 deadline, it became apparent that many old bank account numbers had not been allocated IBANs—an issue that has to be addressed on a country-by-country basis. In Germany, for example, Deutsche Bundesbank and the German Banking Industry Committee require that all holders of German bank codes (\"Bankleitzahl\") publish the specifics of their IBAN generation format taking into account not only the generation of check digits but also the handling of legacy bank codes, thereby enabling third parties to generate IBANs independently of the bank. The first such catalogue was published in June 2013 as a variant of the old bank code catalog (\"Bankleitzahlendatei\").\n\nBanks in numerous non-European countries including most states of the Middle East, North Africa and the Caribbean have implemented the IBAN format for account identification. In some countries the IBAN is used on an \"ad hoc\" basis, an example being Ukraine where account numbers were used for international transfers of four of the national banks have additional aliases that follow the IBAN format as a precursor to formal SWIFT registration until on 1 November 2019 all Ukrainian banks had fully switched to the IBAN standard.\n\nThe degree to which bank verifies the validity of a recipient's bank account number depends of the configuration of the transmitting bank's software—many major software packages supply bank account validation as a standard function. Some banks outside Europe may not recognize IBAN, though this is expected to diminish with time. Non-European banks usually accept IBANs for accounts in Europe, although they might not treat IBANs differently from other foreign bank account numbers. In particular, they might not check the IBAN's validity prior to sending the transfer.\n\nBanks in the United States do not use IBAN as account numbers for U.S. accounts. Any adoption of the IBAN standard by U.S. banks would likely be initiated by ANSI ASC X9, the U.S. financial services standards development organization: a working group (X9B20) was established as an X9 subcommittee to generate an IBAN construction for U.S. bank accounts.\n\nCanadian financial institutions have not adopted IBAN and use routing numbers issued by Payments Canada for domestic transfers, and SWIFT for international transfers. There is no formal governmental or private sector regulatory requirement in Canada for the major banks to use IBAN.\n\nAustralia and New Zealand do not use IBAN. They use Bank State Branch codes for domestic transfers and SWIFT for international transfers.\n\nThis table summarises the IBAN formats by country:\nBULLET::::- The \"kk\" after the two-character ISO country code represents the check digits calculated from the rest of the IBAN characters. If it is a constant for the country concerned, this will be stated in the Comments column. This happens where the BBAN has its own check digits that use the same algorithm as the IBAN check digits\nBULLET::::- The BBAN format column shows the format of the BBAN part of an IBAN in terms of upper case alpha characters (A–Z) denoted by \"a\", numeric characters (0–9) denoted by \"n\" and mixed case alphanumeric characters (a–z, A–Z, 0–9) denoted by \"c\". For example, the Bulgarian BBAN (4a,6n,8c) consists of 4 alpha characters, followed by 6 numeric characters, then by 8 mixed-case alpha-numeric characters\nBULLET::::- Descriptions in the \"Comments\" field have been standardised with country specific names in brackets. The format of the various fields can be deduced from the BBAN field\nBULLET::::- Countries that are planning to introduce the IBAN are shown in \"italics\" with the planned date of introduction in bold\n\n! Country\n! Chars\n! BBAN Format\n! IBAN Fields\n! Comment\n\nIn addition to the above list, Nordea has catalogued IBANs for countries listed below.\n\nIn this list\nBULLET::::- codice_97 represent the IBAN checksum\nBULLET::::- codice_98 represents an alphabetic character\nBULLET::::- codice_99 represents a numeric character\nBULLET::::- codice_100 represents a bank code character\nBULLET::::- codice_101 represents an account digit.\nBULLET::::- codice_102 represents a \"0\" character.\n{ class=\"wikitable sortable\"\n! Country\n! Chars\n! Example\n! Comments\nAlgeria\n24\ncodice_103\nAngola\n25\ncodice_104\nBenin\n28\ncodice_105\nBurkina Faso\n28\ncodice_106\nBurundi\n16\ncodice_107\nCameroon\n27\ncodice_108\nCape Verde\n25\ncodice_109\nIran\n26\ncodice_110\nIvory Coast\n28\ncodice_111\nMadagascar\n27\ncodice_112\nthis format is identical to the French format\nMali\n28\ncodice_113\nMozambique\n25\ncodice_114\nSenegal\n28\ncodice_115\n\nAddition list of countries, in the process of introducing the IBAN retrieved from SWIFT partner website are listed below.\n\nIn this list\nBULLET::::- codice_97 represent the IBAN checksum\nBULLET::::- codice_98 represents an alphabetic character\nBULLET::::- codice_99 represents a numeric character\n\n! Country\n! Chars\n! Example\nComoros\n27\ncodice_119\nChad\n27\ncodice_120\nCongo\n27\ncodice_121\nEgypt\n27\ncodice_122\nGabon\n27\ncodice_123\nHonduras\n28\ncodice_124\nMorocco\n28\ncodice_125\nNicaragua\n32\ncodice_126\nNiger\n28\ncodice_127\nTogo\n28\ncodice_128\n\nThere is criticism about the length and readability of IBAN. Printed on paper the IBAN is often difficult to read. Therefore, it is popular to group the IBAN with four symbols. However, for electronic documents (e.g. PDF invoice) the copy and paste of grouped IBAN can result in errors with online banking forms. However, most modern bank institutes allow and detect the copy and paste of both grouped and ungrouped IBAN.\n\nBULLET::::- Bank card number\nBULLET::::- Bank regulation\nBULLET::::- ABA routing transit number\nBULLET::::- Routing number (Canada)\n\nBULLET::::- Official ISO 13616 Registry Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication (SWIFT)\nBULLET::::- ISO 13616-1:2007 International Organization for Standardization (ISO)\nBULLET::::- IBAN Implementation Guidelines State Bank of Pakistan, 15 May 2012\nBULLET::::- \"Check digits (or characters) are a 'checksum' on a number to help prevent manual typing errors. in PHP\"\nBULLET::::- \"Online database Swift, BIC, BIN or Bank Name search\" Swift, BIC, BIN or Bank Name search\n"}
{"id": "15254", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15254", "title": "Infinitive", "text": "Infinitive\n\nInfinitive (abbreviated ) is a grammatical term referring to certain verb forms existing in many languages, most often used as non-finite verbs. As with many linguistic concepts, there is not a single definition applicable to all languages. The word is derived from Late Latin \"[modus] infinitivus\", a derivative of \"infinitus\" meaning \"unlimited\".\n\nIn traditional descriptions of English, the infinitive is the basic dictionary form of a verb when used non-finitely, with or without the particle \"to\". Thus \"to go\" is an infinitive, as is \"go\" in a sentence like \"I must go there\" (but not in \"I go there\", where it is a finite verb). The form without \"to\" is called the bare infinitive, and the form with \"to\" is called the full infinitive or \"to\"-infinitive.\n\nIn many other languages the infinitive is a single word, often with a characteristic inflective ending, like \"morir\" (\"(to) die\") in Spanish, \"manger\" (\"(to) eat\") in French, \"portare\" (\"(to) carry\") in Latin, \"lieben\" (\"(to) love\") in German, etc. However, some languages have no infinitive forms. Many Native American languages, and some languages in Africa and Australia do not have direct equivalents to infinitives or verbal nouns. Instead, they use finite verb forms in ordinary clauses or various special constructions.\n\nBeing a verb, an infinitive may take objects and other complements and modifiers to form a verb phrase (called an infinitive phrase). Like other non-finite verb forms (like participles, converbs, gerunds and gerundives), infinitives do not generally have an expressed subject; thus an infinitive verb phrase also constitutes a complete non-finite clause, called an infinitive (infinitival) clause. Such phrases or clauses may play a variety of roles within sentences, often being nouns (for example being the subject of a sentence or being a complement of another verb), and sometimes being adverbs or other types of modifier. Many verb forms known as infinitives differ from gerunds (verbal nouns) in that they do not inflect for case or occur in adpositional phrases. Instead, infinitives often originate in earlier inflectional forms of verbal nouns. Unlike finite verbs, infinitives are not usually inflected for tense, person, etc. either, although some degree of inflection sometimes occurs; for example Latin has distinct active and passive infinitives.\n\nAn \"infinitive phrase\" is a verb phrase constructed with the verb in infinitive form. This consists of the verb together with its objects and other complements and modifiers. Some examples of infinitive phrases in English are given below – these may be based on either the full infinitive (introduced by the particle \"to\") or the bare infinitive (without the particle \"to\").\nBULLET::::- (to) sleep\nBULLET::::- (to) write ten letters\nBULLET::::- (to) go to the store for a pound of sugar\n\nInfinitive phrases often have an implied grammatical subject making them effectively clauses rather than phrases. Such \"infinitive clauses\" or \"infinitival clauses\", are one of several kinds of non-finite clause. They can play various grammatical roles like a constituent of a larger clause or sentence; for example it may form a noun phrase or adverb. Infinitival clauses may be embedded within each other in complex ways, like in the sentence:\nBULLET::::- I want to tell you that Brett Favre is going to get married.\nHere the infinitival clause \"to get married\" is contained within the finite dependent clause \"that Brett Favre is going to get married\"; this in turn is contained within another infinitival clause, which is contained in the finite independent clause (the whole sentence).\n\nThe grammatical structure of an infinitival clause may differ from that of a corresponding finite clause. For example, in German, the infinitive form of the verb usually goes to the end of its clause, whereas a finite verb (in an independent clause) typically comes in second position.\n\nFollowing certain verbs or prepositions, infinitives commonly \"do\" have an expressed subject, e.g., \nBULLET::::- I want them to eat their dinner.\nBULLET::::- For him to fail now would be a disappointment.\nAs these examples illustrate, the subject of the infinitive is in the objective case (them, him) in contrast to the nominative case that would be used with a finite verb, e.g., \"They ate their dinner.\" \nSuch accusative and infinitive constructions are present in Latin and Ancient Greek, as well as many modern languages. The unusual case for the subject of an infinitive is an example of exceptional case-marking, where the infinitive clause's role being an object of a verb or preposition (want, for) overpowers the pronoun's subjective role within the clause.\n\nIn some languages, infinitives may be marked for grammatical categories like voice, aspect, and to some extent tense. This may be done by inflection, like with the Latin perfect and passive infinitives, or by periphrasis (with the use of auxiliary verbs), like with the Latin future infinitives or the English perfect and progressive infinitives.\n\nLatin has present, perfect and future infinitives, with active and passive forms of each. For details see .\n\nEnglish has infinitive constructions that are marked (periphrastically) for aspect: perfect, progressive (continuous), or a combination of the two (perfect progressive). These can also be marked for passive voice (as can the plain infinitive):\nBULLET::::- \"(to) eat\" (plain infinitive, active)\nBULLET::::- \"(to) be eaten\" (passive)\nBULLET::::- \"(to) have eaten\" (perfect active)\nBULLET::::- \"(to) have been eaten\" (perfect passive)\nBULLET::::- \"(to) be eating\" (progressive active)\nBULLET::::- \"(to) be being eaten\" (progressive passive)\nBULLET::::- \"(to) have been eating\" (perfect progressive active)\nBULLET::::- \"(to) have been being eaten\" (perfect progressive passive, not often used)\nFurther constructions can be made with other auxiliary-like expressions, like \"(to) be going to eat\" or \"(to) be about to eat\", which have future meaning. For more examples of the above types of construction, see .\n\nPerfect infinitives are also found in other European languages that have perfect forms with auxiliaries similarly to English. For example, \"avoir mangé\" means \"(to) have eaten\" in French.\n\nRegarding English, the term \"infinitive\" is traditionally applied to the unmarked form of the verb (the \"plain form\") when it forms a non-finite verb, whether or not introduced by the particle \"to\". Hence \"sit\" and \"to sit\", as used in the following sentences, would each be considered an infinitive:\nBULLET::::- I can sit here all day.\nBULLET::::- I want to sit on the other chair.\n\nThe form without \"to\" is called the \"bare infinitive\"; the form introduced by \"to\" is called the \"full infinitive\" or \"to-infinitive\".\n\nThe other non-finite verb forms in English are the gerund or present participle (the \"-ing\" form), and the past participle – these are not considered infinitives. Moreover, the unmarked form of the verb is not considered an infinitive when it is forms a finite verb: like a present indicative (\"I \"sit\" every day\"), subjunctive (\"I suggest that he \"sit\"\"), or imperative (\"\"Sit\" down!\"). (For some irregular verbs the form of the infinitive coincides additionally with that of the past tense and/or past participle, like in the case of \"put\".)\n\nCertain auxiliary verbs are defective in that they do not have infinitives (or any other non-finite forms). This applies to the modal verbs (\"can\", \"must\", etc.), as well as certain related auxiliaries like the \"had\" of \"had better\" and the \"used\" of \"used to\". (Periphrases can be employed instead in some cases, like \"(to) be able to\" for \"can\", and \"(to) have to\" for \"must\".) It also applies to the auxiliary \"do\", like used in questions, negatives and emphasis like described under \"do\"-support. (Infinitives are negated by simply preceding them with \"not\". Of course the verb \"do\" when forming a main verb can appear in the infinitive.) However, the auxiliary verbs \"have\" (used to form the perfect) and \"be\" (used to form the passive voice and continuous aspect) both commonly appear in the infinitive: \"I should have finished by now\"; \"It's thought to have been a burial site\"; \"Let him be released\"; \"I hope to be working tomorrow.\"\n\nHuddleston and Pullum's \"Cambridge Grammar of the English Language\" (2002) does not use the notion of the \"infinitive\" (\"there is no form in the English verb paradigm called 'the infinitive'\"), only that of the \"infinitival clause\", noting that English uses the same form of the verb, the \"plain form\", in infinitival clauses that it uses in imperative and present-subjunctive clauses.\n\nA matter of controversy among prescriptive grammarians and style writers has been the appropriateness of separating the two words of the \"to\"-infinitive (as in \"I expect \"to\" happily \"sit\" here\"). For details of this, see split infinitive. Opposing linguistic theories typically do not consider the \"to\"-infinitive a distinct constituent, instead regarding the scope of the particle \"to\" as an entire verb phrase; thus, \"to buy a car\" is parsed like \"<nowiki>to [buy [a car]]</nowiki>\", not like \"<nowiki>[to buy] [a car]</nowiki>\".\n\nThe bare infinitive and the \"to\"-infinitive have a variety of uses in English. The two forms are mostly in complementary distribution – certain contexts call for one, and certain contexts for the other; they are not normally interchangeable, except in occasional instances like after the verb \"help\", where either can be used.\n\nThe main uses of infinitives (or infinitive phrases) are like follows:\nBULLET::::- As complements of other verbs. The bare infinitive form is a complement of the dummy auxiliary \"do\", most modal auxiliary verbs, verbs of perception like \"see\", \"watch\" and \"hear\" (after a direct object), and the verbs of permission or causation \"make\", \"bid\", \"let\", and \"have\" (also after a direct object). The \"to\"-infinitive is used after many intransitive verbs like \"want\", \"aim\", \"like\", \"fail\", etc., and like a second complement after a direct object in the case of verbs like \"want\", \"convince\", \"aim\", etc.\nBULLET::::- In various particular expressions, like \"had better\" and \"would rather\" (with bare infinitive), \"in order to\", \"as if to\", \"am to/is to/are to\".\nBULLET::::- As a noun phrase, expressing its action or state in an abstract, general way, forming the subject of a clause or a predicative expression: \"To err is human\"; \"To know me is to love me\". The bare infinitive can be used in such sentences like \"What you should do is make a list.\" A common construction with the \"to\"-infinitive involves a dummy pronoun subject (\"it\"), with the infinitive phrase placed after the predicate: \"It was nice to meet you.\"\nBULLET::::- Adverbially, to express purpose, intent or result – the \"to\"-infinitive can have the meaning of \"in order to...\" (I closed the door (in order) to block out any noise).\nBULLET::::- As a modifier of a noun or adjective. This may relate to the meaning of the noun or adjective (\"a request to see someone\"; \"keen to get on\"), or it may form a type of non-finite relative clause, like in \"the man to save us\"; \"the method to use\"; \"nice to listen to\".\nBULLET::::- In elliptical questions (direct or indirect): \"I don't know where to go.\" After \"why\" the bare infinitive is used: \"Why reveal it?\"\n\nThe infinitive is also the usual dictionary form or citation form of a verb. The form listed in dictionaries is the bare infinitive, although the \"to\"-infinitive is often used in referring to verbs or in defining other verbs: \"The word 'amble' means 'to walk slowly'\"; \"How do we conjugate the verb \"to go\"?\"\n\nFor further detail and examples of the uses of infinitives in English, see Bare infinitive and \"To\"-infinitive in the article on uses of English verb forms.\n\nThe original Proto-Germanic ending of the infinitive was \"-an\", with verbs derived from other words ending in \"-jan\" or \"-janan\".\n\nIn German it is \"-en\" (\"sagen\"), with \"-eln\" or \"-ern\" endings on a few words based on -l or -r roots (\"segeln\", \"ändern\"). The use of \"zu\" with infinitives is similar to English \"to\", but is less frequent than in English. German infinitives can form nouns, often expressing abstractions of the action, in which case they are of neuter gender: \"das Essen\" means \"the eating\", but also \"the food\".\n\nIn Dutch infinitives also end in \"-en\" (\"zeggen\" — \"to say\"), sometimes used with \"te\" similar to English \"to\", e.g., \"Het is niet moeilijk te begrijpen\" → \"It is not hard to understand.\" The few verbs with stems ending in \"-a\" have infinitives in -n (\"gaan\" — \"to go\", \"slaan\" — \"to hit\"). Afrikaans has lost the distinction between the infinitive and present forms of verbs, with the exception of the verbs \"wees\" (to be), which admits the present form \"is\", and the verb \"hê\" (to have), whose present form is \"het\".\n\nIn North Germanic languages the final \"-n\" was lost from the infinitive as early as 500–540 AD, reducing the suffix to \"-a\". Later it has been further reduced to \"-e\" in Danish and some Norwegian dialects (including the written majority language bokmål). In the majority of Eastern Norwegian dialects and a few bordering Western Swedish dialects the reduction to \"-e\" was only partial, leaving some infinitives in \"-a\" and others in \"-e\" (å laga vs. å kaste). In northern parts of Norway the infinitive suffix is completely lost (å lag’ vs. å kast’) or only the \"-a\" is kept (å laga vs. å kast’). The infinitives of these languages are inflected for passive voice through the addition of \"-s\" or \"-st\" to the active form. This suffix appearance in Old Norse was a contraction of \"mik\" (“me”, forming \"-mk\") or \"sik\" (reflexive pronoun, forming \"-sk\") and was originally expressing reflexive actions: (hann) \"kallar\" (“(he) calls”) + \"-sik\" (“himself”) > (hann) \"kallask\" (“(he) calls himself”). The suffixes \"-mk\" and \"-sk\" later merged to \"-s\", which evolved to \"-st\" in the western dialects. The loss or reduction of \"-a\" in active voice in Norwegian did not occur in the passive forms (\"-ast\", \"-as\"), except for some dialects that have \"-es\". The other North Germanic languages have the same vowel in both forms.\n\nThe formation of the infinitive in the Romance languages reflects that in their ancestor, Latin, almost all verbs had an infinitive ending with \"-re\" (preceded by one of various thematic vowels). For example, in Italian infinitives end in \"-are\", \"-ere\", \"-rre\" (rare), or \"-ire\" (which is still identical to the Latin forms), and in \"-arsi\", \"-ersi\", \"-rsi\", \"-irsi\" for the reflexive forms. In Spanish and Portuguese, infinitives end in \"-ar\", \"-er\", or \"-ir\" (Spanish also has reflexive forms in \"-arse\", \"-erse\", \"-irse\"), while similarly in French they typically end in \"-re\", \"-er\", \"oir\", and \"-ir\". In Romanian, both short and long-form infinitives exist; the so-called \"long infinitives\" end in \"-are, -ere, -ire\" and in modern speech are used exclusively as verbal nouns. Verbs that cannot be converted into the nominal long infinitive are very rare). The \"short infinitives\" used in verbal contexts (e.g., after an auxiliary verb) have the endings \"-a\",\"-ea\", \"-e\", and \"-i\" (basically removing the ending in \"-re\"). In Romanian, the infinitive is usually replaced by a clause containing the conjunction \"să\" plus the subjunctive mood. The only verb that is modal in common modern Romanian is the verb \"a putea\", to be able to. However, in popular speech the infinitive after \"a putea\" is also increasingly replaced by the subjunctive.\n\nIn all Romance languages, infinitives can also form nouns.\n\nLatin infinitives challenged several of the generalizations about infinitives. They did inflect for voice (\"amare\", \"to love\", \"amari\", to be loved) and for tense (\"amare\", \"to love\", \"amavisse\", \"to have loved\"), and allowed for an overt expression of the subject (\"video Socratem currere\", \"I see Socrates running\"). See .\n\nRomance languages inherited from Latin the possibility of an overt expression of the subject (as in Italian \"vedo Socrate correre\"). Moreover, the \"inflected infinitive\" (or \"personal infinitive\") found in Portuguese and Galician inflects for person and number. These, alongside Sardinian, are the only Indo-European languages that allow infinitives to take person and number endings. This helps to make infinitive clauses very common in these languages; for example, the English finite clause \"in order that you/she/we have...\" would be translated to Portuguese like \"para teres/ela ter/termos...\" (Portuguese is a null-subject language). The Portuguese personal infinitive has no proper tenses, only aspects (imperfect and perfect), but tenses can be expressed using periphrastic structures. For instance, \"even though you sing/have sung/are going to sing\" could be translated to \"apesar de cantares/teres cantado/ires cantar\".\n\nOther Romance languages (including Spanish, Romanian, Catalan, and some Italian dialects) allow uninflected infinitives to combine with overt nominative subjects. For example, Spanish \"al abrir yo los ojos\" (\"when I opened my eyes\") or \"sin yo saberlo\" (\"without my knowing about it\").\n\nIn Ancient Greek the infinitive has four tenses (present, future, aorist, perfect) and three voices (active, middle, passive). Present and perfect have the same infinitive for both middle and passive, while future and aorist have separate middle and passive forms.\n\n! !! active !! middle !! passive\n! present\n! future\n\n! aorist\n\n! perfect\n\nThematic verbs form present active infinitives by adding to the stem the thematic vowel and the infinitive ending , and contracts to , e.g., . Athematic verbs, and perfect actives and aorist passives, add the suffix instead, e.g., . In the middle and passive, the present middle infinitive ending is , e.g., and most tenses of thematic verbs add an additional between the ending and the stem, e.g., .\n\nThe infinitive \"per se\" does not exist in Modern Greek. To see this, consider the ancient Greek \"ἐθέλω γράφειν\" “I want to write”. In modern Greek this becomes \"θέλω να γράψω\" “I want that I write”. In modern Greek, the infinitive has thus changed form and function and is used mainly in the formation of periphrastic tense forms and not with an article or alone. Instead of the Ancient Greek infinitive system \"γράφειν, γράψειν, γράψαι, γεγραφέναι\", Modern Greek uses only the form \"γράψει\", a development of the ancient Greek aorist infinitive \"γράψαι\". This form is also invariable. The modern Greek infinitive has only two forms according to voice: for example, \"γράψει\" for the active voice and \"γραφ(τ)εί\" for the passive voice (coming from the ancient passive aorist infinitive \"γραφῆναι\").\n\nThe infinitive in Russian usually ends in \"-t’\" (ть) preceded by a thematic vowel, or \"-ti\" (ти), if not preceded by one; some verbs have a stem ending in a consonant and change the \"t\" to \"č’\", like \"*mogt’ → moč’\" (*могть → мочь) \"can\". Some other Balto-Slavic languages have the infinitive typically ending in, for example, \"-ć\" (sometimes \"-c\") in Polish, \"-t’\" in Slovak, \"-t\" (formerly \"-ti\") in Czech and Latvian (with a handful ending in -s on the latter), \"-ty\" (-ти) in Ukrainian, -ць (\"-ts\"') in Belarusian. Lithuanian infinitives end in -\"ti\", Slovenian end on -\"ti\" or -\"či\", and Croatian on -\"ti\" or -\"ći\".\n\nSerbian officially retains infinitives -\"ti\" or -\"ći\", but is more flexible than the other slavic languages in breaking the infinitive through a clause. The infinitive nevertheless remains the dictionary form. \n\nBulgarian and Macedonian have lost the infinitive altogether except in a handful of frozen expressions where it is the same as the 3rd person singular aorist form. Almost all expressions where an infinitive may be used in Bulgarian are listed here; neverthess in all cases a subordinate clause is the more usual form. For that reason, the present first-person singular conjugation is the dictionary form in Bulgarian, while Macedonian uses the third person singular form of the verb in present tense.\n\nHebrew has \"two\" infinitives, the infinitive absolute and the infinitive construct. The infinitive construct is used after prepositions and is inflected with pronominal endings to indicate its subject or object: \"bikhtōbh hassōphēr\" \"when the scribe wrote\", \"ahare lekhtō\" \"after his going\". When the infinitive construct is preceded by (\"lə-\", \"li-\", \"lā-\", \"lo-\") \"to\", it has a similar meaning to the English \"to\"-infinitive, and this is its most frequent use in Modern Hebrew. The infinitive absolute is used for verb focus and emphasis, like in \"mōth yāmūth\" (literally \"a dying he will die\"; figuratively, \"he shall indeed/surely die\"). This usage is commonplace in the Bible, but in Modern Hebrew it is restricted to high-flown literary works.\n\nNote, however, that the \"to\"-infinitive of Hebrew is not the dictionary form; that is the third person singular perfect form.\n\nThe Finnish grammatical tradition includes many non-finite forms that are generally labeled as (numbered) infinitives although many of these are functionally converbs. To form the so-called first infinitive, the strong form of the root (without consonant gradation or epenthetic 'e') is used, and these changes occur:\nBULLET::::1. the root is suffixed with \"-ta/-tä\" according to vowel harmony\nBULLET::::2. consonant elision takes place if applicable, e.g., \"juoks+ta\" → \"juosta\"\nBULLET::::3. assimilation of clusters violating sonority hierarchy if applicable, e.g., \"nuol+ta\" → \"nuolla\", \"sur+ta\" → \"surra\"\nBULLET::::4. 't' weakens to 'd' after diphthongs, e.g., \"juo+ta\" → \"juoda\"\nBULLET::::5. 't' elides if intervocalic, e.g., \"kirjoitta+ta\" → \"kirjoittaa\"\n\nAs such, it is inconvenient for dictionary use, because the imperative would be closer to the root word. Nevertheless, dictionaries use the first infinitive.\n\nThere are also four other infinitives, plus a \"long\" form of the first:\nBULLET::::- The long first infinitive is \"-kse-\" and must have a personal suffix appended to it. It has the general meaning of \"in order to [do something], e.g., \"kirjoittaakseni\" \"in order for me to write [something]\".\nBULLET::::- The second infinitive is formed by replacing the final \"-a/-ä\" of the first infinitive with \"e\". It can take the inessive and instructive cases to create forms like \"kirjoittaessa\" \"while writing\".\nBULLET::::- The third infinitive is formed by adding \"-ma\" to the first infinitive, which alone creates an \"agent\" form: \"kirjoita-\" becomes \"kirjoittama\". The third infinitive is technically a noun (denoting the act of performing some verb), so case suffixes identical to those attached to ordinary Finnish nouns allow for other expressions using the third infinitive, e.g., \"kirjoittamalla\" \"by writing\".\nBULLET::::- A personal suffix can then be added to this form to indicate the \"agent participle\", such that \"kirjoittamani kirja\" = \"The book that I wrote.\"\nBULLET::::- The fourth infinitive adds \"-minen\" to the first to form a noun that has the connotation of \"the process of [doing something]\", e.g., \"kirjoittaminen\" \"[the process of] writing\". It, too, can be inflected like other Finnish nouns that end in \"-nen\".\nBULLET::::- The fifth infinitive adds \"-maisilla-\" to the first, and like the long first infinitive, must take a possessive suffix. It has to do with being \"about to [do something]\" and may also imply that the act was cut off or interrupted, e.g., \"kirjoittamaisillasi\" \"you were about to write [but something interrupted you]\". This form is more commonly replaced by the third infinitive in adessive case, usually also with a possessive suffix (thus \"kirjoittamallasi\").\nNote that all of these must change to reflect vowel harmony, so the fifth infinitive (with a third-person suffix) of \"hypätä\" \"jump\" is \"hyppäämäisillään\" \"he was about to jump\", not \"*hyppäämaisillaan\".\n\nThe Seri language of northwestern Mexico has infinitival forms used in two constructions (with the verb meaning 'want' and with the verb meaning 'be able'). The infinitive is formed by adding a prefix to the stem: either \"iha-\" (plus a vowel change of certain vowel-initial stems) if the complement clause is transitive, or \"ica-\" (and no vowel change) if the complement clause is intransitive. The infinitive shows agreement in number with the controlling subject. Examples are: \"icatax ihmiimzo\" 'I want to go', where \"icatax\" is the singular infinitive of the verb 'go' (singular root is \"-atax\"), and \"icalx hamiimcajc\" 'we want to go', where \"icalx\" is the plural infinitive. Examples of the transitive infinitive: \"ihaho\" 'to see it/him/her/them' (root \"-aho\"), and \"ihacta\" 'to look at it/him/her/them' (root \"-oocta\").\n\nIn languages without an infinitive, the infinitive is translated either as a \"that\"-clause or as a verbal noun. For example, in Literary Arabic the sentence \"I want to write a book\" is translated as either \"urīdu an aktuba kitāban\" (lit. \"I want that I write a book\", with a verb in the subjunctive mood) or \"urīdu kitābata kitābin\" (lit. \"I want the writing of a book\", with the \"masdar\" or verbal noun), and in Levantine Colloquial Arabic \"biddi aktub kitāb\" (subordinate clause with verb in subjunctive).\n\nEven in languages that have infinitives, similar constructions are sometimes necessary where English would allow the infinitive. For example, in French the sentence \"I want you to come\" translates to \"Je veux que vous veniez\" (lit. \"I want that you come\", with \"come\" being in the subjunctive mood). However, \"I want to come\" is simply \"Je veux venir\", using the infinitive, just as in English. In Russian, sentences such as \"I want you to leave\" do not use an infinitive. Rather, they use the conjunction чтобы \"in order to/so that\" with the past tense form (most probably remnant of subjunctive) of the verb: \"Я хочу, чтобы вы ушли\" (literally, \"I want so that you left\").\n\nBULLET::::- Auxiliary verb\nBULLET::::- Finite verb\nBULLET::::- Gerund\nBULLET::::- Non-finite verb\nBULLET::::- Split infinitive\nBULLET::::- Verbal noun\n"}
{"id": "15256", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15256", "title": "Immaculate Conception", "text": "Immaculate Conception\n\nIn Roman Catholic Christian theology, the Immaculate Conception is the conception of the Virgin Mary free from original sin by virtue of the merits of her son Jesus. The Catholic Church teaches that God acted upon Mary in the first moment of her conception, keeping her \"immaculate\". Other Christian denominations have a range of views on the matter.\n\nThe Immaculate Conception is commonly confused with the virgin birth of Jesus, the latter saying that Jesus was conceived and born by his mother Mary without a human father. While many Christians believe in the virgin birth of Jesus, it is principally Roman Catholics who believe in the doctrine of the Immaculate Conception.\n\nAlthough the belief that Mary was sinless, or conceived without original sin, has been widely held since Late Antiquity, the doctrine was not dogmatically defined in the Catholic Church until 1854 when Pope Pius IX, declared \"ex cathedra\", i.e., using papal infallibility, in his papal bull \"Ineffabilis Deus\", the Immaculate Conception to be doctrine. The Catholic Church celebrates the Solemnity of the Immaculate Conception on December 8; in many Catholic countries, it is a holy day of obligation or patronal feast, and in some a national public holiday.\n\nThe defined dogma of the Immaculate Conception states:\nThe definition concerns original sin only, and it makes no declaration about the Church's belief that the Blessed Virgin was sinless in the sense of freedom from actual or personal sin. \nThe doctrine teaches that from her conception Mary, being always free from original sin, received the sanctifying grace that would normally come with baptism after birth.\n\nThe Encyclical \"Mystici Corporis\" from Pope Pius XII (1943) in addition holds that Mary was also sinless personally, \"free from all sin, original or personal\". In this, Pius XII repeats a position already expressed by the Council of Trent, which decreed \"If anyone shall say that a man once justified can sin no more, nor lose grace, and that therefore he who falls and sins was never truly justified; or, on the contrary, that throughout his whole life he can avoid all sins even venial sins, except by a special privilege of God, as the Church holds in regard to the Blessed Virgin: let him be anathema.\"\nWhen defining the dogma in \"Ineffabilis Deus\", Pope Pius IX explicitly affirmed that Mary was redeemed in a manner more sublime. He stated that Mary, rather than being cleansed after sin, was completely prevented from contracting original sin in view of the foreseen merits of Jesus Christ, the Savior of the human race. In , Mary proclaims: \"My spirit has rejoiced in God my Saviour.\" This is referred to as Mary's pre-redemption by Christ. Since the Second Council of Orange against semi-pelagianism, the Catholic Church has taught that even had man never sinned in the Garden of Eden and was sinless, he would still require God's grace to remain sinless.\n\nThe doctrine of the Immaculate Conception (Mary being conceived free from original sin) is not to be confused with the virginal conception of her son Jesus. Catholics believe that Mary was conceived of both parents, traditionally known by the names of Saint Joachim and Saint Anne. In 1677, the Holy See condemned the error of Imperiali who taught that St. Anne in the conception and birth of Mary remained virgin, which had been a belief surfacing occasionally since the 4th century. The Church celebrates the Feast of the Immaculate Conception (when Mary was conceived free from original sin) on December 8, exactly nine months before celebrating the Nativity of Mary. The feast of the Annunciation (which commemorates the virginal conception and the Incarnation of Jesus) is celebrated on March 25, nine months before Christmas Day.\n\nA feast of the Conception of the Most Holy and All Pure Mother of God was celebrated in Syria on December 8 perhaps as early as the 5th century. The title of \"achrantos\" (spotless, immaculate, all-pure) refers to the holiness of Mary, not specifically to the holiness of her conception.\n\nMary's complete sinlessness and concomitant exemption from any taint from the first moment of her existence was a doctrine familiar to Greek theologians of Byzantium. Beginning with St. Gregory Nazianzen, his explanation of the \"purification\" of Jesus and Mary at the circumcision (Luke 2:22) prompted him to consider the primary meaning of \"purification\" in Christology (and by extension in Mariology) to refer to a perfectly sinless nature that manifested itself in glory in a moment of grace (e.g., Jesus at his Baptism). St. Gregory Nazianzen designated Mary as \"prokathartheisa\" (prepurified). Gregory likely attempted to solve the riddle of the Purification of Jesus and Mary in the Temple through considering the human natures of Jesus and Mary as equally holy and therefore both purified in this manner of grace and glory. Gregory's doctrines surrounding Mary's purification were likely related to the burgeoning commemoration of the Mother of God in and around Constantinople very close to the date of Christmas. Nazianzen's title of Mary at the Annunciation as \"prepurified\" was subsequently adopted by all theologians interested in his Mariology to justify the Byzantine equivalent of the Immaculate Conception. This is especially apparent in the Fathers St. Sophronios of Jerusalem and St. John Damascene, who will be treated below in this article at the section on Church Fathers. About the time of Damascene, the public celebration of the \"Conception of St. Ann\" (i.e., of the \"Theotokos\" in her womb) was becoming popular. After this period, the \"purification\" of the perfect natures of Jesus and Mary would not only mean moments of grace and glory at the Incarnation and Baptism and other public Byzantine liturgical feasts, but purification was eventually associated with the feast of Mary's very conception (along with her Presentation in the Temple as a toddler) by Orthodox authors of the 2nd millennium (e.g., St. Nicholas Cabasilas and Joseph Bryennius).\n\nIt is admitted that the doctrine as defined by Pius IX was not explicitly noted before the 12th century. It is also agreed that \"no direct or categorical and stringent proof of the dogma can be brought forward from Scripture\". But it is claimed that the doctrine is implicitly contained in the teaching of the Fathers. Their expressions on the subject of the sinlessness of Mary are, it is pointed out, so ample and so absolute that they must be taken to include original sin as well as actual. Thus in the first five centuries such epithets as \"in every respect holy\", \"in all things unstained\", \"super-innocent\", and \"singularly holy\" are applied to her; she is compared to Eve before the fall, as ancestress of a redeemed people; she is \"the earth before it was accursed\". The well-known words of St. Augustine (d. 430) may be cited: \"As regards the mother of God,\" he says, \"I will not allow any question whatever of sin.\" It is true that he is here speaking directly of actual or personal sin. But his argument is that all men are sinners; that they are so through original depravity; that this original depravity may be overcome by the grace of God, and he adds that he does not know but that Mary may have had sufficient grace to overcome sin \"of every sort\" (\"omni ex parte\").\n\nAlthough the doctrine of Mary's Immaculate Conception appears only later among Latin (and particularly Frankish) theologians, it became ever more manifest among Byzantine theologians reliant on Gregory Nazianzen's Mariology in the Medieval or Byzantine East. Although hymnographers and scholars, like the Emperor Justinian I, were accustomed to call Mary \"prepurified\" in their poetic and credal statements, the first point of departure for more fully commenting on Nazianzen's meaning occurs in Sophronius of Jerusalem. In other places Sophronius explains that the Theotokos was already immaculate, when she was \"purified\" at the Annunciation and goes so far as to note that John the Baptist is literally \"holier than all 'Men' born of woman\" since Mary's surpassing holiness signifies that she was holier than even John after his sanctification in utero. Sophronius' teaching is augmented and incorporated by St. John Damascene (d. 749/750). John, besides many passages wherein he extolls the Theotokos for her purification at the Annunciation, grants her the unique honor of \"purifying the waters of baptism by touching them\". This honor was most famously and firstly attributed to Christ, especially in the legacy of Nazianzen. As such, Nazianzen's assertion of parallel holiness between the prepurified Mary and purified Jesus of the New Testament is made even more explicit in Damascene in his discourse on Mary's holiness to also imitate Christ's baptism at the Jordan. The Damascene's hymnongraphy and \"De fide Orthodoxa\" explicitly use Mary's \"pre-purification\" as a key to understanding her absolute holiness and unsullied human nature. In fact, Damascene (along with Nazianzen) serves as the source for nearly all subsequent promotion of Mary's complete holiness from her Conception by the \"all pure seed\" of Joachim and the womb \"wider than heaven\" of St. Ann.\n\nBernard of Clairvaux in the 12th century raised the question of the Immaculate Conception. A feast of the Conception of the Blessed Virgin had already begun to be celebrated in some churches of the West. St Bernard blames the canons of the metropolitan church of Lyon for instituting such a festival without the permission of the Holy See. In doing so, he takes occasion to repudiate altogether the view that the conception of Mary was sinless, calling it a \"novelty\". Some doubt, however, whether he was using the term \"conception\" in the same sense in which it is used in the definition of Pope Pius IX. Bernard would seem to have been speaking of conception in the active sense of the mother's cooperation, for in his argument he says: \"How can there be absence of sin where there is concupiscence (\"libido\")?\" and stronger expressions follow, which could be interpreted to indicate that he was speaking of the mother and not of the child. Yet, Bernard also decries those who support the feast for trying to \"add to the glories of Mary\", which proves he was indeed talking about Mary.\n\nSaint Thomas Aquinas rejected the Immaculate Conception, saying if the Virgin Mary had been sanctified before her conception, she would not have needed the redemption of Christ concluding that \"Blessed Virgin was sanctified after animation\". Aquinas distinguished between first time of conception, animation and birth: with the word \"conception\" is meant the first time of life of the human body, caused by the parents' union (except for the Virgin birth of Jesus), whereas the term \"animation\" indicates the following time where a soul is believed to be created by God, and then by Him unified together with the human body. The person exists only when the body has received its own soul. Latin \"Summa theologica\" affirms:\nSaint Bonaventure (d. 1274), second only to Saint Thomas in his influence on the Christian schools of his age, hesitated to accept it for a similar reason. He believed that Mary was completely free from sin, but that she was not given this grace at the instant of her conception.\n\nThe celebrated John Duns Scotus (d. 1308), a Friar Minor like Saint Bonaventure, argued, on the contrary, that from a rational point of view it was certainly as little derogatory to the merits of Christ to assert that Mary was by him preserved from all taint of sin, as to say that she first contracted it and then was delivered. Proposing a solution to the theological problem of reconciling the doctrine with that of universal redemption in Christ, he argued that Mary's immaculate conception did not remove her from redemption by Christ; rather it was the result of a more perfect redemption granted her because of her special role in salvation history.\n\nThe arguments of Scotus, combined with a better acquaintance with the language of the early Fathers, gradually prevailed in the schools of the Western Church. In 1387 the university of Paris strongly condemned the opposite view.\n\nScotus's arguments remained controversial, however, particularly among the Dominicans, who were willing enough to celebrate Mary's \"sanctificatio\" (being made free from sin) but, following the Dominican Thomas Aquinas' arguments, continued to insist that her sanctification could not have occurred until after her conception.\n\nPopular opinion remained firmly behind the celebration of Mary's conception. In 1439, the Council of Basel, which is not reckoned an ecumenical council, stated that belief in the immaculate conception of Mary is in accord with the Catholic faith. By the end of the 15th century the belief was widely professed and taught in many theological faculties, but such was the influence of the Dominicans, and the weight of the arguments of Thomas Aquinas (who had been canonised in 1323 and declared \"Doctor Angelicus\" of the Church in 1567) that the Council of Trent (1545–1563)—which might have been expected to affirm the doctrine—instead declined to take a position.\n\nThe papal bull defining the dogma, \"Ineffabilis Deus\" (1854), mentioned in particular the patrististic interpretation of as referring to a woman, Mary, who would be eternally at enmity with the evil serpent and completely triumphing over him. It said the Fathers saw foreshadowings of Mary's \"wondrous abundance of divine gifts and original innocence\" \"in that ark of Noah, which was built by divine command and escaped entirely safe and sound from the common shipwreck of the whole world; in the ladder which Jacob saw reaching from the earth to heaven, by whose rungs the angels of God ascended and descended, and on whose top the Lord himself leaned; in that bush which Moses saw in the holy place burning on all sides, which was not consumed or injured in any way but grew green and blossomed beautifully; in that impregnable tower before the enemy, from which hung a thousand bucklers and all the armor of the strong; in that garden enclosed on all sides, which cannot be violated or corrupted by any deceitful plots; in that resplendent city of God, which has its foundations on the holy mountains; in that most august temple of God, which, radiant with divine splendours, is full of the glory of God; and in very many other biblical types of this kind.\"\n\nThe bull recounts that the Fathers interpreted the angel's address to Mary, \"highly favoured one\" or \"full of grace\", as indicating that \"she was never subject to the curse and was, together with her Son, the only partaker of perpetual benediction\"; they \"frequently compare her to Eve while yet a virgin, while yet innocence, while yet incorrupt, while not yet deceived by the deadly snares of the most treacherous serpent\".\n\nThe theological underpinnings of Immaculate Conception had been the subject of debate during the Middle Ages with opposition provided by figures such as Saint Thomas Aquinas, a Dominican. However, supportive arguments by Franciscans William of Ware and Duns Scotus, and general belief among Catholics made the doctrine more acceptable, so that the Council of Basel supported it in the 15th century, but the Council of Trent sidestepped the question. Pope Sixtus IV, a Franciscan, had tried to pacify the situation by forbidding either side to criticize the other, and placed the feast of the Immaculate Conception on the Roman Calendar in 1477, but Pope Pius V, a Dominican, changed it to the feast of the Conception of Mary. Clement XI made the feast universal in 1708, but still did not call it the feast of the Immaculate Conception. Popular and theological support for the concept continued to grow and by the 18th century it was widely depicted in art.\n\nDuring the reign of Pope Gregory XVI the bishops in various countries began to press for a definition as dogma of the teaching of Mary's immaculate conception.\n\nIn 1839, Mariano Spada (1796–1872), professor of theology at the Roman College of Saint Thomas, published \"Esame Critico sulla dottrina dell' Angelico Dottore S. Tommaso di Aquino circa il Peccato originale, relativamente alla Beatissima Vergine Maria\" [\"A critical examination of the doctrine of St. Thomas Aquinas, the Angelic Doctor, regarding original sin with respect to the Most Blessed Virgin Mary\"], in which Aquinas is interpreted not as treating the question of the Immaculate Conception later formulated in the papal bull \"Ineffabilis Deus\" but rather the sanctification of Mary within the womb of Saint Anne. Spada furnished an interpretation whereby Pius IX was relieved of the problem of seeming to foster a doctrine not in agreement with the Aquinas' teaching. Pope Pius IX would later appoint Spada Master of the Sacred Palace in 1867.\n\nPius IX, at the beginning of his pontificate, and again after 1851, appointed commissions to investigate the whole subject, and he was advised that the doctrine was one which could be defined and that the time for a definition was opportune.\n\nIt was not until 1854 that Pope Pius IX, with the support of the overwhelming majority of Roman Catholic bishops, whom he had consulted between 1851–1853, promulgated the papal bull \"Ineffabilis Deus\" (Latin for \"Ineffable God\"), which defined \"ex cathedra\" the dogma of the Immaculate Conception:\n\nThe dogma was defined in accordance with the conditions of papal infallibility, which would be defined in 1870 by the First Vatican Council.\n\nThe papal definition of the dogma declares with absolute certainty and authority that Mary possessed sanctifying grace from the first instant of her existence and was free from the lack of grace caused by the original sin at the beginning of human history. Mary's salvation was won by her son Jesus Christ through his passion, death, and resurrection and was not due to her own merits.\n\nGeorge Sale in 1734 proposed that the doctrine of immaculate conception of Mary may be alluded to in the text of the Qur'an. \nThus, commenting in 1734 on the passage \"I have called her Mary; and I commend her to thy protection, and also her issue, against Satan driven away with stones\", Sale stated: \"It is not improbable that the pretended immaculate conception of the virgin Mary is intimated in this passage. For according to a tradition of Mohammed, every person that comes into the world, is touched at his birth by the devil, and therefore cries out, Mary and her son only excepted; between whom, and the evil spirit God placed a veil, so that his touch did not reach them. And for this reason they say, neither of them were guilty of any sin, like the rest of the children of Adam.\"\nEdward Gibbon in volume 5 of his \"Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire\", published in 1788, wrote: \"The Latin Church has not disdained to borrow from the Koran the immaculate conception of his virgin mother.\" That he was speaking of her immaculate conception by her mother, not of her own virginal conception of Jesus, is shown by his footnote: \"In the xiith century the immaculate conception was condemned by St. Bernard as a presumptuous novelty.\" \nIn the aftermath of the definition of the dogma in 1854, this charge was repeated in an article published in 1865: \"Strange as it may appear, that the doctrine which the church of Rome has promulgated, with so much pomp and ceremony, 'for the destruction of all heresies, and the confirmation of the faith of her adherents', should have its origin in the Mohametan Bible; yet the testimony of such authorities as Gibbon, and Sale, and Forster, and Gagnier, and Maracci, leave no doubt as to the marvellous fact.\"\n\nWithout making Islamic belief the origin of the doctrine defined in 1854, a similarity between the two has been noted also by Roman Catholic writers such as Thomas Patrick Hughes, William Bernard Ullathorne, and Giancarlo Finazzo.\n\n\"The English Commentary of the Holy Quran\" (1988) argues that this interpretation is misleading because Islam does not embrace the concept of original sin to begin with, so Mary could not have been exempt from it.\n\nMoreover, Hannah's prayer in the Quran for her child to remain protected from Satan (Shayṭān) was said \"after\" it had already been born, not before and expresses a natural concern any righteous parent would have.\n\nA \"hadith\" nevertheless states that the only children born without the \"touch of Satan\" were Mary and Jesus- \nThe specific mention of Mary and Jesus in this hadith has been argued as taken to \"represent a class of people\", in keeping with the Arabic language and the Quranic verse \"[O Satan,] surely thou shalt have no power over My servants, except such of the erring ones as choose to follow thee\" (15:42).\n\nFor the Roman Catholic Church the dogma of the Immaculate Conception gained additional significance from the reputed apparitions of Our Lady of Lourdes in 1858. At Lourdes a 14-year-old girl, Bernadette Soubirous, claimed that a beautiful woman appeared to her and said, \"I am the Immaculate Conception\". Many believe the woman to have been the Blessed Virgin Mary and pray to her as such.\n\nPope Pius IX defined the dogma of the Immaculate Conception \"not so much because of proofs in Scripture or ancient tradition, but due to a profound \"sensus fidelium\" and the Magisterium\".\n\nSpeaking of the witness of the Church Fathers in claiming for Mary titles such as \"Free from all contagion of sin\", Pope Pius XII wrote:\nThe Roman Catholic tradition has a well-established philosophy for the study of the Immaculate Conception and the veneration of the Blessed Virgin Mary in the field of Mariology, with Pontifical schools such as the Marianum specifically devoted to this.\n\nAccording to Bernard Ullathorne, a 19th-century English Roman Catholic prelate, \"the expressions – The Immaculate Conception – The Immaculate Preservation – The Immunity – and Exception from original sin, are all phrases which bear the same signification, and are used equally to express one and the same mystery.\"\n\nA number of countries are considered to be under the patronage of the Immaculate Conception by pontifical decree. These include Argentina, Brazil, Korea, Nicaragua, Paraguay, the Philippines, Spain (including the old kingdoms and the present state), the United States and Uruguay. By royal decree under the House of Bragança, she is the principal Patroness of Portugal.\n\nBy 750, the feast of her conception (December 8) was widely celebrated in the Byzantine East, under the name of the Conception (active) of Saint Anne. In the West it was known as the feast of the Conception (passive) of Mary, and was associated particularly with the Normans, whether these introduced it directly from the East or took it from English usage. The spread of the feast, by now with the adjective \"Immaculate\" attached to its title, met opposition on the part of some, on the grounds that sanctification was possible only after conception. Critics included Saints Bernard of Clairvaux, Albertus Magnus and Thomas Aquinas. Other theologians defended the expression \"Immaculate Conception\", pointing out that sanctification could be conferred at the first moment of conception in view of the foreseen merits of Christ, a view held especially by Franciscans.\n\nWilliam of Ware and Blessed John Duns Scotus pointed out that Mary’s Immaculate Conception enhances Jesus’ redemptive work. One of the chief proponents of the doctrine was the Hungarian Franciscan Pelbartus Ladislaus of Temesvár.\nOn February 28, 1476, Pope Sixtus IV, authorized those dioceses that wished to introduce the feast to do so, and introduced it to his own diocese of Rome in 1477, with a specially composed Mass and Office of the feast. With his bull \"Cum praeexcelsa\" of February 28, 1477, in which he referred to the feast as that of the Conception of Mary, without using the word \"Immaculate\", he granted indulgences to those who would participate in the specially composed Mass or Office on the feast itself or during its octave, and he used the word \"immaculate\" of Mary, but applied instead the adjective \"miraculous\" to her conception. On September 4, 1483, referring to the feast as that of \"the Conception of Immaculate Mary ever Virgin\", he condemned both those who called it mortally sinful and heretical to hold that the \"glorious and immaculate mother of God was conceived \"without\" the stain of original sin\" and those who called it mortally sinful and heretical to hold that \"the glorious Virgin Mary was conceived \"with\" original sin\", since, he said, \"up to this time there has been no decision made by the Roman Church and the Apostolic See.\" This decree was reaffirmed by the Council of Trent.\n\nPope Pius V, while including the feast in the Tridentine Calendar, removed the adjective \"Immaculate\" and suppressed the existing special Mass for the feast, directing that the Mass for the Nativity of Mary (with the word \"Nativity\" replaced by \"Conception\") be used instead. Part of that earlier Mass was revived in the Mass that Pope Pius IX ordered to be used on the feast and that is still in use.\n\nOn December 6, 1708, Pope Clement XI made the feast of the Conception of Mary, at that time still with the Nativity of Mary formula for the Mass, a Holy Day of Obligation. Until Pope Pius X reduced in 1911 the number of Holy Days of Obligation to 8, there were in the course of the year 36 such days, apart from Sundays. Writers such as Sarah Jane Boss interpret the existence of the feast as a strong indication of the Church's traditional belief in the Immaculate Conception.\n\nFor differing reasons, belief in Mary's immaculate conception in the Catholic doctrinal form is not part of the official doctrines of the Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, Anglican and Protestant churches.\n\nContemporary Eastern Orthodox Christians often object to the dogmatic declaration of her immaculate conception as an \"over-elaboration\" of the faith and because they see it as too closely connected with a particular interpretation of the doctrine of ancestral sin. All the same, the historical and authentic tradition of Mariology in Byzantium took its historical point of departure from Sophronios, Damascene, and their imitators. The most famous Eastern Orthodox theologian to imply Mary's Immaculate Conception was St. Gregory Palamas. Though many passages from his works were long known to extol and attribute to Mary a Christlike holiness in her human nature, traditional objections to Palamas' disposition toward the Immaculate Conception typically rely on a poor understanding of his doctrine of \"the purification of Mary\" at the Annunciation. Not only did he explicitly cite St. Gregory Nazianzen for his understanding of Jesus' purification at His baptism and Mary's at the Annunciation, but Theophanes of Nicaea, Joseph Bryennius, and Gennadios Scholarios all explicitly placed Mary's Conception as the first moment of her all-immaculate participation in the divine energies to such a degree that she was always completely without spot and graced. In addition to Emperor Manuel II and Gennadius Scholarius, St. Mark of Ephesus also fervently defended Mary's title as \"prepurified\" against the Dominican Manuel Calecas, who was perhaps promoting thomistic Mariology that denied Mary's all-holiness from the first moment of her existence.\n\nIn the tradition of Ethiopian Orthodoxy, the Kebra Nagast says:\nWhile Old Catholics do not reject the Immaculate Conception of Mary, and some of their parishes venerate Mary as immaculately conceived and celebrate the feast of her Immaculate Conception, they do not accept its definition as a dogma, since they reject papal infallibility and, with it, the Pope's authority to define dogma.\n\nMartin Luther, who was excommunicated in the 1520 papal bull \"Exsurge Domine\", stated \"Mother Mary, like us, was born in sin of sinful parents, but the Holy Spirit covered her, sanctified and purified her so that this child was born of flesh and blood, but not with sinful flesh and blood. The Holy Spirit permitted the Virgin Mary to remain a true, natural human being of flesh and blood, just as we. However, he warded off sin from her flesh and blood so that she became the mother of a pure child, not poisoned by sin as we are. For in that moment when she conceived, she was a holy mother filled with the Holy Spirit and her fruit is a holy pure fruit, at once God and truly man, in one person.\" Some Lutherans, such as the members of the Anglo-Lutheran Catholic Church, support the doctrine.\n\nLater on, Lutheran theologian Martin Chemnitz considered whether Mary was sinless in his \"Examination of the Council of Trent\" and concluded that the \"Decretum Gelasianum\" condemned certain not only certain Marian and nativity related pseudepigrapha, but also the doctrines they contained.\n\nMost Protestants today reject the doctrine because they do not consider the development of dogmatic theology to be authoritative apart from biblical exegesis, and because the doctrine of the Immaculate Conception is not taught in the Bible. The formal pronouncement of Mary's Immaculate Conception by the Catholic Church in 1854 further alienated some Protestant churches largely due to its implication that not all have sinned.\n\nBelief in Mary's immaculate conception is not a doctrine within Anglicanism, although it is shared by many Anglo-Catholics. In the Church of England's \"Common Worship\" prayer book, December 8 is designated a Lesser Festival of the \"Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary\" (without the adjective \"immaculate\").\n\nThe report \"Mary: Faith and Hope in Christ\", by the Anglican-Roman Catholic International Commission, concluded that the teaching about Mary in the two definitions of the Assumption and the Immaculate Conception can be said to be consonant with the teaching of the Scriptures and the ancient common traditions. But the report expressed concerns that the Roman Catholic dogmatic definitions of these concepts implies them to be \"revealed by God\", stating: \"The question arises for Anglicans, however, as to whether these doctrines concerning Mary are revealed by God in a way which must be held by believers as a matter of faith.\"\n\nOther than Anglo-Catholics, most Anglicans reject the doctrine that Mary was sinless and conceived without original sin, often citing that it is not within the Holy Scripture and is against the redemptive role and purpose of Jesus Christ merited for all human beings.\n\nThe Roman Missal and the Roman Rite Liturgy of the Hours naturally includes references to Mary's immaculate conception in the feast of the Immaculate Conception. An example is the antiphon that begins: \"Tota pulchra es, Maria, et macula originalis non est in te\" (\"You are all beautiful, Mary, and the original stain [of sin] is not in you.\" It continues: \"Your clothing is white as snow, and your face is like the sun. You are all beautiful, Mary, and the original stain [of sin] is not in you. You are the glory of Jerusalem, you are the joy of Israel, you give honour to our people. You are all beautiful, Mary.\") On the basis of the original Gregorian chant music, polyphonic settings have been composed by Anton Bruckner, Pablo Casals, Maurice Duruflé, Grzegorz Gerwazy Gorczycki, , José Maurício Nunes Garcia, and .\n\nOther prayers honouring Mary's immaculate conception are in use outside the formal liturgy. The Immaculata prayer, composed by Saint Maximillian Kolbe, is a prayer of entrustment to Mary as the Immaculata. A novena of prayers, with a specific prayer for each of the nine days has been composed under the title of the Immaculate Conception Novena.\n\nAve Maris Stella is the vesper hymn of the feast of the Immaculate Conception. The hymn \"Immaculate Mary\", addressed to Mary as the Immaculately Conceived One, is closely associated with Lourdes.\n\nDuring the Medieval period, the conception of Mary was symbolically depicted in the Meeting at the Golden Gate and was an early scene in the many cycles of the \"Life of the Virgin\", as a counterpart of the Annunciation showing the conception of Jesus. To some medieval viewers, the kiss was a literal representation of the moment of Mary's conception, while for others it was a symbolic representation. The 14th and 15th centuries were the highpoint of these depictions. Gradually more allegorical depictions of the Immaculate Conception, featuring an adult Mary, replaced this scene in representing the doctrine.\n\nThe 1476 extension of the feast of the Immaculate Conception to the entire Latin Church reduced the likelihood of controversy for the artist or patron in depicting an image, so that emblems depicting \"The Immaculate Conception\" began to appear.\n\nMany artists in the 15th century faced the problem of how to depict an abstract idea such as the Immaculate Conception, and the problem was not fully solved for 150 years. The Italian Renaissance artist Piero di Cosimo was among those artists who tried new solutions, but none of these became generally adopted so that the subject matter would be immediately recognisable to the faithful.\n\nThe definitive iconography for the Immaculate Conception, drawing on the emblem tradition, seems to have been finally established by the master and then father-in-law of Diego Velázquez, the painter and theorist Francisco Pacheco. Pacheco's iconography influenced other Spanish artists or artists active in Spain such as El Greco, Bartolomé Murillo, Diego Velázquez, and Francisco Zurbarán, who each produced a number of artistic masterpieces based on the use of these same symbols.\n\nThe popularity of this particular representation of \"The Immaculate Conception\" spread across the rest of Europe, and has since remained the best known artistic depiction of the concept: in a heavenly realm, moments after her creation, the spirit of Mary (in the form of a young woman) looks up in awe at (or bows her head to) God. The moon is under her feet and a halo of twelve stars surround her head, possibly a reference to \"a woman clothed with the sun\" from Revelation 12:1–2. Additional imagery may include clouds, a golden light, and putti. In some paintings the putti are holding lilies and roses, flowers often associated with Mary.\n\nBULLET::::- Act for the Immaculate Conception of Mary\nBULLET::::- Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Congregation of the Immaculate Conception\nBULLET::::- Feast of the Immaculate Conception\nBULLET::::- Immaculate Mary\nBULLET::::- Immaculata prayer\nBULLET::::- Miraculous medal\nBULLET::::- Marian doctrines of the Catholic Church\nBULLET::::- Mother of God (Roman Catholic)\nBULLET::::- Original sin\nBULLET::::- Patronages of the Immaculate Conception\nBULLET::::- Perpetual virginity of Mary\nBULLET::::- Roman Catholic Marian art\nBULLET::::- Virgin birth of Jesus\n\nBULLET::::- Le Franc, Martin. \"The Conception of Mary – A Rhyming Translation of Book V of Le Champion des Dames by Martin Le Franc (1410–1461).\" Ed. and trans. Steven Millen Taylor. Lewiston, NY: The Edwin Mellen Press, 2010.\nBULLET::::- Response:\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Immaculate Conception in Art\" (Painting)\nBULLET::::- \"Ineffabilis Deus\" (Apostolic Constitution of Pope Pius IX defining the dogma of the Immaculate Conception)\nBULLET::::- Godzinki: The Little Hours of the Immaculate Conception\nBULLET::::- St. Alphonsus Liguori's writing on the Immaculate Conception in his book \"The Glories of Mary\"\nBULLET::::- \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" entry on the Immaculate Conception\nBULLET::::- \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" entry on Original Sin\nBULLET::::- The Immaculate Conception. A study by a Melkite archimandrite\nBULLET::::- The Immaculate Conception of the Mother of God based on Juniper Carol's Mariology and William Bernard Ullathornee's book\nBULLET::::- \"St. Augustine and Original Sin\" — a short article on the different understandings of Original Sin in Eastern and Western Christianity, without distinguishing Protestant theology from Roman Catholic. The latter holds that \"original sin does not have the character of a personal fault in any of Adam's descendants\" (\"Catechism of the Catholic Church\", 405).\nBULLET::::- Original Sin According To St. Paul by John S. Romanides\n"}
{"id": "15260", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15260", "title": "Islands of the North Atlantic", "text": "Islands of the North Atlantic\n\nIONA (Islands of the North Atlantic) is an acronym suggested in 1980 by Sir John Biggs-Davison to refer to a loose linkage of England, Wales, Scotland, Ireland, the Isle of Man and Channel Islands, similar to the present day British-Irish Council. Its intended purpose was as a more politically acceptable alternative to British Isles, which is disliked by many people in Ireland.\n\nThe neologism has been criticised on the grounds that it excludes most of the islands in the North Atlantic, and also that the only island referred to by the term that is actually in the North Atlantic Ocean is Ireland. Great Britain is in fact in between the Irish Sea and The North Sea. It has been used particularly in the context of the Northern Irish peace process during the negotiation of the Good Friday Agreement, as a neutral name for the proposed council.\n\nOne feature of this name is that IONA has the same spelling as the island of Iona which is off the coast of Scotland but with which Irish people have strong cultural associations. It is therefore a name with which people of both main islands might identify. Taoiseach Bertie Ahern noted the symbolism in a 2006 address in Edinburgh:[The Island of] Iona is a powerful symbol of relationships between these islands, with its ethos of service not dominion. Iona also radiated out towards the Europe of the Dark Ages, not to mention Pagan England at Lindisfarne. The British-Irish Council is the expression of a relationship that at the origin of the Anglo-Irish process in 1981 was sometimes given the name Iona, islands of the North Atlantic, and sometimes Council of the Isles, with its evocation of the Lords of the Isles of the 14th and 15th centuries who spanned the North Channel. In the 17th century, Highland warriors and persecuted Presbyterian Ministers criss-crossed the North Channel.\nIn a Dáil Éireann debate, Proinsias De Rossa was less enthusiastic: The acronym IONA is a useful way of addressing the coming together of these two islands. However, the island of Iona is probably a green heaven in that nobody lives on it and therefore it cannot be polluted in any way.\n\nOutside the Northern Ireland peace process the term IONA is used by the World Universities Debating Championship and in inter-varsity debating competitions throughout Britain and Ireland. In this context IONA is one of the regions which appoint a representative onto the committee of the World Universities Debating Council. Greenland, the Faroe Islands and Iceland would be included in the definition of IONA used in this context, while Newfoundland and Prince Edward Island would be in North America. However, none of these islands have yet participated in the World Universities Debating Championships. Otherwise, the term has achieved very little popular usage in any context.\n\nBULLET::::- British Isles naming dispute\nBULLET::::- British Isles (terminology)\n\nBULLET::::- The Good Friday Agreement\nBULLET::::- British-Irish Council\nBULLET::::- Project IONA\n"}
{"id": "15261", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15261", "title": "Intel DX4", "text": "Intel DX4\n\nThe IntelDX4 is a clock-tripled i486 microprocessor with 16 KB L1 cache. Intel named it DX4 (rather than \"DX3\") as a consequence of litigation with AMD over trademarks. The product was officially named the IntelDX4, but OEMs continued using the i486 naming convention.\n\nIntel produced IntelDX4s with two clock speed steppings: A 75 MHz version (3× 25 MHz multiplier), and a 100 MHz version (3× 33.3 MHz). Both chips were released in March 1994. A version of the IntelDX4 featuring write-back cache was released in October 1994. The original write-through versions of the chip are marked with a laser embossed \"&E\", while the write-back enabled versions are marked \"&EW\". i486 OverDrive editions of the IntelDX4 had locked multipliers, and therefore can only run at 3× the external clock-speed. The 100 MHz model of the processor had an iCOMP rating of 435, while the 75 MHz processor had a rating of 319. The IntelDX4 was an OEM-only product, but the DX4 Overdrive could be purchased at a retail store.\n\nThe IntelDX4 microprocessor is mostly pin-compatible with the 80486, but requires a lower 3.3 V supply. Normal 80486 and DX2 processors use a 5 V supply; plugging a DX4 into an unmodified socket will destroy it. Motherboards lacking support for the 3.3 V CPUs can sometimes make use of them using a voltage regulator (VRM) that fits between the socket and the CPU.\n\n! Processor speed (MHz)  Input clock (MHz)  Voltage center (V)  Voltage range (V)  Part number  Clock multiplier  S-spec number\n75  25× 3  3.3  3.1–3.6  FC80486DX4-75  3× mode only  SK052, SX883\n100  33× 3  3.3, 3.45  3.1–3.6  FC80486DX4-100  3× mode only  SX906\n100  33× 3 / 50× 2  3.45  3.3–3.6  FC80486DX4-100  3× or 2× mode  SX876\n100  33× 3 / 50× 2  3.3, 3.45  3.1–3.6  FC80486DX4-100  3× or 2× mode  SK053\n75  25× 3  3.3  3.1–3.6  A80486DX4-75  3× mode only  SK047, SX884\n100  33× 3  3.45  3.3–3.6  A80486DX4-100  3× mode only  SK051, SX900\n100  33× 3 / 50× 2  3.45  3.3–3.6  A80486DX4-100 3× or 2× mode  SX877\n100  33× 3 / 50× 2  3.3  3.1–3.6  A80486DX4-100  3× or 2× mode  SK050\n100  33× 3  3.45  3.3–3.6  A80486DX4WB-100  3× mode only  SK096\n100  33× 3 / 50× 2  3.3  3.1–3.6  A80486DX4WB-100  3× or 2× mode  Limited availability\n75  25× 3  3.3  3.1–3.5  A80486DX4WB-75 3× mode only  SK102\n100  33× 3 / 50× 2  3.3  3.1–3.6  FC80486DX4WB-100  3× or 2× mode SK099\n75  25× 3  3.3  3.1–3.5  FC80486DX4WB-75  3× mode only SK100\n"}
{"id": "15264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15264", "title": "Iapetus (disambiguation)", "text": "Iapetus (disambiguation)\n\nIapetus is a Titan in Greek mythology.\nIapetus may also refer to:\nBULLET::::- Iapetus (moon), one of the planet Saturn's moons, named for the mythological Titan\nBULLET::::- Iapetus Ocean, an ancient ocean between the paleocontinents Laurentia and Baltica\nBULLET::::- Iapetus suture, line of closure of the Iapetus Ocean\n"}
{"id": "15266", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15266", "title": "Interactive Fiction Competition", "text": "Interactive Fiction Competition\n\nThe Interactive Fiction Competition (also known as IFComp) is one of several annual competitions for works of interactive fiction. It has been held since 1995. It is intended for fairly short games, as judges are only allowed to spend two hours playing a game before deciding how many points to award it. The competition has been described as the \"Super Bowl\" of interactive fiction.\n\nThe competition is organized by \"Stephen Granade\". Although the first competition had separate sections for Inform and TADS games, subsequent competitions have not been divided into sections and are open to games produced by any method, provided that the software used to play the game is freely available. Anyone can judge the games, and anyone can donate a prize. Almost always, there are enough prizes donated that anyone who enters will get one. Because anyone can judge and participate in the competition, authors are required to make their entries freely available to play.\n\nIn addition to the main competition, the entries take part in the Miss Congeniality contest, where the participating authors vote for three games (not including their own). This was started in 1998 to distribute that year's surplus prizes; this additional contest has remained unchanged since then, even without the original reason for its existence.\n\nThere is also a 'Golden Banana of Discord' side contest; the distinction is given to the entry with scores with the highest standard deviation.\n\nIn 2016, operation of the competition was taken over by the Interactive Fiction Technology Foundation.\n\nThe competition differs from the XYZZY Awards, as authors must specifically submit games to the Interactive Fiction Competition, but all games released in the past year are eligible for the XYZZY Awards. Many games win awards in both competitions.\n\nThe following is a list of first place winners to date:\nBULLET::::- 2019: \"Zozzled\" by Steph Cherrywell\nBULLET::::- 2018: \"Alias \"The Magpie\"\" by J. J. Guest\nBULLET::::- 2017: \"The Wizard Sniffer\" by Buster Hudson\nBULLET::::- 2016: \"Detectiveland\" by Robin Johnson\nBULLET::::- 2015: \"Brain Guzzlers from Beyond!\" by Steph Cherrywell\nBULLET::::- 2014: \"Hunger Daemon\" by Sean M. Shore\nBULLET::::- 2013: \"Coloratura\" by Lynnea Glasser\nBULLET::::- 2012: \"Andromeda Apocalypse\" by Marco Innocenti\nBULLET::::- 2011: \"Taco Fiction\" by Ryan Veeder\nBULLET::::- 2010: \"Aotearoa\" by Matt Wigdahl\nBULLET::::- 2009: \"Rover's Day Out\" by Jack Welch and Ben Collins-Sussman\nBULLET::::- 2008: \"Violet\" by Jeremy Freese\nBULLET::::- 2007: \"Lost Pig\" by Admiral Jota (writing as Grunk)\nBULLET::::- 2006: \"Floatpoint\" by Emily Short\nBULLET::::- 2005: \"Vespers\" by Jason Devlin\nBULLET::::- 2004: \"Luminous Horizon\" by Paul O'Brian\nBULLET::::- 2003: \"Slouching Towards Bedlam\" by Star Foster and Daniel Ravipinto\nBULLET::::- 2002: \"Another Earth, Another Sky\" by Paul O'Brian\nBULLET::::- 2001: \"All Roads\" by Jon Ingold\nBULLET::::- 2000: \"Kaged\" by Ian Finley\nBULLET::::- 1999: \"Winter Wonderland\" by Laura A. Knauth\nBULLET::::- 1998: \"Photopia\" by Adam Cadre\nBULLET::::- 1997: \"The Edifice\" by Lucian P. Smith\nBULLET::::- 1996: \"The Meteor, the Stone and a Long Glass of Sherbet\" by Graham Nelson\nBULLET::::- 1995: Tie: \"A Change in the Weather\" by Andrew Plotkin, \"Uncle Zebulon's Will\" by Magnus Olsson\n\nA reviewer for \"The A.V. Club\" said of the 2008 competition, \"Once again, the IF Competition delivers some of the best writing in games.\" The 2008 competition was described as containing \"some real standouts both in quality of puzzles and a willingness to stretch the definition of text adventures/interactive fiction.\"\n\nBULLET::::- Spring Thing\nBULLET::::- XYZZY Awards\n\nBULLET::::- Official website\n"}
{"id": "15267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15267", "title": "Immunity", "text": "Immunity\n\nImmunity may refer to:\nBULLET::::- Immunity (medical), resistance of an organism to infection or disease\nBULLET::::- \"Immunity\" (journal), a scientific journal published by Cell Press\n\nBULLET::::- Immune system\n\nBULLET::::- Radiofrequence immunity describes how well an electronic circuit is protected against electromagnetic interference\n\nBULLET::::- Legal immunity, the concept of a person or entity being immune from legal liability due to a special status\nBULLET::::- Absolute immunity, a type of immunity for government officials that confers total immunity when acting in the course of their duties\nBULLET::::- Amnesty law, a law that provides immunity for past crimes\nBULLET::::- Charitable immunity, immunity from liability granted to charities in many countries from the 19th century to the mid-20th century\nBULLET::::- Diplomatic immunity, agreement between sovereign governments to exclude diplomats from local laws\nBULLET::::- Immunity from prosecution (international law), exclusion of governments or their officials from prosecution under international law\nBULLET::::- Judicial immunity, immunity of a judge or magistrate in the course of their official duties\nBULLET::::- Parliamentary immunity, immunity granted to elected officials during their tenure and in the course of their duties\nBULLET::::- Qualified immunity, in the United States, immunity of individuals performing tasks as part of the government's actions\nBULLET::::- Sovereign immunity, the prevention of lawsuits or prosecution against rulers or governments without their given consent\nBULLET::::- Sovereign immunity in the United States, the legal privilege by which the American federal, state, and tribal governments cannot be sued\nBULLET::::- Spousal privilege, also called spousal immunity, protects a spouse from testifying against the defendant\nBULLET::::- State immunity, principle of international law that the government of a state is not amenable before the courts of another state\nBULLET::::- Witness immunity, immunity granted to a witness in exchange for testimony\n\nBULLET::::- \"Immunity\" (Rupert Hine album)\nBULLET::::- \"Immunity\" (Jon Hopkins album)\nBULLET::::- \"Immunity\" (Clairo album)\nBULLET::::- Immunity (reality television), a condition which protects a contestant on a reality TV show from being kicked off the show in a given period\n"}
{"id": "15268", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15268", "title": "Inquests in England and Wales", "text": "Inquests in England and Wales\n\nInquests in England and Wales are held into sudden or unexplained deaths and also into the circumstances of and discovery of a certain class of valuable artefacts known as \"treasure trove\". In England and Wales, inquests are the responsibility of a coroner, who operates under the jurisdiction of the Coroners and Justice Act 2009. In some circumstances where an inquest cannot view or hear all the evidence, it may be suspended and a public inquiry held with the consent of the Home Secretary.\n\nThere is a general duty upon every person to report a death to the coroner if an inquest is likely to be required. However, this duty is largely unenforceable in practice and the duty falls on the responsible registrar. The registrar must report a death where:\nBULLET::::- The deceased was not attended by a doctor during their last illness\nBULLET::::- The death occurred within 24 hours of admission to a hospital\nBULLET::::- The cause of death has not been certified by a doctor who saw the deceased after death or within the 14 days before death\nBULLET::::- The cause of death is unknown\nBULLET::::- The registrar believes that the cause of death was unnatural, caused by violence, neglect or abortion outside the exemptions of the Abortion Act 1967, or occurred in suspicious circumstances\nBULLET::::- Death occurred during surgery of any kind or while under anaesthetic both local and general\nBULLET::::- The cause of death was or was suspected to be an industrial disease\nBULLET::::- The death relates to public health or the general health or welfare of the public-at-large\n\nThe coroner must hold an inquest where the death is:\nBULLET::::- Violent or unnatural\nBULLET::::- Sudden and of unknown cause\nBULLET::::- In prison or police custody\nBULLET::::- Suspected to be suicide\n\nWhere the cause of death is unknown, the coroner may order a post mortem examination in order to determine whether the death was violent. If the death is found to be non-violent, an inquest is unnecessary.\n\nIn 2004 in England and Wales, there were 514,000 deaths of which 225,500 were referred to the coroner. Of those, 115,800 resulted in post-mortem examinations and there were 28,300 inquests, 570 with a jury. In 2014 the Royal College of Pathologists claimed that up to 10,000 deaths a year recorded as being from natural causes should have been investigated by inquests. They were particularly concerned about people whose death occurred as a result of medical errors. \"We believe a medical examiner would have been alerted to what was going on in Mid-Staffordshire long before this long list of avoidable deaths reached the total it did,\" said Archie Prentice, the pathologists' president.\n\nA coroner must summon a jury for an inquest if the death was not a result of natural causes and occurred when the deceased was in state custody (for example in prison, police custody, or whilst detained under the Mental Health Act 1983); or if it was the result of an act or omission of a police officer; or if it was a result of a notifiable accident, poisoning or disease. The senior coroner can also call a jury at his or her own discretion. This discretion has been heavily litigated in light of the Human Rights Act 1998, which means that juries are required now in a broader range of situations than expressly required by statute.\n\nThe purpose of the inquest is to answer four questions:\nBULLET::::- Identity of the deceased\nBULLET::::- Place of death\nBULLET::::- Time of death\nBULLET::::- How the deceased came by their death\n\nEvidence must be solely for the purpose of answering these questions and no other evidence is admitted. It is not for the inquest to ascertain \"how the deceased died\" or \"in what broad circumstances\", but \"how the deceased came by his death\", a more limited question. Moreover, it is not the purpose of the inquest to determine, or appear to determine, criminal or civil liability, to apportion guilt or attribute blame. For example, where a prisoner hanged himself in a cell, he came by his death by hanging and it was not the role of the inquest to enquire into the broader circumstances such as the alleged neglect of the prison authorities that might have contributed to his state of mind or given him the opportunity. However, the inquest should set out as many of the facts as the public interest requires.\n\nUnder the terms of article 2 of the European Convention of Human Rights, governments are required to \"establish a framework of laws, precautions, procedures and means of enforcement which will, to the greatest extent reasonably practicable, protect life\". The European Court of Human Rights has interpreted this as mandating independent official investigation of any death where public servants may be implicated. Since the Human Rights Act 1998 came into force, in those cases alone, the inquest is now to consider the broader question \"by what means and in what circumstances\".\n\nIn disasters, such as the 1987 King's Cross fire, a single inquest may be held into several deaths.\n\nInquests are governed by the Rules. The coroner gives notice to near relatives, those entitled to examine witnesses and those whose conduct is likely to be scrutinised. Inquests are held in public except where there are real issues and substantial of national security but only the portions which relate to national security will be held behind closed doors.\n\nIndividuals with an interest in the proceedings, such as relatives of the deceased, individuals appearing as witnesses, and organisations or individuals who may face some responsibility in the death of the individual, may be represented by a legal professional be that a solicitor or barrister at the discretion of the coroner. Witnesses may be compelled to testify subject to the privilege against self-incrimination.\n\nIf there are matters of National Security or matters which relate to sensitive matters then under Schedule 1 of the Coronoers and Justice Act 2009 an inquest may be suspended and replaced by a public inquiry under s.2 of the Inquiries Act 2005. This can only be ordered by the Home Secretary and must be announced to Parliament with the Cornor incharge being informed and the next of kin being informed. Te next of kin and Cornoer can appeal the decision of the Home Secretary.\n\nThe following conclusions (formerly called verdicts) are not mandatory but are strongly recommended:\nBULLET::::- Category 1\nBULLET::::- Natural causes\nBULLET::::- Industrial diseases\nBULLET::::- Dependency on drugs or non-dependent abuse of drugs\nBULLET::::- Lack of attention at birth\nBULLET::::- Lack of care or self-neglect\nBULLET::::- Category 2\nBULLET::::- Suicide\nBULLET::::- Attempted or self-induced abortion\nBULLET::::- Accident or misadventure\nBULLET::::- Execution of sentence of death\nBULLET::::- Lawful killing (formerly \"justifiable homicide\")\nBULLET::::- Open verdict (cause of death unknown or unstated)\nBULLET::::- Category 3 – Unlawful killing\nBULLET::::- Murder\nBULLET::::- Manslaughter\nBULLET::::- Infanticide\nBULLET::::- Category 4\nBULLET::::- Stillbirth\n\nIn 2004, 37% of inquests recorded an outcome of death by accident / misadventure, 21% by natural causes, 13% suicide, 10% open verdicts, and 19% other outcomes.\n\nSince 2004 it has been possible for the coroner to record a narrative verdict, recording the circumstances of a death without apportioning blame or liability. Since 2009, other possible verdicts have included \"alcohol/drug related death\" and \"road traffic collision\". The civil standard of proof, on the balance of probabilities, is used for all conclusions. The standard of proof for suicide and unlawful killing changed in 2018 from beyond all reasonable doubt to the balance of probabilities following a case in the courts of appeal.\n\nOwing in particular to the failures to notice the serial murder committed by Harold Shipman, the Coroners and Justice Act 2009 modernised the system with:\nBULLET::::- Greater rights of bereaved people to contribute to coroners' investigations;\nBULLET::::- A new office of chief coroner to lead and supervise practice;\nBULLET::::- Full-time coroners with new district boundaries;\nBULLET::::- Broader investigatory powers for coroners;\nBULLET::::- Improved medical support for coroners' investigation and decision making;\nBULLET::::- Vesting of treasure jurisdiction in the new office of treasure coroner with national responsibility.\n\nBULLET::::- Preliminary hearing\nBULLET::::- Grand jury\nBULLET::::- Committal procedure\nBULLET::::- Immunity from prosecution\nBULLET::::- Fatal accident inquiry, Scotland\n\nBULLET::::- <br>This act extends to England and Wales only.\n\nBULLET::::- Department for Constitutional Affairs (2006)\nBULLET::::- Home Office (2003a)  , Cm 5831\nBULLET::::- — (2003b)  , Cm 5854\nBULLET::::- — (2004)  , Cm 6159,\nBULLET::::- Lord Mackay of Clashfern (ed.) (2006) \"Halsbury's Laws of England\", 4th ed. reissue, vol.9(2), \"Coroners\"\n"}
{"id": "15270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15270", "title": "Index", "text": "Index\n\nIndex may refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- Index (\"A Certain Magical Index\"), a character in the light novel series \"A Certain Magical Index\"\nBULLET::::- The Index, an item on a halo megastructure in the \"Halo\" series of video games\n\nBULLET::::- \"Index Magazine\", a publication for art and culture\nBULLET::::- index.hu, a Hungarian-language news and community portal\nBULLET::::- \"The Index\" (Kalamazoo College), a student newspaper\nBULLET::::- \"The Index\", an 1860s European propaganda journal created by Henry Hotze to support the Confederate States of America\nBULLET::::- The Index (Pittsburgh), a newspaper published in Pittsburgh from 1895 until it merged with The Bulletin in 1930 to become The Bulletin Index\nBULLET::::- \"Truman State University Index\", a student newspaper\n\nBULLET::::- The Index (band)\nBULLET::::- \"Indexed\", a Web cartoon by Jessica Hagy\nBULLET::::- \"Index\", album by Ana Mena\n\nBULLET::::- Index (retailer), a former UK catalogue retailer\nBULLET::::- INDEX, a market research fair in Lucknow, India\nBULLET::::- Index Corporation, a Japanese video game developer\n\nBULLET::::- Index fund, a collective investment scheme\nBULLET::::- Stock market index, a statistical average of prices of selected securities\n\nBULLET::::- Index, Arkansas, an unincorporated community\nBULLET::::- Index, Kentucky, an unincorporated community\nBULLET::::- Index, Missouri, a ghost town\nBULLET::::- Index, New York, a hamlet in Hartwick and Otsego, New York\nBULLET::::- Index, Virginia, an unincorporated community\nBULLET::::- Index, Washington, a town\nBULLET::::- Index, West Virginia, an unincorporated community\n\nBULLET::::- Index (publishing), an organized list of information in a publication\nBULLET::::- Index (typography), a hand- or fist-shaped punctuation mark\nBULLET::::- Bibliographic index, a regularly updated publication that lists articles, books, or other information items\nBULLET::::- Citation index\nBULLET::::- Index card, used for recording and storing small amounts of data\nBULLET::::- \"Index Librorum Prohibitorum\", a list of publications which the Catholic Church censored\nBULLET::::- Index on Censorship, a publishing organization that campaigns for freedom of expression, or its magazine of the same name\nBULLET::::- Thumb index, a round cut-out in the pages of a publication\nBULLET::::- \"The Index, Germany's List of Media Harmful to Young People\", published by the Bundesprüfstelle für jugendgefährdende Medien\n\nBULLET::::- Index, a key in an associative array\nBULLET::::- Index (typography), a character in Unicode, its code is 132\nBULLET::::- Index, the dataset maintained by search engine indexing\nBULLET::::- Array index, an integer pointer into an array data structure\nBULLET::::- BitTorrent index, a list of .torrent files available for searches\nBULLET::::- Database index, a data structure that improves the speed of data retrieval\nBULLET::::- Index mapping of raw data for an array\nBULLET::::- Index register, a processor register used for modifying operand addresses during the run of a program\nBULLET::::- Indexed color, in computer imagery\nBULLET::::- Indexed Sequential Access Method (ISAM), used for indexing data for fast retrieval\nBULLET::::- Lookup table, a data structure used to store precomputed information\nBULLET::::- Site map, or site index, a list of pages of a web site accessible to crawlers or users\nBULLET::::- Subject indexing, describing the content of a document by keywords\nBULLET::::- Web indexing, Internet indexing\nBULLET::::- Webserver directory index, a default or index web page in a directory on a web server, such as index.html\n\nBULLET::::- Index (economics), a single number calculated from an array of prices and quantities\nBULLET::::- Price index, a typical price for some good or service\n\nBULLET::::- Index, a number or other symbol that specifies an element of an indexed family or set\nBULLET::::- Index, an element of an index set\nBULLET::::- Index, the label of a summand in Σ-notation of a summation\n\nBULLET::::- Index of a subgroup, the number of a subgroup's left cosets\nBULLET::::- Index, the degree of an \"n\"th root\nBULLET::::- Index of a linear map, the dimension of the map's kernel minus the dimension of its cokernel\nBULLET::::- Index of a matrix\nBULLET::::- Index of a real quadratic form\n\nBULLET::::- Index, the winding number of an oriented closed curve on a surface relative to a point on that surface\nBULLET::::- Diversity index, a measure of distribution or variety in fields such as ecology or information science\nBULLET::::- Index of a vector field, an integer that helps to describe the behaviour of a vector field around an isolated zero\nBULLET::::- Indexicality, in linguistics, the phenomenon of a sign pointing to some object in the context in which it occurs\n\nBULLET::::- Index, or the discrete logarithm of a number\n\nBULLET::::- Index (statistics), a type of aggregate measure\nBULLET::::- Scale (social sciences), a method of reporting data in social sciences, sometimes called an index\n\nBULLET::::- Dental indices, standardized scoring systems for tooth problems\nBULLET::::- Indexing (motion), in mechanical engineering and machining, movement to a precisely known location\nBULLET::::- Refractive index, a measurement of how light propagates through a material\nBULLET::::- Valve Index, a virtual reality headset\n\nBULLET::::- \"INDEX\", earlier name for the Reimei satellite\nBULLET::::- , a Danish nonprofit organization which promotes Design for Life\nBULLET::::- The Index (Dubai), a skyscraper\nBULLET::::- Index (crater), a moon crater\n\nBULLET::::- Indexer (disambiguation)\n"}
{"id": "15271", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15271", "title": "Information retrieval", "text": "Information retrieval\n\nInformation retrieval (IR) is the activity of obtaining information system resources that are relevant to an information need from a collection of those resources. Searches can be based on full-text or other content-based indexing. Information retrieval is the science of searching for information in a document, searching for documents themselves, and also searching for the metadata that describes data, and for databases of texts, images or sounds.\n\nAutomated information retrieval systems are used to reduce what has been called information overload. An IR system is a software system that provides access to books, journals and other documents; stores and manages those documents. Web search engines are the most visible IR applications.\n\nAn information retrieval process begins when a user enters a query into the system. Queries are formal statements of information needs, for example search strings in web search engines. In information retrieval a query does not uniquely identify a single object in the collection. Instead, several objects may match the query, perhaps with different degrees of relevancy.\n\nAn object is an entity that is represented by information in a content collection or database. User queries are matched against the database information. However, as opposed to classical SQL queries of a database, in information retrieval the results returned may or may not match the query, so results are typically ranked. This ranking of results is a key difference of information retrieval searching compared to database searching.\n\nDepending on the application the data objects may be, for example, text documents, images, audio, mind maps or videos. Often the documents themselves are not kept or stored directly in the IR system, but are instead represented in the system by document surrogates or metadata.\n\nMost IR systems compute a numeric score on how well each object in the database matches the query, and rank the objects according to this value. The top ranking objects are then shown to the user. The process may then be iterated if the user wishes to refine the query.\n\nThe idea of using computers to search for relevant pieces of information was popularized in the article \"As We May Think\" by Vannevar Bush in 1945. It would appear that Bush was inspired by patents for a 'statistical machine' - filed by Emanuel Goldberg in the 1920s and '30s - that searched for documents stored on film. The first description of a computer searching for information was described by Holmstrom in 1948, detailing an early mention of the Univac computer. Automated information retrieval systems were introduced in the 1950s: one even featured in the 1957 romantic comedy, Desk Set. In the 1960s, the first large information retrieval research group was formed by Gerard Salton at Cornell. By the 1970s several different retrieval techniques had been shown to perform well on small text corpora such as the Cranfield collection (several thousand documents). Large-scale retrieval systems, such as the Lockheed Dialog system, came into use early in the 1970s.\n\nIn 1992, the US Department of Defense along with the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), cosponsored the Text Retrieval Conference (TREC) as part of the TIPSTER text program. The aim of this was to look into the information retrieval community by supplying the infrastructure that was needed for evaluation of text retrieval methodologies on a very large text collection. This catalyzed research on methods that scale to huge corpora. The introduction of web search engines has boosted the need for very large scale retrieval systems even further.\n\nFor effectively retrieving relevant documents by IR strategies, the documents are typically transformed into a suitable representation. Each retrieval strategy incorporates a specific model for its document representation purposes. The picture on the right illustrates the relationship of some common models. In the picture, the models are categorized according to two dimensions: the mathematical basis and the properties of the model.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Set-theoretic\" models represent documents as sets of words or phrases. Similarities are usually derived from set-theoretic operations on those sets. Common models are:\nBULLET::::- Standard Boolean model\nBULLET::::- Extended Boolean model\nBULLET::::- Fuzzy retrieval\nBULLET::::- \"Algebraic models\" represent documents and queries usually as vectors, matrices, or tuples. The similarity of the query vector and document vector is represented as a scalar value.\nBULLET::::- Vector space model\nBULLET::::- Generalized vector space model\nBULLET::::- (Enhanced) Topic-based Vector Space Model\nBULLET::::- Extended Boolean model\nBULLET::::- Latent semantic indexing a.k.a. latent semantic analysis\nBULLET::::- \"Probabilistic models\" treat the process of document retrieval as a probabilistic inference. Similarities are computed as probabilities that a document is relevant for a given query. Probabilistic theorems like the Bayes' theorem are often used in these models.\nBULLET::::- Binary Independence Model\nBULLET::::- Probabilistic relevance model on which is based the okapi (BM25) relevance function\nBULLET::::- Uncertain inference\nBULLET::::- Language models\nBULLET::::- Divergence-from-randomness model\nBULLET::::- Latent Dirichlet allocation\nBULLET::::- \"Feature-based retrieval models\" view documents as vectors of values of \"feature functions\" (or just \"features\") and seek the best way to combine these features into a single relevance score, typically by learning to rank methods. Feature functions are arbitrary functions of document and query, and as such can easily incorporate almost any other retrieval model as just another feature.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Models without term-interdependencies\" treat different terms/words as independent. This fact is usually represented in vector space models by the orthogonality assumption of term vectors or in probabilistic models by an independency assumption for term variables.\nBULLET::::- \"Models with immanent term interdependencies\" allow a representation of interdependencies between terms. However the degree of the interdependency between two terms is defined by the model itself. It is usually directly or indirectly derived (e.g. by dimensional reduction) from the co-occurrence of those terms in the whole set of documents.\nBULLET::::- \"Models with transcendent term interdependencies\" allow a representation of interdependencies between terms, but they do not allege how the interdependency between two terms is defined. They rely an external source for the degree of interdependency between two terms. (For example, a human or sophisticated algorithms.)\n\nThe evaluation of an information retrieval system' is the process of assessing how well a system meets the information needs of its users. In general, measurement considers a collection of documents to be searched and a search query. Traditional evaluation metrics, designed for Boolean retrieval or top-k retrieval, include precision and recall. All measures assume a ground truth notion of relevancy: every document is known to be either relevant or non-relevant to a particular query. In practice, queries may be ill-posed and there may be different shades of relevancy.\n\nBULLET::::- Before the 1900s\nBULLET::::- 1801: Joseph Marie Jacquard invents the Jacquard loom, the first machine to use punched cards to control a sequence of operations.\nBULLET::::- 1880s: Herman Hollerith invents an electro-mechanical data tabulator using punch cards as a machine readable medium.\nBULLET::::- 1890 Hollerith cards, keypunches and tabulators used to process the 1890 US Census data.\nBULLET::::- 1920s-1930s\nBULLET::::- Emanuel Goldberg submits patents for his \"Statistical Machine” a document search engine that used photoelectric cells and pattern recognition to search the metadata on rolls of microfilmed documents.\nBULLET::::- 1940s–1950s\nBULLET::::- late 1940s: The US military confronted problems of indexing and retrieval of wartime scientific research documents captured from Germans.\nBULLET::::- 1945: Vannevar Bush's \"As We May Think\" appeared in \"Atlantic Monthly\".\nBULLET::::- 1947: Hans Peter Luhn (research engineer at IBM since 1941) began work on a mechanized punch card-based system for searching chemical compounds.\nBULLET::::- 1950s: Growing concern in the US for a \"science gap\" with the USSR motivated, encouraged funding and provided a backdrop for mechanized literature searching systems (Allen Kent \"et al.\") and the invention of citation indexing (Eugene Garfield).\nBULLET::::- 1950: The term \"information retrieval\" was coined by Calvin Mooers.\nBULLET::::- 1951: Philip Bagley conducted the earliest experiment in computerized document retrieval in a master thesis at MIT.\nBULLET::::- 1955: Allen Kent joined Case Western Reserve University, and eventually became associate director of the Center for Documentation and Communications Research. That same year, Kent and colleagues published a paper in American Documentation describing the precision and recall measures as well as detailing a proposed \"framework\" for evaluating an IR system which included statistical sampling methods for determining the number of relevant documents not retrieved.\nBULLET::::- 1958: International Conference on Scientific Information Washington DC included consideration of IR systems as a solution to problems identified. See: \"Proceedings of the International Conference on Scientific Information, 1958\" (National Academy of Sciences, Washington, DC, 1959)\nBULLET::::- 1959: Hans Peter Luhn published \"Auto-encoding of documents for information retrieval.\"\nBULLET::::- 1960s:\nBULLET::::- early 1960s: Gerard Salton began work on IR at Harvard, later moved to Cornell.\nBULLET::::- 1960: Melvin Earl Maron and John Lary Kuhns published \"On relevance, probabilistic indexing, and information retrieval\" in the Journal of the ACM 7(3):216–244, July 1960.\nBULLET::::- 1962:\nBULLET::::- Cyril W. Cleverdon published early findings of the Cranfield studies, developing a model for IR system evaluation. See: Cyril W. Cleverdon, \"Report on the Testing and Analysis of an Investigation into the Comparative Efficiency of Indexing Systems\". Cranfield Collection of Aeronautics, Cranfield, England, 1962.\nBULLET::::- Kent published \"Information Analysis and Retrieval\".\nBULLET::::- 1963:\nBULLET::::- Weinberg report \"Science, Government and Information\" gave a full articulation of the idea of a \"crisis of scientific information.\" The report was named after Dr. Alvin Weinberg.\nBULLET::::- Joseph Becker and Robert M. Hayes published text on information retrieval. Becker, Joseph; Hayes, Robert Mayo. \"Information storage and retrieval: tools, elements, theories\". New York, Wiley (1963).\nBULLET::::- 1964:\nBULLET::::- Karen Spärck Jones finished her thesis at Cambridge, \"Synonymy and Semantic Classification\", and continued work on computational linguistics as it applies to IR.\nBULLET::::- The National Bureau of Standards sponsored a symposium titled \"Statistical Association Methods for Mechanized Documentation.\" Several highly significant papers, including G. Salton's first published reference (we believe) to the SMART system.\nBULLET::::- mid-1960s:\nBULLET::::- National Library of Medicine developed MEDLARS Medical Literature Analysis and Retrieval System, the first major machine-readable database and batch-retrieval system.\nBULLET::::- Project Intrex at MIT.\nBULLET::::- 1965: J. C. R. Licklider published \"Libraries of the Future\".\nBULLET::::- 1966: Don Swanson was involved in studies at University of Chicago on Requirements for Future Catalogs.\nBULLET::::- late 1960s: F. Wilfrid Lancaster completed evaluation studies of the MEDLARS system and published the first edition of his text on information retrieval.\nBULLET::::- 1968:\nBULLET::::- Gerard Salton published \"Automatic Information Organization and Retrieval\".\nBULLET::::- John W. Sammon, Jr.'s RADC Tech report \"Some Mathematics of Information Storage and Retrieval...\" outlined the vector model.\nBULLET::::- 1969: Sammon's \"A nonlinear mapping for data structure analysis\" (IEEE Transactions on Computers) was the first proposal for visualization interface to an IR system.\nBULLET::::- 1970s\nBULLET::::- early 1970s:\nBULLET::::- First online systems—NLM's AIM-TWX, MEDLINE; Lockheed's Dialog; SDC's ORBIT.\nBULLET::::- Theodor Nelson promoting concept of hypertext, published \"Computer Lib/Dream Machines\".\nBULLET::::- 1971: Nicholas Jardine and Cornelis J. van Rijsbergen published \"The use of hierarchic clustering in information retrieval\", which articulated the \"cluster hypothesis.\"\nBULLET::::- 1975: Three highly influential publications by Salton fully articulated his vector processing framework and term discrimination model:\nBULLET::::- \"A Theory of Indexing\" (Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics)\nBULLET::::- \"A Theory of Term Importance in Automatic Text Analysis\" (JASIS v. 26)\nBULLET::::- \"A Vector Space Model for Automatic Indexing\" (CACM 18:11)\nBULLET::::- 1978: The First ACM SIGIR conference.\nBULLET::::- 1979: C. J. van Rijsbergen published \"Information Retrieval\" (Butterworths). Heavy emphasis on probabilistic models.\nBULLET::::- 1979: Tamas Doszkocs implemented the CITE natural language user interface for MEDLINE at the National Library of Medicine. The CITE system supported free form query input, ranked output and relevance feedback.\nBULLET::::- 1980s\nBULLET::::- 1980: First international ACM SIGIR conference, joint with British Computer Society IR group in Cambridge.\nBULLET::::- 1982: Nicholas J. Belkin, Robert N. Oddy, and Helen M. Brooks proposed the ASK (Anomalous State of Knowledge) viewpoint for information retrieval. This was an important concept, though their automated analysis tool proved ultimately disappointing.\nBULLET::::- 1983: Salton (and Michael J. McGill) published \"Introduction to Modern Information Retrieval\" (McGraw-Hill), with heavy emphasis on vector models.\nBULLET::::- 1985: David Blair and Bill Maron publish: An Evaluation of Retrieval Effectiveness for a Full-Text Document-Retrieval System\nBULLET::::- mid-1980s: Efforts to develop end-user versions of commercial IR systems.\nBULLET::::- 1985–1993: Key papers on and experimental systems for visualization interfaces.\nBULLET::::- Work by Donald B. Crouch, Robert R. Korfhage, Matthew Chalmers, Anselm Spoerri and others.\nBULLET::::- 1989: First World Wide Web proposals by Tim Berners-Lee at CERN.\nBULLET::::- 1990s\nBULLET::::- 1992: First TREC conference.\nBULLET::::- 1997: Publication of Korfhage's \"Information Storage and Retrieval\" with emphasis on visualization and multi-reference point systems.\nBULLET::::- 1999: Publication of Ricardo Baeza-Yates and Berthier Ribeiro-Neto's \"Modern Information Retrieval\" by Addison Wesley, the first book that attempts to cover all IR.\nBULLET::::- late 1990s: Web search engines implementation of many features formerly found only in experimental IR systems. Search engines become the most common and maybe best instantiation of IR models.\n\nBULLET::::- SIGIR: Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval\nBULLET::::- ECIR: European Conference on Information Retrieval\nBULLET::::- CIKM: Conference on Information and Knowledge Management\nBULLET::::- WWW: International World Wide Web Conference\nBULLET::::- WSDM: Conference on Web Search and Data Mining\nBULLET::::- ICTIR: International Conference on Theory of Information Retrieval\n\nBULLET::::- Tony Kent Strix award\nBULLET::::- Gerard Salton Award\n\nIn the film Brazil, the main character wants to be hired at the Information Retrieval in order to learn about the woman who appears in his dreams.\n\nBULLET::::- Adversarial information retrieval\nBULLET::::- Collaborative information seeking\nBULLET::::- Computer memory\nBULLET::::- Controlled vocabulary\nBULLET::::- Cross-language information retrieval\nBULLET::::- Data mining\nBULLET::::- European Summer School in Information Retrieval\nBULLET::::- Human–computer information retrieval (HCIR)\nBULLET::::- Information extraction\nBULLET::::- Information Retrieval Facility\nBULLET::::- Knowledge visualization\nBULLET::::- Multimedia information retrieval\nBULLET::::- Personal information management\nBULLET::::- Relevance (information retrieval)\nBULLET::::- Relevance feedback\nBULLET::::- Rocchio classification\nBULLET::::- Search index\nBULLET::::- Social information seeking\nBULLET::::- Special Interest Group on Information Retrieval\nBULLET::::- Subject indexing\nBULLET::::- Temporal information retrieval\nBULLET::::- tf-idf\nBULLET::::- XML retrieval\nBULLET::::- Web mining\nBULLET::::- Ricardo Baeza-Yates, Berthier Ribeiro-Neto. Modern Information Retrieval: The Concepts and Technology behind Search (second edition). Addison-Wesley, UK, 2011.\nBULLET::::- Stefan Büttcher, Charles L. A. Clarke, and Gordon V. Cormack. Information Retrieval: Implementing and Evaluating Search Engines. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 2010.\nBULLET::::- Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Hinrich Schütze. Introduction to Information Retrieval. Cambridge University Press, 2008.\n\nBULLET::::- ACM SIGIR: Information Retrieval Special Interest Group\nBULLET::::- BCS IRSG: British Computer Society - Information Retrieval Specialist Group\nBULLET::::- Text Retrieval Conference (TREC)\nBULLET::::- Forum for Information Retrieval Evaluation (FIRE)\nBULLET::::- Information Retrieval (online book) by C. J. van Rijsbergen\nBULLET::::- Information Retrieval Wiki\nBULLET::::- Information Retrieval Facility\nBULLET::::- Information Retrieval @ DUTH\nBULLET::::- TREC report on information retrieval evaluation techniques\nBULLET::::- How eBay measures search relevance\nBULLET::::- Information retrieval performance evaluation tool @ Athena Research Centre\n"}
{"id": "15272", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15272", "title": "List of Italian-language poets", "text": "List of Italian-language poets\n\nList of poets who wrote in Italian (or Italian dialects).\nBULLET::::- Antonio Abati\nBULLET::::- Luigi Alamanni\nBULLET::::- Aleardo Aleardi\nBULLET::::- Dante Alighieri\nBULLET::::- Cecco Angiolieri\nBULLET::::- Gabriele D'Annunzio\nBULLET::::- Ludovico Ariosto\nBULLET::::- Francis of Assisi\n\nBULLET::::- Nanni Balestrini\nBULLET::::- Dario Bellezza\nBULLET::::- Giuseppe Gioacchino Belli (Roman dialect)\nBULLET::::- Attilio Bertolucci\nBULLET::::- Carlo Betocchi\nBULLET::::- Alberta Bigagli\nBULLET::::- Giovanni Boccaccio\nBULLET::::- Maria Alinda Bonacci Brunamonti\nBULLET::::- Carlo Bordini\nBULLET::::- Michelangelo Buonarroti\nBULLET::::- Helle Busacca\nBULLET::::- Ignazio Buttitta (Sicilian language)\nBULLET::::- Paolo Buzzi\n\nBULLET::::- Dino Campana\nBULLET::::- Giorgio Caproni\nBULLET::::- Giosuè Carducci\nBULLET::::- Guido Cavalcanti\nBULLET::::- Roberto Carifi\nBULLET::::- Gabriello Chiabrera\n\nBULLET::::- Antonio De Santis (Italian and Larinese dialect)\nBULLET::::- Milo de Angelis\nBULLET::::- Fabrizio De André\n\nBULLET::::- Muzi Epifani\n\nBULLET::::- Franco Fortini\nBULLET::::- Ugo Foscolo\n\nBULLET::::- Alfonso Gatto\nBULLET::::- Giuseppe Giusti\nBULLET::::- Guido Gozzano\nBULLET::::- Lionello Grifo\nBULLET::::- Giovanni Battista Guarini\nBULLET::::- Amalia Guglielminetti\nBULLET::::- Margherita Guidacci\nBULLET::::- Guido Guinizzelli\n\nBULLET::::- Giacomo da Lentini\nBULLET::::- Jacopo da Leona\nBULLET::::- Giacomo Leopardi\nBULLET::::- Mario Luzi\n\nBULLET::::- Lorenzo il Magnifico (sovereign of Florence)\nBULLET::::- Alessandro Manzoni\nBULLET::::- Filippo Tommaso Marinetti\nBULLET::::- Giambattista Marino\nBULLET::::- Alda Merini\nBULLET::::- Metastasio (Pietro Trapassi)\nBULLET::::- Grazyna Miller\nBULLET::::- Eugenio Montale (Nobel Prize in literature, 1975)\nBULLET::::- Vincenzo Monti\nBULLET::::- Marino Moretti\nBULLET::::- Maurizio Moro\n\nBULLET::::- Elio Pagliarani\nBULLET::::- Aldo Palazzeschi\nBULLET::::- Giuseppe Parini\nBULLET::::- Giovanni Pascoli\nBULLET::::- Pier Paolo Pasolini\nBULLET::::- Nicoletta Pasquale\nBULLET::::- Cesare Pavese\nBULLET::::- Francesco Petrarca\nBULLET::::- Poliziano (Angelo Ambrogini)\nBULLET::::- Lorenzo Da Ponte\nBULLET::::- Antonio Porta (author)\nBULLET::::- Carlo Porta\nBULLET::::- Antonia Pozzi\nBULLET::::- Ezra Pound (Italian, English, and others)\nBULLET::::- Luigi Pulci (1432–84)\n\nBULLET::::- Salvatore Quasimodo\n\nBULLET::::- Giovanni Raboni\nBULLET::::- Clemente Rebora\nBULLET::::- Amelia Rosselli\nBULLET::::- Gabriele Rossetti\n\nBULLET::::- Umberto Saba\nBULLET::::- Giulio Salvadori\nBULLET::::- Edoardo Sanguineti\nBULLET::::- Leonardo Sinisgalli\nBULLET::::- Maria Luisa Spaziani\n\nBULLET::::- Rosa Taddei\nBULLET::::- Torquato Tasso\nBULLET::::- Laura Terracina\nBULLET::::- Giovanni Testori\nBULLET::::- Jacopone da Todi\nBULLET::::- Trilussa (Carlo Alberto Salustri) (Roman dialect)\nBULLET::::- Theodor Daubler\n\nBULLET::::- Giuseppe Ungaretti\n\nBULLET::::- Diego Valeri (poet)\nBULLET::::- Emilio Villa\n\nBULLET::::- Andrea Zanzotto\n\nBULLET::::- List of Italian writers\n"}
{"id": "15274", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15274", "title": "International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia", "text": "International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia\n\nThe International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991, more commonly referred to as the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), was a body of the United Nations established to prosecute serious crimes committed during the Yugoslav Wars, and to try their perpetrators. The tribunal was an ad hoc court located in The Hague, Netherlands.\n\nThe Court was established by Resolution 827 of the United Nations Security Council, which was passed on 25 May 1993. It had jurisdiction over four clusters of crimes committed on the territory of the former Yugoslavia since 1991: grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions, violations of the laws or customs of war, genocide, and crimes against humanity. The maximum sentence it could impose was life imprisonment. Various countries signed agreements with the UN to carry out custodial sentences.\n\nA total of 161 persons were indicted; the final indictments were issued in December 2004, the last of which were confirmed and unsealed in the spring of 2005. The final fugitive, Goran Hadžić, was arrested on 20 July 2011. The final judgment was issued on 29 November 2017 and the institution formally ceased to exist on 31 December 2017.\n\nResidual functions of the ICTY, including oversight of sentences and consideration of any appeal proceedings initiated since 1 July 2013, are under the jurisdiction of a successor body, the Mechanism for International Criminal Tribunals.\n\nUnited Nations Security Council Resolution 808 of 22 February 1993 decided that \"an international tribunal shall be established for the prosecution of persons responsible for serious violations of international humanitarian law committed in the territory of the former Yugoslavia since 1991\", and calling on the Secretary-General to \"submit for consideration by the Council ... a report on all aspects of this matter, including specific proposals and where appropriate options ... taking into account suggestions put forward in this regard by Member States\".\n\nThe Court was originally proposed by German Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel. By 25 May 1993, the international community had tried to pressure the leaders of the former Yugoslavian republics diplomatically, militarily, politically, economically, and – with Resolution 827 – through juridical means. Resolution 827 of 25 May 1993 approved S/25704 report of the Secretary-General and adopted the Statute of the International Tribunal annexed to it, formally creating the ICTY. It would have jurisdiction over four clusters of crime committed on the territory of the former SFR Yugoslavia since 1991: grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions, violations of the laws or customs of war, genocide, and crime against humanity. The maximum sentence it could impose was life imprisonment.\n\nIn 1993, the ICTY built its internal infrastructure. 17 states have signed an agreement with the ICTY to carry out custodial sentences.\n\n1993–1994: In the first year of its existence, the Tribunal laid the foundations for its existence as a judicial organ. The Tribunal established the legal framework for its operations by adopting the rules of procedure and evidence, as well as its rules of detention and directive for the assignment of defense counsel. Together these rules established a legal aid system for the Tribunal. As the ICTY is part of the United Nations and as it was the first \"international\" court for \"criminal\" justice, the development of a juridical infrastructure was considered quite a challenge. However after the first year the first ICTY judges had drafted and adopted all the rules for court proceedings.\n\n1994–1995: The ICTY established its offices within the Aegon Insurance Building in The Hague (which was, at the time, still partially in use by Aegon) and detention facilities in Scheveningen in The Hague (the Netherlands). The ICTY hired now many staff members. By July 1994 there were sufficient staff members in the office of the prosecutor to begin field investigations and by November 1994 the first indictment was presented and confirmed. In 1995, the entire staff numbered more than 200 persons and came from all over the world. Moreover, some governments assigned their legally trained people to the ICTY.\n\nIn 1994 the first indictment was issued against the Bosnian-Serb concentration camp commander Dragan Nikolić. This was followed on 13 February 1995 by two indictments comprising 21 individuals which were issued against a group of 21 Bosnian-Serbs charged with committing atrocities against Muslim and Croat civilian prisoners. While the war in the former Yugoslavia was still raging, the ICTY prosecutors showed that an international court was viable. However, no accused was arrested.\n\nThe court confirmed eight indictments against 46 individuals and issued arrest warrants. Bosnian Serb indictee Duško Tadić became the subject of the Tribunal's first trial. Tadić was arrested by German police in Munich in 1994 for his alleged actions in the Prijedor region in Bosnia-Herzegovina (especially his actions in the Omarska, Trnopolje and Keraterm detention camps). He made his first appearance before the ICTY Trial Chamber on 26 April 1995, and pleaded not guilty to all of the charges in the indictment.\n\n1995–1996: Between June 1995 and June 1996, 10 public indictments had been confirmed against a total of 33 individuals. Six of the newly indicted persons were transferred in the Tribunal's detention unit. In addition to Duško Tadic, by June 1996 the tribunal had Tihomir Blaškić, Dražen Erdemović, Zejnil Delalić, Zdravko Mucić, Esad Landžo and Hazim Delić in custody. Erdemović became the first person to enter a guilty plea before the tribunal's court. Between 1995 and 1996, the ICTY dealt with miscellaneous cases involving several detainees, which never reached the trial stage.\n\nIn 2004, the ICTY published a list of five accomplishments \"in justice and law\":\n\nBULLET::::1. \"Spearheading the shift from impunity to accountability\", pointing out that, until very recently, it was the only court judging crimes committed as part of the Yugoslav conflict, since prosecutors in the former Yugoslavia were, as a rule, reluctant to prosecute such crimes;\nBULLET::::2. \"Establishing the facts\", highlighting the extensive evidence-gathering and lengthy findings of fact that Tribunal judgments produced;\nBULLET::::3. \"Bringing justice to thousands of victims and giving them a voice\", pointing out the large number of witnesses that had been brought before the Tribunal;\nBULLET::::4. \"The accomplishments in international law\", describing the fleshing out of several international criminal law concepts which had not been ruled on since the Nuremberg Trials;\nBULLET::::5. \"Strengthening the Rule of Law\", referring to the Tribunal's role in promoting the use of international standards in war crimes prosecutions by former Yugoslav republics.\n\nThe United Nations Security Council passed resolutions 1503 in August 2003 and 1534 in March 2004, which both called for the completion of all cases at both the ICTY and its sister tribunal, the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) by 2010.\n\nIn December 2010, the Security Council adopted Resolution 1966, which established the Mechanism for International Criminal Tribunals (MICT), a body intended to gradually assume residual functions from both the ICTY and the ICTR as they wound down their mandate. Resolution 1966 called upon the Tribunal to finish its work by 31 December 2014 to prepare for its closure and the transfer of its responsibilities.\n\nIn a \"Completion Strategy Report\" issued in May 2011, the ICTY indicated that it aimed to complete all trials by the end of 2012 and complete all appeals by 2015, with the exception of Radovan Karadžić whose trial was expected to end in 2014 and Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić, who were still at large at that time and were not arrested until later that year.\n\nThe MICT's ICTY branch began functioning on 1 July 2013. Per the Transitional Arrangements adopted by the UN Security Council, the ICTY was to conduct and complete all outstanding first instance trials, including those of Karadžić, Mladić and Hadžić. The ICTY would also conduct and complete all appeal proceedings for which the notice of appeal against the judgement or sentence was filed before 1 July 2013. The MICT will handle any appeals for which notice is filed after that date.\n\nThe final ICTY trial to be completed in the first instance was that of Ratko Mladić, who was convicted on 22 November 2017. The final case to be considered by the ICTY was an appeal proceeding encompassing six individuals, whose sentences were upheld on 29 November 2017.\n\nWhile operating, the Tribunal employed around 900 staff. Its organisational components were Chambers, Registry and the Office of the Prosecutor (OTP).\nThe Prosecutor was responsible for investigating crimes, gathering evidence and prosecutions and was head of the Office of the Prosecutor (OTP). The Prosecutor was appointed by the UN Security Council upon nomination by the UN Secretary-General.\n\nThe last prosecutor was Serge Brammertz. Previous Prosecutors have been Ramón Escovar Salom of Venezuela (1993–1994), however, he never took up that office, Richard Goldstone of South Africa (1994–1996), Louise Arbour of Canada (1996–1999), and Carla Del Ponte of Switzerland (1999–2007). Richard Goldstone, Louise Arbour and Carla Del Ponte also simultaneously served as the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda until 2003. Graham Blewitt [Australia] served as the Deputy Prosecutor from 1994 until 2004. David Tolbert, the President of the International Center for Transitional Justice, was also appointed Deputy Prosecutor of the ICTY in 2004.\n\nChambers encompassed the judges and their aides. The Tribunal operated three Trial Chambers and one Appeals Chamber. The President of the Tribunal was also the presiding Judge of the Appeals Chamber.\n\nAt the time of the court's dissolution, there were seven permanent judges and one \"ad hoc\" judge who served on the Tribunal. A total of 86 judges have been appointed to the Tribunal from 52 United Nations member states. Of those judges, 51 were permanent judges, 36 were \"ad litem\" judges, and one was an \"ad hoc\" judge. Note that one judge served as both a permanent and \"ad litem\" judge, and another served as both a permanent and \"ad hoc\" judge.\n\nUN member and observer states could each submit up to two nominees of different nationalities to the UN Secretary-General. The UN Secretary-General submitted this list to the UN Security Council which selected from 28 to 42 nominees and submitted these nominees to the UN General Assembly. The UN General Assembly then elected 14 judges from that list. Judges served for four years and were eligible for re-election. The UN Secretary-General appointed replacements in case of vacancy for the remainder of the term of office concerned.\n\nOn 21 October 2015, Judge Carmel Agius of Malta was elected President of the ICTY and Liu Daqun of China was elected Vice-President; they have assumed their positions on 17 November 2015. His predecessors were Antonio Cassese of Italy (1993–1997), Gabrielle Kirk McDonald of the United States (1997–1999), Claude Jorda of France (1999–2002), Theodor Meron of the United States (2002–2005), Fausto Pocar of Italy (2005–2008), Patrick Robinson of Jamaica (2008–2011), and Theodor Meron (2011–2015).\n\n! Name\n! State\n! Position(s)\n! Term began\n! Term ended\n\nThe Registry was responsible for handling the administration of the Tribunal; activities included keeping court records, translating court documents, transporting and accommodating those who appear to testify, operating the Public Information Section, and such general duties as payroll administration, personnel management and procurement. It was also responsible for the Detention Unit for indictees being held during their trial and the Legal Aid program for indictees who cannot pay for their own defence. It was headed by the Registrar, a position occupied over the years by Theo van Boven of the Netherlands (February 1994 to December 1994), Dorothée de Sampayo Garrido-Nijgh of the Netherlands (1995–2000), Hans Holthuis of the Netherlands (2001–2009), and John Hocking of Australia (May 2009 to December 2017).\n\nThose defendants on trial and those who were denied a provisional release were detained at the United Nations Detention Unit on the premises of the Penitentiary Institution Haaglanden, location Scheveningen in Belgisch Park, a suburb of The Hague, located some 3 km by road from the courthouse. The indicted were housed in private cells which had a toilet, shower, radio, satellite TV, personal computer (without internet access) and other luxuries. They were allowed to phone family and friends daily and could have conjugal visits. There was also a library, a gym and various rooms used for religious observances. The inmates were allowed to cook for themselves. All of the inmates mixed freely and were not segregated on the basis of nationality. As the cells were more akin to a university residence instead of a jail, some had derisively referred to the ICT as the \"Hague Hilton\". The reason for this luxury relative to other prisons is that the first president of the court wanted to emphasise that the indictees were innocent until proven guilty.\n\nThe Tribunal indicted 161 individuals between 1997 and 2004 and completed proceedings with them as follows:\nBULLET::::- 111 had trials completed by the ICTY:\nBULLET::::- 21 were acquitted by the ICTY:\nBULLET::::- 18 acquittals have stood;\nBULLET::::- 2 were originally acquitted by the ICTY, but following successful appeal by the prosecution the acquittals were overturned and a retrial is being conducted by the MICT; and\nBULLET::::- 1 was acquitted by the ICTY, but the prosecution has filed an appeal to the MICT that is being considered\nBULLET::::- 90 were convicted and sentenced by the ICTY:\nBULLET::::- 81 were transferred to 14 different states where they served their prison sentences, had sentences that amounted to time spent in detention during trial, or died after conviction:\nBULLET::::- 16 remain imprisoned;\nBULLET::::- 56 completed their sentences;\nBULLET::::- 9 died while completing their sentences or after conviction awaiting transfer\nBULLET::::- 7 were convicted and sentenced, and remain in MICT detention awaiting transfer; and\nBULLET::::- 2 were convicted and sentenced, but have filed appeals to the MICT that are being considered\nBULLET::::- 13 had their cases transferred to courts in:\nBULLET::::- Bosnia and Herzegovina (10);\nBULLET::::- Croatia (2); and\nBULLET::::- Serbia (1)\nBULLET::::- 37 had their cases terminated prior to trial completion, because\nBULLET::::- the indictments were withdrawn (20); or\nBULLET::::- the indictees died before or after transfer to the Tribunal (17).\n\nThe indictees ranged from common soldiers to generals and police commanders all the way to prime ministers. Slobodan Milošević was the first sitting head of state indicted for war crimes. Other \"high level\" indictees included Milan Babić, former President of the Republika Srpska Krajina; Ramush Haradinaj, former Prime Minister of Kosovo; Radovan Karadžić, former President of the Republika Srpska; Ratko Mladić, former Commander of the Bosnian Serb Army; and Ante Gotovina, former General of the Croatian Army.\n\nThe very first hearing at the ICTY was referral request in the Tadić case on 8 November 1994. Croat Serb General and former President of the Republic of Serbian Krajina Goran Hadžić was the last fugitive wanted by the Tribunal to be arrested on 20 July 2011.\n\nAn additional 23 individuals have been the subject of contempt proceedings.\n\nSkeptics argued that an international court could not function while the war in the former Yugoslavia was still going on. This would be a huge undertaking for any court, but for the ICTY it would be an even greater one, as the new tribunal still needed judges, a prosecutor, a registrar, investigative and support staff, an extensive interpretation and translation system, a legal aid structure, premises, equipment, courtrooms, detention facilities, guards and all the related funding.\n\nCriticisms of the court include:\nBULLET::::- On 6 December 2006, the Tribunal at The Hague approved the use of force-feeding of Serbian politician Vojislav Šešelj. They decided it was not \"torture, inhuman or degrading treatment if there is a medical necessity to do so... and if the manner in which the detainee is force-fed is not inhuman or degrading\".\nBULLET::::- Reducing the indictment charges after the arrest of Ratko Mladić, Croatian officials publicly condemned chief prosecutor Serge Brammertz for his announcement that the former Bosnian Serb General, will be tried solely for crimes allegedly committed in Bosnia, not in Croatia.\nBULLET::::- Critics have questioned whether the Tribunal exacerbates tensions rather than promotes reconciliation, as is claimed by Tribunal supporters. Polls show a generally negative reaction to the Tribunal among both Serbs and Croats. A majority of Serbs and Croats have expressed doubts regarding the ICTY's integrity and question the tenability of its legal procedures.\nBULLET::::- 68% of indictees have been Serbs (or Montenegrins), to the extent that a sizeable portion of the Bosnian Serb and Croatian Serb political and military leaderships have been indicted. Many have seen this as reflecting bias, while the Tribunal's defenders have seen this as indicative of the actual proportion of crimes committed. However, Marko Hoare claimed that, aside from Milošević, only Momčilo Perišić (Chief of the General Staff of the Yugoslav Army), who was acquitted, has been indicted from the Serbian military or political top when it comes to wars in Croatia and Bosnia.\nBULLET::::- According to Hoare, a former employee at the ICTY, an investigative team worked on indictments of senior members of the \"joint criminal enterprise\", including not only Milošević but also Veljko Kadijević, Blagoje Adžić, Borisav Jović, Branko Kostić, Momir Bulatović and others. However, Hoare claims that, due to Carla del Ponte's intervention, these drafts were rejected, and the indictment limited to Milošević alone.\nBULLET::::- There have been allegations of censorship: in July 2011, the Appeals Chamber of ICTY confirmed the judgment of the Trial Chamber which found journalist and former Tribunal's OTP spokesperson Florence Hartmann guilty of contempt of court and fined her €7,000. She disclosed documents of FR Yugoslavia's Supreme Defense Council meetings and criticized the Tribunal for granting confidentiality of some information in them to protect Serbia's 'vital national interests' during Bosnia's lawsuit against the country for genocide in front of the International Court of Justice. Hartmann argued that Serbia was freed of the charge of genocide because ICTY redacted certain information in the Council meetings. Since these documents have in the meantime been made public by the ICTY itself, a group of organizations and individuals, who supported her, said that the Tribunal in this appellate proceedings \"imposed a form of censorship aimed to protect the international judges from any form of criticism\". (France refused to extradite Hartmann to serve the prison sentence issued against her by the ICTY after she refused to pay the €7,000 fine.)\nBULLET::::- Klaus-Peter Willsch compared the Ante Gotovina verdict, in which the late Croatian president Franjo Tuđman was posthumously found to have been participating in a Joint Criminal Enterprise, with the 897 Cadaver Synod trial in Rome, when Pope Stephen VI had the corpse of Pope Formosus exhumed, put on trial and posthumously convicted.\nBULLET::::- Some sentences have been considered too mild, even within the Tribunal, complained at small sentences of convicted war criminals in comparison with their crimes. In 2010, Veselin Šljivančanin's sentence for his involvement in the Vukovar massacre was cut from 17 to 10 years, which caused outrage in Croatia. Upon hearing that news, Vesna Bosanac, who had been in charge of the Vukovar hospital during the fall of the city, said that the \"ICTY is dead\" for her: \"For crimes that he [Šljivančanin], had committed in Vukovar, notably at Ovčara, he should have been jailed for life. I'm outraged... The Hague(-based) tribunal has showed again that it is not a just tribunal.\" Danijel Rehak, the head of Croatian Association of Prisoners in Serbian Concentration Camps, said, \"The shock of families whose beloved ones were killed at Ovčara is unimaginable. The court made a crucial mistake by accepting a statement of a JNA officer to whom Šljivančanin was a commander. I cannot understand that\". Pavle Strugar's 8-year sentence for shelling of Dubrovnik, a UNESCO World Heritage Site, also caused outrage in Croatia. Judge Kevin Parker (of Australia) was named in a Croatian journal (Nacional) as a main cause of the system's failure for having dismissed the testimonies of numerous witnesses.\nBULLET::::- Some of the defendants, such as Slobodan Milošević, claimed that the Court has no legal authority because it was established by the UN Security Council instead of the UN General Assembly and so had not been created on a broad international basis. The Tribunal was established on the basis of Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter; the relevant portion of which reads \"the Security Council can take measures to maintain or restore international peace and security\". The legal criticism has been succinctly stated in a memorandum issued by Austrian Professor Hans Köchler, which was submitted to the President of the Security Council in 1999. British Conservative Party MEP Daniel Hannan has called for the court to be abolished, claiming it is anti-democratic and a violation of national sovereignty.\nBULLET::::- The interactive thematic debate on the role of international criminal justice in reconciliation was convened on 10 April 2013 by the President of the General Assembly during the resumed part of the GA's 67th Session. The debate was scheduled after the convictions of Ante Gotovina and Mladen Markač for inciting war crimes against Serbs in Croatia were overturned by an ICTY Appeals Panel in November 2012. The ICTY president Theodor Meron announced that all three Hague war-crimes courts turned down the invitation of UNGA president to participate in the debate about their work. The President of the General Assembly described Meron's refusal to participate in this debate as scandalous. He emphasized that he does not shy away from criticizing the ICTY, which has \"convicted nobody for inciting crimes committed against Serbs in Croatia.\" Tomislav Nikolić, the president of Serbia criticized the ICTY, claiming it did not contribute but hindered reconciliation in the former Yugoslavia. He added that although there is no significant ethnic disproportion among the number of casualties in the Yugoslav wars, the ICTY sentenced Serbs and ethnic Serbs to a combined total of 1150 years in prison while claiming that members of other ethnic groups have been sentenced to a total of 55 years for crimes against Serbs. Vitaly Churkin, the ambassador of Russia to the UN, criticized the work of the ICTY, especially the overturned convictions of Gotovina and Ramush Haradinaj.\nBULLET::::- Regarding the final case on November 29, 2017 proceeding encompassing six Bosnian-Croat individuals, one of whom Slobodan Praljak in protest in court drank a poison and subsequently died, the Prime Minister of Croatia Andrej Plenković claimed the verdict was \"unjust\" and Praljak's suicide \"speaks of deep moral injustice to the six Croats, from Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Croat people\". He criticized the verdict because it did not recognize the assistance and support provided by Croatia to Bosnia and Herzegovina and collaboration of both armies at a time when the neighboring state was faced with the \"Greater-Serbian aggression\" and when its territorial integrity was compromised, as well it alludes to the link between the then leadership of the Republic of Croatia, while in the previous verdict to Bosnian-Serb Ratko Mladić does not recognize the connection with Serbia's state officials at that time.\nBULLET::::- Dutch filmmaker Jos de Putter made a trilogy, The Milosevic Case - Glosses at Trial, for Tegenlicht investigative slot at the VPRO. The main hypothesis of the film is that ICTY prosecution has been struggling and failing to prove any link between Milosevic and the media version of the truth of the bloody break-up of Yugoslavia. The legitimacy of the prosecution methodology in securing the witness accounts and evidence, in general, has been examined by the filmmaker.\n\nResponse to criticism of the work of the ICTY came from various scholars, academicians, and professionals, in various forms and in various publications. \nExample of Jelena Subotić's response to David Harland's summarize and illustrate underlying point of this debate in a competent manner. In response to Harland's \"Selective Justice\", Subotić, an assistant professor of political science at Georgia State University and author of \"Hijacked Justice: Dealing with the Past in the Balkans\", explained that the critics of the Tribunal missing the point, \"(...) which is not to deliver justice for past wrongs equally for 'all sides', fostering reconciliation, but to carefully measure each case on its own merits ... We should judge the work of the tribunal by its legal expertise, not by the political outcomes we desire.\"<br>\nMarko Hoare said that the accusations of the tribunal's \"selective justice\" stem from Serbian nationalist propaganda. He wrote: \"This is, of course, the claim that hardline Serb nationalists and supporters of Slobodan Milosevic have been making for about the last two decades. Instead of carrying out any research into the actual record of the ICTY in order to support his thesis, Harland simply repeats a string of cliches of the kind that frequently appear in anti-Hague diatribes by Serb nationalists.\"\n\nBULLET::::- List of people indicted in the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia\nBULLET::::- Command responsibility\nBULLET::::- International Criminal Court\nBULLET::::- Trial of Gotovina et al\n\nBULLET::::- Ackerman, J.E. and O'Sullivan, E.: \"Practice and procedure of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia: with selected materials for the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda\", The Hague, KLI, 2000.\nBULLET::::- Aldrich, G.H.: \"Jurisdiction of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia\", American Journal of International Law, 1996, pp. 64–68h\nBULLET::::- Bachmann, Klaus; Sparrow-Botero, Thomas and Lambertz, Peter: \"When justice meets politics. Independence and autonomy of ad hoc international criminal tribunals. Peter Lang International 2013.\nBULLET::::- Bassiouni, M.C.: \"The Law of the International Criminal Tribunal of the Former Yugoslavia\", New York, Transnational Publications, 1996.\nBULLET::::- Boelaert-Suominen, S.: \"The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) anno 1999: its place in the international legal system, mandate and most notable jurisprudence\", Polish Yearbook of International Law, 2001, pp. 95–155.\nBULLET::::- Boelaert-Suominen, S.: \"The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the Kosovo Conflict\", International Review of the Red Cross, 2000, pp. 217–251.\nBULLET::::- Cassese, Antonio: \"The ICTY: A Living and Vital Reality\", Journal of International Criminal Justice Vol.2\", 2004, No.2, pp. 585–597\nBULLET::::- Cisse, C.: \"The International Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda: some elements of comparison\", Transnational Law and Contemporary Problems, 1997, pp. 103–118.\nBULLET::::- Clark, R.S. and SANN, M.: \"A critical study of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia\", European Journal of International Law, 1997, pp. 198–200.\nBULLET::::- Goldstone, R.J.: \"Assessing the work of the United Nations war crimes tribunals\", Stanford Journal of International Law, 1997, pp. 1–8.\nBULLET::::- Ivković, S.K.: \"Justice by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia\", Stanford Journal of International Law, 2001, pp. 255–346.\nBULLET::::- Jones, J.W.R.D.: \"The practice of the international criminal tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda\", New York, Transnational, 2000.\nBULLET::::- Kaszubinski, M.: \"The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia\", in: Bassiouni, M.C. (ed.), \"Post-conflict justice\", New York, Transnational, 2002, pp. 459–585.\nBULLET::::- Kerr, R.: \"International judicial intervention: the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia\", International Relations, 2000, pp. 17–26.\nBULLET::::- Kerr, R.: \"The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia: an exercise in law, politics and diplomacy\", Oxford, OUP, 2004.\nBULLET::::- King, F. and La Rosa, A.: \"Current Developments. International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia\", B.T.I.R., 1997, pp. 533–555.\nBULLET::::- Klip, A. and Sluiter, G.: \"Annotated leading cases of international criminal tribunals; (Vol. III) The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia 2000–2001\", Schoten, Intersentia, 2003.\nBULLET::::- Köchler, Hans: \"Global Justice or Global Revenge? International Criminal Justice at the Crossroads\", Vienna/New York, Springer, 2003, pp. 166–184.\nBULLET::::- Kolb, R.: \"The jurisprudence of the Yugoslav and Rwandan Criminal Tribunals on their jurisdiction and on international crimes\", British Yearbook of International Law, 2001, pp. 259–315.\nBULLET::::- Lamb, S.: \"The powers of arrest of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia\", British Yearbook of International Law, 2000, pp. 165–244.\nBULLET::::- Laughland, J.: \"Travesty: The Trial of Slobodan Milošević and the Corruption of International Justice\", London, Pluto Press, 2007.\nBULLET::::- Lescure, K.: \"International justice for former Yugoslavia: the working of the International Criminal Tribunal of the Hague\", The Hague, KLI, 1996.\nBULLET::::- Mak, T.: \"The Case Against an International War Crimes Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia\", (1995) International Peacekeeping, 2:4, 536-563.\nBULLET::::- McDonald, G.K.: \"Reflections on the contributions of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia\", Hastings International and Comparative Law Review, 2001, pp. 155–172.\nBULLET::::- Mettraux, G.: \"Crimes against humanity in the jurisprudence of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda\", \"Harvard International Law Journal\", 2002, pp. 237–316.\nBULLET::::- Morris, V. and Scharf, M.P.: \"An insider's guide to the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia\", African Yearbook of International Law, 1995, pp. 441–446.\nBULLET::::- Murphy, S.D.: \"Progress and jurisprudence of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia\", American Journal of International Law, 1999, pp. 57–96.\nBULLET::::- Panovsky, D.: \"Some war crimes are not better than others: the failure of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia to prosecute war crimes in Macedonia\", Northwestern University Law Review, 2004, pp. 623–655.\nBULLET::::- Pilouras, S.: \"International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and Milosevic's trial\", New York Law School Journal of Human Rights, 2002, pp. 515–525.\nBULLET::::- Pronk, E.: \"\"The ICTY and the people from the former Yugoslavia. A reserved relationship.\"\" (thesis)\nBULLET::::- Roberts, K.: \"The law of persecution before the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia\", Leiden Journal of International Law, 2002, pp. 623–663.\nBULLET::::- Robinson, P.L.: \"Ensuring fair and expeditious trials at the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia\", European Journal of International Law, 2000, pp. 569–589.\nBULLET::::- Shenk, M.D.: \"International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda\", The International Lawyer, 1999, pp. 549–554.\nBULLET::::- Shraga, D. and Zackalin, R.: \"The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia\", European Journal of International Law, 1994, pp. 360–380.\nBULLET::::- Sjocrona, J.M.: \"The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia: some introductory remarks from a defence point of view\", Leiden Journal of International Law, 1995, pp. 463–474.\nBULLET::::- Tolbert, David: \"The ICTY: Unforeseen Successes and Foreseeable Shortcomings\", The Fletcher Forum of World Affairs, Vol.26, No.2, Summer/Fall 2002, pp. 7–20\nBULLET::::- Tolbert, David: \"Reflections on the ICTY Registry\", Journal of International Criminal Justice, Vol.2, No.2, 2004, pp. 480–485\nBULLET::::- Vierucci, L.: \"The First Steps of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia\", European Journal of International Law, 1995, pp. 134–143.\nBULLET::::- Warbrick, C. and McGoldrick, D.: \"Co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia\", International and Comparative Law Quarterly, 1996, pp. 947–953.\nBULLET::::- Wilson, Richard Ashby: 'Judging History: the Historical Record of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.' Human Rights Quarterly. 2005. August. Vol. 27, No. 3, pp. 908–942.\nBULLET::::- International Center for Transitional Justice, Criminal Justice page\nBULLET::::- International Progress Organization: Monitoring of the ICTY\nBULLET::::- Del Ponte, Carla (2003). \"The role of international criminal prosecutions in reconstructing divided communities\", public lecture by Carla Del Ponte, Prosecutor, International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, given at the London School of Economics, 20 October 2003.\nBULLET::::- Topical digests of the case law of ICTR and ICTY, Human Rights Watch, 2004\nBULLET::::- Hague Justice Portal: Academic gateway to The Hague organisations concerning international peace, justice and security.\nBULLET::::- Calendar of court proceedings before the ICTY: Hague Justice Portal\nBULLET::::- Why Journalists Should be Worried by the Rwanda Tribunal Precedents (deals also with ICTY) by Thierry Cruvellier for Reporters Without Borders\nBULLET::::- SENSE News Agency, a special project based in ICTY\nBULLET::::- Complete web-based video archive of the Milosevic trial\nBULLET::::- War Crimes, conditionality and EU integration in the Western Balkans, by Vojin Dimitrijevic, Florence Hartmann, Dejan Jovic, Tija Memisevic, edited by Judy Batt, Jelena Obradović, Chaillot Paper No. 116, June 2009, European Union Institute for Security Studies\nBULLET::::- Introductory note by Fausto Pocar on the \"Statute of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia\" in the Historic Archives of the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law\nBULLET::::- Procedural history of the \"Statute of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia\" in the Historic Archives of the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law\nBULLET::::- Lecture by Fausto Pocar entitled \"Completing the Mandate: The Legal Challenges Facing the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia\" in the Lecture Series of the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law\nBULLET::::- Lecture by Fausto Pocar entitled \"Contribution of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia to the Development of International Humanitarian Law\" in the Lecture Series of the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law\nBULLET::::- Lecture by Patrick Lipton Robinson, \"Fairness and Efficiency in the Proceedings of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia\" in the Lecture Series of the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law\n"}
{"id": "15275", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15275", "title": "ISO 216", "text": "ISO 216\n\nISO 216 specifies international standard (ISO) paper sizes used in most countries in the world today, although not in Canada, the United States, Mexico, Peru, Colombia, or the Dominican Republic. The standard defines the \"A\" and \"B\" series of paper sizes, including A4, the most commonly available paper size worldwide. Two supplementary standards, ISO 217 and ISO 269, define related paper sizes; the ISO 269 \"C\" series is commonly listed alongside the A and B sizes.\n\nAll ISO 216, ISO 217 and ISO 269 paper sizes (except some envelopes) have the same aspect ratio, :1, within rounding to millimetres. This ratio has the unique property that when cut or folded in half widthways, the halves also have the same aspect ratio. Each ISO paper size is one half of the area of the next larger size in the same series.\n\n+ ISO paper sizes in millimetres and in inches\n! rowspan=\"2\"  Size\n! colspan=\"2\"  A series formats\n! colspan=\"2\"  B series formats\n! colspan=\"2\"  C series formats\n! mm !! inches\n! mm !! inches\n! mm !! inches\n! 0\n1000 × 1414  39.4 × 55.7\n! 1\n! 2\n! 3\n! 4\n! 5\n! 6\n! 7\n! 8\n! 9\n! 10\n\nThe oldest known mention of the advantages of basing a paper size on an aspect ratio of is found in a letter written on 25 October 1786 by the German scientist Georg Christoph Lichtenberg to Johann Beckmann. \n\nThe formats that became ISO paper sizes A2, A3, B3, B4, and B5 were developed in France. They were listed in a 1798 law on taxation of publications that was based in part on page sizes.\nThe French format series never became widely known and was quickly forgotten again. Searching for a standard system of paper formats on a scientific basis by the association Die Brücke - Internationales Institut zur Organisierung der geistigen Arbeit (The Bridge - International institute to organise intellectual work), as a replacement for the vast variety of other paper formats that had been used before, in order to make paper stocking and document reproduction cheaper and more efficient, Wilhelm Ostwald proposed in 1911, over a hundred years after the “Loi sur le timbre”, a \"Weltformat\" (world format) for paper sizes based on the ratio 1:, referring to the argument advanced by Lichtenberg 1786 letter, and linking this to the metrical system by using 1 centimetre as the width of the base format. W. Porstmann argued in a long article published in 1918, that a firm basis for the system of paper formats, which deal with surfaces, could not be the length, but the surface, i.e. linking the system of paper formats to the metrical system of measures by the square metre, using the two formulae of x / y = 1: and x × y = 1. Porstmann also argued that formats for \"containers\" of paper like envelopes should be 10% larger than the paper format itself. \n\nIn 1921, after a long discussion and another intervention by W. Porstmann, the \"Normenausschuß der deutschen Industrie\" (NADI, \"Standardisation Committee of German Industry\", today Deutsches Institut für Normung or short DIN) published German standard \"DI Norm 476\" the specification of 4 series of paper formats with ratio 1:, with series A as the always preferred formats and basis for the other series. All measures are rounded to the nearest millimetre. A0 has a surface area within a rounding error of 1 square metre with a width of 841mm and height of 1189mm, so an actual area of 0.999949m², and A4 recommended as standard paper size for business, administrative and government correspondence and A6 for postcards. Series B is based on B0 with width of 1 metre, C0 is 917 mm × 1297 mm, and D0 771 mm × 1090 mm. Series C is the basis for envelope formats. \n\nThis German standardisation work was accompanied by contributions from other countries, and the published DIN paper-format concept was soon introduced as a national standard in many other countries, for example, Belgium (1924), Netherlands (1925), Norway (1926), Switzerland (1929), Sweden (1930), Soviet Union (1934), Hungary (1938), Italy (1939), Finland (1942), Uruguay (1942), Argentina (1943), Brazil (1943), Spain (1947), Austria (1948), Romania (1949), Japan (1951), Denmark (1953), Czechoslovakia (1953), Israel (1954), Portugal (1954), Yugoslavia (1956), India (1957), Poland (1957), United Kingdom (1959), Venezuela (1962), New Zealand (1963), Iceland (1964), Mexico (1965), South Africa (1966), France (1967), Peru (1967), Turkey (1967), Chile (1968), Greece (1970), Zimbabwe (1970), Singapore (1970), Bangladesh (1972), Thailand (1973), Barbados (1973), Australia (1974), Ecuador (1974), Columbia (1975) and Kuwait (1975). \n\nIt finally became both an international standard (ISO 216) as well as the official United Nations document format in 1975 and it is today used in almost all countries on this planet, with the exception of North America, Peru, Colombia, and the Dominican Republic.\n\nIn 1977, a large German car manufacturer performed a study of the paper formats found in their incoming mail and concluded that out of 148 examined countries, 88 already used the A series formats.\n\nThe main advantage of this system is its scaling. Rectangular paper with an aspect ratio of has the unique property that, when cut or folded in half midway between its longer sides, each half has the same aspect ratio as the whole sheet before it was divided. Equivalently, if one lays two same-sized sheets of paper with an aspect ratio of side-by-side along their longer side, they form a larger rectangle with the aspect ratio of and double the area of each individual sheet.\n\nThe ISO system of paper sizes exploits these properties of the aspect ratio. In each series of sizes (for example, series A), the largest size is numbered 0 (for example, A0), and each successive size (for example, A1, A2, etc.) has half the area of the preceding sheet and can be cut by halving the length of the preceding size sheet. The new measurement is rounded down to the nearest millimetre. A folded brochure can be made by using a sheet of the next larger size (for example, an A4 sheet is folded in half to make a brochure with size A5 pages. An office photocopier or printer can be designed to reduce a page from A4 to A5 or to enlarge a page from A4 to A3. Similarly, two sheets of A4 can be scaled down to fit one A4 sheet without excess empty paper.\n\nThis system also simplifies calculating the weight of paper. Under ISO 536, paper's grammage is defined as a sheet's weight in grams (g) per area in square metres (abbreviated g/m or gsm). One can derive the grammage of other sizes by arithmetic division in g/m. A standard A4 sheet made from 80 g/m paper weighs 5 g, as it is (four halvings, ignoring rounding) of an A0 page. Thus the weight, and the associated postage rate, can be easily approximated by counting the number of sheets used.\n\nISO 216 and its related standards were first published between 1975 and 1995:\nBULLET::::- ISO 216:2007, defining the A and B series of paper sizes\nBULLET::::- ISO 269:1985, defining the C series for envelopes\nBULLET::::- ISO 217:2013, defining the RA and SRA series of raw (\"untrimmed\") paper sizes\n\nPaper in the A series format has an aspect ratio of (≈ 1.414, when rounded). A0 is defined so that it has an area of 1 square metre before rounding to the nearest millimetre. Successive paper sizes in the series (A1, A2, A3, etc.) are defined by halving the area of the preceding paper size and rounding down, so that the long side of A(\"n\"+1) is the same length as the short side of A\"n\". Hence, each next size is roughly half of the prior size. So, an A1 page can fit 2 A2 pages inside the same area.\n\nThe most used of this series is the size A4, which is and thus almost exactly in area. For comparison, the letter paper size commonly used in North America () is about 6 mm (0.24 in) wider and 18 mm (0.71 in) shorter than A4. Then, the size of A5 paper is half of A4, as 148 x 210 mm (5.8 × 8.3 in). \n\nThe geometric rationale for using the square root of 2 is to maintain the aspect ratio of each subsequent rectangle after cutting or folding an A-series sheet in half, perpendicular to the larger side. Given a rectangle with a longer side, , and a shorter side, , ensuring that its aspect ratio, , will be the same as that of a rectangle half its size, , which means that , which reduces to ; in other words, an aspect ratio of 1:.\n\nThe formula that gives the larger border of the paper size A\"n\" in metres and without rounding off is the geometric sequence:\n\nThe paper size A\"n\" thus has the dimension\n\nand area (before rounding)\n\nThe measurement in millimetres of the long side of A\"n\" can be calculated as\n(brackets represent the floor function).\n\nThe B series is defined in the standard as follows: \"A subsidiary series of sizes is obtained by placing the geometrical means between adjacent sizes of the A series in sequence.\" The use of the geometric mean makes each step in size: B0, A0, B1, A1, B2 … smaller than the previous one by the same factor. As with the A series, the lengths of the B series have the ratio , and folding one in half (and rounding down to the nearest millimetre) gives the next in the series. The shorter side of B0 is exactly 1 metre.\n\nThe measurement in millimetres of the long side of B\"n\" can be calculated as:\n\nThere is also an incompatible Japanese B series which the JIS defines to have 1.5 times the area of the corresponding JIS A series (which is identical to the ISO A series). Thus, the lengths of JIS B series paper are ≈ 1.22 times those of A-series paper. By comparison, the lengths of ISO B series paper are ≈ 1.19 times those of A-series paper.\n\nThe C series formats are geometric means between the B series and A series formats with the same number (e.g., C2 is the geometric mean between B2 and A2). The width to height ratio is as in the A and B series. The C series formats are used mainly for envelopes. An unfolded A4 page will fit into a C4 envelope. C series envelopes follow the same ratio principle as the A series pages. For example, if an A4 page is folded in half so that it is A5 in size, it will fit into a C5 envelope (which will be the same size as a C4 envelope folded in half). The lengths of ISO C series paper are therefore ≈ 1.09 times those of A-series paper.\n\nA, B, and C paper fit together as part of a geometric progression, with ratio of successive side lengths of , though there is no size half-way between B\"n\" and A(\"n\" − 1): A4, C4, B4, \"D4\", A3, …; there is such a D-series in the Swedish extensions to the system.\n\nThe measurement in millimetres of the long side of C\"n\" can be calculated as:\n\nThe tolerances specified in the standard are:\nBULLET::::- ±1.5 mm for dimensions up to 150 mm,\nBULLET::::- ±2.0 mm for dimensions in the range 150 to 600 mm, and\nBULLET::::- ±3.0 mm for dimensions above 600 mm.\n\nThese are related to comparison between series A, B and C.\n\nThe ISO 216 formats are organized around the ratio 1:; two sheets next to each other together have the same ratio, sideways. In scaled photocopying, for example, two A4 sheets reduced to A5 size fit exactly onto one A4 sheet, and an A4 sheet in magnified size onto an A3 sheet; in each case, there is neither waste nor want.\n\nThe principal countries not generally using the ISO paper sizes are the United States and Canada, which use North American paper sizes. Although they have also officially adopted the ISO 216 paper format, Mexico, Panama, Peru, Colombia, the Philippines, and Chile also use mostly U.S. paper sizes.\n\nRectangular sheets of paper with the ratio 1: are popular in paper folding, such as origami, where they are sometimes called \"A4 rectangles\" or \"silver rectangles\". In other contexts, the term \"silver rectangle\" can also refer to a rectangle in the proportion 1:(1 + ), known as the silver ratio.\n\nAn important adjunct to the ISO paper sizes, particularly the A series, are the technical drawing line widths specified in ISO 128, and the matching technical pen widths of 0.13, 0.18, 0.25, 0.35, 0.5, 0.7, 1.0, 1.40, and 2.0 mm, as specified in ISO 9175-1. Color codes are assigned to each size to facilitate easy recognition by the drafter. These sizes increase by a factor of , so that particular pens can be used on particular sizes of paper, and then the next smaller or larger size can be used to continue the drawing after it has been reduced or enlarged, respectively. For example, a continuous thick line on A0 size paper shall be drawn with a 0.7 mm pen, the same line on A1 paper shall be drawn with a 0.5 mm pen, and finally on A2, A3, or A4 paper it shall be drawn with a 0.35 mm pen.\n\n!style=\"text-align:left\" Linewidth (mm)\nwidth=\"9%\" colspan=2 0.10\nwidth=\"9%\" colspan=2 0.13\nwidth=\"9%\" colspan=2 0.18\nwidth=\"9%\" colspan=2 0.25\nwidth=\"9%\" colspan=2 0.35\nwidth=\"9%\" colspan=2 0.50\nwidth=\"9%\" colspan=2 0.70\nwidth=\"9%\" colspan=2 1.0\nwidth=\"9%\" colspan=2 1.4\nwidth=\"9%\" colspan=2 2.0\n!style=\"text-align:left\" Color\nwidth=\"2%\" style=\"background:maroon\" Maroon\nwidth=\"2%\" style=\"background:orchid\" Violet\nwidth=\"2%\" style=\"background:red\" Red\nwidth=\"2%\" style=\"background:white\" White\nwidth=\"2%\" style=\"background:yellow\" Yellow\nwidth=\"2%\" style=\"background:chocolate\" Brown\nwidth=\"2%\" style=\"background:deepskyblue\" Blue\nwidth=\"2%\" style=\"background:darkorange\" Orange\nwidth=\"2%\" style=\"background:seagreen\" Green\nwidth=\"2%\" style=\"background:silver\" Gray\n\nThe earlier DIN 6775 standard upon which ISO 9175-1 is based also specified a term and symbol for easy identification of pens and drawing templates compatible with the standard, called \"Micronorm\", which may still be found on some technical drafting equipment.\n\nBULLET::::- ANSI/ASME Y14.1\nBULLET::::- International standard envelope sizes\nBULLET::::- Paper density\n\nBULLET::::- International standard paper sizes: ISO 216 details and rationale\nBULLET::::- ISO 216 at iso.org\nBULLET::::- Articles by Wilhelm Ostwald referencing Lichtenberg's letter, and W. Porstmann specifying a metric system of norms for formats for lengths, surfaces (planes), and volumes, laying the ground for the DIN-Series, in German\n"}
{"id": "15276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15276", "title": "ISO 3864", "text": "ISO 3864\n\nISO 3864 specifies international standards for safety signs and markings in workplaces and public facilities. These labels are graphical, to overcome language barriers. The standard is split into four parts:\nBULLET::::- ISO 3864-1:2011 Part 1: Design principles for safety signs and safety\nBULLET::::- ISO 3864-2:2016 Part 2: Design principles for product safety labels\nBULLET::::- ISO 3864-3:2012 Part 3: Design principles for graphical symbols for use in safety signs\nBULLET::::- ISO 3864-4:2011 Part 4: Colorimetric and photometric properties of safety sign materials\n\nThese are the colors specified in ISO Standard 3864-4 in RAL colour standard.\n! Meaning !! RAL Name !! RAL Number !! RGB Hex !! Example of Color\n\nThe corresponding American standard is ANSI Z535, which is incompatible with the ISO standard. ANSI standard ANSI Z535.6-2006 defines an optional accompanying text in one or more languages.\n\nISO 3864 is extended by ISO 7010, which provides a set of symbols based on the principles and properties specified in ISO 3864.\n\nBULLET::::- ISO 7010 - Standard for safety symbols used in ISO 3864.\nBULLET::::- ANSI Z535 - Corresponding American standard for safety signage.\n"}
{"id": "15281", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15281", "title": "Isaac Abendana", "text": "Isaac Abendana\n\nIsaac Abendana (ca. 1640 – 1699) was the younger brother of Jacob Abendana, and became \"hakam\" of the Spanish Portuguese Synagogue in London after his brother died. \n\nAbendana moved to England before his brother, in 1662, and taught Hebrew at Cambridge University. He completed an unpublished Latin translation of the \"Mishnah\" for the university in 1671. \n\nWhile he was at Cambridge, Abendana sold Hebrew books to the Bodleian Library of Oxford, and in 1689 he took a teaching position in Magdalen College. In Oxford, he wrote a series of Jewish almanacs for Christians, which he later collected and compiled as the \"Discourses on the Ecclesiastical and Civil Polity of the Jews\" (1706). Like his brother, he maintained an extensive correspondence with leading Christian scholars of his time, most notably with the philosopher Ralph Cudworth, master of Christ's College, Cambridge. \n"}
{"id": "15284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15284", "title": "List of intelligence agencies", "text": "List of intelligence agencies\n\nThis is a list of intelligence agencies. It includes only currently operational institutions.\n\nBULLET::::- National Directorate of Security (NDS)\n\nBULLET::::- State Intelligence Service (INR) – \"Sherbimi Informativ Shteteror\"\nBULLET::::- Military Intelligence Service (SHIU) – \"Shërbimi Informativ Ushtarak\"\n\nBULLET::::- Département du Renseignement et de la Sécurité\nBULLET::::- Département de Surveillance et de Sécurité\nBULLET::::- Sécurité militaire\nBULLET::::- Ministère de l'Armement et des Liaisons générales\n\nBULLET::::- President's Office\nBULLET::::- Federal Intelligence Agency (AFI) – \"Agencia Federal de Inteligencia\"\nBULLET::::- National Intelligence School (ENI) – \"Escuela Nacional de Inteligencia\"\nBULLET::::- Directorate of Judicial Surveillance (DOJ) – \"Dirección de Observaciones Judiciales\"\nBULLET::::- Federal Counternarcotics Service (SEFECONAR) – \"Servicio Federal de Lucha contra el Narcotráfico\"\nBULLET::::- Argentine National Gendarmerie Intelligence (SIGN) – \"Inteligencia de la Gendarmería Nacional Argentina\"\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Defense\nBULLET::::- National Directorate of Strategic Military Intelligence (DNIEM) – \"Dirección Nacional de Inteligencia Estratégica Militar\"\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Justice\nBULLET::::- Federal Penitentiary Service Intelligence – \"Inteligencia del Servicio Penitenciario Federal\"\nBULLET::::- Airport Security Police Intelligence – \"Inteligencia de la Policía de Seguridad Aeroportuaria\"\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Interior\nBULLET::::- National Directorate of Criminal Intelligence (DNIC) – \"Dirección Nacional de Inteligencia Criminal\"\nBULLET::::- Argentine Federal Police Intelligence – \"Inteligencia de la Policía Federal Argentina\"\nBULLET::::- Buenos Aires Police Intelligence (SIPBA) (Buenos Aires Police Intelligence) – \"Inteligencia de la Policía Bonaerense\"\nBULLET::::- Argentine Naval Prefecture Intelligence (SIPN) – \"Inteligencia de la Prefectura Naval Argentina\"\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Economy\nBULLET::::- Financial Intelligence Unit (UIF) – \"Unidad de Inteligencia Financiera\"\nBULLET::::- Intelligence Department of the Joint General Staff of the Armed Forces (J-2)\nBULLET::::- Military Intelligence Collection Center (CRIM) – \"Central de Reunión de Inteligencia Militar\"\nBULLET::::- Army Intelligence Service (SIE) – \"Servicio de Inteligencia del Ejército\"\nBULLET::::- Naval Intelligence Service (SIN) – \"Servicio de Inteligencia Naval\"\nBULLET::::- Air Force Intelligence Service (SIFA) – \"Servicio de Inteligencia de la Fuerza Aérea\"\n\nBULLET::::- National Security Service (NSS)\nBULLET::::- Department of Intelligence of the Armed Forces of Armenia\n\nBULLET::::- Australian Security Intelligence Organisation (ASIO)\nBULLET::::- Australian Secret Intelligence Service (ASIS)\nBULLET::::- Australian Signals Directorate (ASD)\nBULLET::::- Australian Geospatial-Intelligence Organisation (AGO)\nBULLET::::- Defence Intelligence Organisation (DIO)\nBULLET::::- Office of National Assessments (ONA)\n\nBULLET::::- Bundesministerium für Landesverteidigung (BMLV): \"Federal Ministry of Defence\"\nBULLET::::- Abwehramt (AWA): \"Military Protective Office\"\nBULLET::::- Heeresnachrichtenamt (HNA): \"Army Intelligence Office\"\nBULLET::::- Bundesministerium für Inneres (BMI): \"Federal Ministry of the Interior\"\nBULLET::::- Bundesamt für Verfassungsschutz und Terrorismusbekämpfung (BVT): \"Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution and Counter-Terrorism\"\n\nBULLET::::- State Security Service (Dövlət Təhlükəsizliyi Xidməti)\nBULLET::::- Foreign Intelligence Service (Xarici Kəşfiyyat Xidməti)\n\nBULLET::::- Security and Intelligence Branch (SIB)\nBULLET::::- Defence Force Intelligence Branch (DFIB)\nBULLET::::- Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU)\nBULLET::::- National Intelligence Agency (NIA)\n\nBULLET::::- NSA – National Security Agency\n\nBULLET::::- NSI – National Security Intelligence - \"জাতীয় নিরাপত্তা গোয়েন্দা\"\nBULLET::::- DGFI – Directorate General of Forces Intelligence (Intelligence branch of Bangladesh Armed Forces)\nBULLET::::- DCI - Directorate of Counter Intelligence Child Agency of DGFI\nBULLET::::- CTIB - Counter Terrorism and Intelligence Branch Child Agency of DGFI\nBULLET::::- Signals Intelligence Bureau\nBULLET::::- Internal Affairs Bureau\nBULLET::::- MI - Directorate of Military Intelligence (Intelligence branch of Bangladesh Army)\nBULLET::::- DNI -Directorate of Naval Intelligence (Intelligence branch of Bangladesh Navy)\nBULLET::::- DAI -Directorate of Air Intelligence (Intelligence branch of Bangladesh Air force)\nBangladesh Police\nBULLET::::- SB – Special Branch\nBULLET::::- DB - Detective Branch\nBULLET::::- CID - Criminal Investigation Department\nBULLET::::- PBI - Police Bureau of Investigation\nBULLET::::- POI - Police Internal Oversight\nBULLET::::- Rab Intelligence Unit\nBULLET::::- Customs Intilligence Unit\nBULLET::::- FIU- Financial Intelligence Unit\n\nBULLET::::- Royal Barbados Police Force Special Branch (SB)\nBULLET::::- Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU)\nBULLET::::- Criminal Investigations Department (CID)\nBULLET::::- Military Intelligence Unit (MIU)\n\nBULLET::::- Камітэт дзяржаўнай бяспекі / Комитет государственной безопасности (KDB/KGB) (State Security Committee)\n\nBULLET::::- VSSE (State Security Service)\nBULLET::::- ADIV / SGRS (ADIV/SGRS) (General Intelligence and Security Service, military intelligence)\nBULLET::::- OCAD / OCAM (Coordination Unit for the Threat Assessment)\n\nBULLET::::- Intelligence-Security Agency of Bosnia and Herzegovina (OSA)\nBULLET::::- Državna Agencija za Istrage i Zaštitu (State Investigation and Protection Agency, SIPA)\n\nBULLET::::- Directorate of Intelligence and Security Services (DISS)\nBULLET::::- Criminal Investigation Department (CID)\nBULLET::::- Military Intelligence (MI)\nBULLET::::- Financial Intelligence Agency (FIA)\n\nBULLET::::- Brazilian Intelligence Agency (ABIN)\nBULLET::::- Federal Police Department (DPF) (counterintelligence agency)\nBULLET::::- Army Intelligence Center (CIE)\nBULLET::::- Navy Intelligence Center (CIM)\nBULLET::::- Aeronautics Intelligence Center (CIA) (Air Force Intelligence)\nBULLET::::- Secretaria da Receita Federal do Brasil (Federal Revenue Secretariat) (RFB) (General Coordination for Research and Investigations - Coordenação-Geral de Pesquisa e Investigação - Copei)\n\nBULLET::::- Internal Security Department (Brunei) (internal)\nBULLET::::- Research Department (external)\n\nBULLET::::- Държавна агенция „Разузнаване“ (DAR) (State Intelligence Agency) – oversees intelligence gathering service under the supervision of the Council of Ministers of Bulgaria\nBULLET::::- Държавна агенция за национална сигурност State Agency for National Security (DANS) – national security service under the supervision of the Council of Ministers of Bulgaria\nBULLET::::- Служба \"Военна информация\" (CVI) (Military Intelligence Service) – under Ministry of Defence supervision\n\nBULLET::::- Ministry of National Defense\nBULLET::::- General Directorate of Intelligence\n\nBULLET::::- Canadian Security Intelligence Service (CSIS)\nBULLET::::- Communications Security Establishment (CSE)\nBULLET::::- Canadian Forces Intelligence Command (DND)\nBULLET::::- Canadian Forces National Counter-Intelligence Unit (DND) operated by the Canadian Forces Military Police Group\nBULLET::::- Joint Task Force X\nBULLET::::- Criminal Intelligence Service Canada (CISC) which is led by the (RCMP)\nBULLET::::- Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis Centre of Canada (FINTRAC)\nBULLET::::- Global Affairs Canada (GAC) Bureau of Intelligence Analysis and Security and Bureau of Economic Intelligence\nBULLET::::- Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) -assisting other intelligence agencies but former intelligence role of their Security Service has been transferred to CSIS\nBULLET::::- Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA)\n\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Interior\nBULLET::::- National Intelligence Agency (ANI) – \"Agencia Nacional de Inteligencia\"\nBULLET::::- Carabineros Intelligence Departament (DIPOLCAR) – \"Dirección de Inteligencia de Carabineros\"\nBULLET::::- Police Intelligence Department – \"Jefatura de Inteligencia Policial\"\nBULLET::::- Ministry of National Defence\nBULLET::::- Defense Intelligence Departament (DID) – \"Dirección de Inteligencia de la Defensa\"\nBULLET::::- Army Intelligence Departament (DINE) – \"Dirección de Inteligencia del Ejército\"\nBULLET::::- Air Force Intelligence Departament (DIFA) – \"Dirección de Inteligencia de la Fuerza Aérea\"\nBULLET::::- Navy Intelligence Departament – \"Direccion de Inteligencia de la Armada\"\n\nBULLET::::- Ministry of State Security (MSS)\nBULLET::::- People's Liberation Army\nBULLET::::- People's Liberation Army Strategic Support Force, particularly the 3rd department (\"3PLA\").\n\nBULLET::::- Dirección Nacional de Inteligencia (DNI)\nBULLET::::- Jefatura de Inteligencia Militar Conjunta\nBULLET::::- Jefatura de Inteligencia Militar (JEIMI)\nBULLET::::- Jefatura de Inteligencia Aérea (JIA)\nBULLET::::- Jefatura de Inteligencia Naval (JINA)\nBULLET::::- Dirección de Inteligencia de la Policía Nacional (DIPOL)\n\nBULLET::::- National Intelligence Agency (ANR)\nBULLET::::- General Staff of Military intelligence (ex-DEMIAP)\nBULLET::::- Directorate of General Information ( Congolese National Police PNC)\nBULLET::::- CENAREF (National Financial Intelligence Unit)\n\nBULLET::::- Intelligence and National Security Department (DIS) – \"Direccion de Inteligencia y Seguridad Nacional\"\n\nBULLET::::- Sigurnosno-obavještajna agencija (SOA) (Security and Intelligence Agency)\nBULLET::::- Vojna sigurnosno-obavještajna agencija (VSOA) (Military Security and Intelligence Agency)\n\nBULLET::::- Dirección de Inteligencia (DGI) (Directorate of Intelligence)\nBULLET::::- Revolutionary Armed Forces Intelligence\n\nBULLET::::- Cyprus Intelligence Service (CIS) (Κυπριακή Υπηρεσία Πληροφοριών)(ΚΥΠ), (former Central Intelligence Service-KYP)\n\nBULLET::::- Security Information Service (Bezpečnostní informační služba, BIS)\nBULLET::::- Office for Foreign Relations and Information (Úřad pro zahraniční styky a informace, ÚZSI)\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Defence\nBULLET::::- Military Intelligence (Vojenské zpravodajství, VZ)\n\nBULLET::::- Danish Security and Intelligence Service (Politiets Efterretningstjeneste (PET)).\nBULLET::::- Danish Defence Intelligence Service (Forsvarets Efterretningstjeneste (FE)).\nBULLET::::- Army Intelligence Center (Hærens Efterretningscenter (HEC)).\n\nBULLET::::- Departamento Nacional de Investigaciones (DNI) (National Department of Investigations)\n\nBULLET::::- Gihaz al-Mukhabarat al-Amma (GIS) (General Intelligence Service)\nBULLET::::- Idarat al-Mukhabarat al-Harbyya wa al-Istitla (OMIR) (Office of Military Intelligence and Reconnaissance)\nBULLET::::- Al-amn al-Watani (GHS) (General Homeland Security)\nBULLET::::- Mukhabarat\n\nBULLET::::- Estonian Internal Security Service (KaPo) (\"Kaitsepolitseiamet\")\nBULLET::::- Foreign Intelligence Service (\"Välisluureamet\")\nBULLET::::- Military Intelligence Centre of Estonian Defence Forces (\"Kaitseväe Luurekeskus\")\n\nBULLET::::- Information Network Security Agency (INSA)\nBULLET::::- Ethiopian National Intelligence and Security Service (NISS)\n\nBULLET::::- 1987 Military Government of Fiji\nBULLET::::- Fiji Intelligence Services\n\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Interior\nBULLET::::- Finnish Security Intelligence Service (Supo) — \"Suojelupoliisi / Skyddspolisen\"\nBULLET::::- National Bureau of Investigation (NBI) — \"Keskusrikospoliisi / Centralkriminalpolisen\"\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Defence\nBULLET::::- Finnish Defence Intelligence Agency — \"Puolustusvoimien tiedustelulaitos (PVTIEDL)\" / \"Försvarsmaktens underrättelsetjänst\"\nBULLET::::- Intelligence Division (Finland) — \"Pääesikunnan tiedusteluosasto (PE TIEDOS) / Huvudstabens underrättelseavdelning)\"\n\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Interior\nBULLET::::- General Directorate for Internal Security (DGSI; \"Direction générale de la sécurité intérieure\") – Domestic counter-terrorism and counter-espionage intelligence.\nBULLET::::- Central Directorate of the Judicial Police (DCPJ; \"Direction centrale de la Police judiciaire\") – Organised crime intelligence.\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Defence\nBULLET::::- Directorate-General for External Security (DGSE; \"Direction générale de la sécurité extérieure\") – Foreign intelligence relating to national security.\nBULLET::::- Directorate of Protection and Defense Security (DPSD; \"Direction de la protection et de la sécurité de la défense\") – Foreign intelligence relating to national security.\nBULLET::::- Directorate of Military Intelligence (DRM; \"Direction du renseignement militaire\") – Military intelligence.\n\nBULLET::::- National Intelligence Agency (NIA)\n\nBULLET::::- State Security Service (SSSG) − \"სახელმწიფო უშიშროების სამსახური\"\nBULLET::::- Georgian Intelligence Service (GIS) − \"საქართველოს დაზვერვის სამსახური\"\nBULLET::::- Georgian Armed Forces\nBULLET::::- Military Intelligence Department\n\nBULLET::::- Bundeskanzleramt: \"Federal Chancellery\"\nBULLET::::- Bundesnachrichtendienst (BND): \"Federal Intelligence Service\"\nBULLET::::- Bundesministerium des Innern (BMI): \"Federal Ministry of Interior\"\nBULLET::::- Bundesamt für Verfassungsschutz (BfV): \"Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution\"\nBULLET::::- Bundeswehr: \"Federal Defense Force\"\nBULLET::::- Militärischer Abschirmdienst (MAD): \"Military Counterintelligence Service\"\n\nBULLET::::- Landesministerium des Innern: \"State Ministry of the Interior\" (different denominations from state to state)\nBULLET::::- Landesamt für Verfassungsschutz (LfV): (semi-independent) \"State Authority for the Protection of the Constitution\" for every single state\n\nBULLET::::- National Security Council (Ghana) (Centre of National Security)\nBULLET::::- Bureau of National Investigations (BNI) – (Internal Intelligence Agency)\nBULLET::::- Research Department Unit – Research Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs (External Intelligence Agency)\nBULLET::::- Criminal Investigative Department (CID) – (Ghana Police)\nBULLET::::- Military Intelligence Unit (MIU) – (Ghana Armed Forces)\n\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Citizen Protection\nBULLET::::- National Intelligence Service (ΕΥΠ) – \"Εθνική Υπηρεσία Πληροφοριών\"\nBULLET::::- Hellenic National Defence General Staff\nBULLET::::- E Division – Intelligence Division\n\nBULLET::::- Service d'Intelligence National (SIN) (National Intelligence Service)\n\nBULLET::::- Criminal Intelligence Bureau (CIB) of the Hong Kong Police Force\nBULLET::::- Joint Financial Intelligence Unit (JFIU) of the Hong Kong Police Force and the Customs and Excise Department\n\nBULLET::::- Információs Hivatal (IH) (Information Office)\nBULLET::::- Alkotmányvédelmi Hivatal (AH) (Constitution Protection Office)\nBULLET::::- Katonai Nemzetbiztonsági Szolgálat (KNBSZ) (Military National Security Service)\nBULLET::::- Nemzetbiztonsági Szakszolgálat (NBSZ) (Special Service for National Security)\nBULLET::::- Terrorelhárítási Központ (TEK) (Counter Terrorism Centre)\n\nBULLET::::- Greiningardeild Ríkislögreglustjóra (GRLS) (National Security Agency) (formerly \"Eftirgrennslanadeild Lögreglunnar\" and \"Útlendingaeftirlitið\")\nBULLET::::- Greiningardeild Varnarmálastofnunar Íslands (GVMSÍ) (Military Intelligence Service) (formerly: Icelandic Intelligence Service (IIS))\nBULLET::::- Skattrannsóknarstjóri Ríkisins (National Tax Investigation Police)\n\nBULLET::::- Joint Intelligence Committee\n\nBULLET::::- External Intelligence\nBULLET::::- Research and Analysis Wing\nBULLET::::- Defence Intelligence\nBULLET::::- Defence Intelligence Agency\nBULLET::::- Directorate of Military Intelligence\nBULLET::::- Directorate of Air Intelligence\nBULLET::::- Directorate of Naval Intelligence\nBULLET::::- Image Processing and Analysis Centre\nBULLET::::- Directorate of Signals Intelligence\nBULLET::::- Joint Cipher Bureau\nBULLET::::- Internal Security\nBULLET::::- Intelligence Bureau (IB)\nBULLET::::- Economic Intelligence\nBULLET::::- Directorate of Revenue Intelligence\nBULLET::::- Economic Intelligence Council\nBULLET::::- Directorate General of GST Intelligence (DGGI)\nBULLET::::- Central Economic Intelligence Bureau\nBULLET::::- Directorate of Economic Enforcement\nBULLET::::- Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU-Ind)\nBULLET::::- Other Intelligence\nBULLET::::- Wildlife Crime Control Bureau\nBULLET::::- Narcotics Control Bureau\n\nBULLET::::- Foreign/Domestic Intelligence\nBULLET::::- Badan Intelijen Negara (BIN) (State Intelligence Agency)\nBULLET::::- Military Intelligence\nBULLET::::- (BAIS) (Strategic Intelligence Agency)\nBULLET::::- (BAINTEL KEMHAN/BAINSTRANAS) (Defence Intelligence Agency/Strategic National Installations Agency)\nBULLET::::- Pusat Intelijen Angkatan Darat (PUSINTELAD) (Indonesian Army Center for Intelligence)\nBULLET::::- Signals Intelligence\nBULLET::::- (BSSN) (National Crypto and Cyber Security Agency)\nBULLET::::- Criminal Intelligence\nBULLET::::- (BAINTELKAM) (National Police Security Intelligence Agency)\nBULLET::::- (JAM Intelijen) (Office of the Solicitor General for Intelligence)\nBULLET::::- Direktorat Intelijen Imigrasi (Directorate of Immigration Intelligence)\nBULLET::::- Seksi Intelijen BNN (National Narcotics Agency Intelligence Section)\nBULLET::::- Financial Intelligence\nBULLET::::- Inspektorat Bidang Investigasi Kemkeu (Ministry of Finance Inspectorate of Investigation)\nBULLET::::- Sub Direktorat Intelijen Dirjen Bea Cukai (Customs & Excise Sub-Directorate of Intelligence)\n\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Intelligence (VAJA)\nBULLET::::- Oghab 2 – Nuclear facilities security\n\nGeneral Staff of the Armed Forces of the Islamic Republic of Iran:\nBULLET::::- Intelligence Protection Organization of General Staff of the Armed Forces\n\nIslamic Republic of Iran Army:\nBULLET::::- Intelligence Protection Organization of Iranian Army (SAHEFAJA)\n\nIslamic Revolutionary Guard Corps:\nBULLET::::- Intelligence Organization of IRGC\nBULLET::::- Intelligence Protection Organization of IRGC (SAHEFASA)\n\nLaw Enforcement Force of the Islamic Republic of Iran:\nBULLET::::- Iranian Security Police (PAVA)\nBULLET::::- Intelligence Protection Organization of Iranian Police (SAHEFANAJA)\n\nMinistry of Defence and Armed Forces Logistics:\nBULLET::::- Intelligence Protection Organization of Ministry of Defence (SAHEFAVEDJA)\n\nBULLET::::- General Security Directorate (GSD) (Internal security agency)\nBULLET::::- Iraqi National Intelligence Service (INIS) (Foreign intelligence and special operations)\nKurdistan Region\nBULLET::::- Security council of Kurdistan Region\n\nForeign & Domestic Military Intelligence (Defence Forces)\nBULLET::::- Directorate of Military Intelligence (G2)\nBULLET::::- Communications and Information Services Corps (CIS) SIGINT Section\nDomestic Police Intelligence (\"Garda Síochána\")\nBULLET::::- Crime & Security Branch (CSB)\nBULLET::::- Special Detective Unit (SDU)\nBULLET::::- National Surveillance Unit (NSU)\nBULLET::::- Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU)\n\nBULLET::::- Mossad (Foreign Intelligence and Special Operations)\nBULLET::::- Shin Bet (Internal Security Service)\nBULLET::::- Aman (Military intelligence)\nBULLET::::- Lahav 433 (Police intelligence)\n\nBULLET::::- Agenzia Informazioni e Sicurezza Interna (AISI): \"Agency for Internal Information and Security\" (domestic intelligence agency).\nBULLET::::- Agenzia Informazioni e Sicurezza Esterna (AISE): \"Agency for External Information and Security\" (foreign intelligence agency).\nBULLET::::- Dipartimento delle Informazioni per la Sicurezza (DIS): \"Department of Information for Security\" (classified data management, personnel training for both AISI and AISE).\nBULLET::::- Comitato Interministeriale per la Sicurezza della Repubblica (CISR): \"Inter-ministerial Committee for the Security of the Republic\" (a joint intelligence supervision committee).\nBULLET::::- Centro Intelligence Interforze (CII): \"Center for Interforce Intelligence\" (Military Intelligence).\n\nBULLET::::- Jamaica Defence Force Intelligence Unit\nBULLET::::- National Intelligence Bureau\nBULLET::::- Special Branch of Jamaica Constabulary Force\n\nBULLET::::- Cabinet Secretariat\nBULLET::::- CIRO (Cabinet Intelligence and Research Office)\nBULLET::::- Cabinet Satellite Intelligence Center (CSICE)\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Defense\nBULLET::::- Defense Intelligence Headquarters (DIH)\nBULLET::::- Intelligence Security Command (JSDF)\nBULLET::::- Military Intelligence Command (JGSDF)\nBULLET::::- Fleet Intelligence Command (JMSDF)\nBULLET::::- Air Intelligence Wing (JASDF)\nBULLET::::- National Public Safety Commission\nBULLET::::- National Police Agency\nBULLET::::- NPA Security Bureau\nBULLET::::- Tokyo Metropolitan Police Department Public Security Bureau\nBULLET::::- Prefectural Police Department Security Bureau\nBULLET::::- Public Security Section\nBULLET::::- Police Station\nBULLET::::- Public Security Section\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Foreign Affairs\nBULLET::::- Intelligence and Analysis Service (IAS)\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Justice\nBULLET::::- Public Security Intelligence Agency (PSIA)\n\nBULLET::::- Da’irat al-Mukhabarat al-’Ammah (GID) (General Intelligence Department)\n\nBULLET::::- National Security Committee of the Republic of Kazakhstan\nBULLET::::- General Intelligence Office\nBULLET::::- State Security Service of Kazakhstan\n\nBULLET::::- National Intelligence Service (NIS)\nBULLET::::- Directorate of Military Intelligence\nBULLET::::- National Cyber Command Center (NC3)\n\nBULLET::::- Kosovo Intelligence Agency (AKI)\nBULLET::::- State Committee for National Security (UKMK/GKNB)\n\nBULLET::::- National Intelligence Service (NIS) – 국가정보원\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Justice – 법무부\nBULLET::::- Supreme Prosecutors' Office of the Republic of Korea (SPO) – 검찰청\nBULLET::::- Ministry of National Defense – 국방부\nBULLET::::- Defense Security Support Command (DSSC) – 군사안보지원사령부\nBULLET::::- Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) – 국방정보본부\nBULLET::::- Defense Intelligence Command (DIC) – 정보사령부\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Government Administration and Home Affair – 행정자치부\nBULLET::::- National Police Agency (NPA) – 경찰청\nBULLET::::- Intelligence and Security Bureau\n\nBULLET::::- The Ministry of Interior (وزارة الداخلية),\nBULLET::::- Domestic Undercover Police (المباحث الجنائية)\nBULLET::::- Kuwait National Security Bureau (جهاز الأمن الوطني)\nBULLET::::- The Ministry of Defense (وزارة الدفاع),\nBULLET::::- Military Intelligence Agency ( الاستخبارات العسكرية )\nBULLET::::- The National Guard (الحرس الوطني),\nBULLET::::- National Guard Intelligence Agency (وكالة استخبارات الحرس الوطني)\n\nBULLET::::- Valsts drošības dienests (VDD) (State Security Service)\nBULLET::::- Satversmes aizsardzības birojs (SAB) (Constitution Protection Bureau)\nBULLET::::- Militārās izlūkošanas un drošības dienests (MIDD) (Defence Intelligence and Security Service)\n\nBULLET::::- General Directorate of General Security\nBULLET::::- The Information Branch\nBULLET::::- Lebanese State Security\nBULLET::::- Intelligence Directorate of the Lebanese Army\n\nBULLET::::- National Security Agency\n\nBULLET::::- Valstybes Saugumo Departamentas (VSD) (State Security Department)\nBULLET::::- Antrasis operatyvinių tarnybų departamentas (AOTD) prie Krašto apsaugos ministerijos (AOTD) (Second Investigation Department under Ministry of National Defence)\n\nBULLET::::- Service de Renseignement de l'État Luxembourgeois / Lëtzebuerger Staatlëchen Noriichtendéngscht (SREL, \"Luxembourg State Intelligence Service\", i.e. the Homeland Intelligence Service)\nBULLET::::- Haut Commissariat de la Sécurité Extérieure / Héichkommissariat fir auswäerteg Sëcherheet (HCSE, \"High Commission for External Security\", i.e. the Foreign Intelligence Service)\nBULLET::::- Service de Renseignement de l'Armée Luxembourgeoise / Noriichtendéngscht vun der Lëtzebuerger Arméi (SRAL, \"Luxembourgish Army Intelligence Service\", i.e. the Military Intelligence Service)\n\nBULLET::::- Counter-intelligence Section – Research and Information Division of Public Security Police Force of Macau\nBULLET::::- Information Division of Macau Security Force\n\nIn the Presidents Office\nBULLET::::- National Intelligence Service formerly known as National Intelligence Bureau\n\nBULLET::::- Malaysian Special Branch, a Special Branch\nBULLET::::- Defence Staff Intelligence Division\nBULLET::::- Royal Intelligence Corps (Kor Risik DiRaja), Military intelligence, Malaysian Armed Forces\nBULLET::::- Research Division of the Prime Minister's Department (Malaysian External Intelligence Organization)\nBULLET::::- Chief Government Security Office (CGSO)\n\nBULLET::::- Maldives National Defence Force (Defence Intelligence Service)\nBULLET::::- Maldives Police Service (Internal Intelligence Department)\n\nBULLET::::- Federal government of Mexico\nBULLET::::- Civilian agencies\nBULLET::::- Attorney General of Mexico (PGR)\nBULLET::::- Attorney General's Crime-Combat Planning, Analysis and Information Center ( CENAPI / PGR – Centro de Planeación, Análisis e Información para el Combate a la Delincuencia )\nBULLET::::- Attorney General's Office for Special Investigations on Organized Crime (SEIDO / PGR )\nBULLET::::- Interior Ministry (SEGOB)\nBULLET::::- National Commission for Security (CNS)\nBULLET::::- Federal Police\nBULLET::::- Intelligence Division of the Federal Police (Division de Inteligencia – CNS / Policia Federal)\nBULLET::::- National Security and Investigation Center (CISEN)\nBULLET::::- Military agencies\nBULLET::::- SEDENA\nBULLET::::- 2nd Section of the National Defense Intelligence Staff (SEDENA S-2 – Seccion 2da: Inteligencia del Estado Mayor)\nBULLET::::- Military Intelligence – National Defense Ministry (Inteligencia Militar – SEDENA / Ejercito y Fuerza Aerea)\nBULLET::::- SEMAR\nBULLET::::- Naval Intelligence – Navy Ministry (Inteligencia Naval – SEMAR / Marina Armada )\n\nBULLET::::- Information of and Security Service (SIS) – \"Serviciul de Informații și Securitate\"\n\nBULLET::::- General Intelligence Agency of Mongolia (GIA)\n\nBULLET::::- National Security Agency (ANB)\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Defence\nBULLET::::- Intelligence-security Service\n\nBULLET::::- Direction de la Surveillance du Territoire (DST) (Directorate of Territorial Surveillance)\nBULLET::::- Direction Generale pour l'Etude et la Documentation (DGED) (Directorate of Research and Documentation)\nBULLET::::- Bureau Central d'Investigations Judiciaires (BCIJ) (Central Bureau of Judicial Investigations)\n\nBULLET::::- Bureau Of Special Investigation (BSI)\nBULLET::::- Military Intelligence (MI)\nBULLET::::- Special Intelligence Department (Special Branch)\nBULLET::::- Criminal Investigation Department (CID)\n\nBULLET::::- National Investigation Department (NID) Formerly known as Nepal Guptachar vibhag\nBULLET::::- Directorate of Military Intelligence\n\nBULLET::::- Algemene Inlichtingen- en Veiligheidsdienst (AIVD) (General Intelligence and Security Service)\nBULLET::::- Militaire Inlichtingen- en Veiligheidsdienst (MIVD) (Military Intelligence and Security Service)\nBULLET::::- Joint Sigint Cyber Unit (JSCU)\nBULLET::::- Nationale Coördinator Terrorismebestrijding en Veiligheid (NCTV) (National Coordinator for Counterterrorism and Security), used for the analysis of threats and coordination of counterterrorism measures\nBULLET::::- Koninklijke Marechaussee (Royal Marechaussee)\nBULLET::::- Team Criminal Intelligence (KMar-TCI)\nBULLET::::- Fiscale Inlichtingen- en Opsporingsdienst (Fiscal Information and Investigation Service)\nBULLET::::- Team Criminal Intelligence (FIOD-TCI)\nBULLET::::- Korps Nationale Politie (National Police Corps)\nBULLET::::- Team Criminal Intelligence (TCI)\nBULLET::::- Team Special Witnesses (TSG) (Team Speciale Getuigen)\nBULLET::::- Regional Intelligence Service (Regionale Inlichtingendienst), National Police teams which collect national security intelligence for the AIVD\nBULLET::::- Team Public Order Intelligence (Team Openbare Order Inlichtingen), intelligence unit focused on collecting intelligence to maintain public order and security\n\nBULLET::::- Government Communications Security Bureau\nBULLET::::- New Zealand Security Intelligence Service\nBULLET::::- National Assessments Bureau\n\nBULLET::::- Dirección de Información para la Defensa (DID) (Directorate of Information for Defense)\n\nBULLET::::- State Security Service (Internal Security)\nBULLET::::- National Intelligence Agency (Foreign Intelligence and Counterintelligence)\nBULLET::::- Defence Intelligence Agency (Military Intelligence)\nBULLET::::- Department Directorate Of Secret Service (Nigeria)\nBULLET::::- Force Intelligence Bureau(FIB) (Intelligence Arm of The Nigerian Police Force)\n\nBULLET::::- Reconnaissance General Bureau\nBULLET::::- State Security Department\n\nBULLET::::- Administration for Security and Counterintelligence (\"Uprava za bezbednost i kontrarazuznavanje\") (Police Agency)\nBULLET::::- Intelligence Agency (\"Agencija za Razuznavanje\") (Civilian Agency)IA\nBULLET::::- Military Service for Security and Intelligence (\"Voena služba za razuznuvanje i bezbednost\") (Military Agency)\n\nBULLET::::- Nasjonal sikkerhetsmyndighet (NSM) (National Security Authority)\nBULLET::::- Politiets sikkerhetstjeneste (PST) (Police Security Service)\nBULLET::::- Etterretningstjenesten (NIS) (Norwegian Intelligence Service)\nBULLET::::- Forsvarets sikkerhetstjeneste (FOST) – Norwegian Defence Security Service (NORDSS)\n\nBULLET::::- External Intelligence\nBULLET::::- Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI)\nBULLET::::- Defence Intelligence\nBULLET::::- National Intelligence Directorate\nBULLET::::- Directorate-General of Air Intelligence (DGAI)\nBULLET::::- Directorate-General of Military Intelligence (DGMI)\nBULLET::::- Directorate-General of Naval Intelligence (DGNI)\nBULLET::::- Internal Intelligence\nBULLET::::- Anti-Crime & Anti-Terrorism (ACAT)\nBULLET::::- Anti-Narcotics Force (ANF)\nBULLET::::- Crime Investigation Department (CID)\nBULLET::::- Counter-Terrorism Department (CTD)\nBULLET::::- Federal Investigation Agency (FIA)\nBULLET::::- Intelligence Bureau (IB)\nBULLET::::- National Counter Terrorism Authority (NACTA)\nBULLET::::- National Crises Management Cell (NCMC)\nBULLET::::- Economic Intelligence & Securities\nBULLET::::- Federal Board of Revenue (FBR)\nBULLET::::- Directorate-General of Intelligence and Investigation (DGII)\nBULLET::::- Financial Monitoring Unit (FMU)\nBULLET::::- National Accountability Bureau (NAB)\nBULLET::::- Security and Exchange Commission Pakistan (SECP)\n\nBULLET::::- Consejo de Seguridad Pública y Defensa Nacional (CSPDN) (security, defense and intelligence main government entity)\nBULLET::::- National Police Intelligence Directorate (DNIP) – Dirección Nacional de Inteligencia Policial\nBULLET::::- Direccion de Investigacion Judicial (DIJ)\nBULLET::::- Direccion General de Analisis e Inteligencia Estrategica (DGAIE)\nBULLET::::- Servicio Nacional de Inteligencia y Seguridad (SENIS)\n\nBULLET::::- National Intelligence Organization (NIO)\nBULLET::::- Royal PNG Constabulary - National Criminal Intelligence Unit (NCIU), Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU)\nBULLET::::- PNG Customs Service - Customs Intelligence\nBULLET::::- Department of Prime Minister - Office of Security Coordination & Assessment (OSCA)\nBULLET::::- PNG Defense Force - Defense Intelligence Bureau (DIB)\nBULLET::::- Bank of PNG - Financial Analysis & Supervision Unit (FASU)\n\nBULLET::::- Dirección Nacional de Inteligencia (DINI) (National Directorate of Intelligence)\n\nBULLET::::- National Intelligence Coordinating Agency (NICA)\nBULLET::::- National Bureau of Investigation (NBI)\nBULLET::::- Philippine Drug Enforcement Agency (PDEA)\nBULLET::::- Intelligence Service of the Armed Forces of the Philippines (ISAFP)\nBULLET::::- Philippine National Police Intelligence Group\nBULLET::::- Intelligence and Security Unit, Department of Foreign Affairs\n\nBULLET::::- Agencja Wywiadu (AW) (Foreign Intelligence Agency)\nBULLET::::- Agencja Bezpieczeństwa Wewnętrznego (ABW) (Internal Security Agency)\nBULLET::::- Służba Wywiadu Wojskowego (SWW) (Military Intelligence Service)\nBULLET::::- Służba Kontrwywiadu Wojskowego (SKW) (Military Counter-intelligence Service)\nBULLET::::- Centralne Biuro Antykorupcyjne (CBA) (Central Anticorruption Bureau)\n\nBULLET::::- Sistema de Informações da República Portuguesa (SIRP) (Intelligence System of the Portuguese Republic)\nBULLET::::- Serviço de Informações de Segurança (SIS) (Security Intelligence Service)\nBULLET::::- Serviço de Informações Estratégicas de Defesa (SIED) (Defense Strategic Intelligence Service)\nBULLET::::- Centro de Informações e Segurança Militares (CISMIL) (Military Intelligence and Security Service)\n\nBULLET::::- Qatar State Security\n\nBULLET::::- Romanian Intelligence Service (SRI) – \"Serviciul Român de Informații\"\nBULLET::::- Foreign Intelligence Service (SIE) – \"Serviciul de Informații Externe\"\nBULLET::::- Serviciul de Telecomunicații Speciale (STS)-\nSpecial Telecommunication Service, abbreviated STS\nBULLET::::- Protection and Guard Service (SPP)-\nServiciul de Protecţie şi Pază, abbreviated SPP\nBULLET::::- Ministry of National Defence\nBULLET::::- Directorate General of Defence Intelligence\n(DGIA) – \"Direcția Generală de Informații a Apărării\"\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Interior and Administrative Reform\nBULLET::::- Directorate General of Information and Internal Protection (DGIPI) – \"Direcția Generală de Informații și Protecție Internă\", Common name- Doi și-un sfert\n\nBULLET::::- Federal Security Service (FSB) – \"Федеральная служба безопасности\"\nBULLET::::- Foreign Intelligence Service (SVR) – \"Служба Внешней Разведки\"\nBULLET::::- Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU) – \"Главное Разведывательное Управление\"\nBULLET::::- Federal Protective Service (FSO) – \"Федеральная служба охраны\"\nBULLET::::- Special Communications Service of Russia – \"Служба специальной связи и информации\"\n\nBULLET::::- Council of Political and Security Affairs (CPSA) - مجلس الشؤون السياسية والأمنية\nBULLET::::- General Intelligence Presidency (GIP) – رئاسة الاستخبارات العامة\nBULLET::::- Presidency of State Security (PSS) – رئاسة أمن الدولة\nBULLET::::- Mabahith (GDI) – المباحث العامة\nBULLET::::- Saudi Arabia Ministry of Defense (MOD) - وزارة الدفاع\nBULLET::::- The Armed Forces Intelligence and Security Commission - هيئة استخبارات وأمن القوات المسلحة\nBULLET::::- The Land Forces Intelligence and Security Commission - هيئة استخبارات وأمن القوات البرية\nBULLET::::- The Naval Forces Intelligence and Security Commission - هيئة استخبارات وأمن القوات البحرية\nBULLET::::- The Air Forces Intelligence and Security Commission - هيئة استخبارات وأمن القوات الجوية\nBULLET::::- The Air Defense Forces Intelligence and Security Commission - هيئة استخبارات وأمن قوات الدفاع الجوي\nBULLET::::- The Strategic Missile Force Intelligence and Security Commission - هيئة استخبارات وأمن قوة الصواريخ الاستراتيجية\nBULLET::::- Saudi Arabia Ministry of Interior (MOI) - وزارة الداخلية\nBULLET::::- Saudi Arabia Border Guards Intelligence Directorate - استخبارات حرس الحدود\nBULLET::::- General Directorate of Public Security (GPS) - مديرية الأمن العام\nBULLET::::- General Administration of Financial Investigations (GAFI) - الادارة العامة للتحريات المالية\nBULLET::::- Saudi Arabia National Guard (SANG) - الحرس الوطني السعودي\nBULLET::::- National Guard Intelligence Commission - هيئة الاستخبارات بالحرس الوطني\nBULLET::::- Saudi Royal Guard (SRG) - رئاسة الحرس الملكي\nBULLET::::- Saudi Royal Guard Intelligence Commission - هيئة استخبارات الحرس الملكي السعودي\nBULLET::::- The National Cyber Security Commission (NCSC) - الهيئة الوطنية للأمن السيبراني\nBULLET::::- Saudi Arabian Monetary Authority (SAMA) - مؤسسة النقد العربي السعودي\nBULLET::::- Anti-Money Laundering Committee (AMLC) - اللجنة الدائمة لمكافحة غسل الاموال\n\nBULLET::::- National\nBULLET::::- National Security Council and Classified Information Protection Office – \"Канцеларија Савета за националну безбедност и заштиту тајних података\"\n\nBULLET::::- Ministry of the Interior\nBULLET::::- Security Intelligence Agency (BIA) – \"Безбедносно-информативна агенција\"\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Defence\nBULLET::::- Military Intelligence Agency (VOA) – \"Војнообавештајна агенција\"\nBULLET::::- Military Security Agency (VBA) – \"Војнобезбедносна агенција\"\nBULLET::::- Intelligence and Reconnaissance Directorate (J-2) – \"Управа за обавештајно-извиђачке послове\"\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Finance\nBULLET::::- Money Laundering Prevention Administration – \"Управа за спречавање прања новца\"\n\nBULLET::::- Internal Security Department (ISD)\nBULLET::::- Security and Intelligence Division (SID)\n\nBULLET::::- Slovenská informačná služba (SIS) (Slovak Information Service)\nBULLET::::- Vojenské spravodajstvo (Military Intelligence)\nBULLET::::- Národný bezpečnostný úrad (NBÚ) (National Security Bureau)\n\nBULLET::::- Slovenska Obveščevalno-Varnostna Agencija (SOVA) (Slovenian Intelligence and Security Agency)\nBULLET::::- Obveščevalno Varnostna Služba (OVS) ( Intelligence and Security Service of Slovenian Ministry of Defence)\nBULLET::::- General štab SV – Sektor za obveščevalne zadeve – J2 (GŠSV-J2) ( (General Staff SAF – Section for intelligence matters – J2)\nBULLET::::- Nacionalni Preiskovalni urad (NPU)\n\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Defence (Somalia)\nBULLET::::- National Intelligence and Security Agency (NISA)\nBULLET::::- Puntland Intelligence Agency (PIA)\nBULLET::::- Jubbaland Intelligence Agency (JIA)\n\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Defence (Somaliland)\nBULLET::::- National Intelligence Agency (NIA)\n\nBULLET::::- Domestic Branch (SSA)\nBULLET::::- Foreign Branch (SSA)\nBULLET::::- South African National Defence Force Intelligence Division (SANDF-ID)\nBULLET::::- Crime Intelligence Division, South African Police Service\nBULLET::::- Intelligence Unit\n\nBULLET::::- Ministry of the Presidency\nBULLET::::- National Security Department (DSN)\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Defence\nBULLET::::- National Intelligence Centre (CNI)\nBULLET::::- Spanish Armed Forces\nBULLET::::- Armed Forces Intelligence Center (CIFAS)\nBULLET::::- Ministry of the Interior\nBULLET::::- Intelligence Center for Counter-Terrorism and Organized Crime (CITCO)\nBULLET::::- Cuerpo Nacional de Policia\nBULLET::::- Brigada de Investigación Tecnológica (BIT)\nBULLET::::- Comisaría General de la Información (CGI)\nBULLET::::- Civil Guard\nBULLET::::- Servicio de Información de la Guardia Civil (SIGC)\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Economy and Enterprise\nBULLET::::- Customs Surveillance Service (SVA)\n\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Defence\nBULLET::::- State Intelligence Service\nBULLET::::- Sri Lanka Armed Forces\nBULLET::::- Directorate of Military Intelligence\nBULLET::::- Military Intelligence Corps (Sri Lanka)\nBULLET::::- Central Bank of Sri Lanka\nBULLET::::- Financial Intelligence Unit (Sri Lanka)\nBULLET::::- Sri Lanka Navy\nBULLET::::- Navy Intelligence\n\nBULLET::::- National Intelligence and Security Service (NISS) – \"Jihaaz Al Amn Al Watani Wal Mukhaabaraat\"\n\nBULLET::::- Swedish Military Intelligence and Security Service (MUST) – \"Militära underrättelse- och säkerhetstjänsten\"\nBULLET::::- Office for Special Acquisition (KSI) – \"Kontoret för särskild inhämtning\"\nBULLET::::- Intelligence Office (UNDK) – \"Underrättelsekontoret\"\nBULLET::::- Security Office (SÄKK) – \"Säkerhetskontoret\"\nBULLET::::- National Defence Radio Establishment (FRA) – \"Försvarets Radioanstalt\"\nBULLET::::- Swedish Security Service (Säpo) – \"Säkerhetspolisen\"\n\nBULLET::::- Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sports\nBULLET::::- Nachrichtendienst des Bundes (NDB) Federal Intelligence Service as of 1 January 2010, created by merger of Strategic Intelligence Service (SND) – \"Strategischer Nachrichtendienst\" and Analysis and Prevention Service (DAP) – \"Dienst für Analyse und Prävention\"\nBULLET::::- Swiss Armed Forces\nBULLET::::- Military Intelligence Service (MND) – \"Militärischer Nachrichtendienst\"\nBULLET::::- Federal Department of Justice and Police\nBULLET::::- The Postal Service and Telecommunications Surveillance (UPF) – \"Überwachung Post- und Fernmeldeverkehr\"\n\nBULLET::::- Air Force Intelligence Directorate\nBULLET::::- General Security Directorate\nBULLET::::- Political Security Directorate\nBULLET::::- Military Intelligence Service\n\nBULLET::::- General Strategy\nBULLET::::- National Security Bureau, National Security Council\nBULLET::::- Civil\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Justice Investigation Bureau (MJIB)\nBULLET::::- National Police Agency, Ministry of Interior\nBULLET::::- Semi-military\nBULLET::::- Coast Guard Administration\nBULLET::::- Military\nBULLET::::- All Service Units\nBULLET::::- Military Police Command, Ministry of National Defense\nBULLET::::- Military Intelligence Bureau, General Staff Headquarters, Ministry of National Defense\nBULLET::::- Military Security General Corps, General Staff Headquarters, Ministry of National Defense\nBULLET::::- Political Warfare General Bureau, Ministry of National Defense\nBULLET::::- Single Branch Units\nBULLET::::- Staff Department of Intelligence (S2), Army Command\nBULLET::::- Staff Department of Intelligence (S2), Navy Command\nBULLET::::- Staff Department of Intelligence (S2), Air Force Command\n\nBULLET::::- State Committee for National Security (SCNS) – Кумитаи давлатии амнияти милли (КДАМ)/Государственный комитет национальной безопасности (ГКНБ)\n\nBULLET::::- Tanzania Intelligence and Security Service\n\nBULLET::::- National Intelligence Agency (NIA) under the Office of the Prime Minister\nBULLET::::- Department of Special Investigation, (DSI) Ministry of Justice\nBULLET::::- Internal Security Operations Command (ISOC) under the Office of the Prime Minister\nBULLET::::- Crime Suppression Division (CSD) and the Special Branch Bureau (SBB) of the Royal Thai Police\n\nBULLET::::- National Security Council (MGK) (umbrella organization)\nBULLET::::- Republic of Turkey Prime Ministry Undersecretariat\nBULLET::::- National Intelligence Organization (MİT) (semi-dependent (main), foreign intelligence, counter espionage and special operations)\nBULLET::::- Strategic Analysis Directorate\nBULLET::::- Counter-Intelligence Directorate\nBULLET::::- External Operations Directorate\nBULLET::::- Security Intelligence Directorate\nBULLET::::- Electronic and Technical Intelligence Directorate\nBULLET::::- Signals Intelligence Directorate (SİB)\nBULLET::::- Undersecretariat of Public Order and Security (KDGM) (semi-dependent, internal security service)\nBULLET::::- Joint Chief of Staff Intelligence Bureau (GENKUR-İDB) (semi-dependent, military intelligence and special operations)\nBULLET::::- Army Intelligence Bureau (semi-dependent, military intelligence)\nBULLET::::- Navy Intelligence Bureau (semi-dependent, military intelligence)\nBULLET::::- Air Force Intelligence Bureau (semi-dependent, military intelligence)\nBULLET::::- Coast Guard Intelligence Bureau (semi-dependent, military intelligence)\nBULLET::::- Gendarmerie Intelligence and Counter-Terrorism Bureau (unofficially, as JİTEM) (semi-dependent, military law enforcement) (2005–present, officially, as JİT (Gendarmerie Intelligence Organization))\nBULLET::::- Police Intelligence Bureau (semi-dependent, law enforcement)\nBULLET::::- Offices of the Other Ministries\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Finance, Financial Crimes Investigation Unit (MASAK) (semi-dependent, financial monitoring)\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Customs, Customs Enforcement (Gümrük Muhafaza) (dependent, customs protection)\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Forestry, Forest Conservation (Orman Muhafaza) (dependent, environmental protection)\n\nBULLET::::- Ministry of National Security (MNB)\n\nBULLET::::- Central Intelligence DirectorateHolovne Upravlinnya Rozvidky (HUR)\nBULLET::::- Foreign Intelligence Service of UkraineSluzhba Zovnishnioyi Rozvidky Ukrayiny (SZR or SZRU)\nBULLET::::- National Bureau of Investigation (NBI)\nBULLET::::- State Service for Financial Monitoring(Financial Intelligence Unit)\nBULLET::::- External secret agencies (ESC)\nBULLET::::- Security Service of Ukraine Sluzhba Bezpeky Ukrayiny (SBU)\n\nBULLET::::- UAE State Security\nBULLET::::- Signals Intelligence Agency (SIA) formerly known as the National Electronic Security Authority(NESA)\nMISS (formerly DMI - Defense Military Intelligence) now Military Intelligence Security Services\n\nBULLET::::- Joint Intelligence Organisation (JIO) – Joint intelligence analysis.\n\nCriminal Intelligence and Protected Persons\nBULLET::::- National Crime Agency (NCA) – Organised crime intelligence gathering and analysis. In addition to having intelligence and surveillance powers, officers from the National Crime Agency can hold any or all three of the powers of a (armed) police officer, immigration officer and/or customs officer. The Agency and its officers have special powers including acting as an enforcement authority for Unexplained wealth orders and access of internet records through the Investigatory Powers Act 2016. National Crime Agency officers are posted overseas in around 50 countries. They operate the UK Protected Persons Service, which includes witness protection.\n\nDomestic intelligence\nBULLET::::- Security Service/MI5 – Domestic counter terrorism and counter espionage intelligence gathering and analysis.\nBULLET::::- Office for Security and Counter-Terrorism (OSCT) – Counter terrorism and protecting critical national infrastructure.\nBULLET::::- National Domestic Extremism and Disorder Intelligence Unit (NDEDIU) – Domestic counter extremism and public disorder intelligence gathering and analysis.\nBULLET::::- National Ballistics Intelligence Service (NBIS) – Illegal firearms intelligence analysis.\nBULLET::::- National Fraud Intelligence Bureau (NFIB) – Economic crime intelligence gathering and analysis.\n\nForeign intelligence\nBULLET::::- Secret Intelligence Service (SIS)/MI6 – Foreign intelligence gathering and analysis.\nBULLET::::- Defence Intelligence (DI) – Military intelligence analysis.\n\nSignals intelligence\nBULLET::::- Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ) – Signals intelligence gathering and analysis.\n\nBULLET::::- Office of the Director of National Intelligence\nBULLET::::- Independent agencies\nBULLET::::- Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)\nBULLET::::- United States Department of Defense\nBULLET::::- Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA)\nBULLET::::- National Security Agency (NSA)\nBULLET::::- National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA)\nBULLET::::- National Reconnaissance Office (NRO)\nBULLET::::- Twenty-Fifth Air Force (25 AF)\nBULLET::::- Military Intelligence Corps (MI)\nBULLET::::- Marine Corps Intelligence Activity (MCIA)\nBULLET::::- Office of Naval Intelligence (ONI)\nBULLET::::- United States Department of Energy\nBULLET::::- Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence (OICI)\nBULLET::::- United States Department of Homeland Security\nBULLET::::- Office of Intelligence and Analysis (I&A)\nBULLET::::- Coast Guard Intelligence (CGI)\nBULLET::::- United States Department of Justice\nBULLET::::- Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)\nBULLET::::- Office of National Security Intelligence (ONSI)\nBULLET::::- United States Department of State\nBULLET::::- Bureau of Intelligence and Research (INR)\nBULLET::::- United States Department of the Treasury\nBULLET::::- Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence (TFI)\n\nBULLET::::- Servicio de Inteligencia y Contraespionaje del Estado – State Intelligence and Counterespionage Service\n\nBULLET::::- Davlat Xavfsizlik Xizmati, Служба государственной безопасности (СГБ) (State Security Service)\n\nBULLET::::- Servicio Bolivariano de Inteligencia (SEBIN) – Bolivarian Intelligence Service\nBULLET::::- Dirección General de Contrainteligencia Militar (DGCIM) – Military Intelligence\nBULLET::::- General Counterintelligence Office\n\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Defence (Vietnam)\nBULLET::::- Tổng cục Tình báo Quân đội (Tổng cục 2, or TC2) (General Department of Military Intelligence or Second General Department)\nBULLET::::- Ministry of Public Security (Vietnam)\nBULLET::::- Tổng cục An ninh (Tổng cục I) (General Department of Security or First General Department)\nBULLET::::- Tổng cục Tình báo Công an (Tổng cục V, or TC V) (General Department of Public Security Intelligence or Fifth General Department)\n\nBULLET::::- Zambia Security Intelligence Service (ZSIS)\n\nBULLET::::- Central Intelligence Organisation (CIO)\n\nBULLET::::- Intelligence agency\nBULLET::::- List of defunct intelligence agencies\nBULLET::::- List of fictional secret police and intelligence organizations\nBULLET::::- List of intelligence gathering disciplines\nBULLET::::- List of law enforcement agencies\nBULLET::::- List of protective service agencies\nBULLET::::- Secret police\nBULLET::::- Secret service\n\nBULLET::::- World Intelligence and Security Agencies, FAS\nBULLET::::- Map: security services, Europe and the world\n"}
{"id": "15285", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15285", "title": "Internet Engineering Task Force", "text": "Internet Engineering Task Force\n\nThe Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) is an open standards organization, which develops and promotes voluntary Internet standards, in particular the standards that comprise the Internet protocol suite (TCP/IP). It has no formal membership roster or membership requirements. All participants and managers are volunteers, though their work is usually funded by their employers or sponsors. \n\nThe IETF started out as an activity supported by the US federal government, but since 1993 it has operated as a standards-development function under the auspices of the Internet Society, an international membership-based non-profit organization.\n\nThe IETF is organized into a large number of working groups and informal discussion groups (BoFs, or Birds of a Feather), each dealing with a specific topic and operates in a bottom-up task creation mode, largely driven by these working groups. Each working group has an appointed chairperson (or sometimes several co-chairs), along with a charter that describes its focus, and what and when it is expected to produce. It is open to all who want to participate, and holds discussions on an open mailing list or at IETF meetings, where the entry fee in July 2014 was US$650 per person. Mid-2018 the fees are: early bird US$700, late payment US$875, student US$150 and a one day pass for US$375.\n\nRough consensus is the primary basis for decision making. There are no formal voting procedures. Because the majority of the IETF's work is done via mailing lists, meeting attendance is not required for contributors. Each working group is intended to complete work on its topic and then disband. In some cases, the WG will instead have its charter updated to take on new tasks as appropriate.\n\nThe working groups are organized into areas by subject matter. Current areas are Applications, General, Internet, Operations and Management, Real-time Applications and Infrastructure, Routing, Security, and Transport. Each area is overseen by an area director (AD), with most areas having two co-ADs. The ADs are responsible for appointing working group chairs. The area directors, together with the IETF Chair, form the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG), which is responsible for the overall operation of the IETF. \n\nThe Internet Architecture Board (IAB) oversees the IETF's external relationships and relations with the RFC Editor. The IAB provides long-range technical direction for Internet development. The IAB is also jointly responsible for the IETF Administrative Oversight Committee (IAOC), which oversees the IETF Administrative Support Activity (IASA), which provides logistical, etc. support for the IETF. The IAB also manages the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF), with which the IETF has a number of cross-group relations.\n\nA Nominating Committee (NomCom) of ten randomly chosen volunteers who participate regularly at meetings is vested with the power to appoint, reappoint, and remove members of the IESG, IAB, IASA, and the IAOC. To date, no one has been removed by a NomCom, although several people have resigned their positions, requiring replacements.\n\nIn 1993 the IETF changed from an activity supported by the US Federal Government to an independent, international activity associated with the Internet Society, an international membership-based non-profit organization. Because the IETF itself does not have members, nor is it an organization \"per se\", the Internet Society provides the financial and legal framework for the activities of the IETF and its sister bodies (IAB, IRTF). IETF activities are funded by meeting fees, meeting sponsors and by the Internet Society via its organizational membership and the proceeds of the Public Interest Registry. \n\nIn December 2005 the IETF Trust was established to manage the copyrighted materials produced by the IETF.\n\nThe first IETF meeting was attended by 21 US Federal Government-funded researchers on 16 January 1986. It was a continuation of the work of the earlier GADS Task Force. Representatives from non-governmental entities were invited to attend starting with the fourth IETF meeting in October 1986. Since that time all IETF meetings have been open to the public.\n\nInitially, the IETF met quarterly, but from 1991, it has been meeting three times a year. The initial meetings were very small, with fewer than 35 people in attendance at each of the first five meetings. The maximum attendance during the first 13 meetings was only 120 attendees. This occurred at the 12th meeting held during January 1989. These meetings have grown in both participation and scope a great deal since the early 1990s; it had a maximum attendance of 2,810 at the December 2000 IETF held in San Diego, California. Attendance declined with industry restructuring during the early 2000s, and is currently around 1,200.\n\nThe location for IETF meetings vary greatly. A list of past and future meeting locations can be found on the IETF meetings page. The IETF strives to hold its meetings near where most of the IETF volunteers are located. For many years, the goal was three meetings a year, with two in North America and one in either Europe or Asia, alternating between them every other year. The current goal is to hold three meetings in North America, two in Europe and one in Asia during a two-year period. However, corporate sponsorship of the meetings is also an important factor and the schedule has been modified from time to time in order to decrease operational costs.\n\nThe IETF also organizes hackathons during the IETF meetings. The focus is on implementing code that will improve standards in terms of quality and interoperability.\n\nThe details of IETF operations have changed considerably as the organization has grown, but the basic mechanism remains publication of proposed specifications, development based on the proposals, review and independent testing by participants, and republication as a revised proposal, a draft proposal, or eventually as an Internet Standard. IETF standards are developed in an open, all-inclusive process in which any interested individual can participate. All IETF documents are freely available over the Internet and can be reproduced at will. Multiple, working, useful, interoperable implementations are the chief requirement before an IETF proposed specification can become a standard. Most specifications are focused on single protocols rather than tightly interlocked systems. This has allowed the protocols to be used in many different systems, and its standards are routinely re-used by bodies which create full-fledged architectures (e.g. 3GPP IMS).\n\nBecause it relies on volunteers and uses \"rough consensus and running code\" as its touchstone, results can be slow whenever the number of volunteers is either too small to make progress, or so large as to make consensus difficult, or when volunteers lack the necessary expertise. For protocols like SMTP, which is used to transport e-mail for a user community in the many hundreds of millions, there is also considerable resistance to any change that is not fully backwards compatible, except for IPv6. Work within the IETF on ways to improve the speed of the standards-making process is ongoing but, because the number of volunteers with opinions on it is very great, consensus on improvements has been slow to develop.\n\nThe IETF cooperates with the W3C, ISO/IEC, ITU, and other standards bodies.\n\nStatistics are available that show who the top contributors by RFC publication are. While the IETF only allows for participation by individuals, and not by corporations or governments, sponsorship information is available from these statistics.\n\nThe IETF Chairperson is selected by the Nominating Committee (NomCom) process for a 2-year renewable term. Before 1993, the IETF Chair was selected by the IAB.\n\nA list of the past and current Chairs of the IETF follows:\nBULLET::::- Mike Corrigan (1986)\nBULLET::::- Phill Gross (1986–1994)\nBULLET::::- Paul Mockapetris (1994–1996)\nBULLET::::- Fred Baker (1996–2001)\nBULLET::::- Harald Tveit Alvestrand (2001–2005)\nBULLET::::- Brian Carpenter (2005–2007)\nBULLET::::- Russ Housley (2007–2013)\nBULLET::::- Jari Arkko (2013–2017)\nBULLET::::- Alissa Cooper (2017- )\nIt works on a broad range of networking technologies which provide foundation for the Internet's growth and evolution.\n\nIt aims to improve the efficiency in management of networks as they grow in size and complexity. The IETF is also standardizing protocols for autonomic networking that enables networks to be self managing.\n\nIt is a network of physical objects or things that are embedded with electronics, sensors, software and also enables objects to exchange data with operator, manufacturer and other connected devices. Several IETF working groups are developing protocols that are directly relevant to IoT.\n\nIts development provides the ability of internet applications to send data over the Internet. There are some well established transport protocols such as TCP (Transmission Control Protocol) and UDP (User Datagram Protocol) which are continuously getting extended and refined to meet the needs of the global Internet.\n\nIt divides its work into number of areas which have Working groups that have a relation to an area's focus. Area Directors handle the primary task of area management. Area Directors may be advised by one or more Directorates. The area structure is defined by the Internet Engineering Steering Group. The Nominations Committee can be used to add new members.\n\nIn October 2018, Microsoft and Google engineers introduced a plan to create the Token Binding Protocol in order to stop replay attacks onOAuth tokens.\n\nBULLET::::- Internet Architecture Board (IAB)\nBULLET::::- Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG)\nBULLET::::- Internet governance\nBULLET::::- Internet Research Task Force (IRTF)\nBULLET::::- Internet standard\nBULLET::::- Request for Comments (RFCs)\nBULLET::::- Standardization\nBULLET::::- IETF Online Proceedings\nBULLET::::- Early IETF Proceedings (\"note: large pdf files, one for each volume\")\nBULLET::::- Past Meetings of the IETF\nBULLET::::- Past IESG Members and IETF Chairs\nBULLET::::- The Tao of the IETF: details on how IETF is organized\n"}
{"id": "15286", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15286", "title": "ISM band", "text": "ISM band\n\nThe Industrial, Scientific and Medical (ISM) radio bands are radio bands (portions of the radio spectrum) reserved internationally for the use of radio frequency (RF) energy for industrial, scientific and medical purposes other than telecommunications. \nExamples of applications in these bands include radio-frequency process heating, microwave ovens, and medical diathermy machines. The powerful emissions of these devices can create electromagnetic interference and disrupt radio communication using the same frequency, so these devices are limited to certain bands of frequencies. In general, communications equipment operating in these bands must tolerate any interference generated by ISM applications, and users have no regulatory protection from ISM device operation.\n\nDespite the intent of the original allocations, in recent years the fastest-growing use of these bands has been for short-range, low power wireless communications systems, since these bands are often approved for such devices which can be used without a government license, as would otherwise be required for transmitters; ISM frequencies are often chosen for this purpose as they already have interference issues. Cordless phones, Bluetooth devices, near field communication (NFC) devices, garage door openers, baby monitors and wireless computer networks (WiFi) may all use the ISM frequencies, although these low power transmitters are not considered to be ISM devices.\n\nThe ISM bands are defined by the ITU Radio Regulations (article 5) in footnotes 5.138, 5.150, and 5.280 of the Radio Regulations. Individual countries' use of the bands designated in these sections may differ due to variations in national radio regulations. Because communication devices using the ISM bands must tolerate any interference from ISM equipment, unlicensed operations are typically permitted to use these bands, since unlicensed operation typically needs to be tolerant of interference from other devices anyway. The ISM bands share allocations with unlicensed and licensed operations; however, due to the high likelihood of harmful interference, licensed use of the bands is typically low. In the United States, uses of the ISM bands are governed by Part 18 of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) rules, while Part 15 contains the rules for unlicensed communication devices, even those that share ISM frequencies. In Europe, the ETSI is responsible for regulating the use of Short Range Devices, some of which operate in ISM bands.\n\nThe allocation of radio frequencies is provided according to \"Article 5\" of the ITU Radio Regulations (edition 2012).\n\nIn order to improve harmonisation in spectrum utilisation, the majority of service-allocations stipulated in this document were incorporated in national Tables of Frequency Allocations and Utilisations which is within the responsibility of the appropriate national administration. The allocation might be primary, secondary, exclusive, and shared.\nBULLET::::- primary allocation: is indicated by writing in capital letters (see example below)\nBULLET::::- secondary allocation: is indicated by small letters\nBULLET::::- exclusive or shared utilization: is within the responsibility of administrations\n\nBULLET::::- Example of frequency allocation:\n{ class=\"wikitable sortable\"\n!! colspan=2 data-sort-type=\"number\"  Frequency range !! data-sort-type=\"number\"  Center frequency\n! data-sort-type=\"number\"  Bandwidth!! Type !! Availability !! Licensed users\nstyle=\"white-space: nowrap; text-align: right\" MHz  style=\"white-space: nowrap; text-align: right\"  6.795 MHz \n! A \nstyle=\"white-space: nowrap; text-align: right\" MHz  style=\"white-space: nowrap; text-align: right\" 13.567 MHz \n! B \nstyle=\"white-space: nowrap; text-align: right\" MHz style=\"white-space: nowrap; text-align: right\" 27.283 MHz \n! B \nstyle=\"white-space: nowrap; text-align: right\" MHz style=\"white-space: nowrap; text-align: right\" 40.7 MHz \n! B \nstyle=\"white-space: nowrap; text-align: right\" MHz style=\"white-space: nowrap; text-align: right\" 434.79 MHz \n! A \nstyle=\"white-space: nowrap; text-align: right\" MHz  style=\"white-space: nowrap; text-align: right\"  928 MHz \n! B\nRegion 2 only (with some exceptions)  FIXED, Mobile except aeronautical mobile & Radiolocation service; in Region 2 additional Amateur service\nstyle=\"white-space: nowrap; text-align: right\" GHz  style=\"white-space: nowrap; text-align: right\"  2.5 GHz \n! B\nstyle=\"white-space: nowrap; text-align: right\" GHz style=\"white-space: nowrap; text-align: right\" 5.875 GHz\n! B\nstyle=\"white-space: nowrap; text-align: right\" GHz style=\"white-space: nowrap; text-align: right\" 24.25 GHz\n! B\nstyle=\"white-space: nowrap; text-align: right\" GHz  style=\"white-space: nowrap; text-align: right\"  61.5 GHz \n! A\nstyle=\"white-space: nowrap; text-align: right\" GHz  style=\"white-space: nowrap; text-align: right\"  123 GHz \n! A\nstyle=\"white-space: nowrap; text-align: right\" GHz style=\"white-space: nowrap; text-align: right\" 246 GHz \n! A\n\nType A (footnote 5.138) = frequency bands are designated for \"ISM applications\". The use of these frequency bands for ISM applications shall be subject to special authorization by the administration concerned, in agreement with other administrations whose radiocommunication services might be affected. In applying this provision, administrations shall have due regard to the latest relevant ITU-R Recommendations.\n\nType B (footnote 5.150) = frequency bands are also designated for ISM applications. Radiocommunication services operating within these bands must accept harmful interference which may be caused by these applications.\n\nITU RR, (Footnote 5.280) = In Germany, Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Macedonia, Liechtenstein, Montenegro, Portugal, Serbia, Slovenia and Switzerland, the band 433.05-434.79 MHz (center frequency 433.92 MHz) is designated for \"ISM applications\". Radio communication services of these countries operating within this band must accept harmful interference which may be caused by these applications.\n\nFootnote AU = Australia is part of ITU Region 3. The band 433.05 to 434.79 MHz is not a designated ISM band in Australia, however the operation of low powered devices in the radio frequency band 433.05 to 434.79 MHz is supported through Radio communications class licence for low interference potential devices (LIPDs).\n\nThe ISM bands were first established at the International Telecommunications Conference of the ITU in Atlantic City, 1947. The American delegation specifically proposed several bands, including the now commonplace 2.4 GHz band, to accommodate the then nascent process of microwave heating; however, FCC annual reports of that time suggest that much preparation was done ahead of these presentations.\n\nFrom the proceedings:\n\"The delegate of the United States, referring to his request that the frequency 2450 Mc/s be allocated for I.S.M., indicated that there was in existence in the United States, and working on this frequency a diathermy machine and an electronic cooker, and that the latter might eventually be installed in transatlantic ships and airplanes. There was therefore some point in attempting to reach world agreement on this subject.\"\n\nRadio frequencies in the ISM bands have been used for communication purposes, although such devices may experience interference from non-communication sources. In the United States, as early as 1958 Class D Citizens Band, a Part 95 service, was allocated to frequencies that are also allocated to ISM. [1]\n\nIn the U.S., the FCC first made unlicensed spread spectrum available in the ISM bands in rules adopted on May 9, 1985.\n\nMany other countries later developed similar regulations, enabling use of this technology. The FCC action was proposed by Michael Marcus of the FCC staff in 1980 and the subsequent regulatory action took five more years. It was part of a broader proposal to allow civil use of spread spectrum technology and was opposed at the time by mainstream equipment manufacturers and many radio system operators.\n\n Industrial, scientific and medical (ISM) applications (of radio frequency energy) (short: ISM applications) are – according to \"article 1.15\" of the International Telecommunication Union´s (ITU) ITU Radio Regulations (RR) – defined as «\"Operation of equipment or appliances designed to generate and use locally radio frequency energy for industrial, scientific, medical, domestic or similar purposes, excluding applications in the field of telecommunications\".»\n\nThe original ISM specifications envisioned that the bands would be used primarily for noncommunication purposes, such as heating. The bands are still widely used for these purposes. For many people, the most commonly encountered ISM device is the home microwave oven operating at 2.45 GHz which uses microwaves to cook food. Industrial heating is another big application area; such as induction heating, microwave heat treating, plastic softening, and plastic welding processes. In medical settings, shortwave and microwave diathermy machines use radio waves in the ISM bands to apply deep heating to the body for relaxation and healing. More recently hyperthermia therapy uses microwaves to heat tissue to kill cancer cells.\n\nHowever, as detailed below, the increasing congestion of the radio spectrum, the increasing sophistication of microelectronics, and the attraction of unlicensed use, has in recent decades led to an explosion of uses of these bands for short range communication systems for wireless devices, which are now by far the largest uses of these bands. These are sometimes called \"non ISM\" uses since they do not fall under the originally envisioned \"industrial\", \"scientific\", and \"medical\" application areas. One of the largest applications has been wireless networking (WiFi). The IEEE 802.11 wireless networking protocols, the standards on which almost all wireless systems are based, use the ISM bands. Virtually all laptops, tablet computers, computer printers and cellphones now have 802.11 wireless modems using the 2.4 and 5.7 GHz ISM bands. Bluetooth is another networking technology using the 2.4 GHz band, which can be problematic given the probability of interference. Near field communication devices such as proximity cards and contactless smart cards use the lower frequency 13 and 27 MHz ISM bands. Other short range devices using the ISM bands are: wireless microphones, baby monitors, garage door openers, wireless doorbells, keyless entry systems for vehicles, radio control channels for UAVs (drones), wireless surveillance systems, RFID systems for merchandise, and wild animal tracking systems.\n\nSome electrodeless lamp designs are ISM devices, which use RF emissions to excite fluorescent tubes. Sulfur lamps are commercially available plasma lamps, which use a 2.45 GHz magnetron to heat sulfur into a brightly glowing plasma.\n\nLong-distance wireless power systems have been proposed and experimented with which would use high-power transmitters and rectennas, in lieu of overhead transmission lines and underground cables, to send power to remote locations. NASA has studied using microwave power transmission on 2.45 GHz to send energy collected by solar power satellites back to the ground.\n\nAlso in space applications, a Helicon Double Layer ion thruster is a prototype spacecraft propulsion engine which uses a 13.56 MHz transmission to break down and heat gas into plasma.\n\nIn recent years ISM bands have also been shared with (non-ISM) license-free error-tolerant communications applications such as wireless sensor networks in the 915 MHz and 2.450 GHz bands, as well as wireless LANs and cordless phones in the 915 MHz, 2.450 GHz, and 5.800 GHz bands. Because unlicensed devices are required to be tolerant of ISM emissions in these bands, unlicensed low power users are generally able to operate in these bands without causing problems for ISM users. ISM equipment does not necessarily include a radio receiver in the ISM band (e.g. a microwave oven does not have a receiver).\n\nIn the United States, according to 47 CFR Part 15.5, low power communication devices must accept interference from licensed users of that frequency band, and the Part 15 device must not cause interference to licensed users. Note that the 915 MHz band should not be used in countries outside Region 2, except those that specifically allow it, such as Australia and Israel, especially those that use the GSM-900 band for cellphones. The ISM bands are also widely used for Radio-frequency identification (RFID) applications with the most commonly used band being the 13.56 MHz band used by systems compliant with ISO/IEC 14443 including those used by biometric passports and contactless smart cards.\n\nIn Europe, the use of the ISM band is covered by Short Range Device regulations issued by European Commission, based on technical recommendations by CEPT and standards by ETSI. In most of Europe, LPD433 band is allowed for license-free voice communication in addition to PMR446.\n\nWireless LAN devices use wavebands as follows:\nBULLET::::- Bluetooth 2450 MHz band falls under WPAN\nBULLET::::- HIPERLAN 5800 MHz band\nBULLET::::- IEEE 802.11/Wi-Fi 2450 MHz and 5800 MHz bands\n\nIEEE 802.15.4, ZigBee and other personal area networks may use the and ISM bands because of frequency sharing between different allocations.\n\nWireless LANs and cordless phones can also use bands other than those shared with ISM, but such uses require approval on a country by country basis. DECT phones use allocated spectrum outside the ISM bands that differs in Europe and North America. Ultra-wideband LANs require more spectrum than the ISM bands can provide, so the relevant standards such as IEEE 802.15.4a are designed to make use of spectrum outside the ISM bands. Despite the fact that these additional bands are outside the official ITU-R ISM bands, because they are used for the same types of low power personal communications, they are sometimes incorrectly referred to as ISM bands as well.\n\nAlso note that several brands of radio control equipment use the band range for low power remote control of toys, from gas powered cars to miniature aircraft.\n\nWorldwide Digital Cordless Telecommunications or WDCT is a technology that uses the radio spectrum.\n\nGoogle's Project Loon uses ISM bands (specifically 2.4 and 5.8 GHz bands) for balloon-to-balloon and balloon-to-ground communications.\n\nPursuant to 47 CFR Part 97 some ISM bands are used by licensed amateur radio operators for communication - including amateur television.\n\nBULLET::::- ISM applications\nBULLET::::- Frequency allocation\nBULLET::::- Fixed wireless\nBULLET::::- Electromagnetic interference at 2.4 GHz\n\nBULLET::::- Cordless phone frequencies\nBULLET::::- ITU page on definitions of ISM bands\nBULLET::::- ITU page on Radio Regulations\nBULLET::::- European Radiocommunications Office frequency information system\nBULLET::::- In the US, CFR 07/47cfr18 07.html Title 47 Part 18 describes the regulation of the ISM bands. contains some of the regulations for wireless LAN devices operating in three of the low power communication, Part 15, bands.\n"}
{"id": "15287", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15287", "title": "Series (mathematics)", "text": "Series (mathematics)\n\nIn mathematics, a series is, roughly speaking, a description of the operation of adding infinitely many quantities, one after the other, to a given starting quantity. The study of series is a major part of calculus and its generalization, mathematical analysis. Series are used in most areas of mathematics, even for studying finite structures (such as in combinatorics), through generating functions. In addition to their ubiquity in mathematics, infinite series are also widely used in other quantitative disciplines such as physics, computer science, statistics and finance.\n\nFor a long time, the idea that such a potentially infinite summation could produce a finite result was considered paradoxical. This paradox was resolved using the concept of a limit during the 19th century. Zeno's paradox of Achilles and the tortoise illustrates this counterintuitive property of infinite sums: Achilles runs after a tortoise, but when he reaches the position of the tortoise at the beginning of the race, the tortoise has reached a second position; when he reaches this second position, the tortoise is at a third position, and so on. Zeno concluded that Achilles could \"never\" reach the tortoise, and thus that movement does not exist. Zeno divided the race into infinitely many sub-races, each requiring a finite amount of time, so that the total time for Achilles to catch the tortoise is given by a series. The resolution of the paradox is that, although the series has an infinite number of terms, it has a finite sum, which gives the time necessary for Achilles to catch up with the tortoise.\n\nIn modern terminology, any (ordered) infinite sequence formula_1 of terms (that is, numbers, functions, or anything that can be added) defines a series, which is the operation of adding the formula_2 one after the other. To emphasize that there are an infinite number of terms, a series may be called an infinite series. Such a series is represented (or denoted) by an expression like\nor, using the summation sign,\n\nThe infinite sequence of additions implied by a series cannot be effectively carried on (at least in a finite amount of time). However, if the set to which the terms and their finite sums belong has a notion of limit, it is sometimes possible to assign a value to a series, called the \"sum\" of the series. This value is the limit as tends to infinity (if the limit exists) of the finite sums of the first terms of the series, which are called the \"th partial sums\" of the series. That is,\nWhen this limit exists, one says that the series is \"convergent\" or \"summable\", or that the sequence formula_1 is summable. In this case, the limit is called the \"sum of the series\". Otherwise, the series is said to be \"divergent\".\n\nGenerally, the terms of a series come from a ring, often the field formula_7 of the real numbers or the field formula_8 of the complex numbers. In this case, the set of all series is itself a ring (and even an associative algebra), in which the addition consists of adding the series term by term, and the multiplication is the Cauchy product.\n\nAn infinite series or simply a series is an infinite sum, represented by an infinite expression of the form\nwhere formula_10 is any ordered sequence of terms, such as numbers, functions, or anything else that can be added (an abelian group). This is an expression that is obtained from the list of terms formula_11 by laying them side by side, and conjoining them with the symbol \"+\". A series may also be represented by using summation notation, such as\n\nIf an abelian group \"A\" of terms has a concept of limit (for example, if it is a metric space), then some series, the convergent series, can be interpreted as having a value in \"A\", called the \"sum of the series\". This includes the common cases from calculus in which the group is the field of real numbers or the field of complex numbers. Given a series formula_13 its \"k\"th partial sum is\nBy definition, the series formula_15 \"converges\" to the limit (or simply \"sums\" to ), if the sequence of its partial sums has a limit . In this case, one usually writes\nA series is said to be \"convergent\" if it converges to some limit or \"divergent\" when it does not. The value of this limit, if it exists, is then the value of the series.\n\nA series is said to converge or to \"be convergent\" when the sequence of partial sums has a finite limit. If the limit of is infinite or does not exist, the series is said to diverge. When the limit of partial sums exists, it is called the value (or sum) of the series\n\nAn easy way that an infinite series can converge is if all the \"a\" are zero for \"n\" sufficiently large. Such a series can be identified with a finite sum, so it is only infinite in a trivial sense.\n\nWorking out the properties of the series that converge even if infinitely many terms are non-zero is the essence of the study of series. Consider the example\n\nIt is possible to \"visualize\" its convergence on the real number line: we can imagine a line of length 2, with successive segments marked off of lengths 1, ½, ¼, etc. There is always room to mark the next segment, because the amount of line remaining is always the same as the last segment marked: when we have marked off ½, we still have a piece of length ½ unmarked, so we can certainly mark the next ¼. This argument does not prove that the sum is \"equal\" to 2 (although it is), but it does prove that it is \"at most\" 2. In other words, the series has an upper bound. Given that the series converges, proving that it is equal to 2 requires only elementary algebra. If the series is denoted , it can be seen that\n\nTherefore,\n\nThe idiom can be extended to other, equivalent notions of series. For instance, a recurring decimal, as in\n\nencodes the series\n\nSince these series always converge to real numbers (because of what is called the completeness property of the real numbers), to talk about the series in this way is the same as to talk about the numbers for which they stand. In particular, the decimal expansion 0.111... can be identified with /. This leads to an argument that , which only relies on the fact that the limit laws for series preserve the arithmetic operations; this argument is presented in the article 0.999...\n\nBULLET::::- A \"geometric series\" is one where each successive term is produced by multiplying the previous term by a constant number (called the common ratio in this context). Example:\nBULLET::::- Hypergeometric series:\nand their generalizations (such as basic hypergeometric series and elliptic hypergeometric series) frequently appear in integrable systems and mathematical physics.\nBULLET::::- An \"arithmetico-geometric series\" is a generalization of the geometric series, which has coefficients of the common ratio equal to the terms in an arithmetic sequence. Example:\nBULLET::::- The \"harmonic series\" is the series\nBULLET::::- An \"alternating series\" is a series where terms alternate signs. Examples:\n\nand\n\nBULLET::::- The \"p\"-series\nBULLET::::- A telescoping series\nBULLET::::- There are some elementary series whose convergence is not yet known/proven. For example, it is unknown whether the Flint Hills series\n\nPartial summation takes as input a sequence, { \"a\" }, and gives as output another sequence, { \"S\" }. It is thus a unary operation on sequences. Further, this function is linear, and thus is a linear operator on the vector space of sequences, denoted Σ. The inverse operator is the finite difference operator, Δ. These behave as discrete analogs of integration and differentiation, only for series (functions of a natural number) instead of functions of a real variable. For example, the sequence {1, 1, 1, ...} has series {1, 2, 3, 4, ...} as its partial summation, which is analogous to the fact that formula_50\n\nIn computer science it is known as prefix sum.\n\nSeries are classified not only by whether they converge or diverge, but also by the properties of the terms a (absolute or conditional convergence); type of convergence of the series (pointwise, uniform); the class of the term a (whether it is a real number, arithmetic progression, trigonometric function); etc.\n\nWhen \"a\" is a non-negative real number for every \"n\", the sequence \"S\" of partial sums is non-decreasing. It follows that a series ∑\"a\" with non-negative terms converges if and only if the sequence \"S\" of partial sums is bounded.\n\nFor example, the series\n\nis convergent, because the inequality\n\nand a telescopic sum argument implies that the partial sums are bounded by 2. The exact value of the original series is the Basel problem.\n\nA series\nis said to converge absolutely if the series of absolute values\nconverges. This is sufficient to guarantee not only that the original series converges to a limit, but also that any reordering of it converges to the same limit.\n\nA series of real or complex numbers is said to be conditionally convergent (or semi-convergent) if it is convergent but not absolutely convergent. A famous example is the alternating series\n\nwhich is convergent (and its sum is equal to ln 2), but the series formed by taking the absolute value of each term is the divergent harmonic series. The Riemann series theorem says that any conditionally convergent series can be reordered to make a divergent series, and moreover, if the \"a\" are real and \"S\" is any real number, that one can find a reordering so that the reordered series converges with sum equal to \"S\".\n\nAbel's test is an important tool for handling semi-convergent series. If a series has the form\n\nwhere the partial sums \"B\" = are bounded, \"λ\" has bounded variation, and exists:\n\nthen the series is convergent. This applies to the pointwise convergence of many trigonometric series, as in\n\nwith 0 < \"x\" < 2π. Abel's method consists in writing \"b\" = \"B\" − \"B\", and in performing a transformation similar to integration by parts (called summation by parts), that relates the given series to the absolutely convergent series\n\nThe evaluation of truncation errors is an important procedure in numerical analysis (especially validated numerics and computer-assisted proof).\nWhen conditions of the alternating series test is satisfied by formula_60, there is an exact error evaluation. Set formula_61 as the partial sum of the given alternating series formula_60. Then the next inequality holds:\nTaylor's theorem is a statement that includes the evaluation of the error term when the Taylor series is truncated.\nBy using the ratio, we can obtain the evaluation of the error term when the hypergeometric series is truncated.\n\nFor the matrix exponential:\nthe following error evaluation holds (scaling and squaring method):\n\nThere exist many tests that can be used to determine whether particular series converge or diverge.\nBULLET::::- \"n-th term test\": If lim \"a\" ≠ 0, then the series diverges; if lim \"a\" = 0, then the test is inconclusive.\nBULLET::::- Comparison test 1 (see Direct comparison test): If ∑\"b\"  is an absolutely convergent series such that \"a\"  ≤ \"C\" \"b\"  for some number \"C\"  and for sufficiently large \"n\" , then ∑\"a\"  converges absolutely as well. If ∑\"b\"  diverges, and \"a\"  ≥ \"b\"  for all sufficiently large \"n\" , then ∑\"a\"  also fails to converge absolutely (though it could still be conditionally convergent, for example, if the \"a\"  alternate in sign).\nBULLET::::- Comparison test 2 (see Limit comparison test): If ∑\"b\"  is an absolutely convergent series such that \"a\" /\"a\"  ≤ \"b\" /\"b\"  for sufficiently large \"n\" , then ∑\"a\"  converges absolutely as well. If ∑\"b\"  diverges, and \"a\" /\"a\"  ≥ \"b\" /\"b\"  for all sufficiently large \"n\" , then ∑\"a\"  also fails to converge absolutely (though it could still be conditionally convergent, for example, if the \"a\"  alternate in sign).\nBULLET::::- Ratio test: If there exists a constant \"C\" < 1 such that \"a\"/\"a\"<\"C\" for all sufficiently large \"n\", then ∑\"a\" converges absolutely. When the ratio is less than 1, but not less than a constant less than 1, convergence is possible but this test does not establish it.\nBULLET::::- Root test: If there exists a constant \"C\" < 1 such that \"a\" ≤ \"C\" for all sufficiently large \"n\", then ∑\"a\" converges absolutely.\nBULLET::::- Integral test: if \"ƒ\"(\"x\") is a positive monotone decreasing function defined on the interval <nowiki>[</nowiki>1, ∞<nowiki>)</nowiki> with \"ƒ\"(\"n\") = \"a\" for all \"n\", then ∑\"a\" converges if and only if the integral  ∫ \"ƒ\"(\"x\") d\"x\" is finite.\nBULLET::::- Cauchy's condensation test: If \"a\" is non-negative and non-increasing, then the two series  ∑\"a\"  and  ∑2\"a\" are of the same nature: both convergent, or both divergent.\nBULLET::::- Alternating series test: A series of the form ∑(−1) \"a\" (with \"a\" > 0) is called \"alternating\". Such a series converges if the sequence \"a\" is monotone decreasing and converges to 0. The converse is in general not true.\nBULLET::::- For some specific types of series there are more specialized convergence tests, for instance for Fourier series there is the Dini test.\n\nA series of real- or complex-valued functions\n\nconverges pointwise on a set \"E\", if the series converges for each \"x\" in \"E\" as an ordinary series of real or complex numbers. Equivalently, the partial sums\nconverge to \"ƒ\"(\"x\") as \"N\" → ∞ for each \"x\" ∈ \"E\".\n\nA stronger notion of convergence of a series of functions is called uniform convergence. The series converges uniformly if it converges pointwise to the function \"ƒ\"(\"x\"), and the error in approximating the limit by the \"N\"th partial sum,\ncan be made minimal \"independently\" of \"x\" by choosing a sufficiently large \"N\".\n\nUniform convergence is desirable for a series because many properties of the terms of the series are then retained by the limit. For example, if a series of continuous functions converges uniformly, then the limit function is also continuous. Similarly, if the \"ƒ\" are integrable on a closed and bounded interval \"I\" and converge uniformly, then the series is also integrable on \"I\" and can be integrated term-by-term. Tests for uniform convergence include the Weierstrass' M-test, Abel's uniform convergence test, Dini's test, and the Cauchy criterion.\n\nMore sophisticated types of convergence of a series of functions can also be defined. In measure theory, for instance, a series of functions converges almost everywhere if it converges pointwise except on a certain set of measure zero. Other modes of convergence depend on a different metric space structure on the space of functions under consideration. For instance, a series of functions converges in mean on a set \"E\" to a limit function \"ƒ\" provided\nas \"N\" → ∞.\n\nA power series is a series of the form\n\nThe Taylor series at a point \"c\" of a function is a power series that, in many cases, converges to the function in a neighborhood of \"c\". For example, the series\nis the Taylor series of formula_72 at the origin and converges to it for every \"x\".\n\nUnless it converges only at \"x\"=\"c\", such a series converges on a certain open disc of convergence centered at the point \"c\" in the complex plane, and may also converge at some of the points of the boundary of the disc. The radius of this disc is known as the radius of convergence, and can in principle be determined from the asymptotics of the coefficients \"a\". The convergence is uniform on closed and bounded (that is, compact) subsets of the interior of the disc of convergence: to wit, it is uniformly convergent on compact sets.\n\nHistorically, mathematicians such as Leonhard Euler operated liberally with infinite series, even if they were not convergent. When calculus was put on a sound and correct foundation in the nineteenth century, rigorous proofs of the convergence of series were always required.\n\nWhile many uses of power series refer to their sums, it is also possible to treat power series as \"formal sums\", meaning that no addition operations are actually performed, and the symbol \"+\" is an abstract symbol of conjunction which is not necessarily interpreted as corresponding to addition. In this setting, the sequence of coefficients itself is of interest, rather than the convergence of the series. Formal power series are used in combinatorics to describe and study sequences that are otherwise difficult to handle, for example, using the method of generating functions. The Hilbert–Poincaré series is a formal power series used to study graded algebras.\n\nEven if the limit of the power series is not considered, if the terms support appropriate structure then it is possible to define operations such as addition, multiplication, derivative, antiderivative for power series \"formally\", treating the symbol \"+\" as if it corresponded to addition. In the most common setting, the terms come from a commutative ring, so that the formal power series can be added term-by-term and multiplied via the Cauchy product. In this case the algebra of formal power series is the total algebra of the monoid of natural numbers over the underlying term ring. If the underlying term ring is a differential algebra, then the algebra of formal power series is also a differential algebra, with differentiation performed term-by-term.\n\nLaurent series generalize power series by admitting terms into the series with negative as well as positive exponents. A Laurent series is thus any series of the form\nIf such a series converges, then in general it does so in an annulus rather than a disc, and possibly some boundary points. The series converges uniformly on compact subsets of the interior of the annulus of convergence.\n\nA Dirichlet series is one of the form\n\nwhere \"s\" is a complex number. For example, if all \"a\" are equal to 1, then the Dirichlet series is the Riemann zeta function\n\nLike the zeta function, Dirichlet series in general play an important role in analytic number theory. Generally a Dirichlet series converges if the real part of \"s\" is greater than a number called the abscissa of convergence. In many cases, a Dirichlet series can be extended to an analytic function outside the domain of convergence by analytic continuation. For example, the Dirichlet series for the zeta function converges absolutely when Re \"s\" > 1, but the zeta function can be extended to a holomorphic function defined on formula_76  with a simple pole at 1.\n\nThis series can be directly generalized to general Dirichlet series.\n\nA series of functions in which the terms are trigonometric functions is called a trigonometric series:\nThe most important example of a trigonometric series is the Fourier series of a function.\n\nGreek mathematician Archimedes produced the first known summation of an infinite series with a\nmethod that is still used in the area of calculus today. He used the method of exhaustion to calculate the area under the arc of a parabola with the summation of an infinite series, and gave a remarkably accurate approximation of π.\n\nMathematicians from Kerala, India studied infinite series around 1350 CE.\n\nIn the 17th century, James Gregory worked in the new decimal system on infinite series and published several Maclaurin series. In 1715, a general method for constructing the Taylor series for all functions for which they exist was provided by Brook Taylor. Leonhard Euler in the 18th century, developed the theory of hypergeometric series and q-series.\n\nThe investigation of the validity of infinite series is considered to begin with Gauss in the 19th century. Euler had already considered the hypergeometric series\n\non which Gauss published a memoir in 1812. It established simpler criteria of convergence, and the questions of remainders and the range of convergence.\n\nCauchy (1821) insisted on strict tests of convergence; he showed that if two series are convergent their product is not necessarily so, and with him begins the discovery of effective criteria. The terms \"convergence\" and \"divergence\" had been introduced long before by Gregory (1668). Leonhard Euler and Gauss had given various criteria, and Colin Maclaurin had anticipated some of Cauchy's discoveries. Cauchy advanced the theory of power series by his expansion of a complex function in such a form.\n\nAbel (1826) in his memoir on the binomial series\n\ncorrected certain of Cauchy's conclusions, and gave a completely\nscientific summation of the series for complex values of formula_80 and formula_81. He showed the necessity of considering the subject of continuity in questions of convergence.\n\nCauchy's methods led to special rather than general criteria, and\nthe same may be said of Raabe (1832), who made the first elaborate\ninvestigation of the subject, of De Morgan (from 1842), whose\nlogarithmic test DuBois-Reymond (1873) and Pringsheim (1889) have\nshown to fail within a certain region; of Bertrand (1842), Bonnet\n(1843), Malmsten (1846, 1847, the latter without integration);\nStokes (1847), Paucker (1852), Chebyshev (1852), and Arndt\n(1853).\n\nGeneral criteria began with Kummer (1835), and have been\nstudied by Eisenstein (1847), Weierstrass in his various\ncontributions to the theory of functions, Dini (1867),\nDuBois-Reymond (1873), and many others. Pringsheim's memoirs (1889) present the most complete general theory.\n\nThe theory of uniform convergence was treated by Cauchy (1821), his\nlimitations being pointed out by Abel, but the first to attack it\nsuccessfully were Seidel and Stokes (1847–48). Cauchy took up the\nproblem again (1853), acknowledging Abel's criticism, and reaching\nthe same conclusions which Stokes had already found. Thomae used the\ndoctrine (1866), but there was great delay in recognizing the\nimportance of distinguishing between uniform and non-uniform\nconvergence, in spite of the demands of the theory of functions.\n\nA series is said to be semi-convergent (or conditionally convergent) if it is convergent but not absolutely convergent.\n\nSemi-convergent series were studied by Poisson (1823), who also gave a general form for the remainder of the Maclaurin formula. The most important solution of the problem is due, however, to Jacobi (1834),\nwho attacked the question of the remainder from a different standpoint and reached a different formula. This expression was also worked out, and another one given, by Malmsten (1847). Schlömilch (\"Zeitschrift\", Vol.I, p. 192, 1856) also improved Jacobi's remainder, and showed the relation between the remainder and Bernoulli's function\n\nGenocchi (1852) has further contributed to the theory.\n\nAmong the early writers was Wronski, whose \"loi suprême\" (1815) was hardly recognized until Cayley (1873) brought it into\nprominence.\n\nFourier series were being investigated\nas the result of physical considerations at the same time that\nGauss, Abel, and Cauchy were working out the theory of infinite\nseries. Series for the expansion of sines and cosines, of multiple\narcs in powers of the sine and cosine of the arc had been treated by\nJacob Bernoulli (1702) and his brother Johann Bernoulli (1701) and still\nearlier by Vieta. Euler and Lagrange simplified the subject,\nas did Poinsot, Schröter, Glaisher, and Kummer.\n\nFourier (1807) set for himself a different problem, to\nexpand a given function of \"x\" in terms of the sines or cosines of\nmultiples of \"x\", a problem which he embodied in his \"Théorie analytique de la chaleur\" (1822). Euler had already given the\nformulas for determining the coefficients in the series;\nFourier was the first to assert and attempt to prove the general\ntheorem. Poisson (1820–23) also attacked the problem from a\ndifferent standpoint. Fourier did not, however, settle the question\nof convergence of his series, a matter left for Cauchy (1826) to\nattempt and for Dirichlet (1829) to handle in a thoroughly\nscientific manner (see convergence of Fourier series). Dirichlet's treatment (\"Crelle\", 1829), of trigonometric series was the subject of criticism and improvement by\nRiemann (1854), Heine, Lipschitz, Schläfli, and\ndu Bois-Reymond. Among other prominent contributors to the theory of\ntrigonometric and Fourier series were Dini, Hermite, Halphen,\nKrause, Byerly and Appell.\n\nAsymptotic series, otherwise asymptotic expansions, are infinite series whose partial sums become good approximations in the limit of some point of the domain. In general they do not converge, but they are useful as sequences of approximations, each of which provides a value close to the desired answer for a finite number of terms. The difference is that an asymptotic series cannot be made to produce an answer as exact as desired, the way that convergent series can. In fact, after a certain number of terms, a typical asymptotic series reaches its best approximation; if more terms are included, most such series will produce worse answers.\n\nUnder many circumstances, it is desirable to assign a limit to a series which fails to converge in the usual sense. A summability method is such an assignment of a limit to a subset of the set of divergent series which properly extends the classical notion of convergence. Summability methods include Cesàro summation, (\"C\",\"k\") summation, Abel summation, and Borel summation, in increasing order of generality (and hence applicable to increasingly divergent series).\n\nA variety of general results concerning possible summability methods are known. The Silverman–Toeplitz theorem characterizes \"matrix summability methods\", which are methods for summing a divergent series by applying an infinite matrix to the vector of coefficients. The most general method for summing a divergent series is non-constructive, and concerns Banach limits.\n\nThe notion of series can be easily extended to the case of a Banach space. If \"x\" is a sequence of elements of a Banach space \"X\", then the series Σ\"x\" converges to \"x\" ∈ \"X\" if the sequence of partial sums of the series tends to \"x\"; to wit,\nas \"N\" → ∞.\n\nMore generally, convergence of series can be defined in any abelian Hausdorff topological group. Specifically, in this case, Σ\"x\" converges to \"x\" if the sequence of partial sums converges to \"x\".\n\nDefinitions may be given for sums over an arbitrary index set . There are two main differences with the usual notion of series: first, there is no specific order given on the set ; second, this set may be uncountable. The notion of convergence needs to be strengthened, because the concept of conditional convergence depends on the ordering of the index set.\n\nIf formula_84 is a function from an index set to a set , then the \"series\" associated to formula_85 is the formal sum of the elements formula_86 over the index elements formula_87 denoted by the\n\nWhen the index set is the natural numbers formula_89, the function formula_90 is a sequence denoted by formula_91. A series indexed on the natural numbers is an ordered formal sum and so we rewrite formula_92 as formula_93 in order to emphasize the ordering induced by the natural numbers. Thus, we obtain the common notation for a series indexed by the natural numbers\n\nWhen summing a family {\"a\"}, \"i\" ∈ \"I\", of non-negative numbers, one may define\n\nWhen the supremum is finite, the set of \"i\" ∈ \"I\" such that \"a\" > 0 is countable. Indeed, for every \"n\" ≥ 1, the set formula_96 is finite, because\n\nIf \"I\"  is countably infinite and enumerated as \"I\" = {\"i\", \"i\"...} then the above defined sum satisfies\n\nprovided the value ∞ is allowed for the sum of the series.\n\nAny sum over non-negative reals can be understood as the integral of a non-negative function with respect to the counting measure, which accounts for the many similarities between the two constructions.\n\nLet \"a\" : \"I\" → \"X\", where \"I\"  is any set and \"X\"  is an abelian Hausdorff topological group. Let \"F\"  be the collection of all finite subsets of \"I\", with \"F\" viewed as a directed set, ordered under inclusion with union as join. Define the sum \"S\"  of the family \"a\" as the limit\n\nif it exists and say that the family \"a\" is unconditionally summable. Saying that the sum \"S\"  is the limit of finite partial sums means that for every neighborhood \"V\"  of 0 in \"X\", there is a finite subset \"A\" of \"I\"  such that\n\nBecause \"F\"  is not totally ordered, this is not a limit of a sequence of partial sums, but rather of a net.\n\nFor every \"W\", neighborhood of 0 in \"X\", there is a smaller neighborhood \"V\"  such that \"V\" − \"V\" ⊂ \"W\". It follows that the finite partial sums of an unconditionally summable family \"a\", \"i\" ∈ \"I\", form a \"Cauchy net\", that is, for every \"W\", neighborhood of 0 in \"X\", there is a finite subset \"A\" of \"I\"  such that\n\nWhen \"X\"  is complete, a family \"a\" is unconditionally summable in \"X\"  if and only if the finite sums satisfy the latter Cauchy net condition. When \"X\"  is complete and \"a\", \"i\" ∈ \"I\", is unconditionally summable in \"X\", then for every subset \"J\" ⊂ \"I\", the corresponding subfamily \"a\", \"j\" ∈ \"J\", is also unconditionally summable in \"X\".\n\nWhen the sum of a family of non-negative numbers, in the extended sense defined before, is finite, then it coincides with the sum in the topological group \"X\" = R.\n\nIf a family \"a\" in \"X\"  is unconditionally summable, then for every \"W\", neighborhood of 0 in \"X\", there is a finite subset \"A\" of \"I\"  such that \"a\" ∈ \"W\"  for every \"i\" not in \"A\". If \"X\"  is first-countable, it follows that the set of \"i\" ∈ \"I\"  such that \"a\" ≠ 0 is countable. This need not be true in a general abelian topological group (see examples below).\n\nSuppose that \"I\" = N. If a family \"a\", \"n\" ∈ N, is unconditionally summable in an abelian Hausdorff topological group \"X\", then the series in the usual sense converges and has the same sum,\n\nBy nature, the definition of unconditional summability is insensitive to the order of the summation. When ∑\"a\" is unconditionally summable, then the series remains convergent after any permutation \"σ\" of the set N of indices, with the same sum,\n\nConversely, if every permutation of a series ∑\"a\" converges, then the series is unconditionally convergent. When \"X\"  is complete, then unconditional convergence is also equivalent to the fact that all subseries are convergent; if \"X\"  is a Banach space, this is equivalent to say that for every sequence of signs \"ε\" = ±1, the series\n\nconverges in \"X\". If \"X\"  is a Banach space, then one may define the notion of absolute convergence. A series ∑\"a\" of vectors in \"X\"  converges absolutely if\n\nIf a series of vectors in a Banach space converges absolutely then it converges unconditionally, but the converse only holds in finite-dimensional Banach spaces (theorem of ).\n\nConditionally convergent series can be considered if \"I\" is a well-ordered set, for example, an ordinal number \"α\". One may define by transfinite recursion:\n\nand for a limit ordinal \"α\",\n\nif this limit exists. If all limits exist up to \"α\", then the series converges.\n\nBULLET::::- Continued fraction\nBULLET::::- Convergence tests\nBULLET::::- Convergent series\nBULLET::::- Divergent series\nBULLET::::- Infinite compositions of analytic functions\nBULLET::::- Infinite expression\nBULLET::::- Infinite product\nBULLET::::- Iterated binary operation\nBULLET::::- List of mathematical series\nBULLET::::- Prefix sum\nBULLET::::- Sequence transformation\nBULLET::::- Series expansion\n\nBULLET::::- Bromwich, T. J. \"An Introduction to the Theory of Infinite Series\" MacMillan & Co. 1908, revised 1926, reprinted 1939, 1942, 1949, 1955, 1959, 1965.\nBULLET::::- Infinite Series Tutorial\n"}
