{"id": "18130", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18130", "title": "Louisiana", "text": "Louisiana\n\nLouisiana (, ) is a state in the Deep South region of the South Central United States. It is the 31st most extensive and the 25th most populous of the 50 United States. Louisiana is bordered by the state of Texas to the west, Arkansas to the north, Mississippi to the east, and the Gulf of Mexico to the south. A large part of its eastern boundary is demarcated by the Mississippi River. Louisiana is the only U.S. state with political subdivisions termed parishes, which are equivalent to counties. The state's capital is Baton Rouge, and its largest city is New Orleans.\n\nMuch of the state's lands were formed from sediment washed down the Mississippi River, leaving enormous deltas and vast areas of coastal marsh and swamp. These contain a rich southern biota; typical examples include birds such as ibis and egrets. There are also many species of tree frogs, and fish such as sturgeon and paddlefish. In more elevated areas, fire is a natural process in the landscape, and has produced extensive areas of longleaf pine forest and wet savannas. These support an exceptionally large number of plant species, including many species of terrestrial orchids and carnivorous plants. Louisiana has more Native American tribes than any other southern state, including four that are federally recognized, ten that are state recognized, and four that have not received recognition.\n\nSome Louisiana urban environments have a multicultural, multilingual heritage, being so strongly influenced by a mixture of 18th-century French, Haitian, Spanish, Native American, and African cultures that they are considered to be exceptional in the US. Before the American purchase of the territory in 1803, the present-day State of Louisiana had been both a French colony and for a brief period a Spanish one. In addition, colonists imported numerous African people as slaves in the 18th century. Many came from peoples of the same region of West Africa, thus concentrating their culture. In the post-Civil War environment, Anglo-Americans increased the pressure for Anglicization, and in 1921, English was for a time made the sole language of instruction in Louisiana schools before a policy of multilingualism was revived in 1974. There has never been an official language in Louisiana, and the state constitution enumerates \"the right of the people to preserve, foster, and promote their respective historic, linguistic, and cultural origins.\"\n\nLike other states in the Deep South region, Louisiana frequently ranks low in terms of health, education, and development, and high in measures of poverty. In 2018, Louisiana was ranked as the least healthy state in the country, with high levels of drug-related deaths and excessive alcohol consumption, while it has had the highest homicide rate in the United States since at least the 1990s.\n\nLouisiana was named after Louis XIV, King of France from 1643 to 1715. When René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle claimed the territory drained by the Mississippi River for France, he named it . The suffix -ana (or -ane) is a Latin suffix that can refer to \"information relating to a particular individual, subject, or place.\" Thus, roughly, Louis + ana carries the idea of \"related to Louis.\" Once part of the French Colonial Empire, the Louisiana Territory stretched from present-day Mobile Bay to just north of the present-day Canada–United States border, including a small part of what is now the Canadian provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan.\n\nThe Gulf of Mexico did not exist 250 million years ago when there was but one supercontinent, Pangea. As Pangea split apart, the Atlantic Ocean and Gulf of Mexico opened. Louisiana slowly developed, over millions of years, from water into land, and from north to south. The oldest rocks are exposed in the north, in areas such as the Kisatchie National Forest. The oldest rocks date back to the early Cenozoic Era, some 60 million years ago. The history of the formation of these rocks can be found in D. Spearing's \"Roadside Geology of Louisiana\".\n\nThe youngest parts of the state were formed during the last 12,000 years as successive deltas of the Mississippi River: the Maringouin, Teche, St. Bernard, Lafourche, the modern Mississippi, and now the Atchafalaya. The sediments were carried from north to south by the Mississippi River.\n\nIn between the Tertiary rocks of the north, and the relatively new sediments along the coast, is a vast belt known as the Pleistocene Terraces. Their age and distribution can be largely related to the rise and fall of sea levels during past ice ages. In general, the northern terraces have had sufficient time for rivers to cut deep channels, while the newer terraces tend to be much flatter.\n\nSalt domes are also found in Louisiana. Their origin can be traced back to the early Gulf of Mexico, when the shallow ocean had high rates of evaporation. There are several hundred salt domes in the state; one of the most familiar is Avery Island, Louisiana. Salt domes are important not only as a source of salt; they also serve as underground traps for oil and gas.\n\nLouisiana is bordered to the west by Texas; to the north by Arkansas; to the east by Mississippi; and to the south by the Gulf of Mexico.\n\nThe state may properly be divided into two parts, the uplands of the north, and the alluvial along the coast.\n\nThe alluvial region includes low swamp lands, coastal marshlands and beaches, and barrier islands that cover about . This area lies principally along the Gulf of Mexico and the Mississippi River, which traverses the state from north to south for a distance of about and empties into the Gulf of Mexico; the Red River; the Ouachita River and its branches; and other minor streams (some of which are called bayous).\n\nThe breadth of the alluvial region along the Mississippi is from 10 to 60 miles (15 to 100 km), and along the other rivers, the alluvial region averages about 10 miles (15 km) across. The Mississippi River flows along a ridge formed by its own natural deposits (known as a levee), from which the lands decline toward a river beyond at an average fall of six feet per mile (3 m/km). The alluvial lands along other streams present similar features.\n\nThe higher and contiguous hill lands of the north and northwestern part of the state have an area of more than . They consist of prairie and woodlands. The elevations above sea level range from 10 feet (3 m) at the coast and swamp lands to 50 and 60 feet (15–18 m) at the prairie and alluvial lands. In the uplands and hills, the elevations rise to Driskill Mountain, the highest point in the state at only 535 feet (163 m) above sea level. From years 1932 to 2010 the state lost 1,800 sq. miles due to rises in sea level and erosion. The Louisiana Coastal Protection and Restoration Authority (CPRA) spends around $1 billion per year to help shore up and protect Louisiana shoreline and land in both federal and state funding.\n\nBesides the waterways already named, there are the Sabine, forming the western boundary; and the Pearl, the eastern boundary; the Calcasieu, the Mermentau, the Vermilion, Bayou Teche, the Atchafalaya, the Boeuf, Bayou Lafourche, the Courtableau River, Bayou D'Arbonne, the Macon River, the Tensas, Amite River, the Tchefuncte, the Tickfaw, the Natalbany River, and a number of other smaller streams, constituting a natural system of navigable waterways, aggregating over long.\n\nThe state also has political jurisdiction over the approximately -wide portion of subsea land of the inner continental shelf in the Gulf of Mexico. Through a peculiarity of the political geography of the United States, this is substantially less than the -wide jurisdiction of nearby states Texas and Florida, which, like Louisiana, have extensive Gulf coastlines.\n\nThe southern coast of Louisiana in the United States is among the fastest-disappearing areas in the world. This has largely resulted from human mismanagement of the coast (see Wetlands of Louisiana). At one time, the land was added to when spring floods from the Mississippi River added sediment and stimulated marsh growth; the land is now shrinking. There are multiple causes.\n\nArtificial levees block spring flood water that would bring fresh water and sediment to marshes. Swamps have been extensively logged, leaving canals and ditches that allow saline water to move inland. Canals dug for the oil and gas industry also allow storms to move sea water inland, where it damages swamps and marshes. Rising sea waters have exacerbated the problem. Some researchers estimate that the state is losing a land mass equivalent to 30 football fields every day. There are many proposals to save coastal areas by reducing human damage, including restoring natural floods from the Mississippi. Without such restoration, coastal communities will continue to disappear. And as the communities disappear, more and more people are leaving the region. Since the coastal wetlands support an economically important coastal fishery, the loss of wetlands is adversely affecting this industry.\n\nLouisiana has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification \"Cfa\"). It has long, hot, humid summers and short, mild winters. The subtropical characteristics of the state are due to its low latitude, low lying topography, and the influence of the Gulf of Mexico, which at its farthest point is no more than away.\n\nRain is frequent throughout the year, although from April to September is slightly wetter than the rest of the year, which is the state's wet season. There is a dip in precipitation in October. In summer, thunderstorms build during the heat of the day, and bring intense but brief, tropical downpours. In winter, rainfall is more frontal and less intense.\n\nSummers in southern Louisiana have high temperatures from June through September averaging 90 °F (32 °C) or more, and overnight lows averaging above 70 °F (22 °C). At times, temperatures in the 90s F, combined with dew points in the upper 70s F, create sensible temperatures over 120 °F. The humid, thick, jungle-like heat in southern Louisiana is a famous subject of countless stories and movies.\n\nTemperatures are generally warm in the winter in the southern part of the state, with highs around New Orleans, Baton Rouge, the rest of south Louisiana, and the Gulf of Mexico averaging 66 °F (19 °C). The northern part of the state is mildly cool in the winter, with highs averaging 59 °F (15 °C). The overnight lows in the winter average well above freezing throughout the state, with 46 °F (8 °C) the average near the Gulf and an average low of 37 °F (3 °C) in the winter in the northern part of the state.\n\nOn occasion, cold fronts from low pressure centers to the north, reach Louisiana in winter. Low temperatures near 20 °F (−8 °C) occur on occasion in the northern part of the state, but almost never do so in the southern part of the state. Snow is rare near the Gulf of Mexico, although residents in the northern parts of the state might receive dusting of snow a few times each decade. Louisiana's highest recorded temperature is in Plain Dealing on August 10, 1936, while the coldest recorded temperature is at Minden on February 13, 1899.\n\nLouisiana is often affected by tropical cyclones and is very vulnerable to strikes by major hurricanes, particularly the lowlands around and in the New Orleans area. The unique geography of the region, with the many bayous, marshes and inlets, can result in water damage across a wide area from major hurricanes. The area is also prone to frequent thunderstorms, especially in the summer.\n\nThe entire state averages over 60 days of thunderstorms a year, more than any other state except Florida. Louisiana averages 27 tornadoes annually. The entire state is vulnerable to a tornado strike, with the extreme southern portion of the state slightly less so than the rest of the state. Tornadoes are more common from January to March in the southern part of the state, and from February through March in the northern part of the state.\n\n+ Average temperatures in Louisiana (°F)\n!  data-sort-type=\"number\"  Jan  data-sort-type=\"number\"  Feb  data-sort-type=\"number\"  Mar  data-sort-type=\"number\"  Apr  data-sort-type=\"number\"  May  data-sort-type=\"number\"  Jun  data-sort-type=\"number\"  Jul  data-sort-type=\"number\"  Aug  data-sort-type=\"number\"  Sept  data-sort-type=\"number\"  Oct  data-sort-type=\"number\"  Nov  data-sort-type=\"number\"  Dec  data-sort-type=\"number\"  Annual\n! Shreveport\n! Monroe\n! Alexandria\n! Lake Charles\n! Lafayette\n! Baton Rouge\n! New Orleans\n\nBULLET::::- August 28–29, 2012, Isaac (Category 1 at landfall) hits southeast Louisiana 7 years after Katrina (2005).\nBULLET::::- September 1, 2008, Gustav (Category 2 at landfall) made landfall along the coast near Cocodrie in southeastern Louisiana. As late as August 31 it had been projected by the National Hurricane Center that the hurricane would remain at Category 3 or above on September 1, but in the event the center of Gustav made landfall as a strong Category 2 hurricane (1 mph below Category 3), and dropped to Category 1 soon after. As a result of NHC's forecasts, a massive evacuation of New Orleans took place after many residents having failed to leave for Katrina in 2005. A significant number of deaths were caused by or attributed to Gustav. Around 1.5 million people were without power in Louisiana on September 1.\nBULLET::::- September 24, 2005, Rita (Category 3 at landfall) struck southwestern Louisiana, flooding many parishes and cities along the coast, including Cameron Parish, Lake Charles, and other towns. The storm's winds weakened the damaged levees in New Orleans and caused renewed flooding in parts of the city.\nBULLET::::- August 29, 2005, Katrina (Category 3 at landfall) struck and devastated southeastern Louisiana, where it breached and undermined levees in New Orleans, causing 80% of the city to flood. Most people had been evacuated, but the majority of the population became homeless. The city was virtually closed until October. It is estimated that more than two million people in the Gulf region were displaced by the hurricane, and that more than 1,500 fatalities resulted in Louisiana alone. A public outcry criticized governments at the local, state, and federal levels, for lack of preparation and slowness of response. Louisiana residents relocated across the country for temporary housing, and many have not returned.\n\nBULLET::::- October 3, 2002, Lili (Category 1 at landfall)\nBULLET::::- August 25, 1992, Andrew (Category 3 at landfall) struck south-central Louisiana. It killed four people; knocked out power to nearly 150,000 citizens; and destroyed crops worth hundreds of millions of dollars.\nBULLET::::- August 17, 1969, Camille (Category 5) caused a storm surge and killed 250 people. Although Camille officially made landfall in Mississippi and the worst damage occurred there, it also had effects in Louisiana, destroying thousands of residences in Plaquemines Parish. New Orleans remained dry, with the exception of mild rain-generated flooding in the most low-lying areas.\nBULLET::::- September 9, 1965, Betsy (Category 4 at landfall) came ashore near Grand Isle, causing massive destruction as the first hurricane in history to cause one billion dollars in damage (over ten billion in inflation-adjusted US$). The storm hit New Orleans and flooded nearly 35% of the city (including the Lower 9th Ward, Gentilly, and parts of Mid-City), as well as most of St. Bernard and Plaquemines parishes. The death toll in the state was 76.\nBULLET::::- June 25, 1957, Audrey (Category 3) devastated southwest Louisiana, destroying or severely damaging 60–80 percent of the homes and businesses from Cameron to Grand Chenier. 40,000 people were left homeless and more than 300 people in the state died.\nBULLET::::- August 15–17, 1915: A hurricane made landfall just west of Galveston. Gales howled throughout Cameron and Vermilion Parishes and as far east as Mobile. It produced storm surge of 11 feet at Cameron (called Leesburg at the time), 10 feet at Grand Cheniere, and 9.5 feet at Marsh Island; Grand Isle reported water 6 feet deep across the city. The lightkeeper at the Sabine Pass lighthouse had to turn the lens by hand, as vibrations caused by the wave action put the clockwork out of order. At Sabine Bank, 17 miles offshore the Mouth of the Sabine, damage was noted. Damage estimates for Louisiana and Texas totaled around $50 million.\nBULLET::::- Over 300 people drowned below Montegut – four can be identified as white, none of the others have been identified and are assumed to be Indians. The Indian settlement was about 10 miles below Montegut, called by the Indians – Taire-bonne – is now in swamp and can only be reached by boat. This hurricane caused the survivors to move to higher ground.\n\nOwing to its location and geology, the state has high biological diversity. Some vital areas, such as southwestern prairie, have experienced a loss in excess of 98 percent. The pine flatwoods are also at great risk, mostly from fire suppression and urban sprawl. There is not yet a properly organized system of natural areas to represent and protect Louisiana's biological diversity. Such a system would consist of a protected system of core areas linked by biological corridors, such as Florida is planning.\n\nLouisiana contains a number of areas which, to varying degrees, prevent people from using them. In addition to National Park Service areas and a United States National Forest, Louisiana operates a system of state parks, state historic sites, one state preservation area, one state forest, and many Wildlife Management Areas.\n\nOne of Louisiana's largest government-owned areas is Kisatchie National Forest. It is some 600,000 acres in area, more than half of which is flatwoods vegetation, which supports many rare plant and animal species. These include the Louisiana pine snake and red-cockaded woodpecker. The system of government-owned cypress swamps around Lake Pontchartrain is another large area, with southern wetland species including egrets, alligators, and sturgeon. At least 12 core areas would be needed to build a \"protected areas system\" for the state; these would range from southwestern prairies, to the Pearl River Floodplain in the east, to the Mississippi River alluvial swamps in the north.\n\nHistoric or scenic areas managed, protected, or otherwise recognized by the National Park Service include:\nBULLET::::- Atchafalaya National Heritage Area in Ascension Parish;\nBULLET::::- Cane River National Heritage Area near Natchitoches;\nBULLET::::- Cane River Creole National Historical Park near Natchitoches;\nBULLET::::- Jean Lafitte National Historical Park and Preserve, headquartered in New Orleans, with units in St. Bernard Parish, Barataria (Crown Point), and Acadiana (Lafayette);\nBULLET::::- Poverty Point National Monument at Delhi, Louisiana; and\nBULLET::::- Saline Bayou, a designated National Wild and Scenic River near Winn Parish in northern Louisiana.\n\nBULLET::::- Kisatchie National Forest is Louisiana's only national forest. It includes 600,000 acres in central and north Louisiana with large areas of flatwoods and longleaf pine forest.\n\nLouisiana operates a system of 22 state parks, 17 state historic sites and one state preservation area.\n\nLouisiana has 955,973 acres, in four ecoregions under the wildlife management of the Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries. The Nature Conservancy also owns and manages a set of natural areas.\n\nThe Louisiana Natural and Scenic Rivers System provides a degree of protection for 51 rivers, streams and bayous in the state. It is administered by the Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries.\n\nThe Louisiana Department of Transportation and Development is the state government organization in charge of maintaining public transportation, roadways, bridges, canals, select levees, floodplain management, port facilities, commercial vehicles, and aviation which includes 69 airports.\n\nBULLET::::- Future\n\n valign=\"top\"\n\nThe Intracoastal Waterway is an important means of transporting commercial goods such as petroleum and petroleum products, agricultural produce, building materials and manufactured goods.\n\nIn 2011, Louisiana ranked among the five deadliest states for debris/litter-caused vehicle accidents per total number of registered vehicles and population size. Figures derived from the NTSHA show at least 25 persons in Louisiana were killed per year in motor vehicle collisions with non-fixed objects, including debris, dumped litter, animals and their carcasses.\n\nLouisiana was inhabited by Native Americans for many millennia before the arrival of Europeans in the 16th century. During the Middle Archaic period, Louisiana was the site of the earliest mound complex in North America and one of the earliest dated, complex constructions in the Americas, the Watson Brake site near present-day Monroe. An 11-mound complex, it was built about 5400 BP (3500 BC). The Middle Archaic sites of Caney and Frenchman's Bend have also been securely dated to 5600–5000 BP (3700–3100 BC), demonstrating that seasonal hunter-gatherers organized to build complex earthwork constructions in present-day northern Louisiana. These discoveries overturned previous assumptions in archaeology that such complex mounds were built only by cultures of more settled peoples who were dependent on maize cultivation. The Hedgepeth Site in Lincoln Parish is more recent, dated to 5200–4500 BP (3300–2600 BC).\n\nNearly 2,000 years later, Poverty Point was built; it is the largest and best-known Late Archaic site in the state. The city of modern-day Epps developed near it. The Poverty Point culture may have reached its peak around 1500 BC, making it the first complex culture, and possibly the first tribal culture in North America. It lasted until approximately 700 BC.\n\nThe Poverty Point culture was followed by the Tchefuncte and Lake Cormorant cultures of the Tchula period, local manifestations of Early Woodland period. The Tchefuncte culture were the first people in the area of Louisiana to make large amounts of pottery. These cultures lasted until AD 200. The Middle Woodland period started in Louisiana with the Marksville culture in the southern and eastern part of the state, reaching across the Mississippi River to the east around Natchez and the Fourche Maline culture in the northwestern part of the state. The Marksville culture was named after the Marksville Prehistoric Indian Site in Avoyelles Parish.\n\nThese cultures were contemporaneous with the Hopewell cultures of present-day Ohio and Illinois, and participated in the Hopewell Exchange Network. Trade with peoples to the southwest brought the bow and arrow. The first burial mounds were built at this time. Political power began to be consolidated, as the first platform mounds at ritual centers were constructed for the developing hereditary political and religious leadership.\n\nBy 400 the Late Woodland period had begun with the Baytown culture, Troyville culture, and Coastal Troyville during the Baytown Period and were succeeded by the Coles Creek cultures. Where the Baytown peoples built dispersed settlements, the Troyville people instead continued building major earthwork centers. Population increased dramatically and there is strong evidence of a growing cultural and political complexity. Many Coles Creek sites were erected over earlier Woodland period mortuary mounds. Scholars have speculated that emerging elites were symbolically and physically appropriating dead ancestors to emphasize and project their own authority.\n\nThe Mississippian period in Louisiana was when the Plaquemine and the Caddoan Mississippian cultures developed, and the peoples adopted extensive maize agriculture, cultivating different strains of the plant by saving seeds, selecting for certain characteristics, etc. The Plaquemine culture in the lower Mississippi River Valley in western Mississippi and eastern Louisiana began in 1200 and continued to about 1600. Examples in Louisiana include the Medora Site, the archaeological type site for the culture in West Baton Rouge Parish whose characteristics helped define the culture, the Atchafalaya Basin Mounds in St Mary Parish, the Fitzhugh Mounds in Madison Parish, the Scott Place Mounds in Union Parish, and the Sims Site in St Charles Parish.\n\nPlaquemine culture was contemporaneous with the Middle Mississippian culture that is represented by its largest settlement, the Cahokia site in Illinois east of St. Louis, Missouri. At its peak Cahokia is estimated to have had a population of more than 20,000. The Plaquemine culture is considered ancestral to the historic Natchez and Taensa peoples, whose descendants encountered Europeans in the colonial era.\n\nBy 1000 in the northwestern part of the state, the Fourche Maline culture had evolved into the Caddoan Mississippian culture. The Caddoan Mississippians occupied a large territory, including what is now eastern Oklahoma, western Arkansas, northeast Texas, and northwest Louisiana. Archaeological evidence has demonstrated that the cultural continuity is unbroken from prehistory to the present. The Caddo and related Caddo-language speakers in prehistoric times and at first European contact were the direct ancestors of the modern Caddo Nation of Oklahoma of today. Significant Caddoan Mississippian archaeological sites in Louisiana include Belcher Mound Site in Caddo Parish and Gahagan Mounds Site in Red River Parish.\n\nMany current place names in Louisiana, including Atchafalaya, Natchitouches (now spelled Natchitoches), Caddo, Houma, Tangipahoa, and Avoyel (as Avoyelles), are transliterations of those used in various Native American languages.\n\nThe first European explorers to visit Louisiana came in 1528 when a Spanish expedition led by Pánfilo de Narváez located the mouth of the Mississippi River. In 1542, Hernando de Soto's expedition skirted to the north and west of the state (encountering Caddo and Tunica groups) and then followed the Mississippi River down to the Gulf of Mexico in 1543. Spanish interest in Louisiana faded away for a century and a half.\n\nIn the late 17th century, French and French Canadian expeditions, which included sovereign, religious and commercial aims, established a foothold on the Mississippi River and Gulf Coast. With its first settlements, France laid claim to a vast region of North America and set out to establish a commercial empire and French nation stretching from the Gulf of Mexico to Canada.\n\nIn 1682, the French explorer Robert Cavelier de La Salle named the region Louisiana to honor King Louis XIV of France. The first permanent settlement, Fort Maurepas (at what is now Ocean Springs, Mississippi, near Biloxi), was founded in 1699 by Pierre Le Moyne d'Iberville, a French military officer from Canada. By then the French had also built a small fort at the mouth of the Mississippi at a settlement they named La Balise (or La Balize), \"seamark\" in French. By 1721 they built a wooden lighthouse-type structure here to guide ships on the river.\n\nA royal ordinance of 1722—following the Crown's transfer of the Illinois Country's governance from Canada to Louisiana—may have featured the broadest definition of Louisiana: all land claimed by France south of the Great Lakes between the Rocky Mountains and the Alleghenies. A generation later, trade conflicts between Canada and Louisiana led to a more defined boundary between the French colonies; in 1745, Louisiana governor general Vaudreuil set the northern and eastern bounds of his domain as the Wabash valley up to the mouth of the Vermilion River (near present-day Danville, Illinois); from there, northwest to \"le Rocher\" on the Illinois River, and from there west to the mouth of the Rock River (at present day Rock Island, Illinois). Thus, Vincennes and Peoria were the limit of Louisiana's reach; the outposts at Ouiatenon (on the upper Wabash near present-day Lafayette, Indiana), Chicago, Fort Miamis (near present-day Fort Wayne, Indiana), and Prairie du Chien, Wisconsin, operated as dependencies of Canada.\n\nThe settlement of Natchitoches (along the Red River in present-day northwest Louisiana) was established in 1714 by Louis Juchereau de St. Denis, making it the oldest permanent European settlement in the modern state of Louisiana. The French settlement had two purposes: to establish trade with the Spanish in Texas via the Old San Antonio Road, and to deter Spanish advances into Louisiana. The settlement soon became a flourishing river port and crossroads, giving rise to vast cotton kingdoms along the river that were worked by imported African slaves. Over time, planters developed large plantations and built fine homes in a growing town. This became a pattern repeated in New Orleans and other places, although the commodity crop in the south was primarily sugar cane.\n\nLouisiana's French settlements contributed to further exploration and outposts, concentrated along the banks of the Mississippi and its major tributaries, from Louisiana to as far north as the region called the Illinois Country, around present-day St. Louis, Missouri. The latter was settled by French colonists from Illinois.\n\nInitially, Mobile and then Biloxi served as the capital of La Louisiane. Recognizing the importance of the Mississippi River to trade and military interests, and wanting to protect the capital from severe coastal storms, France developed New Orleans from 1722 as the seat of civilian and military authority south of the Great Lakes. From then until the United States acquired the territory in the Louisiana Purchase of 1803, France and Spain jockeyed for control of New Orleans and the lands west of the Mississippi.\n\nIn the 1720s, German immigrants settled along the Mississippi River, in a region referred to as the German Coast.\n\nFrance ceded most of its territory to the east of the Mississippi to Great Britain in 1763, in the aftermath of Britain's victory in the Seven Years' War (generally referred to in North America as the French and Indian War). The rest of Louisiana, including the area around New Orleans and the parishes around Lake Pontchartrain, had become a colony of Spain by the Treaty of Fontainebleau (1762). The transfer of power on either side of the river would be delayed until later in the decade.\n\nIn 1765, during Spanish rule, several thousand French-speaking refugees from the region of Acadia (now Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and Prince Edward Island, Canada) made their way to Louisiana after having been expelled from their homelands by the British during the French and Indian War. They settled chiefly in the southwestern Louisiana region now called Acadiana. The Spanish, eager to gain more Catholic settlers, welcomed the Acadian refugees, the ancestors of Louisiana's Cajuns.\n\nSpanish Canary Islanders, called Isleños, emigrated from the Canary Islands of Spain to Louisiana under the Spanish crown between 1778 and 1783.\n\nIn 1800, France's Napoleon Bonaparte reacquired Louisiana from Spain in the Treaty of San Ildefonso, an arrangement kept secret for two years.\n\nJean-Baptiste Le Moyne, Sieur de Bienville brought the first two African slaves to Louisiana in 1708, transporting them from a French colony in the West Indies. In 1709, French financier Antoine Crozat obtained a monopoly of commerce in La Louisiane, which extended from the Gulf of Mexico to what is now Illinois. \"That concession allowed him to bring in a cargo of blacks from Africa every year,\" the British historian Hugh Thomas wrote. Physical conditions, including disease, were so harsh there was high mortality among both the colonists and the slaves, resulting in continuing demand and importation of slaves.\n\nStarting in 1719, traders began to import slaves in higher numbers; two French ships, the \"Du Maine\" and the \"Aurore\", arrived in New Orleans carrying more than 500 black slaves coming from Africa. Previous slaves in Louisiana had been transported from French colonies in the West Indies. By the end of 1721, New Orleans counted 1,256 inhabitants, of whom about half were slaves.\n\nIn 1724, the French government issued a law called the Code Noir (\"Black Code\" in English) which \"regulate[d] the interaction of whites [blancs] and blacks [noirs] in its colony of Louisiana (which was much larger than the current state of Louisiana). The law consisted of 57 articles, which regulated religion in the colony, outlawed \"interracial\" marriages (those between people of different skin color, the varying shades of which were also defined by law), restricted manumission, outlined legal punishment of slaves for various offenses, and defined some obligations of owners to their slaves. The main intent of the French government was to assert control over the slave system of agriculture in Louisiana and to impose restrictions on slaveowners there. In practice, the Code Noir was exceedingly difficult to enforce from afar. Some priests continued to perform interracial marriage ceremonies, for example, and some slaveholders continued to manumit slaves without permission while others punished slaves brutally.\n\nArticle II of the Code Noir of 1724 required owners to provide their slaves with religious education in the state religion, Roman Catholicism. Sunday was to be a day of rest for slaves. On days off, slaves were expected to feed and take care of themselves. During the 1740s economic crisis in the colony, owners had trouble feeding their slaves and themselves. Giving them time off also effectively gave more power to slaves, who started cultivating their own gardens and crafting items for sale as their own property. They began to participate in the economic development of the colony while at the same time increasing independence and self-subsistence.\n\nArticle VI of the Code Noir forbade mixed marriages, forbade but did little to protect slave women from rape by their owners, overseers or other slaves. On balance, the Code benefitted the owners but had more protections and flexibility than did the institution of slavery in the southern Thirteen Colonies.\n\nThe Louisiana Black Code of 1806 made the cruel punishment of slaves a crime, but owners and overseers were seldom prosecuted for such acts.\n\nFugitive slaves, called maroons, could easily hide in the backcountry of the bayous and survive in small settlements. The word \"maroon\" comes from the French \"marron,\" meaning \"feral\" or \"fugitive.\"\n\nIn the late 18th century, the last Spanish governor of the Louisiana territory wrote:\n\nTruly, it is impossible for lower Louisiana to get along without slaves and with the use of slaves, the colony had been making great strides toward prosperity and wealth.\n\nWhen the United States purchased Louisiana in 1803, it was soon accepted that enslaved Africans could be brought to Louisiana as easily as they were brought to neighboring Mississippi, though it violated U.S. law to do so. Despite demands by United States Rep. James Hillhouse and by the pamphleteer Thomas Paine to enforce existing federal law against slavery in the newly acquired territory, slavery prevailed because it was the source of great profits and the lowest-cost labor.\n\nAt the start of the 19th century, Louisiana was a small producer of sugar with a relatively small number of slaves, compared to Saint-Domingue and the West Indies. It soon thereafter became a major sugar producer as new settlers arrived to develop plantations. William C. C. Claiborne, Louisiana's first United States governor, said that African slave labor was needed because white laborers \"cannot be had in this unhealthy climate.\" Hugh Thomas wrote that Claiborne was unable to enforce the abolition of the African slave trade, which the US and Great Britain adopted in 1808. The United States continued to protect the domestic slave trade, including the coastwise trade – the transport of slaves by ship along the Atlantic Coast and to New Orleans and other Gulf ports.\n\nBy 1840, New Orleans had the biggest slave market in the United States, which contributed greatly to the economy of the city and of the state. New Orleans had become one of the wealthiest cities, and the third largest city, in the nation. The ban on the African slave trade and importation of slaves had increased demand in the domestic market. During the decades after the American Revolutionary War, more than one million enslaved African Americans underwent forced migration from the Upper South to the Deep South, two thirds of them in the slave trade. Others were transported by their owners as slaveholders moved west for new lands.\n\nWith changing agriculture in the Upper South as planters shifted from tobacco to less labor-intensive mixed agriculture, planters had excess laborers. Many sold slaves to traders to take to the Deep South. Slaves were driven by traders overland from the Upper South or transported to New Orleans and other coastal markets by ship in the coastwise slave trade. After sales in New Orleans, steamboats operating on the Mississippi transported slaves upstream to markets or plantation destinations at Natchez and Memphis.\n\nAs the Deep South was developed for cotton and sugar in the first half of the nineteenth century, demand for slaves increased. This resulted in a massive forced migration (through the slave trade) of more than one million African Americans from the Upper South to the Deep South. Many traders brought slaves to New Orleans for domestic sale, and by 1840, New Orleans had the largest slave market in the country, was the third-largest city, and was one of the wealthiest cities.\nSpanish occupation of Louisiana lasted from 1769 to 1800. Beginning in the 1790s, waves of immigration took place from Saint-Domingue, following a slave rebellion that started in 1791. Over the next decade, thousands of migrants landed in Louisiana from the island, including ethnic Europeans, free people of color, and African slaves, some of the latter brought in by each free group. They greatly increased the French-speaking population in New Orleans and Louisiana, as well as the number of Africans, and the slaves reinforced African culture in the city. The process of gaining independence in Saint-Domingue was complex, but uprisings continued. In 1803, France pulled out its surviving troops from the island, having suffered the loss of two-thirds sent to the island two years before, mostly to yellow fever. In 1804, Haiti, the second republic in the western hemisphere, proclaimed its independence, achieved by slave leaders.\n\nPierre Clément de Laussat (Governor, 1803) said: \"Saint-Domingue was, of all our colonies in the Antilles, the one whose mentality and customs influenced Louisiana the most.\"\n\nWhen the United States won its independence from Great Britain in 1783, one of its major concerns was having a European power on its western boundary, and the need for unrestricted access to the Mississippi River. As American settlers pushed west, they found that the Appalachian Mountains provided a barrier to shipping goods eastward. The easiest way to ship produce was to use a flatboat to float it down the Ohio and Mississippi Rivers to the port of New Orleans, where goods could be put on ocean-going vessels. The problem with this route was that the Spanish owned both sides of the Mississippi below Natchez.\n\nNapoleon's ambitions in Louisiana involved the creation of a new empire centered on the Caribbean sugar trade. By the terms of the Treaty of Amiens of 1802, Great Britain returned ownership of the islands of Martinique and Guadaloupe to the French. Napoleon looked upon Louisiana as a depot for these sugar islands, and as a buffer to U.S. settlement. In October 1801 he sent a large military force to take back Saint-Domingue, then under control of Toussaint Louverture after a slave rebellion.\n\nWhen the army led by Napoleon's brother-in-law Leclerc was defeated, Napoleon decided to sell Louisiana.\n\nThomas Jefferson, third president of the United States, was disturbed by Napoleon's plans to re-establish French colonies in America. With the possession of New Orleans, Napoleon could close the Mississippi to U.S. commerce at any time. Jefferson authorized Robert R. Livingston, U.S. Minister to France, to negotiate for the purchase of the City of New Orleans, portions of the east bank of the Mississippi, and free navigation of the river for U.S. commerce. Livingston was authorized to pay up to $2 million.\n\nAn official transfer of Louisiana to French ownership had not yet taken place, and Napoleon's deal with the Spanish was a poorly kept secret on the frontier. On October 18, 1802, however, Juan Ventura Morales, Acting Intendant of Louisiana, made public the intention of Spain to revoke the right of deposit at New Orleans for all cargo from the United States. The closure of this vital port to the United States caused anger and consternation. Commerce in the west was virtually blockaded. Historians believe that the revocation of the right of deposit was prompted by abuses by the Americans, particularly smuggling, and not by French intrigues as was believed at the time. President Jefferson ignored public pressure for war with France, and appointed James Monroe a special envoy to Napoleon, to assist in obtaining New Orleans for the United States. Jefferson also raised the authorized expenditure to $10 million.\n\nHowever, on April 11, 1803, French Foreign Minister Talleyrand surprised Livingston by asking how much the United States was prepared to pay for the entirety of Louisiana, not just New Orleans and the surrounding area (as Livingston's instructions covered). Monroe agreed with Livingston that Napoleon might withdraw this offer at any time (leaving them with no ability to obtain the desired New Orleans area), and that approval from President Jefferson might take months, so Livingston and Monroe decided to open negotiations immediately. By April 30, they closed a deal for the purchase of the entire Louisiana territory of for 60 million Francs (approximately $15 million).\n\nPart of this sum, $3.5 million, was used to forgive debts owed by France to the United States. The payment was made in United States bonds, which Napoleon sold at face value to the Dutch firm of Hope and Company, and the British banking house of Baring, at a discount of 87½ per each $100 unit. As a result, France received only $8,831,250 in cash for Louisiana.\nEnglish banker Alexander Baring conferred with Marbois in Paris, shuttled to the United States to pick up the bonds, took them to Britain, and returned to France with the money – which Napoleon used to wage war against Baring's own country.\nWhen news of the purchase reached the United States, Jefferson was surprised. He had authorized the expenditure of $10 million for a port city, and instead received treaties committing the government to spend $15 million on a land package which would double the size of the country. Jefferson's political opponents in the Federalist Party argued the Louisiana purchase was a worthless desert, and that the Constitution did not provide for the acquisition of new land or negotiating treaties without the consent of the Senate. What really worried the opposition was the new states which would inevitably be carved from the Louisiana territory, strengthening Western and Southern interests in Congress, and further reducing the influence of New England Federalists in national affairs. President Jefferson was an enthusiastic supporter of westward expansion, and held firm in his support for the treaty. Despite Federalist objections, the U.S. Senate ratified the Louisiana treaty on October 20, 1803.\n\nBy statute enacted on October 31, 1803, President Thomas Jefferson was authorized to take possession of the territories ceded by France and provide for initial governance. A transfer ceremony was held in New Orleans on November 29, 1803. Since the Louisiana territory had never officially been turned over to the French, the Spanish took down their flag, and the French raised theirs. The following day, General James Wilkinson accepted possession of New Orleans for the United States. A similar ceremony was held in St. Louis on March 9, 1804, when a French tricolor was raised near the river, replacing the Spanish national flag. The following day, Captain Amos Stoddard of the First U.S. Artillery marched his troops into town and had the American flag run up the fort's flagpole. The Louisiana territory was officially transferred to the United States government, represented by Meriwether Lewis.\n\nThe Louisiana Territory, purchased for less than 3 cents an acre, doubled the size of the United States overnight, without a war or the loss of a single American life, and set a precedent for the purchase of territory. It opened the way for the eventual expansion of the United States across the continent to the Pacific.\n\nShortly after the United States took possession, the area was divided into two territories along the 33rd parallel north on March 26, 1804, thereby organizing the Territory of Orleans to the south and the District of Louisiana (subsequently formed as the Louisiana Territory) to the north.\n\nLouisiana became the eighteenth U.S. state on April 30, 1812; the Territory of Orleans became the State of Louisiana and the Louisiana Territory was simultaneously renamed the Missouri Territory. An area known as the Florida Parishes was soon annexed into the state of Louisiana on April 14, 1812.\n\nFrom 1824 to 1861, Louisiana moved from a political system based on personality and ethnicity to a distinct two-party system, with Democrats competing first against \"Whigs\", then \"Know Nothings\", and finally only other Democrats.\n\nAccording to the 1860 census, 331,726 people were enslaved, nearly 47% of the state's total population of 708,002. The strong economic interest of elite whites in maintaining the slave society contributed to Louisiana's decision to secede from the Union in January 26, 1861. It followed other Southern states in seceding after the election of Abraham Lincoln as president of the United States. Louisiana's secession was announced on January 26, 1861, and it became part of the Confederate States of America.\n\nThe state was quickly defeated in the Civil War, a result of Union strategy to cut the Confederacy in two by seizing the Mississippi. Federal troops captured New Orleans on April 25, 1862. Because a large part of the population had Union sympathies (or compatible commercial interests), the federal government took the unusual step of designating the areas of Louisiana under federal control as a state within the Union, with its own elected representatives to the U.S. Congress.\n\nFollowing the Civil War and emancipation of slaves, violence rose in the South as the war was carried on by insurgent private and paramilitary groups. Initially state legislatures were dominated by former Confederates, who passed Black Codes to regulate freedmen and generally refused to give the vote. They refused to extend voting rights to African Americans who had been free before the war and had sometimes obtained education and property (as in New Orleans.) Following the Memphis riots of 1866 and the New Orleans riot the same year, the Fourteenth Amendment was passed that provided suffrage and full citizenship for freedmen. Congress passed the Reconstruction Act, establishing military districts for those states where conditions were considered the worst, including Louisiana. It was grouped with Texas in what was administered as the Fifth Military District.\n\nAfrican Americans began to live as citizens with some measure of equality before the law. Both freedmen and people of color who had been free before the war began to make more advances in education, family stability and jobs. At the same time, there was tremendous social volatility in the aftermath of war, with many whites actively resisting defeat and the free labor market. White insurgents mobilized to enforce white supremacy, first in Ku Klux Klan chapters.\n\nBy 1877, when federal forces were withdrawn, white Democrats in Louisiana and other states had regained control of state legislatures, often by paramilitary groups such as the White League, which suppressed black voting through intimidation and violence. Following Mississippi's example in 1890, in 1898, the white Democratic, planter-dominated legislature passed a new constitution that effectively disenfranchised blacks and people of color, by raising barriers to voter registration, such as poll taxes, residency requirements and literacy tests. The effect was immediate and long lasting. In 1896, there were 130,334 black voters on the rolls and about the same number of white voters, in proportion to the state population, which was evenly divided.\n\nThe state population in 1900 was 47% African-American: a total of 652,013 citizens. Many in New Orleans were descendants of Creoles of color, the sizeable population of free people of color before the Civil War. By 1900, two years after the new constitution, only 5,320 black voters were registered in the state. Because of disfranchisement, by 1910 there were only 730 black voters (less than 0.5 percent of eligible African-American men), despite advances in education and literacy among blacks and people of color. Blacks were excluded from the political system and also unable to serve on juries. White Democrats had established one-party Democratic rule, which they maintained in the state for decades deep into the 20th century until after congressional passage of the 1965 Voting Rights Act provided federal oversight and enforcement of the constitutional right to vote.\nIn the early decades of the 20th century, thousands of African Americans left Louisiana in the Great Migration north to industrial cities for jobs and education, and to escape Jim Crow society and lynchings. The boll weevil infestation and agricultural problems cost many sharecroppers and farmers their jobs. The mechanization of agriculture also reduced the need for laborers. Beginning in the 1940s, blacks went West to California for jobs in its expanding defense industries.\n\nDuring some of the Great Depression, Louisiana was led by Governor Huey Long. He was elected to office on populist appeal. His public works projects provided thousands of jobs to people in need, and he supported education and increased suffrage for poor whites, but Long was criticized for his allegedly demogogic and autocratic style. He extended patronage control through every branch of Louisiana's state government. Especially controversial were his plans for wealth redistribution in the state. Long's rule ended abruptly when he was assassinated in the state capitol in 1935.\n\nMobilization for World War II created jobs in the state. But thousands of other workers, black and white alike, migrated to California for better jobs in its burgeoning defense industry. Many African Americans left the state in the Second Great Migration, from the 1940s through the 1960s to escape social oppression and seek better jobs. The mechanization of agriculture in the 1930s had sharply cut the need for laborers. They sought skilled jobs in the defense industry in California, better education for their children, and living in communities where they could vote.\n\nOn November 26, 1958, at Chennault Air Force Base, a USAF B-47 bomber with a nuclear weapon on board developed a fire while on the ground. The aircraft wreckage and the site of the accident were contaminated after a limited explosion of non-nuclear material.\n\nIn the 1950s the state created new requirements for a citizenship test for voter registration. Despite opposition by the States Rights Party, downstate black voters had begun to increase their rate of registration, which also reflected the growth of their middle classes. In 1960 the state established the Louisiana State Sovereignty Commission, to investigate civil rights activists and maintain segregation.\n\nDespite this, gradually black voter registration and turnout increased to 20% and more, and it was 32% by 1964, when the first national civil rights legislation of the era was passed. The percentage of black voters ranged widely in the state during these years, from 93.8% in Evangeline Parish to 1.7% in Tensas Parish, for instance, where there were white efforts to suppress the vote in the black-majority parish.\n\nViolent attacks on civil rights activists in two mill towns were catalysts to the founding of the first two chapters of the Deacons for Defense and Justice in late 1964 and early 1965, in Jonesboro and Bogalusa, respectively. Made up of veterans of World War II and the Korean War, they were armed self-defense groups established to protect activists and their families. Continued violent white resistance in Bogalusa to blacks trying to use public facilities in 1965, following passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, caused the federal government to order local police to protect the activists. Other chapters were formed in Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama.\n\nBy 1960 the proportion of African Americans in Louisiana had dropped to 32%. The 1,039,207 black citizens were still suppressed by segregation and disfranchisement. African Americans continued to suffer disproportionate discriminatory application of the state's voter registration rules. Because of better opportunities elsewhere, from 1965 to 1970, blacks continued to migrate out of Louisiana, for a net loss of more than 37,000 people. Based on official census figures, the African-American population in 1970 stood at 1,085,109, a net gain of more than 46,000 people compared to 1960. During the latter period, some people began to migrate to cities of the New South for opportunities. Since that period, blacks entered the political system and began to be elected to office, as well as having other opportunities.\n\nOn May 21, 1919, the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, giving women full rights to vote, was passed at a national level, and was made the law throughout the United States on August 18, 1920. Louisiana finally ratified the amendment on June 11, 1970.\n\nDue to its location on the Gulf Coast, Louisiana has regularly suffered the effects of tropical storms and damaging hurricanes. On August 29, 2005, New Orleans and many other low-lying parts of the state along the Gulf of Mexico were hit by the catastrophic Hurricane Katrina. It caused widespread damage due to breaching of levees and large-scale flooding of more than 80% of the city. Officials had issued warnings to evacuate the city and nearby areas, but tens of thousands of people, mostly African Americans, stayed behind, many of them stranded. Many people died and survivors suffered through the damage of the widespread floodwaters.\n\nIn August 2016, an unnamed storm dumped trillions of gallons of rain on southern Louisiana, including the cities of Denham Springs, Baton Rouge, Gonzales, St. Amant and Lafayette, causing catastrophic flooding. An estimated 110,000 homes were damaged and thousands of residents were displaced.\n\nThe United States Census Bureau estimates that the population of Louisiana was 4,659,978 on July 1, 2018, a 2.79% increase since the 2010 United States Census. The population density of the state is 104.9 people per square mile.\n\nThe center of population of Louisiana is located in Pointe Coupee Parish, in the city of New Roads.\n\nAccording to the 2010 United States Census, 5.4% of the population aged 5 and older spoke Spanish at home, up from 3.5% in 2000; and 4.5% spoke French (including Louisiana French and Louisiana Creole), down from 4.8% in 2000.\n\nAccording to the US census estimates, the population of Louisiana in 2014 was:\nBULLET::::- White Americans – 63.4% (59.3% non-Hispanic white, 4.1% White Hispanic)\nBULLET::::- Black or African American – 32.5%\nBULLET::::- Asian – 1.8%\nBULLET::::- Multiracial American – 1.5%\nBULLET::::- Native American – 0.8%\nBULLET::::- Hispanic or Latino of any race – 4.8%\n\nThe major ancestry groups of Louisiana are African American (30.4%), French (16.8%), American (9.5%), German (8.3%), Irish (7.5%), English (6.6%), Italian (4.8%) and Scottish (1.1%).\n\nAs of 2011, 49.0% of Louisiana's population younger than age 1 were minorities.\n\n+ Louisiana Racial Breakdown of Population\n! Racial composition !! 1990!! 2000!! 2010\n\nThe largest denominations by number of adherents in 2010 were the Catholic Church with 1,200,900; Southern Baptist Convention with 709,650; and the United Methodist Church with 146,848. Non-denominational Evangelical Protestant congregations had 195,903 members.\n\nAs in other Southern states, the majority of Louisianians, particularly in the north of the state, belong to various Protestant denominations, with Protestants comprising 57% of the state's adult population. Protestants are concentrated in the northern and central parts of the state and in the northern tier of the Florida Parishes. Because of French and Spanish heritage, and their descendants the Creoles, and later Irish, Italian, Portuguese and German immigrants, southern Louisiana and the greater New Orleans area are predominantly Catholic.\n\nSince Creoles were the first settlers, planters and leaders of the territory, they have traditionally been well represented in politics. For instance, most of the early governors were Creole Catholics. Because Catholics still constitute a significant fraction of Louisiana's population, they have continued to be influential in state politics. both Senators and the governor were Catholic. The high proportion and influence of the Catholic population makes Louisiana distinct among Southern states.\n\nJewish communities are established in the state's larger cities, notably New Orleans and Baton Rouge. The most significant of these is the Jewish community of the New Orleans area. In 2000, before the 2005 Hurricane Katrina, its population was about 12,000. Louisiana was among the southern states with a significant Jewish population before the 20th century; Virginia, South Carolina, and Georgia also had influential Jewish populations in some of their major cities from the 18th and 19th centuries. The earliest Jewish colonists were Sephardic Jews who immigrated with English colonists from London. Later in the 19th century, German Jews began to immigrate, followed by those from eastern Europe and the Russian Empire in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.\n\nProminent Jews in Louisiana's political leadership have included Whig (later Democrat) Judah P. Benjamin (1811–1884), who represented Louisiana in the U.S. Senate before the American Civil War and then became the Confederate secretary of state; Democrat-turned-Republican Michael Hahn who was elected as governor, serving 1864–1865 when Louisiana was occupied by the Union Army, and later elected in 1884 as a US congressman; Democrat Adolph Meyer (1842–1908), Confederate Army officer who represented the state in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1891 until his death in 1908; Republican secretary of state Jay Dardenne (1954–), and Republican (Democrat before 2011) attorney general Buddy Caldwell (1946–).\n\nThe total gross state product in 2010 for Louisiana was US$213.6 billion, placing it 24th in the nation. Its per capita personal income is $30,952, ranking 41st in the United States.\n\nIn 2014, Louisiana was ranked as one of the most small business friendly states, based on a study drawing upon data from over 12,000 small business owners.\n\nThe state's principal agricultural products include seafood (it is the biggest producer of crawfish in the world, supplying approximately 90%), cotton, soybeans, cattle, sugarcane, poultry and eggs, dairy products, and rice. Industry generates chemical products, petroleum and coal products, processed foods and transportation equipment, and paper products. Tourism is an important element in the economy, especially in the New Orleans area.\n\nThe Port of South Louisiana, located on the Mississippi River between New Orleans and Baton Rouge, is the largest volume shipping port in the Western Hemisphere and 4th largest in the world, as well as the largest bulk cargo port in the world.\n\nNew Orleans, Shreveport, and Baton Rouge are home to a thriving film industry. State financial incentives since 2002 and aggressive promotion have given Louisiana the nickname \"Hollywood South\". Because of its distinctive culture within the United States, only Alaska is Louisiana's rival in popularity as a setting for reality television programs. In late 2007 and early 2008, a film studio was scheduled to open in Tremé, with state-of-the-art production facilities, and a film training institute.\nTabasco sauce, which is marketed by one of the United States' biggest producers of hot sauce, the McIlhenny Company, originated on Avery Island.\n\nLouisiana has three personal income tax brackets, ranging from 2% to 6%. The sales tax rate is 4%: a 3.97% Louisiana sales tax and a .03% Louisiana Tourism Promotion District sales tax. Political subdivisions also levy their own sales tax in addition to the state fees. The state also has a use tax, which includes 4% to be distributed by the Department of Revenue to local governments. Property taxes are assessed and collected at the local level. Louisiana is a subsidized state, receiving $1.44 from the federal government for every dollar paid in.\n\nTourism and culture are major players in Louisiana's economy, earning an estimated $5.2 billion per year. Louisiana also hosts many important cultural events, such as the World Cultural Economic Forum, which is held annually in the fall at the New Orleans Morial Convention Center.\n\nAs of July 2017, the state's unemployment rate was 5.3%.\n\nLouisiana taxpayers receive more federal funding per dollar of federal taxes paid compared to the average state. Per dollar of federal tax collected in 2005, Louisiana citizens received approximately $1.78 in the way of federal spending. This ranks the state fourth highest nationally and represents a rise from 1995 when Louisiana received $1.35 per dollar of taxes in federal spending (ranked seventh nationally). Neighboring states and the amount of federal spending received per dollar of federal tax collected were: Texas ($0.94), Arkansas ($1.41), and Mississippi ($2.02). Federal spending in 2005 and subsequent years since has been exceptionally high due to the recovery from Hurricane Katrina.\nTax Foundation.\n\nLouisiana is rich in petroleum and natural gas. Petroleum and gas deposits are found in abundance both onshore and offshore in State-owned waters. In addition, vast petroleum and natural gas reserves are found offshore from Louisiana in the federally administered Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) in the Gulf of Mexico. According to the Energy Information Administration, the Gulf of Mexico OCS is the largest U.S. petroleum-producing region. Excluding the Gulf of Mexico OCS, Louisiana ranks fourth in petroleum production and is home to about 2 percent of total U.S. petroleum reserves.\n\nLouisiana's natural gas reserves account for about 5 percent of the U.S. total. The recent discovery of the Haynesville Shale formation in parts of or all of Caddo, Bossier, Bienville, Sabine, De Soto, Red River, and Natchitoches parishes have made it the world's fourth largest gas field with some wells initially producing over 25 million cubic feet of gas daily.\n\nLouisiana was the first site of petroleum drilling over water in the world, on Caddo Lake in the northwest corner of the state. The petroleum and gas industry, as well as its subsidiary industries such as transport and refining, have dominated Louisiana's economy since the 1940s. Beginning in 1950, Louisiana was sued several times by the U.S. Interior Department, in efforts by the federal government to strip Louisiana of its submerged land property rights. These control vast stores of reservoirs of petroleum and natural gas.\n\nWhen petroleum and gas boomed in the 1970s, so did Louisiana's economy. The Louisiana economy as well as its politics of the last half-century cannot be understood without thoroughly accounting for the influence of the petroleum and gas industries. Since the 1980s, these industries' headquarters have consolidated in Houston, but many of the jobs that operate or provide logistical support to the U.S. Gulf of Mexico crude-oil-and-gas industry remained in Louisiana .\n\nIn 1849, the state moved the capital from New Orleans to Baton Rouge. Donaldsonville, Opelousas, and Shreveport have briefly served as the seat of Louisiana state government. The Louisiana State Capitol and the Louisiana Governor's Mansion are both located in Baton Rouge. The Louisiana Supreme Court, however, did not move to Baton Rouge but remains headquartered in New Orleans.\n\nLouisiana and California (whose supreme court is seated in San Francisco) are the only two states whose high courts are not headquartered in the state capital.\n\nThe current Louisiana governor is Democrat John Bel Edwards. The current United States senators are Republicans John Neely Kennedy and Bill Cassidy. Louisiana has six congressional districts and is represented in the U.S. House of Representatives by five Republicans and one Democrat. Louisiana had eight votes in the Electoral College for the 2012 election. It lost one House seat due to stagnant population growth in the 2010 Census.\n\nLouisiana is divided into 64 parishes (the equivalent of counties in most other states).\nBULLET::::- List of parishes in Louisiana\nBULLET::::- Louisiana census statistical areas\n\nMost parishes have an elected government known as the Police Jury, dating from the colonial days. It is the legislative and executive government of the parish, and is elected by the voters. Its members are called Jurors, and together they elect a president as their chairman.\n\nA more limited number of parishes operate under home rule charters, electing various forms of government. This include mayor–council, council–manager (in which the council hires a professional operating manager for the parish), and others.\n\nThe Louisiana political and legal structure has maintained several elements from the times of French and Spanish governance. One is the use of the term \"parish\" (from the French: \"paroisse\") in place of \"county\" for administrative subdivision. Another is the legal system of civil law based on French, German, and Spanish legal codes and ultimately Roman law, as opposed to English common law.\n\nLouisiana's civil law system is what the majority of nations in the world use, especially in Europe and its former colonies, excluding those that derive from the British Empire. However, it is incorrect to equate the Louisiana Civil Code with the Napoleonic Code. Although the Napoleonic Code and Louisiana law draw from common legal roots, the Napoleonic Code was never in force in Louisiana, as it was enacted in 1804, after the United States had purchased and annexed Louisiana in 1803.\n\nWhile the Louisiana Civil Code of 1808 has been continuously revised and updated since its enactment, it is still considered the controlling authority in the state. Differences are found between Louisianan civil law and the common law found in the other U.S. states. While some of these differences have been bridged due to the strong influence of common law tradition, the civil law tradition is still deeply rooted in most aspects of Louisiana private law. Thus property, contractual, business entities structure, much of civil procedure, and family law, as well as some aspects of criminal law, are still based mostly on traditional Roman legal thinking.\n\nIn 1997, Louisiana became the first state to offer the option of a traditional marriage or a covenant marriage. In a covenant marriage, the couple waives their right to a \"no-fault\" divorce after six months of separation, which is available in a traditional marriage. To divorce under a covenant marriage, a couple must demonstrate cause. Marriages between ascendants and descendants, and marriages between collaterals within the fourth degree (i.e., siblings, aunt and nephew, uncle and niece, first cousins) are prohibited. Same-sex marriages were prohibited by statute, but the Supreme Court declared such bans unconstitutional in 2015, in its ruling in \"Obergefell v. Hodges\". Same-sex marriages are now performed statewide. Louisiana is a community property state.\n\nFrom 1898 to 1965, a period when Louisiana had effectively disfranchised most African Americans and many poor whites by provisions of a new constitution, this was essentially a one-party state dominated by white Democrats. Elites had control in the early 20th century, before populist Huey Long came to power as governor. In multiple acts of resistance, blacks left behind the segregation, violence and oppression of the state and moved out to seek better opportunities in northern and western industrial cities during the Great Migrations of 1910–1970, markedly reducing their proportion of population in Louisiana. The franchise for whites was expanded somewhat during these decades, but blacks remained essentially disfranchised until after the civil rights movement of the mid-20th century, gaining enforcement of their constitutional rights through passage by Congress of the Voting Rights Act of 1965.\n\nSince the 1960s, when civil rights legislation was passed under President Lyndon Johnson to protect voting and civil rights, most African Americans in the state have affiliated with the Democratic Party. In the same years, many white social conservatives have moved to support Republican Party candidates in national, gubernatorial and statewide elections. In 2004, David Vitter was the first Republican in Louisiana to be popularly elected as a U.S. senator. The previous Republican senator, John S. Harris, who took office in 1868 during Reconstruction, was chosen by the state legislature under the rules of the 19th century.\n\nLouisiana is unique among U.S. states in using a system for its state and local elections similar to that of modern France. All candidates, regardless of party affiliation, run in a nonpartisan blanket primary (or \"jungle primary\") on Election Day. If no candidate has more than 50% of the vote, the two candidates with the highest vote totals compete in a runoff election approximately one month later. This run-off method does not take into account party identification; therefore, it is not uncommon for a Democrat to be in a runoff with a fellow Democrat or a Republican to be in a runoff with a fellow Republican.\n\nCongressional races have also been held under the jungle primary system. All other states (except Washington, California, and Maine) use single-party primaries followed by a general election between party candidates, each conducted by either a plurality voting system or runoff voting, to elect senators, representatives, and statewide officials. Between 2008 and 2010, federal congressional elections were run under a closed primary system – limited to registered party members. However, upon the passage of House Bill 292, Louisiana again adopted a nonpartisan blanket primary for its federal congressional elections.\n\nLouisiana has six seats in the U.S. House of Representatives, five of which are currently held by Republicans and one by a Democrat. The state lost a House seat at the end of the 112th Congress due to stagnant population growth as recorded by the 2010 United States Census. Louisiana is not classified as a \"swing state\" for future presidential elections, as since the late 20th century, it has regularly supported Republican candidates. The state's two U.S. senators are Bill Cassidy (R) John Neely Kennedy (R).\n\nLouisiana's statewide police force is the Louisiana State Police. It began in 1922 with the creation of the Highway Commission. In 1927, a second branch, the Bureau of Criminal Investigations, was formed. In 1932, the State Highway Patrol was authorized to carry weapons.\n\nOn July 28, 1936, the two branches were consolidated to form the Louisiana Department of State Police; its motto was \"courtesy, loyalty, service\". In 1942, this office was abolished and became a division of the Department of Public Safety, called the Louisiana State Police. In 1988, the Criminal Investigation Bureau was reorganized. Its troopers have statewide jurisdiction with power to enforce all laws of the state, including city and parish ordinances. Each year, they patrol over 12 million miles (20 million km) of roadway and arrest about 10,000 impaired drivers. The State Police are primarily a traffic enforcement agency, with other sections that delve into trucking safety, narcotics enforcement, and gaming oversight.\n\nThe elected sheriff in each parish is the chief law enforcement officer in the parish. They are the keepers of the local parish prisons, which house felony and misdemeanor prisoners. They are the primary criminal patrol and first responder agency in all matters criminal and civil. They are also the official tax collectors in each parish. The sheriffs are responsible for general law enforcement in their respective parishes. Orleans Parish is an exception, as the general law enforcement duties fall to the New Orleans Police Department. Before 2010, Orleans parish was the only parish to have two sheriff's offices. Orleans Parish divided sheriffs' duties between criminal and civil, with a different elected sheriff overseeing each aspect. In 2006, a bill was passed which eventually consolidated the two sheriff's departments into one parish sheriff responsible for both civil and criminal matters.\n\nIn 2015, Louisiana had a higher murder rate (10.3 per 100,000) than any other state in the country for the 27th straight year. Louisiana is the only state with an annual average murder rate (13.6 per 100,000) at least twice as high as the U.S. annual average (6.6 per 100,000) during that period, according to Bureau of Justice Statistics from FBI Uniform Crime Reports. In a different kind of criminal activity, the \"Chicago Tribune\" reports that Louisiana is the most corrupt state in the United States.\n\nAccording to the \"Times Picayune\", Louisiana is the prison capital of the world. Many for-profit private prisons and sheriff-owned prisons have been built and operate here. Louisiana's incarceration rate is nearly five times Iran's, 13 times China's and 20 times Germany's. Minorities are incarcerated at rates disproportionate to their share of the state's population.\n\nThe New Orleans Police Department began a new sanctuary policy to \"no longer cooperate with federal immigration enforcement\" beginning on February 28, 2016.\n\nThe judiciary of Louisiana is defined under the Constitution and law of Louisiana and is composed of the Louisiana Supreme Court, the Louisiana Circuit Courts of Appeal, the District Courts, the Justice of the Peace Courts, the Mayor's Courts, the City Courts, and the Parish Courts. The chief justice of the Louisiana Supreme Court is the chief administrator of the judiciary. Its administration is aided by the Judiciary Commission of Louisiana, the Louisiana Attorney Disciplinary Board, and the Judicial Council of the Supreme Court of Louisiana.\n\nLouisiana has more than 9,000 soldiers in the Louisiana Army National Guard, including the 225th Engineer Brigade and the 256th Infantry Brigade. Both these units have served overseas during the War on Terror in either Iraq, Afghanistan, or both. The Louisiana Air National Guard has over 2,000 airmen and its 159th Fighter Wing has likewise seen overseas service in combat theaters.\n\nTraining sites in the state include Camp Beauregard near Pineville, Camp Villere near Slidell, Camp Minden near Minden, England Air Park (formerly England Air Force Base) near Alexandria, Gillis Long Center near Carville, and Jackson Barracks in New Orleans.\n\nLouisiana is home to several notable colleges and universities, which include Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge and Tulane University in New Orleans. Louisiana State University is the largest and most comprehensive university in Louisiana. Tulane University is a major private research university and the wealthiest university in Louisiana with an endowment over $1.1 billion. Tulane is also highly regarded for its academics nationwide, ranked fortieth on \"U.S. News & World Report's\" 2018 list of best national universities.\n\nLouisiana is also home to two major HBCU's (Historically Black Colleges and Universities), Southern University in Baton Rouge and Grambling State University in Ruston, LA. Both of these SWAC (Southwestern Athletic Conference) schools compete against each other annually in the much anticipated rivalry, the Bayou Classic, during Thanksgiving weekend in the Mercedes-Benz Superdome in New Orleans, Louisiana.\n\nThe Louisiana Science Education Act is a controversial law passed by the Louisiana Legislature on June 11, 2008, and signed into law by Governor Bobby Jindal on June 25. The act allows public school teachers to use supplemental materials in the science classroom which are critical of established science on such topics as the theory of evolution and global warming.\n\nLouisiana is nominally the least populous state with more than one major professional sports league franchise: the National Basketball Association's New Orleans Pelicans and the National Football League's New Orleans Saints.\n\nLouisiana has 12 collegiate NCAA Division I programs, a high number given its population. The state has no NCAA Division II teams and only two NCAA Division III teams. The LSU Tigers football team has won 11 Southeastern Conference titles, six Sugar Bowls and three national championships.\n\nEach year New Orleans plays host to the Sugar Bowl, the Bayou Classic, and the New Orleans Bowl college football games, and Shreveport hosts the Independence Bowl. Also, New Orleans has hosted the Super Bowl a record seven times, as well as the BCS National Championship Game, NBA All-Star Game and NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Championship.\n\nThe Zurich Classic of New Orleans, is a PGA Tour golf tournament held since 1938. The Rock 'n' Roll Mardi Gras Marathon and Crescent City Classic are two road running competitions held at New Orleans.\n\nAs of 2016, Louisiana was the birthplace of the most NFL players per capita for the eighth year in a row.\n\nLouisiana is home to many, especially notable are the distinct culture of the Louisiana Creoles, typically people of color, descendants of free mixed-race families of the colonial and early statehood periods.\n\nThe French colony of \"La Louisiane\" struggled for decades to survive. Conditions were harsh, the climate and soil were unsuitable for certain crops the colonists knew, and they suffered from regional tropical diseases. Both colonists and the slaves they imported had high mortality rates. The settlers kept importing slaves, which resulted in a high proportion of native Africans from West Africa, who continued to practice their culture in new surroundings. As described by historian Gwendolyn Midlo Hall, they developed a marked Afro-Creole culture in the colonial era.\n\nAt the turn of the 18th century and in the early 1800s, New Orleans received a major influx of white and mixed-race refugees fleeing the violence of the Haitian Revolution, many of whom brought their slaves with them. This added another infusion of African culture to the city, as more slaves in Saint-Domingue were from Africa than in the United States. They strongly influenced the African-American culture of the city in terms of dance, music and religious practices.\n\nCreole culture is an amalgamation of French, African, Spanish (and other European), and Native American cultures. Creole comes from the Portuguese word \"crioulo\"; originally it referred to a colonist of European (specifically French) descent who was born in the New World, in comparison to immigrants from France. The oldest Louisiana manuscript to use the word \"Creole,\" from 1782, applied it to a slave born in the French colony. But originally it referred more generally to the French colonists born in Louisiana.\n\nOver time, there developed in the French colony a relatively large group of Creoles of Color (\"gens de couleur libres\"), who were primarily descended from African slave women and French men (later other Europeans became part of the mix, as well as some Native Americans.) Often the French would free their concubines and mixed-race children, and pass on social capital to them. They might educate sons in France, for instance, and help them enter the French Army for a career. They also settled capital or property on their mistresses and children. The free people of color gained more rights in the colony and sometimes education; they generally spoke French and were Roman Catholic. Many became artisans and property owners. Over time, the term \"Creole\" became associated with this class of Creoles of Color, many of whom achieved freedom long before the Civil War.\n\nWealthy French Creoles generally maintained town houses in New Orleans as well as houses on their large sugar plantations outside town along the Mississippi River. New Orleans had the largest population of free people of color in the region; they could find work there and created their own culture, marrying among themselves for decades.\n\nThe ancestors of Cajuns immigrated from west central France to New France, where they settled in the Atlantic provinces of New Brunswick, Nova Scotia and Prince Edward Island, known originally as Acadia. After the British defeated France in the French and Indian War (Seven Years' War) in 1763, France ceded its territory east of the Mississippi River to Britain. The British forcibly separated families and evicted them from Acadia because they refused to vow loyalty to the new British regime. The Acadians were deported to England, New England, and France. Some escaped the British remained in French Canada.\n\nOthers scattered, to France, Canada, Mexico, or the Falkland Islands. Many Acadian refugees settled in south Louisiana in the region around Lafayette and the LaFourche Bayou country. They developed a distinct rural culture there that was different from that of the French Creole colonists in the New Orleans area. Intermarrying with others in the area, they developed what was called Cajun music, cuisine and culture. Until the 1970s, the term \"Cajun\" was considered somewhat derogatory.\n\nA third distinct culture in Louisiana is that of the \"Isleños\", descendants of Spanish Canary Islanders who migrated from the Canary Islands of Spain under the Spanish crown beginning in the mid-1770s. They developed four main communities, but many relocated to what is modern-day St. Bernard Parish. This is where the majority of the Isleño population is still concentrated. An annual festival called Fiesta celebrates the heritage of the Isleños.\n\nSt Bernard Parish has an Isleños museum, cemetery and church, as well as many street names with Spanish words and Spanish surnames from this heritage. Some members of the Isleño community still speak Spanish – with their own Canary Islander accent. Numerous Isleño identity organizations, and many members of Isleños society keep contact with the Canary Islands of Spain.\n\nAccording to a 2010 study by the Modern Language Association, among persons five years old and older, 91.26% of Louisiana residents speak only English at home, 3.45% speak French (standard French, French Creole, or Cajun French), 3.30% speak Spanish, and 0.59% speak Vietnamese.\n\nHistorically, Native American peoples in the area at the time of European encounter were seven tribes distinguished by their languages: Caddo, Tunica, Natchez, Houma, Choctaw, Atakapa, and Chitimacha. Of these, only Tunica, Caddo and Choctaw still have living native speakers, although several other tribes are working to teach and revitalize their languages. Other Native American peoples migrated into the region, escaping from European pressure from the east. Among these were Alabama, Biloxi, Koasati, and Ofo peoples.\n\nStarting in the 1700s, French colonists began to settle along the coast and founded New Orleans. They established French culture and language institutions. They imported thousands of slaves from tribes of West Africa, who spoke several different languages. In the creolization process, the slaves developed a Louisiana Creole dialect incorporating both French and African forms, which colonists adopted to communicate with them, and which persisted beyond slavery. In the 20th century, there were still people of mixed race, particularly, who spoke Louisiana Creole French.\n\nDuring the 19th century after the Louisiana Purchase by the United States, English gradually gained prominence for business and government due to the shift in population with settlement by numerous Americans who were English speakers. Many ethnic French families continued to use French in private. Slaves and some free people of color also spoke Louisiana Creole French. The State Constitution of 1812 gave English official status in legal proceedings, but use of French remained widespread. Subsequent state constitutions reflect the diminishing importance of French. The 1868 constitution, passed during the Reconstruction era before Louisiana was re-admitted to the Union, banned laws requiring the publication of legal proceedings in languages other than English. Subsequently, the legal status of French recovered somewhat, but it never regained its pre-Civil War prominence.\n\nSeveral unique dialects of French, Creole, and English are spoken in Louisiana. Dialects of the French language are: Colonial French and Houma French. Louisiana Creole French is the term for one of the Creole languages. Two unique dialects developed of the English language: Louisiana English, a French-influenced variety of English in which dropping of postvocalic /r/ is common ; and what is informally known as Yat, which resembles the New York City dialect sometimes with southern influences, particularly that of historical Brooklyn. Both accents were influenced by large communities of immigrant Irish and Italians, but the Yat dialect, which developed in New Orleans, was also influenced by French and Spanish.\n\nColonial French was the dominant language of white settlers in Louisiana during the French colonial period; it was spoken primarily by the French Creoles (native-born). In addition to this dialect, the mixed-race people and slaves developed Louisiana Creole, with a base in West African languages. The limited years of Spanish rule at the end of the 18th century did not result in widespread adoption of the Spanish language. French and Louisiana Creole are still used in modern-day Louisiana, often in family gatherings. English and its associated dialects became predominant after the Louisiana Purchase of 1803, after which the area became dominated by numerous English speakers. In some regions, English was influenced by French, as seen with Louisiana English. Colonial French, although mistakenly named Cajun French by some Cajuns, has persisted alongside English.\n\nRenewed interest in the French language in Louisiana has led to the establishment of Canadian-modeled French immersion schools, as well as bilingual signage in the historic French neighborhoods of New Orleans and Lafayette. In addition to private organizations, since 1968 the state has maintained the Council for the Development of French in Louisiana (CODOFIL), which promotes use of the French language in the state's tourism, economic development, culture, education and international relations. Through that office's efforts, in 2018 the state became the first in the nation to join the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie as an observer.\n\nBULLET::::- Louisiana (New France)\nBULLET::::- Index of Louisiana-related articles\nBULLET::::- Outline of Louisiana – organized list of topics about Louisiana\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Sugar Masters: Planters and Slaves in Louisiana's Cane World, 1820–1860\" by Richard Follett, Louisiana State University Press, 2007.\nBULLET::::- \"The Slave Trade: The Story of the Atlantic Slave Trade, 1440–1870\" by Hugh Thomas. 1997: Simon and Schuster. p. 548.\nBULLET::::- \"\" by David Brion Davis 2006: Oxford University Press.\nBULLET::::- Yiannopoulos, A.N., \"The Civil Codes of Louisiana\" (reprinted from Civil Law System: Louisiana and Comparative law, A Coursebook: Texts, Cases and Materials, 3d Edition; similar to version in preface to Louisiana Civil Code, ed. by Yiannopoulos)\nBULLET::::- Rodolfo Batiza, \"The Louisiana Civil Code of 1808: Its Actual Sources and Present Relevance,\" 46 \"TUL. L. REV.\" 4 (1971); Rodolfo Batiza, \"Sources of the Civil Code of 1808, Facts and Speculation: A Rejoinder,\" 46 \"TUL. L. REV.\" 628 (1972); Robert A. Pascal, Sources of the Digest of 1808: A Reply to Professor Batiza, 46 TUL. L. REV. 603 (1972); Joseph M. Sweeney, Tournament of Scholars Over the Sources of the Civil Code of 1808,46 TUL. L. REV. 585 (1972).\nBULLET::::- The standard history of the state, though only through the Civil War, is Charles Gayarré's \"History of Louisiana\"' (various editions, culminating in 1866, 4 vols., with a posthumous and further expanded edition in 1885).\nBULLET::::- A number of accounts by 17th- and 18th-century French explorers: Jean-Bernard Bossu, François-Marie Perrin du Lac, Pierre-François-Xavier de Charlevoix, Dumont (as published by Fr. Mascrier), Fr. Louis Hennepin, Lahontan, Louis Narcisse Baudry des Lozières, Jean-Baptiste Bénard de la Harpe, and Laval. In this group, the explorer Antoine Simon Le Page du Pratz may be the first historian of Louisiana with his \"Histoire de la Louisiane\" (3 vols., Paris, 1758; 2 vols., London, 1763)\nBULLET::::- François Xavier Martin's \"History of Louisiana\" (2 vols., New Orleans, 1827–1829, later ed. by J. F. Condon, continued to 1861, New Orleans, 1882) is the first scholarly treatment of the subject, along with François Barbé-Marbois' \"Histoire de la Louisiane et de la cession de colonie par la France aux Etats-Unis\" (Paris, 1829; in English, Philadelphia, 1830).\nBULLET::::- Alcée Fortier's \"A History of Louisiana\" (N.Y., 4 vols., 1904) is the most recent of the large-scale scholarly histories of the state.\nBULLET::::- The official works of Albert Phelps and Grace King, the publications of the Louisiana Historical Society and several works on the history of New Orleans (q.v.), among them those by Henry Rightor and John Smith Kendall provide background.\n\nBULLET::::- Louisiana Geographic Information Center\nBULLET::::- Louisiana Endowment for the Humanities\nBULLET::::- Louisiana Weather and Tides\n\nBULLET::::- Geology\nBULLET::::- Generalized Geologic Map of Louisiana, 2008\nBULLET::::- Generalized Geology of Louisiana (text to Generalized Geologic Map of Louisiana)\nBULLET::::- Loess Map of Louisiana\nBULLET::::- Other Louisiana Geological Maps\nBULLET::::- Louisiana Geofacts\n\nBULLET::::- Official State of Louisiana website\nBULLET::::- Louisiana State Guide, from the Library of Congress\nBULLET::::- Louisiana State Databases – Annotated list of searchable databases produced by Louisiana state agencies and compiled by the Government Documents Roundtable of the American Library Association.\nBULLET::::- Census Statistics on Louisiana\n\nBULLET::::- Energy Profile for Louisiana\nBULLET::::- USDA Louisiana Statistical Facts\nBULLET::::- USGS real-time, geographic, and other scientific resources of Louisiana\nBULLET::::- : Steve Scalise – Website\nBULLET::::- : Cedric Richmond – Website & Campaign Website\nBULLET::::- : Charles Boustany – Website\nBULLET::::- : John C. Fleming – Website\nBULLET::::- : Ralph Abraham – Website\nBULLET::::- : Garret Graves – Website\n\nBULLET::::- The Times-Picayune major Louisiana newspaper\nBULLET::::- WWL-TV Louisiana television station\n\nBULLET::::- Ecoregions of Louisiana\nBULLET::::- Ecoregions of the Mississippi Alluvial Plain\n\nBULLET::::- Official site of Louisiana tourism\nBULLET::::- Official site of the New Orleans Convention & Tourism Bureau\nBULLET::::- Official site of New Orleans Plantation Country tourism\n"}
{"id": "18131", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18131", "title": "Los Angeles International Airport", "text": "Los Angeles International Airport\n\nLos Angeles International Airport , commonly referred to as LAX (with each of its letters pronounced individually), is the primary international airport serving Los Angeles, California, United States, and its surrounding metropolitan area. \n\nLAX is located in the Westchester neighborhood of Los Angeles in California, southwest of Downtown Los Angeles, with the commercial and residential areas of Westchester to the north, the city of El Segundo to the south and the city of Inglewood to the east. Owned and operated by Los Angeles World Airports (LAWA), an agency of the government of Los Angeles, formerly known as the Department of Airports, the airport covers of land. LAX has four parallel runways. \n\nIn 2018, LAX handled 87,534,384 passengers, making it the world's fourth busiest and the United States' second busiest airport following Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport. As the largest and busiest international airport on the U.S. West Coast, LAX is a major international gateway to the United States, and also serves a connection point for passengers traveling internationally. The airport holds the record for the world's busiest origin and destination airport, since relative to other airports, many more travelers begin or end their trips in Los Angeles than use it as a connection. It is also the only airport to rank among the top five U.S. airports for both passenger and cargo traffic.\n\nLAX serves as a hub or focus city for more passenger airlines than any other airport in the United States. It is the only airport that four U.S. legacy carriers (Alaska, American, Delta, and United) have designated as a hub and is a focus city for Air New Zealand, Allegiant Air, Norwegian Air Shuttle, Qantas, Southwest Airlines, and Volaris. While LAX is the busiest airport in the Greater Los Angeles Area, several other airports, including Hollywood Burbank Airport, John Wayne Airport, Long Beach Airport, as well as Ontario International Airport, also serve the area.\n\nIn 1928, the Los Angeles City Council selected in the southern part of Westchester for a new airport. The fields of wheat, barley and lima beans were converted into dirt landing strips without any terminal buildings. It was named Mines Field for William W. Mines, the real estate agent who arranged the deal. The first structure, Hangar No. 1, was erected in 1929 and is in the National Register of Historic Places.\nMines Field opened as the airport of Los Angeles in 1930 and the city purchased it to be a municipal airfield in 1937. The name became Los Angeles Airport in 1941 and Los Angeles International Airport in 1949. In the 1930s the main airline airports were Burbank Airport (then known as Union Air Terminal, and later Lockheed) in Burbank and the Grand Central Airport in Glendale. (In 1940 the airlines were all at Burbank except for Mexicana's three departures a week from Glendale; in late 1946 most airline flights moved to LAX, but Burbank always retained a few.)\n\nMines Field did not extend west of Sepulveda Boulevard; Sepulveda was rerouted circa 1950 to loop around the west ends of the extended east–west runways (now runways 25L and 25R), which by November 1950 were long. A tunnel was completed in 1953 allowing Sepulveda Boulevard to revert to straight and pass beneath the two runways; it was the first tunnel of its kind. For the next few years the two runways were long.\n\nBefore the 1930s, existing airports used a two-letter abbreviation based on the weather stations at the airports. At that time, \"LA\" served as the designation for Los Angeles Airport. But with the rapid growth in the aviation industry the designations expanded to three letters in 1947, and \"LA\" became \"LAX.\" \"LAX\" is also used for the Port of Los Angeles in San Pedro and by Amtrak for Union Station in downtown Los Angeles.\n\nThe distinctive white Googie Theme Building, designed by Pereira & Luckman architect Paul Williams and constructed in 1961 by Robert E. McKee Construction Co., resembles a flying saucer that has landed on its four legs. A restaurant with a sweeping view of the airport is suspended beneath two arches that form the legs. The Los Angeles City Council designated the building a Los Angeles Historic-Cultural Monument in 1992. A $4 million renovation, with retro-futuristic interior and electric lighting designed by Walt Disney Imagineering, was completed before the Encounter Restaurant opened there in 1997 but is no longer in business. Visitors are able to take the elevator up to the Observation Deck of the \"Theme Building\", which closed after the September 11, 2001 attacks for security reasons. A memorial to the victims of the 9/11 attacks is located on the grounds, as three of the four hijacked planes were originally destined for LAX. The Bob Hope USO expanded and relocated to the first floor of the Theme Building in 2018.\n\n24R/06L and 24L/06R (designated the North Airfield Complex) are north of the airport terminals, and 25R/07L and 25L/07R (designated the South Airfield Complex) are south of the airport terminals.\n+Runways at Los Angeles International\n! class=\"text\"  E !! class=\"number\"  Length !! class=\"number\"  Width !! class=\"text\"  W\n! style=\"font-size:150%;\"  06L →\n! style=\"font-size:150%;\"  ← 24R\n! style=\"font-size:150%;\"  06R →\n! style=\"font-size:150%;\"  ← 24L\n! style=\"font-size:150%;\"  07L →\n! style=\"font-size:150%;\"  ← 25R\n! style=\"font-size:150%;\"  07R →\n! style=\"font-size:150%;\"  ← 25L\n\nSince 1972, Los Angeles World Airports has adopted the \"Preferential Runway Use Policy\" to minimize noise. During daylight hours (0630 to 0000), the normal air traffic pattern is the \"Westerly Operations\" plan, named for the prevailing west winds. Under \"Westerly Operations\", departing aircraft take off to the west, and arriving aircraft approach from the east. To reduce noise from arriving aircraft during night hours (0000 to 0630), the air traffic pattern becomes \"Over-Ocean Operations\". Under \"Over-Ocean\", departing aircraft continue to take off to the west, but arriving aircraft approach from the west unless otherwise required to approach from the east due to reduced visibility or easterly winds. As the name implies, \"Easterly Operations\" is used when prevailing winds have shifted to originate from the east, typically during inclement weather and Santa Ana conditions. Under \"Easterly Operations\", departing aircraft take off to the east, and arriving aircraft approach from the west.\n\nThe \"inboard\" runways (06R/24L and 07L/25R, closest to the central terminal area) are preferred for departures, and the \"outboard\" runways are preferred for arrivals. During noise-sensitive hours (2200 to 0700) and \"Over-Ocean Operations\", the \"inboard\" runways are used preferentially, with arrivals shifting primarily to 06R/24L and departures from 07L/25R. Historically, over 90% of flights have used the \"inboard\" departures and \"outboard\" arrivals scheme.\n\nDuring westbound operations during the daytime, airplanes parked on the north complex tend to use Runway 6R/24L for almost all departures, and airplanes parked on the south complex use Runway 7L/25R for all departures requiring the left turn, and Runway 24L if they are making an immediate right turn. For arrivals, flights coming from the north tend to use Runway 6L/24R, and flights coming from the south tend to use Runway 7R/25L. For flights having a long final westbound, it could depend. \n\nThe South Airfield Complex tends to see more operations than the North, due to a larger number of passenger gates and air cargo operations. Runways in the North Airfield Complex are separated by . Plans have been advanced and approved to increase the separation by , which would allow a central taxiway between runways, despite opposition from residents living north of LAX. The separation between the two runways in the South Airfield Complex has already increased by to accommodate a central taxiway.\n\nDuring westbound operations during the daytime, airplanes taking off to the west that need to go east will often take a left hand U-Turn rather than a right hand one, the reason for this is because there is lots of terrain directly north of the airport and most aircraft can't make it to the proper altitude in time, the only exception to this is destinations directly north of the airport, a plane going to for example, San Francisco, will take off at a steeper incline and/or head out further before making the right turn to the north.\n\nLAX has nine passenger terminals with a total of 132 gates arranged in the shape of the letter U or a horseshoe that are indentified by numbers except for the Tom Bradley International Terminal. The Midfield Satellite Concourse North, an expansion for international flights reached through the Tom Bradley Terminal, is scheduled to open November 3, 2019. There are of cargo facilities at LAX, and a heliport operated by Bravo Aviation.\n\nLAWA currently has several plans to modernize LAX. These include terminal and runway improvements, which will enhance the passenger experience, reduce overcrowding, and provide airport access to the latest class of very large passenger aircraft.\n\nThese improvements include:\nBULLET::::- New crossfield taxiway\nBULLET::::- New large aircraft gates at Tom Bradley International Terminal (TBIT)\nBULLET::::- core improvements\nBULLET::::- $1.3 Billion \"Midfield Satellite Concourse North\" adding 12 gates.\nBULLET::::- Replacement of Central Utility Plant\nBULLET::::- Terminal and Runway Improvements\nBULLET::::- New terminal \"9\" east of Sepulveda Boulevard and Concourse \"0\" east of terminal 1.\n\nA 24-hour automated people mover is under construction. This small train will include three stations in the central terminal area and three outside east of the terminals at a new intermodal transportation facility hub, connecting passengers between the central terminal area and the Metro Green Line, the future Metro Crenshaw/LAX Line regional, local bus lines and a consolidated car rental facility.\n\nIt is the world's fourth-busiest airport by passenger traffic and eleventh-busiest by cargo traffic, serving over 87 million passengers and 2 million tons of freight and mail in 2018. It is the busiest airport in the state of California, and the second-busiest airport by passenger boardings in the United States. In terms of international passengers, the second busiest airport for international traffic in the United states, behind only JFK in New York City.\nThe number of aircraft movements (landings and takeoffs) was 700,362 in 2017, the third most of any airport in the world.\n+ Traffic by calendar year\n! style=\"width:70px\" !! style=\"width:100px\" Passenger volume !! style=\"width:100px\" Aircraft movements !! style=\"width:100px\" Freight(tons) !! style=\"width:100px\" Mail(tons)\n!1994\n51,050,275  689,888  1,516,567  186,878\n!1995\n53,909,223  732,639  1,567,248  193,747\n!1996\n57,974,559  763,866  1,696,663  194,091\n!1997\n60,142,588  781,492  1,852,487  212,410\n!1998\n61,215,712  773,569  1,787,400  264,473\n!1999\n64,279,571  779,150  1,884,526  253,695\n!2000\n67,303,182  783,433  2,002,614  246,538\n!2001\n61,606,204  738,433  1,779,065  162,629\n!2002\n56,223,843  645,424  1,869,932  92,422\n!2003\n54,982,838  622,378  1,924,883  97,193\n!2004\n60,704,568  655,097  2,022,911  92,402\n!2005\n61,489,398  650,629  2,048,817  88,371\n!2006\n61,041,066  656,842  2,022,687  80,395\n!2007\n62,438,583  680,954  2,010,820  66,707\n!2008\n59,815,646  622,506  1,723,038  73,505\n!2009\n56,520,843  544,833  1,599,782  64,073\n!2010\n59,069,409  575,835  1,852,791  74,034\n!2011\n61,862,052  603,912  1,789,204  80,442\n!2012\n63,688,121  605,480  1,867,155  88,438\n!2013\n66,667,619  614,917  1,848,764  77,286\n!2014\n70,662,212  636,706  1,921,302  79,850\n!2015\n74,936,256  655,564  2,047,197  94,299\n!2016\n80,921,527  697,138  2,105,941  99,394\n!2017\n84,557,968  700,362  2,279,878  109,596\n!2018\n87,534,384  707,833  2,336,443  109,694\n\n+ Busiest domestic routes from LAX(August 2018 - July 2019)\n! Rank\n! Airport\n! Passengers\n! Carriers\n\n+ Busiest international routes to and from LAX (2019)\n! Rank\n! Airport\n! Passengers\n! Carriers\n\n+ Largest Airlines at LAX (October 2018 - September 2019)\n!Rank\n!Airline\n!Passengers\n!Share\n1\n12,227,000\n20.13%\n2\n11,123,000\n18.31%\n3\n9,622,000\n15.84%\n4\n9,101,000\n14.98%\n5\n5,294,000\n8.72%\n\nShuttles operate to and from the terminals, providing frequent service for connecting passengers. However, connecting passengers who use these shuttles must leave and then later reenter security. Tunnels connect between terminals 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8, and an above-ground connector between {{abbrTBITTom Bradley International Terminal}} and terminal 4 opened in February 2016. People don't generally have to leave and reenter through security checkpoints.\n\nThe closest bus stops to the terminals are the pair of opposites on Sepulveda Boulevard and Century Boulevard, served by Metro 117, Torrance 8, Metro 232, Commuter Express 574, Metro 102 to USC and the Metro Expo line, and Metro 40 to Los Angeles Union Station (owl service only).\n\nIn addition, out of a number of bus systems, many routes (local, rapid and express) of the LACMTA Metro 232 to Long Beach, Line 8 of Torrance Transit, Line 109 of Beach Cities Transit, the Santa Monica Big Blue Bus system's Line 3 and Rapid 3 via Lincoln Boulevard to Santa Monica and the Culver CityBus's Line 6 and Rapid 6 via Sepulveda Blvd to Culver City and UCLA, LADOT Commuter Express 438 to Downtown LA (Monday-Friday Rush hours AM) and Commuter Express 439 to Downtown LA (Monday-Friday Rush hours PM), all make stops at the LAX Transit Center in Parking Lot C. on 96th St., where shuttle bus \"C\" offers free connections to and from every LAX terminal, and at the Green Line, where shuttle bus \"G\" connects to and from the terminals.\n\nThe Taiwanese airline China Airlines operates a bus service from LAX to Monterey Park and Rowland Heights. This service is only available for China Airlines customers.\n\nThe FlyAway Bus is a nonstop motorcoach/shuttle service run by the LAWA, which provides scheduled service between LAX and Downtown Los Angeles (Union Station), the San Fernando Valley (Van Nuys), Hollywood, and Long Beach. The shuttle service stops at every LAX terminal. The service hours vary based on the line. All lines use the regional system of High Occupancy Vehicle lanes to expedite their trips. The Los Angeles Union Station service and a late-night branch of Metro Local route 40 are the only direct transit links between the airport and Downtown Los Angeles.\n\nDiscontinued routes for the FlyAway include West Los Angeles (Westwood), Santa Monica, and Irvine.\n\nShuttle bus \"G\" offers a free connection to and from the Aviation/LAX station on the Los Angeles Metro Rail Green Line.\n\nThe LAX automated people mover (APM) is an electric train system currently under construction by LAWA. The LAX APM will be {{convert2.25 miles}} in traveling distance and will have six stations serving the central area, terminals 1–8, and the Tom Bradley International Terminal.\n\nOnce leaving the three terminal stations, heading east, the first station is a ground transportation parking structure called the \"Intermodal Transportation Facility-West\" that will serve employee parking, surrounding hotel access and long term airport parking. The next station will be a second car/bus/bike transport facility called the \"Intermodal Transport Facility-East\" as well as LA Metro Rail's platform, the under construction ground infill transit transfer station on the LAX/Crenshaw Metro Line. At this multi-station stop, the first (floor) level will be ground transportation. The second level will be a bridge from the main hub to the light rail platform and APM platform. The third level will be the APM platform. The last stop on the APM will be a rental car hub station called the Consolidated Rent-A-Car-Center (CONRAC). All the car rental companies and rentals will be here. The APM was designed to decrease the need for shuttle bus services and reduce traffic within the terminals World Way.\nThe APM will have nine total trains, each operating in four car sets with capacity of containing up to 200 passengers. The APM will operate every two minutes, with a ten minute end-to-end travel time.\n\nLos Angeles had bid for the 2024 Summer Olympics in 2016 and was one of two city finalists, due to decreasing demand to host the Olympics, the IOC awarded both Los Angeles and the city of Paris with Olympic games each, Los Angeles being awarded the latter, the 2028 Summer Olympics. The project will be completed in time for the 2028 Summer Olympics in 2023 as its original projected completion date was by 2024 before the awarding. They choose to retain the original deadline. LAWA has split the project in three phases. The project has been approved and the construction and operating bidding process was commenced. Three firms submitted bids and LAWA announced scoring for the project would be based on \"technical merit, visual appeal, user experience and price\". LAWA proposed a public private partnership wherein a private sector partner would responsible for the construction and operation of the people mover. Los Angeles City Council gave final approval on April 11, 2018 to \"LAX Integrated Express Solutions\". The joint bid that included manufacturer Bombardier Transportation at 4.895 Billion over 30 years to build and operate. The three phase project is estimated to cost $5.5 billion, and have a completion date of 2023.\n\nBULLET::::- Phase 1\nDallas based building firm Austin Commercial was awarded a five year contract to commence construction in the first quarter of 2018 on phase one of the APM project. The project consists of bridges to connect passengers between the three proposed APM stations inside World Way and the terminals. The bridges will also house restrooms, Airport lounges offices and other spaces. The project is expected to finish by 2021, followed by phases two and three that will consist of the people mover and off site buildings. In January 2018, a consortium led by Hochtief and Bombardier Transportation was selected as the preferred developer to be awarded the $1.95 billion design/build/operate contract.\n\nBULLET::::- Phase 2\nIn 2018, 2,100 parking spaces in lot C were removed to reconfigure the area for phase two, the parking structures. Utility relocation started in the second quarter of 2018. The guideway started construction in spring 2019, It will take up to three years to complete. Groundbreaking was held in March 2019. The \"Intermodal Transportation Facility - West\" began construction in summer of 2019. The Consolidated Car Rental Facility \"CONRAC\" broke ground on September 2019.\n\nLAX's terminals are immediately west of the interchange between Century Boulevard and Sepulveda Boulevard (State Route 1). The 405 Freeway can be reached to the east via Century Boulevard, and the 105 Freeway can be reached to the south via Sepulveda Boulevard. Sepulveda Boulevard also goes right under the airport runways.\n\nArriving passengers) take a shuttle or walk to the LAXit waiting area near Terminal 1 for taxi or ride-share pickups. Taxicab services are operated by nine city-authorized taxi companies and regulated by Authorized Taxicab Supervision Inc. (ATS). ATS queues up taxis at the LAXit waiting area.\n\nA number of private shuttle companies also offer limousine and bus services to LAX Airport.\n\nThe airport also functioned as a joint civil-military facility, providing a base for the United States Coast Guard and its Coast Guard Air Station Los Angeles facility, operating four HH-65 Dolphin helicopters, which covers Coast Guard operations in various Southern California locations, including Catalina Island. Missions include search and rescue (SAR), law enforcement, aids to navigation support (such as operating lighthouses) and various military operations. In addition, Coast Guard helicopters assigned to the air station deploy to Coast Guard cutters.\n\nThe air station relocated by May 18, 2016 from LAX to accommodate the planned improvements for LAX's midfield, including the Midfield Satellite Concourse North (MSC North) terminal. The air station moved to U.S. Navy's Naval Air Station Point Mugu, part of the Naval Base Ventura County (NBVC) in Point Mugu.\n\nThe Flight Path Learning Center is a museum located at 6661 Imperial Highway and was formerly known as the \"West Imperial Terminal\". This building used to house some charter flights (e.g. Condor Airlines, Martinair Holland, World Airways) and regular scheduled flights by MGM Grand Air. It sat empty for 10 years until it was re-opened as a learning center for LAX.\n\nThe center contains information on the history of aviation, several pictures of the airport, as well as aircraft scale models, flight attendant uniforms, and general airline memorabilia such as playing cards, china, magazines, signs, even a TWA gate information sign. The museum also offers school tours and a guest speaker program.\n\nThe museum's library contains an extensive collection of rare items such as aircraft manufacturer company newsletters/magazines, technical manuals for both military and civilian aircraft, industry magazines dating back to World War II and before, historic photographs and other invaluable references on aircraft operation and manufacturing.\n\nThe museum has on display \"The Spirit of Seventy-Six,\" which is a DC-3 (DC-3-262, Serial No. 3269). After being in commercial airline service, the plane served as a corporate aircraft for Union Oil Company for 32 years. The plane was built in the Douglas Aircraft Company plant in Santa Monica in January 1941, which was a major producer of both commercial and military aircraft.\n\nThe museum claims to be \"the only aviation museum and research center situated at a major airport and the only facility with a primary emphasis on contributions of civil aviation to the history and development of Southern California\". There are other museums at major airports, however, including the Udvar-Hazy Center of the National Air and Space Museum adjacent to Washington Dulles Airport, the Royal Thai Air Force Museum at Don Mueang Airport, the Suomen ilmailumuseo (Finnish Aviation Museum) at Helsinki-Vantaa Airport, the Frontiers of Flight Museum at Dallas Love Field, the Tulsa Air and Space Museum & Planetarium at Tulsa International Airport and others.\n\nThe airport has the administrative offices of Los Angeles World Airports.\n\nContinental Airlines once had its corporate headquarters on the airport property. At a 1962 press conference in the office of Mayor of Los Angeles Sam Yorty, Continental Airlines announced that it planned to move its headquarters to Los Angeles in July 1963. In 1963 Continental Airlines headquarters moved to a two-story, $2.3 million building on the grounds of the airport. The July 2009 \"Continental Magazine\" issue stated that the move \"underlined Continental Airlines western and Pacific orientation\". On July 1, 1983 the airline's headquarters were relocated to the America Tower in the Neartown area of Houston.\n\nIn addition to Continental Airlines, Western Airlines and Flying Tiger Line also had their headquarters at LAX.\n\nDuring its history there have been numerous incidents, but only the most notable are summarized below:\n\nBULLET::::- On January 23, 1939, the sole prototype Douglas 7B twin-engine attack bomber, designed and built as a company project, suffered a loss of the vertical fin and rudder during a demonstration flight over Mines Field, flat spun into the parking lot of North American Aviation, and burned. Another source states that the test pilot, in an attempt to impress the Gallic passenger, attempted a snap roll at low altitude with one engine feathered, resulting in the fatal spin. Douglas test pilot Johnny Cable bailed out at 300 feet, his chute unfurled but did not have time to deploy, he was killed on impact, the flight engineer John Parks rode in the airframe and died, but 33-year-old French Air Force Capt. Paul Chemidlin, riding in the aft fuselage near the top turret, survived with a broken leg, severe back injuries, and a slight concussion. The presence of Chemidlin, a representative of a foreign purchasing mission, caused a furor in Congress by isolationists over neutrality and export laws. The type was developed as the Douglas DB-7.\n\nBULLET::::- On June 1, 1940, the first Douglas R3D-1 for the U.S. Navy, BuNo \"1901\", crashed at Mines Field, before delivery. The Navy later acquired the privately owned DC-5 prototype, from William E. Boeing as a replacement.\nBULLET::::- On November 20, 1940, the prototype NA-73X Mustang, \"NX19998\", first flown October 26, 1940, by test pilot Vance Breese, crashed this date. According to P-51 designer Edgar Schmued, the NA-73 was lost because test pilot Paul Balfour refused, before a high-speed test run, to go through the takeoff and flight test procedure with Schmued while the aircraft was on the ground, claiming \"one airplane was like another\". After making two high speed passes over Mines Field, he forgot to put the fuel valve on \"reserve\" and during the third pass ran out of fuel. An emergency landing in a freshly plowed field caused the wheels to dig in, the aircraft flipped over, the airframe was not rebuilt, the second aircraft being used for subsequent testing.\nBULLET::::- On October 26, 1944, WASP pilot Gertrude Tompkins Silver of the 601st Ferrying Squadron, 5th Ferrying Group, Love Field, Dallas, Texas, departed Los Angeles Airport, in a North American P-51D Mustang, \"44-15669\", at 1600 hrs PWT, headed for the East Coast. She took off into the wind, into an offshore fog bank, and was expected that night at Palm Springs. She never arrived. Due to a paperwork foul-up, a search did not get under way for several days, and while the eventual search of land and sea was massive, it failed to find a trace of Silver or her plane. She is the only missing WASP pilot. She had married Sgt. Henry Silver one month before her disappearance.\n\nBULLET::::- On January 13, 1969, Scandinavian Airlines System Flight 933 Douglas DC-8-62, crashed into Santa Monica Bay, approximately {{convert6nmikm}} west of LAX at 7:21 pm, local time. The aircraft was operating as flight SK-933, nearing the completion of a flight from Seattle. Of nine crewmembers, three lost their lives to drowning, while 12 of the 36 passengers also drowned.\nBULLET::::- On January 18, 1969, United Airlines Flight 266 a Boeing 727-200 bearing the registration number N7434U, crashed into Santa Monica Bay approximately {{convert11.3mikm}} west of LAX at 6:21 pm local time. The aircraft was destroyed, resulting in the loss of all 32 passengers and six crew members aboard.\n\nBULLET::::- On the evening of June 6, 1971, Hughes Airwest Flight 706, a Douglas DC-9 jetliner that had departed LAX on a flight to Salt Lake City, Utah, was struck nine minutes after takeoff by a U.S. Marine Corps McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II fighter jet over the San Gabriel Mountains. The midair collision killed all 44 passengers and five crew members aboard the DC-9 airliner and one of two crewmen aboard the military jet.\nBULLET::::- On August 6, 1974, a bomb exploded near the Pan Am ticketing area at Terminal 2; three people were killed and 35 were injured.\nBULLET::::- On March 1, 1978, two tires burst in succession on a McDonnell Douglas DC-10-10 on Continental Airlines Flight 603 during its takeoff roll at LAX and the plane, bound for Honolulu, veered off the runway. A third tire burst and the DC-10's left landing gear collapsed, causing a fuel tank to rupture. Following the aborted takeoff, spilled fuel ignited and enveloped the center portion of the aircraft in flames. During the ensuing emergency evacuation, a husband and wife died when they exited the passenger cabin onto the wing and dropped down directly into the flames. Two additional passengers died of their injuries approximately three months after the accident; 74 others aboard the plane were injured, as were 11 firemen battling the fire.\nBULLET::::- On the evening of March 10, 1979, Swift Aire Flight 235, a twin-engine Aerospatiale Nord 262A-33 turboprop en route to Santa Maria, was forced to ditch in Santa Monica Bay after experiencing engine problems upon takeoff from LAX. The pilot, co-pilot and a female passenger drowned when they were unable to exit the aircraft after the ditching. The female flight attendant and the three remaining passengers—two men and a pregnant woman—survived and were rescued by several pleasure boats and other watercraft in the vicinity.\n\nBULLET::::- On August 31, 1986, Aeroméxico Flight 498, a DC-9 en route from Mexico City, Mexico to Los Angeles, began its descent into LAX when a Piper Cherokee collided with the DC-9's left horizontal stabilizer over Cerritos, causing the DC-9 to crash into a residential neighborhood. All 67 people on the two aircraft were killed, in addition to 15 people on the ground. 5 homes were destroyed and an additional 7 were damaged by the crash and resulting fire. The Piper went down in a nearby schoolyard and caused no further injuries on the ground. As a result of this incident, the FAA required all commercial aircraft to be equipped with Traffic Collision Avoidance System (TCAS).\n\nBULLET::::- On February 1, 1991, USAir Flight 1493 (arriving from Columbus, Ohio), a Boeing 737-300, landing on runway 24L at LAX, collided on touchdown with a SkyWest Airlines Fairchild Metroliner, Flight 5569 departing to Palmdale. The Skywest plane was given clearance to wait on the runway for takeoff. The same controller then gave the USAir plane clearance to land on the same runway, forgetting that the SkyWest plane was there. The collision killed all 12 occupants of the SkyWest plane and 23 people aboard the USAir 737.\n\nBULLET::::- Al-Qaeda attempted to bomb LAX on New Year's Eve 1999/2000. The bomber, Algerian Ahmed Ressam, was captured in Port Angeles, Washington, the U.S. port of entry, with a cache of explosives that could have produced a blast 40 times greater than that of a car bomb hidden in the trunk of the rented car in which he had traveled from Canada. He had planned to leave one or two suitcases filled with explosives in an LAX passenger waiting area. He was initially sentenced to 22 years in prison, but in February 2010 an appellate court ordered that his sentence be extended.\nBULLET::::- On January 31, 2000, Alaska Airlines Flight 261, a McDonnell Douglas MD-83 jetliner flying from Puerto Vallarta, Mexico to San Francisco and Seattle, requested an emergency landing at LAX after experiencing problems with its tail-mounted horizontal stabilizer. Before the plane could divert to Los Angeles, it suddenly plummeted into the Pacific Ocean approximately {{convert2.7mikm}} north of Anacapa Island off the California coast, killing all 88 people aboard.\nBULLET::::- Three of the four planes hijacked on September 11, 2001 were bound for LAX.\nBULLET::::- In the 2002 Los Angeles International Airport shooting of July 4, 2002, Hesham Mohamed Hadayet killed two Israelis at the ticket counter of El Al Airlines at LAX. Although the gunman was not linked to any terrorist group, the man was upset at U.S. support for Israel, and therefore was motivated by political disagreement. This led the FBI to classify this shooting as a terrorist act, one of the few on U.S. soil since the September 11 attacks.\nBULLET::::- On September 21, 2005, JetBlue Flight 292, an Airbus A320 discovered a problem with its landing gear as it took off from Bob Hope Airport in Burbank. It flew in circles for three hours to burn off fuel, then landed safely at Los Angeles International Airport on runway 25L, balancing on its back wheels as it rolled down the center of the runway. Passengers were able to watch their own coverage live from the satellite broadcast on JetBlue in-flight TV seat displays of their plane as it made an emergency landing with the front landing gear visibly becoming damaged. Because JetBlue did not serve LAX at the time, the aircraft was evaluated and repaired at a Continental Airlines hangar.\nBULLET::::- On July 29, 2006, after America West Express Flight 6008, a Canadair Regional Jet operated by Mesa Airlines from Phoenix, Arizona, landed on runway 25L, controllers instructed the pilot to leave the runway on a taxiway known as \"Mike\" and stop short of runway 25R. Even though the pilot read back the instructions correctly, he accidentally taxied onto 25R and into the path of a departing SkyWest Airlines Embraer EMB-120 operating United Express Flight 6037 to Monterey. They cleared each other by {{convert50ftm}} and nobody was hurt.\nBULLET::::- On August 16, 2007, a runway incursion occurred between WestJet Flight 900 and Northwest Airlines Flight 180 on runways 24R and 24L, respectively, with the aircraft coming within {{convert37ftm}} of each other. The planes were carrying a combined total of 296 people, none of whom were injured. The NTSB concluded that the incursion was the result of controller error. In September 2007, FAA Administrator Marion Blakey stressed the need for LAX to increase lateral separation between its pair of north runways in order to preserve the safety and efficiency of the airport.\n\nBULLET::::- On October 13 and 14, 2013, two incidents of dry ice bomb explosions occurred at the airport. The first dry ice bomb exploded at 7:00 p.m. in an employee restroom in Terminal 2, with no injuries. Terminal 2 was briefly shut down as a result. On the next day at 8:30 p.m., a dry ice bomb exploded on the ramp area near the Tom Bradley International Terminal, also without injuries. Two other plastic bottles containing dry ice were found at the scene during the second explosion. On October 15, a 28-year-old airport employee was arrested in connection with the explosions and was booked on charges of possession of an explosive or destructive device near an aircraft. He is currently held on a $1 million bail. On October 18, a 41-year-old airport employee was arrested in connection with the second explosion, and was booked on suspicion of possessing a destructive device near an aircraft. Authorities believe that the incidents are not linked to terrorism.\nBULLET::::- In the 2013 Los Angeles International Airport shooting of November 1, 2013, at around 9:31 a.m. PDT, a lone gunman entered Terminal 3 and opened fire with a semi-automatic rifle, killing a Transportation Security Administration (TSA) officer and wounding three other people. The gunman was later apprehended and taken into custody. Until the situation was clarified and under control, a few terminals at the airport were evacuated, all inbound flights were diverted and all outbound flights were grounded until the airport began returning to normal operation at around 2:30 p.m.\nBULLET::::- On August 28, 2016, there was a false report of shots fired throughout the airport, causing a temporary lock down and about 3 hours of flight delays.\nBULLET::::- On May 20, 2017, Aeroméxico Flight 642, a Boeing 737-800, collided with a utility truck on a taxiway near Runway 25R, injuring 8 people, two of them seriously.\n\nThe \"Imperial Hill\" area in El Segundo is a prime location for aircraft spotting, especially for takeoffs. Part of the Imperial Hill area has been set aside as a city park, Clutter's Park.\n\nAnother popular spotting location sits under the final approach for runways 24 L&R on a lawn next to the Westchester In-N-Out Burger on Sepulveda Boulevard. This is one of the few remaining locations in Southern California from which spotters may watch such a wide variety of low-flying commercial airliners from directly underneath a flight path.\n\nOne can also do aircraft spotting at a small park in the take-off pattern that (normally) goes out over the Pacific. The park is on the East side of the street Vista Del Mar from where it takes its name, Vista Del Mar Park. \n\nAt 12:51 p.m. on Friday, September 21, 2012, a Shuttle Carrier Aircraft carrying the Space Shuttle \"Endeavour\" landed at LAX on runway 25L. An estimated 10,000 people saw the shuttle land. Interstate 105 was backed up for miles at a standstill. Imperial Highway was shut down for spectators. It was quickly taken off the Shuttle Carrier Aircraft, a modified Boeing 747, and was moved to a United Airlines hangar. The shuttle spent about a month in the hangar while it was prepared to be transported to the California Science Center.\n\nNumerous films and television shows have been set or filmed partially at LAX, at least partly due to the airport's proximity to Hollywood studios and Los Angeles. Film shoots at the Los Angeles airports, including LAX, produced $590 million for the Los Angeles region from 2002 to 2005.\n\nBULLET::::- California World War II Army Airfields\nBULLET::::- List of airports in the Los Angeles area\nBULLET::::- Metro\nBULLET::::- Los Angeles Airport Police\nBULLET::::- Peirson Mitchell Hall\n\nBULLET::::- Bullock, Freddy. \"LAX: Los Angeles International Airport\" (1998)\nBULLET::::- Schoneberger, William A., Ethel Pattison, and Lee Nichols. \"Los Angeles International Airport\" (Arcadia Publishing, 2009.)\n\nBULLET::::- Los Angeles International Airport official website\nBULLET::::- LAneXt website\nBULLET::::- LAX Noise Management Internet Flight Tracking System\nBULLET::::- LAX Airport webcams, flight timetables & pilot data\nBULLET::::- LAX Flight Tracking\nBULLET::::- {{FAA-diagram00237}}\nBULLET::::- {{Wikivoyage-inlineLos Angeles International Airport}}\n{{US-airportLAX}}\n"}
{"id": "18133", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18133", "title": "La Tène culture", "text": "La Tène culture\n\nThe La Tène culture (; ) was a European Iron Age culture. \nIt developed and flourished during the late Iron Age (from about 450 BCE to the Roman conquest in the 1st century BCE), succeeding the early Iron Age Hallstatt culture without any definite cultural break, under the impetus of considerable Mediterranean influence from the Greeks in pre-Roman Gaul, the Etruscans, and Golasecca culture.\n\nIts territorial extent corresponded to what is now France, Belgium, Switzerland, Austria, Southern Germany, the Czech Republic, parts of Northern Italy, Slovenia and Hungary, as well as adjacent parts of the Netherlands, Slovakia, Croatia, Transylvania (western Romania), and Transcarpathia (western Ukraine).\nThe Celtiberians of western Iberia shared many aspects of the culture, though not generally the artistic style. To the north extended the contemporary Pre-Roman Iron Age of Northern Europe, including the Jastorf culture of Northern Germany.\n\nCentered on ancient Gaul, the culture became very widespread, and encompasses a wide variety of local differences. It is often distinguished from earlier and neighbouring cultures mainly by the La Tène style of Celtic art, characterized by curving \"swirly\" decoration, especially of metalwork.\n\nIt is named after the type site of La Tène on the north side of Lake Neuchâtel in Switzerland, where thousands of objects had been deposited in the lake, as was discovered after the water level dropped in 1857. La Tène is the type site and the term archaeologists use for the later period of the culture and art of the ancient Celts, a term that is firmly entrenched in the popular understanding, but presents numerous problems for historians and archaeologists.\n\nExtensive contacts through trade are recognized in foreign objects deposited in elite burials; stylistic influences on La Tène material culture can be recognized in Etruscan, Italic, Greek, Dacian and Scythian sources. Dateable Greek pottery and analysis employing scientific techniques such as dendrochronology and thermoluminescence help provide date ranges for an absolute chronology at some La Tène sites.\n\nLa Tène history was originally divided into \"early\", \"middle\" and \"late\" stages based on the typology of the metal finds (Otto Tischler 1885), with the Roman occupation greatly disrupting the culture, although many elements remain in Gallo-Roman and Romano-British culture. A broad cultural unity was not paralleled by overarching social-political unifying structures, and the extent to which the material culture can be linguistically linked is debated. The art history of La Tène culture has various schemes of periodization.\n\nThe archaeological period is now mostly divided into four sub-periods, following Paul Reinecke.\n\n! Tischler (1885)\n! Reinecke (1902) \n! Date\n\nThe preceding final phase of the Hallstatt culture, HaD, c. 650–450 BC, was also widespread across Central Europe, and the transition over this area was gradual, being mainly detected through La Tène style elite artefacts, which first appear on the western edge of the old Hallstatt region.\n\nThough there is no agreement on the precise region in which La Tène culture first developed, there is a broad consensus that the centre of the culture lay on the northwest edges of Hallstatt culture, north of the Alps, within the region between in the West the valleys of the Marne and Moselle, and the part of the Rhineland nearby. In the east the western end of the old Hallstatt core area in modern Bavaria, Austria and Switzerland formed a somewhat separate \"eastern style Province\" in the early La Tène, joining with the western area in Alsace.\nIn 1994 a prototypical ensemble of elite grave sites of the early 5th century BCE was excavated at Glauberg in Hesse, northeast of Frankfurt-am-Main, in a region that had formerly been considered peripheral to the La Tène sphere. The site at La Tène itself was therefore near the southern edge of the original \"core\" area (as is also the case for the Hallstatt site for its core).\n\nThe establishment of a Greek colony, soon very successful, at Massalia (modern Marseilles) on the Mediterranean coast of France led to great trade with the Hallstatt areas up the Rhone and Saone river systems, and early La Tène elite burials like the Vix Grave in Burgundy contain imported luxury goods along with artifacts produced locally. Most areas were probably controlled by tribal chiefs living in hilltop forts, while the bulk of the population lived in small villages or farmsteads in the countryside.\nBy 500 BCE the Etruscans expanded to border Celts in north Italy, and trade across the Alps began to overhaul trade with the Greeks, and the Rhone route declined. Booming areas included the middle Rhine, with large iron ore deposits, the Marne and Champagne regions, and also Bohemia, although here trade with the Mediterranean area was much less important. Trading connections and wealth no doubt played a part in the origin of the La Tène style, though how large a part remains much discussed; specific Mediterranean-derived motifs are evident, but the new style does not depend on them.\n\nBarry Cunliffe notes localization of La Tène culture during the 5th century BCE when there arose \"two zones of power and innovation: a Marne – Moselle zone in the west with trading links to the Po Valley via the central Alpine passes and the Golasecca culture, and a Bohemian zone in the east with separate links to the Adriatic via the eastern Alpine routes and the Venetic culture\".\n\nFrom their homeland, La Tène culture expanded in the 4th century BCE to more of modern France, Germany, and Central Europe, and beyond to Hispania, northern and central Italy, the Balkans, and even as far as Asia Minor, in the course of several major migrations. La Tène style artefacts start to appear in Britain around the same time, and Ireland rather later. The style of \"Insular La Tène\" art is somewhat different and the artefacts are initially found in some parts of the islands but not others. Migratory movements seem at best only partly responsible for the diffusion of La Tène culture there, and perhaps other parts of Europe.\n\nBy about 400 BCE the evidence for Mediterranean trade become sparse; this may have been because the expanding Celtic populations began to migrate south and west, coming into violent conflict with the established populations, including the Etruscans and Romans. \nThe settled life in much of the La Tène homelands also seems to have become much more unstable and prone to wars. In about 387 BCE the Celts under Brennus defeated the Romans and then sacked Rome, establishing themselves as the most prominent threats to the Roman homeland, a status they would retain through a series of Roman-Gallic wars until Julius Caesar's final conquest of Gaul in 58-50 BCE. The Romans prevented the Celts from reaching very far south of Rome, but on the other side of the Adriatic Sea groups passed through the Balkans to reach Greece, where Delphi was attacked in 279 BCE, and Asia, where Galatia was established as a Celtic area of Anatolia. By this time the La Tène style was spreading to the British Isles, though apparently without any significant movements in population.\n\nAfter about 275 BCE, Roman expansion into the La Tène areal began, at first with the conquest of Gallia Cisalpina.\nThe conquest of Celtic Gaul began in 121 BCE and was complete with the Gallic Wars of the 50s BCE.\nGaulish culture now quickly assimilated to Roman culture, giving rise to the hybrid Gallo-Roman culture of Late Antiquity.\n\nLa Tène metalwork in bronze, iron and gold, developing technologically out of Hallstatt culture, is stylistically characterized by inscribed and inlaid intricate spirals and interlace, on fine bronze vessels, helmets and shields, horse trappings and elite jewelry, especially the neck rings called torcs and elaborate clasps called \"fibulae\". It is characterized by elegant, stylized curvilinear animal and vegetal forms, allied with the Hallstatt traditions of geometric patterning.\n\nThe Early Style of La Tène art and culture mainly featured static, geometric decoration, while the transition to the Developed Style constituted a shift to movement-based forms, such as triskeles. Some subsets within the Developed Style contain more specific design trends, such as the recurrent serpentine scroll of the Waldalgesheim Style \n\nInitially La Tène people lived in open settlements that were dominated by the chieftains’ hill forts. The development of towns—\"oppida\"—appears in mid-La Tène culture. La Tène dwellings were carpenter-built rather than of masonry. La Tène peoples also dug ritual shafts, in which votive offerings and even human sacrifices were cast. Severed heads appear to have held great power and were often represented in carvings. Burial sites included weapons, carts, and both elite and household goods, evoking a strong continuity with an afterlife.\n\nElaborate burials also reveal a wide network of trade. In Vix, France, an elite woman of the 6th century BCE was buried with a very large bronze \"wine-mixer\" made in Greece. Exports from La Tène cultural areas to the Mediterranean cultures were based on salt, tin, copper, amber, wool, leather, furs and gold. \nArtefacts typical of the La Tène culture were also discovered in stray finds as far afield as Scandinavia, Northern Germany, Poland and in the Balkans. It is therefore common to also talk of the \"La Tène period\" in the context of those regions even though they were never part of the La Tène culture proper, but connected to its core area via trade.\n\nThe bearers of the La Téne culture were the people known as Celts or Gauls to ancient ethnographers.\nAncient Celtic culture had no written literature of its own, but rare examples of epigraphy in the Greek or Latin alphabets\nexist allowing the fragmentary reconstruction of Continental Celtic.\n\nOur knowledge of this cultural area derives from three sources: from archaeological evidence, from Greek and Latin literary evidence, and from ethnographical evidence suggesting some La Tène artistic and cultural survivals in traditionally Celtic regions of far western Europe. \nSome of the societies that are archaeologically identified with La Tène material culture were identified by Greek and Roman authors from the 5th century onwards as \"Keltoi\" (\"Celts\") and \"Galli\" (\"Gauls\"). Herodotus (iv.49) correctly placed \"Keltoi\" at the source of the Ister/Danube, in the heartland of La Tène material culture: \"The Ister flows right across Europe, rising in the country of the Celts\".\n\nWhether the usage of classical sources means that the whole of La Tène culture can be attributed to a unified Celtic people is difficult to assess; archaeologists have repeatedly concluded that language, material culture, and political affiliation do not necessarily run parallel. Frey (2004) notes that in the 5th century, \"burial customs in the Celtic world were not uniform; rather, localised groups had their own beliefs, which, in consequence, also gave rise to distinct artistic expressions\".\n\nThe La Téne type site is on the northern shore of Lake Neuchâtel, Switzerland, where the small river Thielle, connecting to another lake, enters the Lake Neuchâtel.\nIn 1857, prolonged drought lowered the waters of the lake by about 2 m. \nOn the northernmost tip of the lake, between the river and a point south of the village of Epagnier (), Hansli Kopp, looking for antiquities for Colonel Frédéric Schwab, discovered several rows of wooden piles that still reached up about 50 cm into the water. From among these, Kopp collected about forty iron swords.\n\nThe Swiss archaeologist Ferdinand Keller published his findings in 1868 in his influential first report on the Swiss pile dwellings (\"Pfahlbaubericht\"). In 1863 he interpreted the remains as a Celtic village built on piles. Eduard Desor, a geologist from Neuchâtel, started excavations on the lakeshore soon afterwards. He interpreted the site as an armory, erected on platforms on piles over the lake and later destroyed by enemy action. Another interpretation accounting for the presence of cast iron swords that had not been sharpened, was of a site for ritual depositions.\n\nWith the first systematic lowering of the Swiss lakes from 1868 to 1883, the site fell completely dry. In 1880, Emile Vouga, a teacher from Marin-Epagnier, uncovered the wooden remains of two bridges (designated \"Pont Desor\" and \"Pont Vouga\") originally over 100 m long, that crossed the little Thielle River (today a nature reserve) and the remains of five houses on the shore. After Vouga had finished, F. Borel, curator of the Marin museum, began to excavate as well. In 1885 the canton asked the Société d'Histoire of Neuchâtel to continue the excavations, the results of which were published by Vouga in the same year.\n\nAll in all, over 2500 objects, mainly made from metal, have been excavated in La Tène. Weapons predominate, there being 166 swords (most without traces of wear), 270 lanceheads, and 22 shield bosses, along with 385 brooches, tools, and parts of chariots. Numerous human and animal bones were found as well. The site was used from the 3rd century, with a peak of activity around 200 BCE and abandonment by about 60 BCE. Interpretations of the site vary. Some scholars believe the bridge was destroyed by high water, while others see it as a place of sacrifice after a successful battle (there are almost no female ornaments).\n\nAn exhibition marking the 150th anniversary of the discovery of the La Tène site opened in 2007 at the Musée Schwab in Biel/Bienne, Switzerland, moving to move to Zürich in 2008 and Mont Beuvray in Burgundy in 2009.\n\nSome sites are:\nvalign=\"top\"\nBULLET::::- La Tène, Marin-Epagnier\nBULLET::::- Bern, Engehalbinsel: oppidum\nBULLET::::- Jolimont\nBULLET::::- Manching: oppidum\nBULLET::::- Mormont\nBULLET::::- Münsingen, burial field\nBULLET::::- Petinesca\nBULLET::::- Basel oppidum\nBULLET::::- Bibracte, oppidum of the Aedui at Mont Beuvray in Burgundy\nBULLET::::- Erstfeld hoard\nBULLET::::- Hochdorf Chieftain's Grave\nBULLET::::- Turicum–Lindenhof\nBULLET::::- Bopfingen: \"Viereckschanze\", a characteristic rectangular enclosure\nvalign=\"top\"\nBULLET::::- Fellbach-Schmiden, near Stuttgart: \"Viereckschanze\"; ritual objects recovered from a well\nBULLET::::- Kleinaspergle: elite graves of La Tène I\nBULLET::::- Waldalgesheim chariot burial: an elite chariot burial, 4th century\nBULLET::::- Glauberg, oppidum and elite graves\nBULLET::::- Dürrnberg near Hallein: Burial field and earthworks of late Hallstatt–early La Tène\nBULLET::::- Donnersberg: oppidum\nBULLET::::- Vill near Innsbruck: remains of dwellings\nBULLET::::- Sandberg Celtic city near Platt and Roseldorf in Lower Austria\nBULLET::::- Vix/Mont Lassois: oppidum and elaborate graves\nBULLET::::- Titelberg: oppidum in Luxembourg\nBULLET::::- Reinheim: Tomb of a princess/priestess with burial gifts\n\nSee .\n\nSome outstanding La Tène artifacts are:\nBULLET::::- Vix Grave of a very wealthy woman in Burgundy) buried with an 1100-litre (290 gallon) bronze krater, the largest ever found.\nBULLET::::- Mšecké Žehrovice Head, a stone head from the modern Czech Republic\nBULLET::::- A life-sized sculpture of a warrior that stood above the Glauberg burials\nBULLET::::- Chariot burial found at La Gorge Meillet (St-Germain-en-Laye: Musée des Antiquités Nationales)\nBULLET::::- Basse Yutz Flagons 5th century\nBULLET::::- Agris Helmet, with gold covering, c. 350\nBULLET::::- Waldalgesheim chariot burial, Bad Kreuznach, Germany, late 4th century BCE, Rheinisches Landesmuseum Bonn; the \"Waldalgesheim phase/style\" of the art takes its name from the jewellery found here.\nBULLET::::- A gold-and-bronze model of an oak tree (3rd century BCE) found at the Oppidum of Manching.\nBULLET::::- Sculptures from Roquepertuse, a sanctuary in the south of France\nBULLET::::- The silver Gundestrup cauldron (2nd or 1st century BCE), found ritually broken in a peat bog near Gundestrup, Denmark, but probably made near the Black Sea, perhaps in Thrace. (National Museum of Denmark, Copenhagen)\nBULLET::::- Battersea Shield (350–50 BCE), found in the Thames, made of bronze with red enamel. (British Museum, London)\nBULLET::::- Waterloo Helmet, 150-50 BCE, found in London in the Thames\nBULLET::::- \"Witham Shield\" (4th century BCE). (British Museum, London)\nBULLET::::- Torrs Pony-cap and Horns, from Scotland\nBULLET::::- Cordoba Treasure\nBULLET::::- Turoe stone in Galway, Ireland\nBULLET::::- Great Torc from Snettisham, 100-75 BCE, gold, the most elaborate of the British style of torcs\nBULLET::::- Meyrick Helmet, post-conquest Roman helmet shape, with La Tène decoration\nBULLET::::- Noric steel\n\nBULLET::::- Garrow, Duncan (ed), \"Rethinking Celtic Art\", 2008, Oxbow Books, , 9781842173183, google books\nBULLET::::- Green, Miranda, \"Celtic Art, Reading the Messages\", 1996, The Everyman Art Library,\nBULLET::::- Laing, Lloyd and Jenifer. \"Art of the Celts\", Thames and Hudson, London 1992\nBULLET::::- McIntosh, Jane, \"Handbook to Life in Prehistoric Europe\", 2009, Oxford University Press (USA),\nBULLET::::- Megaw, Ruth and Vincent (2001). \"Celtic Art\".\n\nBULLET::::- Cunliffe, Barry. \"The Ancient Celts\". Oxford: Oxford University Press. 1997\nBULLET::::- Collis, John. \"The Celts: Origins, Myths, Invention\". London: Tempus, 2003.\nBULLET::::- Kruta, Venceslas, \"La grande storia dei Celti. La nascita, l'affermazione, la decadenza\", Newton & Compton, Roma, 2003\nBULLET::::- James, Simon. \"The Atlantic Celts\". London: British Museum Press, 1999.\nBULLET::::- James, Simon & Rigby, Valery. \"Britain and the Celtic Iron Age\". London: British Museum Press, 1997.\nBULLET::::- Reginelli Servais Gianna and Béat Arnold, \"La Tène, un site, un mythe\", Hauterive : Laténium - Parc et musée d'archéologie de Neuchâtel, 2007, Cahiers d'archéologie romande de la Bibliothèque historique vaudoise, 3 vols,\n\nBULLET::::- Charles Bergengren, Cleveland Institute of Art, 1999: illustrations of La Tène artifacts\nBULLET::::- La Tène Archaeological Sites in Romania\n"}
{"id": "18135", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18135", "title": "Lorenz curve", "text": "Lorenz curve\n\nIn economics, the Lorenz curve is a graphical representation of the distribution of income or of wealth. It was developed by Max O. Lorenz in 1905 for representing inequality of the wealth distribution.\n\nThe curve is a graph showing the proportion of overall income or wealth assumed by the bottom \"x\"% of the people, although this is not rigorously true for a finite population (see below). It is often used to represent income distribution, where it shows for the bottom \"x\"% of households, what percentage (\"y\"%) of the total income they have. The percentage of households is plotted on the \"x\"-axis, the percentage of income on the \"y\"-axis. It can also be used to show distribution of assets. In such use, many economists consider it to be a measure of social inequality.\n\nThe concept is useful in describing inequality among the size of individuals in ecology and in studies of biodiversity, where the cumulative proportion of species is plotted against the cumulative proportion of individuals. It is also useful in business modeling: e.g., in consumer finance, to measure the actual percentage \"y\"% of delinquencies attributable to the \"x\"% of people with worst risk scores.\n\n Data from 2005.\nPoints on the Lorenz curve represent statements such as, \"the bottom 20% of all households have 10% of the total income.\"\n\nA perfectly equal income distribution would be one in which every person has the same income. In this case, the bottom \"N\"% of society would always have \"N\"% of the income. This can be depicted by the straight line \"y\" = \"x\"; called the \"line of perfect equality.\"\n\nBy contrast, a perfectly unequal distribution would be one in which one person has all the income and everyone else has none. In that case, the curve would be at \"y\" = 0% for all \"x\" < 100%, and \"y\" = 100% when \"x\" = 100%. This curve is called the \"line of perfect inequality.\"\n\nThe Gini coefficient is the ratio of the area between the line of perfect equality and the observed Lorenz curve to the area between the line of perfect equality and the line of perfect inequality. The higher the coefficient, the more unequal the distribution is. In the diagram on the right, this is given by the ratio \"A\"/(\"A+B\"), where \"A\" and \"B\" are the areas of regions as marked in the diagram.\n\nThe Lorenz curve is a probability plot (a P–P plot) comparing the distribution of a parameter in a population against a hypothetical uniform distribution of that parameter. It can usually be represented by a function \"L\"(\"F\"), where \"F\", the cumulative portion of the population, is represented by the horizontal axis, and \"L\", the cumulative portion of the total wealth or income, is represented by the vertical axis.\n\nFor a population of size \"n\", with a sequence of values \"y\", \"i\" = 1 to \"n\", that are indexed in non-decreasing order ( \"y\" ≤ \"y\"), the Lorenz curve is the continuous piecewise linear function connecting the points ( \"F\", \"L\" ), \"i\" = 0 to \"n\", where \"F\" = 0, \"L\" = 0, and for \"i\" = 1 to \"n\":\n\nFor a discrete probability function \"f\"(\"y\"), let \"y\", \"i\" = 1 to \"n\", be the points with non-zero probabilities indexed in increasing order ( \"y\" < \"y\"). The Lorenz curve is the continuous piecewise linear function connecting the points ( \"F\", \"L\" ), \"i\" = 0 to \"n\", where \"F\" = 0, \"L\" = 0, and for \"i\" = 1 to \"n\":\n\nFor a probability density function \"f\"(\"x\") with the cumulative distribution function \"F\"(\"x\"), the Lorenz curve \"L\" is given by:\n\nwhere formula_8 denotes the average. The Lorenz curve \"L(F)\" may then be plotted as a function parametric in x: \"L(x)\" vs. \"F(x)\". In other contexts, the quantity computed here is known as the length biased (or size biased) distribution; it also has an important role in renewal theory.\n\nAlternatively, for a cumulative distribution function \"F\"(\"x\") with inverse \"x\"(\"F\"), the Lorenz curve \"L\"(\"F\") is directly given by:\n\nThe inverse \"x\"(\"F\") may not exist because the cumulative distribution function has intervals of constant values. However, the previous formula can still apply by generalizing the definition of \"x\"(\"F\"):\n\nFor an example of a Lorenz curve, see Pareto distribution.\n\nA Lorenz curve always starts at (0,0) and ends at (1,1).\n\nThe Lorenz curve is not defined if the mean of the probability distribution is zero or infinite.\n\nThe Lorenz curve for a probability distribution is a continuous function. However, Lorenz curves representing discontinuous functions can be constructed as the limit of Lorenz curves of probability distributions, the line of perfect inequality being an example.\n\nThe information in a Lorenz curve may be summarized by the Gini coefficient and the Lorenz asymmetry coefficient.\n\nThe Lorenz curve cannot rise above the line of perfect equality. \n\nIf the variable being measured cannot take negative values, the Lorenz curve:\nBULLET::::- cannot sink below the line of perfect inequality,\nBULLET::::- is increasing.\nNote however that a Lorenz curve for net worth would start out by going negative due to the fact that some people have a negative net worth because of debt.\n\nThe Lorenz curve is invariant under positive scaling. If X is a random variable, for any positive number \"c\" the random variable \"c\" X has the same Lorenz curve as X.\n\nThe Lorenz curve is flipped twice, once about F = 0.5 and once about \"L\" = 0.5, by negation. If X is a random variable with Lorenz curve \"L\"(\"F\"), then −X has the Lorenz curve:\n\nThe Lorenz curve is changed by translations so that the equality gap \"F\" − \"L\"(\"F\") changes in proportion to the ratio of the original and translated means. If X is a random variable with a Lorenz curve \"L\"(\"F\") and mean \"μ\", then for any constant \"c\" ≠ −\"μ\", X + \"c\" has a Lorenz curve defined by:\n\nFor a cumulative distribution function \"F\"(\"x\") with mean \"μ\" and (generalized) inverse \"x\"(\"F\"), then for any \"F\" with 0 < \"F\" < 1 :\nBULLET::::- If the Lorenz curve is differentiable:\nBULLET::::- If the Lorenz curve is twice differentiable, then the probability density function \"f\"(\"x\") exists at that point and:\nBULLET::::- If \"L\"(\"F\") is continuously differentiable, then the tangent of \"L\"(\"F\") is parallel to the line of perfect equality at the point \"F\"(\"μ\"). This is also the point at which the equality gap \"F\" − \"L\"(\"F\"), the vertical distance between the Lorenz curve and the line of perfect equality, is greatest. The size of the gap is equal to half of the relative mean absolute deviation:\n\nBULLET::::- Distribution (economics)\nBULLET::::- Distribution of wealth\nBULLET::::- Welfare economics\nBULLET::::- Income inequality metrics\nBULLET::::- Gini coefficient\nBULLET::::- Hoover index (a.k.a. Robin Hood index)\nBULLET::::- ROC analysis\nBULLET::::- Social welfare (political science)\nBULLET::::- Economic inequality\nBULLET::::- Zipf's law\nBULLET::::- Pareto distribution\nBULLET::::- Mean deviation\n\n\nBULLET::::- WIID: World Income Inequality Database, a source of information on inequality, collected by WIDER (World Institute for Development Economics Research, part of United Nations University)\nBULLET::::- glcurve: Stata module to plot Lorenz curve (type \"findit glcurve\" or \"ssc install glcurve\" in Stata prompt to install)\nBULLET::::- Free add-on to STATA to compute inequality and poverty measures\nBULLET::::- Free Online Software (Calculator) computes the Gini Coefficient, plots the Lorenz curve, and computes many other measures of concentration for any dataset\nBULLET::::- Free Calculator: Online and downloadable scripts (Python and Lua) for Atkinson, Gini, and Hoover inequalities\nBULLET::::- Users of the R data analysis software can install the \"ineq\" package which allows for computation of a variety of inequality indices including Gini, Atkinson, Theil.\nBULLET::::- A MATLAB Inequality Package, including code for computing Gini, Atkinson, Theil indexes and for plotting the Lorenz Curve. Many examples are available.\nBULLET::::- A complete handout about the Lorenz curve including various applications, including an Excel spreadsheet graphing Lorenz curves and calculating Gini coefficients as well as coefficients of variation.\nBULLET::::- LORENZ 3.0 is a Mathematica notebook which draw sample Lorenz curves and calculates Gini coefficients and Lorenz asymmetry coefficients from data in an Excel sheet.\n"}
{"id": "18136", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18136", "title": "Literate programming", "text": "Literate programming\n\nLiterate programming is a programming paradigm introduced by Donald Knuth in which a computer program is given an explanation of its logic in a natural language, such as English, interspersed with snippets of macros and traditional source code, from which compilable source code can be generated.\n\nThe literate programming paradigm, as conceived by Knuth, represents a move away from writing computer programs in the manner and order imposed by the computer, and instead enables programmers to develop programs in the order demanded by the logic and flow of their thoughts. Literate programs are written as an uninterrupted exposition of logic in an ordinary human language, much like the text of an essay, in which macros are included to hide abstractions and traditional source code.\n\nLiterate programming (LP) tools are used to obtain two representations from a literate source file: one suitable for further compilation or execution by a computer, the \"tangled\" code, and another for viewing as formatted documentation, which is said to be \"woven\" from the literate source. While the first generation of literate programming tools were computer language-specific, the later ones are language-agnostic and exist above the programming languages.\n\nLiterate programming was first introduced by Knuth in 1984. The main intention behind this approach was to treat a program as literature understandable to human beings. This approach was implemented at Stanford University as a part of research on algorithms and digital typography. This implementation was called \"WEB\" by Knuth since he believed that it was one of the few three-letter words of English that hadn't already been applied to computing. However, it correctly resembles the complicated nature of software delicately pieced together from simple materials.\n\nLiterate programming is writing out the program logic in a human language with included (separated by a primitive markup) code snippets and macros. Macros in a literate source file are simply title-like or explanatory phrases in a human language that describe human abstractions created while solving the programming problem, and hiding chunks of code or lower-level macros. These macros are similar to the algorithms in pseudocode typically used in teaching computer science. These arbitrary explanatory phrases become precise new operators, created on the fly by the programmer, forming a \"meta-language\" on top of the underlying programming language.\n\nA preprocessor is used to substitute arbitrary hierarchies, or rather \"interconnected 'webs' of macros\", to produce the compilable source code with one command (\"tangle\"), and documentation with another (\"weave\"). The preprocessor also provides an ability to write out the content of the macros and to add to already created macros in any place in the text of the literate program source file, thereby disposing of the need to keep in mind the restrictions imposed by traditional programming languages or to interrupt the flow of thought.\n\nAccording to Knuth,\nliterate programming provides higher-quality programs, since it forces programmers to explicitly state the thoughts behind the program, making poorly thought-out design decisions more obvious. Knuth also claims that literate programming provides a first-rate documentation system, which is not an add-on, but is grown naturally in the process of exposition of one's thoughts during a program's creation. The resulting documentation allows the author to restart his own thought processes at any later time, and allows other programmers to understand the construction of the program more easily. This differs from traditional documentation, in which a programmer is presented with source code that follows a compiler-imposed order, and must decipher the thought process behind the program from the code and its associated comments. The meta-language capabilities of literate programming are also claimed to facilitate thinking, giving a higher \"bird's eye view\" of the code and increasing the number of concepts the mind can successfully retain and process. Applicability of the concept to programming on a large scale, that of commercial-grade programs, is proven by an edition of TeX code as a literate program.\n\nKnuth also claims that Literate Programming can lead to easy porting of software to multiple environments, and even cites the implementation of TeX as an example.\n\nLiterate programming is very often misunderstood to refer only to formatted documentation produced from a common file with both source code and comments – which is properly called documentation generation – or to voluminous commentaries included with code. This is the converse of literate programming: well-documented code or documentation extracted from code follows the structure of the code, with documentation embedded in the code; while in literate programming, code is embedded in documentation, with the code following the structure of the documentation.\n\nThis misconception has led to claims that comment-extraction tools, such as the Perl Plain Old Documentation or Java Javadoc systems, are \"literate programming tools\". However, because these tools do not implement the \"web of abstract concepts\" hiding behind the system of natural-language macros, or provide an ability to change the order of the source code from a machine-imposed sequence to one convenient to the human mind, they cannot properly be called literate programming tools in the sense intended by Knuth.\n\nIn 1986, Jon Bentley asked Knuth to demonstrate the concept of literate programming by writing a program in WEB. Knuth came up with an 8-pages long monolithic listing that was published together with a critique by Douglas McIlroy of Bell Labs. McIlroy praised intricacy of Knuth's solution, his choice of a data structure (Frank M. Liang's hash trie), but noted that more practical, much faster to implement, debug and modify solution of the problem takes only six lines of shell script by reusing standard Unix utilities. McIlroy concluded:\n\nMcIlroy later admitted that his critique was unfair, since he criticized Knuth's program on engineering grounds, while Knuth's purpose was only to demonstrate the literate programming technique. In 1987, \"Communications of the ACM\" published a followup article which illustrated literate programming with a C program that combined artistic approach of Knuth with engineering approach of McIlroy, with a critique by John Gilbert.\n\nImplementing literate programming consists of two steps:\n\nBULLET::::1. Weaving: Generating a comprehensive document about the program and its maintenance.\nBULLET::::2. Tangling: Generating machine executable code\n\nWeaving and tangling are done on the same source so that they are consistent with each other.\n\nA classic example of literate programming is the literate implementation of the standard Unix codice_1 word counting program. Knuth presented a CWEB version of this example in Chapter 12 of his \"Literate Programming\" book. The same example was later rewritten for the noweb literate programming tool. This example provides a good illustration of the basic elements of literate programming.\n\nThe following snippet of the codice_1 literate program shows how arbitrary descriptive phrases in a natural language are used in a literate program to create macros, which act as new \"operators\" in the literate programming language, and hide chunks of code or other macros. The mark-up notation consists of double angle brackets (\"codice_3\") that indicate macros, the \"codice_4\" symbol which indicates the end of the code section in a noweb file. The \"codice_5\" symbol stands for the \"root\", topmost node the literate programming tool will start expanding the web of macros from. Actually, writing out the expanded source code can be done from any section or subsection (i.e. a piece of code designated as \"codice_6\", with the equal sign), so one literate program file can contain several files with machine source code.\n\nThe unraveling of the chunks can be done in any place in the literate program text file, not necessarily in the order they are sequenced in the enclosing chunk, but as is demanded by the logic reflected in the explanatory text that envelops the whole program.\n\nMacros are not the same as \"section names\" in standard documentation. Literate programming macros can hide any chunk of code behind themselves, and be used inside any low-level machine language operators, often inside logical operators such as \"codice_7\", \"codice_8\" or \"codice_9\". This is illustrated by the following snippet of the codice_1 literate program.\n\nIn fact, macros can stand for any arbitrary chunk of code or other macros, and are thus more general than top-down or bottom-up \"chunking\", or than subsectioning. Knuth says that when he realized this, he began to think of a program as a \"web\" of various parts.\n\nIn a noweb literate program besides the free order of their exposition, the chunks behind macros, once introduced with \"codice_11\", can be grown later in any place in the file by simply writing \"codice_6\" and adding more content to it, as the following snippet illustrates (\"plus\" is added by the document formatter for readability, and is not in the code).\n\nThe documentation for a literate program is produced as part of writing the program. Instead of comments provided as side notes to source code a literate program contains the explanation of concepts on each level, with lower level concepts deferred to their appropriate place, which allows for better communication of thought. The snippets of the literate codice_1 above show how an explanation of the program and its source code are interwoven. Such exposition of ideas creates the flow of thought that is like a literary work. Knuth wrote a \"novel\" which explains the code of the interactive fiction game Colossal Cave Adventure.\n\nBULLET::::- Axiom, which is evolved from scratchpad, a computer algebra system developed by IBM. It is now being developed by Tim Daly, one of the developers of scratchpad, Axiom is totally written as a literate program.\n\nThe first published literate programming environment was WEB, introduced by Knuth in 1981 for his TeX typesetting system; it uses Pascal as its underlying programming language and TeX for typesetting of the documentation. The complete commented TeX source code was published in Knuth's \"TeX: The program\", volume B of his 5-volume \"Computers and Typesetting\". Knuth had privately used a literate programming system called DOC as early as 1979. He was inspired by the ideas of Pierre-Arnoul de Marneffe. The free CWEB, written by Knuth and Silvio Levy, is WEB adapted for C and C++, runs on most operating systems and can produce TeX and PDF documentation.\n\nThere are various other implementations of the literate programming concept (some of them don't have macros and hence violate the order of human logic principle):\n! Name\n! Supported Languages\n! Written in\n! Markup Language\n! Comments\n\nOther useful tools include\n\nBULLET::::- The Leo text editor is an \"outlining\" editor which supports optional noweb and CWEB markup. The author of Leo mixes two different approaches: first, Leo is an outlining editor, which helps with management of large texts; second, Leo incorporates some of the ideas of literate programming, which in its pure form (i.e., the way it is used by Knuth Web tool or tools like \"noweb\") is possible only with some degree of inventiveness and the use of the editor in a way not exactly envisioned by its author (in modified @root nodes). However, this and other extensions (@file nodes) make outline programming and text management successful and easy and in some ways similar to literate programming.\nBULLET::::- The Haskell programming language has native support for semi-literate programming. The compiler/interpreter supports two file name extensions: codice_14 and codice_15; the latter stands for literate Haskell.\nBULLET::::- The Web 68 Literate Programming system used Algol 68 as the underlying programming language, although there was nothing in the pre-processor 'tang' to force the use of that language.\nBULLET::::- The customization mechanism of the Text Encoding Initiative which enables the constraining, modification, or extension of the TEI scheme enables users to mix prose documentation with fragments of schema specification in their One Document Does-it-all format. From this prose documentation, schemas, and processing model pipelines can be generated and Knuth's Literate Programming paradigm is cited as the inspiration for this way of working.\n\nBULLET::::- Sweave and Knitr – examples of use of the \"noweb\"-like Literate Programming tool inside the R language for creation of dynamic statistical reports\nBULLET::::- Self-documenting code – source code that can be easily understood without documentation\n\nBULLET::::- (includes software)\n"}
{"id": "18137", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18137", "title": "Logistic map", "text": "Logistic map\n\nThe logistic map is a polynomial mapping (equivalently, recurrence relation) of degree 2, often cited as an archetypal example of how complex, chaotic behaviour can arise from very simple non-linear dynamical equations. The map was popularized in a 1976 paper by the biologist Robert May, in part as a discrete-time demographic model analogous to the logistic equation first created by Pierre François Verhulst.\nMathematically, the logistic map is written\n\nwhere is a number between zero and one that represents the ratio of existing population to the maximum possible population. The values of interest for the parameter (sometimes also denoted ) are those in the interval .\nThis nonlinear difference equation is intended to capture two effects:\nBULLET::::- \"reproduction\" where the population will increase at a rate proportional to the current population when the population size is small.\nBULLET::::- \"starvation\" (density-dependent mortality) where the growth rate will decrease at a rate proportional to the value obtained by taking the theoretical \"carrying capacity\" of the environment less the current population.\n\nHowever, as a demographic model the logistic map has the pathological problem that some initial conditions and parameter values (for example, if ) lead to negative population sizes. This problem does not appear in the older Ricker model, which also exhibits chaotic dynamics.\n\nThe case of the logistic map is a nonlinear transformation of both the bit-shift map and the case of the tent map.\n\nThe image below shows the amplitude and frequency content of some logistic map iterates for parameter values ranging from 2 to 4.\n\nBy varying the parameter , the following behavior is observed:\nBULLET::::- With between 0 and 1, the population will eventually die, independent of the initial population.\nBULLET::::- With between 1 and 2, the population will quickly approach the value , independent of the initial population.\nBULLET::::- With between 2 and 3, the population will also eventually approach the same value , but first will fluctuate around that value for some time. The rate of convergence is linear, except for , when it is dramatically slow, less than linear (see Bifurcation memory).\nBULLET::::- With between 3 and 1 +  ≈ 3.44949, from almost all initial conditions the population will approach permanent oscillations between two values. These two values are dependent on .\nBULLET::::- With between 3.44949 and 3.54409 (approximately), from almost all initial conditions the population will approach permanent oscillations among four values. The latter number is a root of a 12th degree polynomial .\nBULLET::::- With increasing beyond 3.54409, from almost all initial conditions the population will approach oscillations among 8 values, then 16, 32, etc. The lengths of the parameter intervals that yield oscillations of a given length decrease rapidly; the ratio between the lengths of two successive bifurcation intervals approaches the Feigenbaum constant . This behavior is an example of a period-doubling cascade.\nBULLET::::- At is the onset of chaos, at the end of the period-doubling cascade. From almost all initial conditions, we no longer see oscillations of finite period. Slight variations in the initial population yield dramatically different results over time, a prime characteristic of chaos.\nBULLET::::- Most values of beyond 3.56995 exhibit chaotic behaviour, but there are still certain isolated ranges of that show non-chaotic behavior; these are sometimes called \"islands of stability\". For instance, beginning at 1 +  (approximately 3.82843) there is a range of parameters that show oscillation among three values, and for slightly higher values of oscillation among 6 values, then 12 etc.\nBULLET::::- The development of the chaotic behavior of the logistic sequence as the parameter varies from approximately 3.56995 to approximately 3.82843 is sometimes called the Pomeau–Manneville scenario, characterized by a periodic (laminar) phase interrupted by bursts of aperiodic behavior. Such a scenario has an application in semiconductor devices. There are other ranges that yield oscillation among 5 values etc.; all oscillation periods occur for some values of . A \"period-doubling window\" with parameter is a range of -values consisting of a succession of subranges. The th subrange contains the values of for which there is a stable cycle (a cycle that attracts a set of initial points of unit measure) of period . This sequence of sub-ranges is called a \"cascade of harmonics\". In a sub-range with a stable cycle of period , there are unstable cycles of period for all . The value at the end of the infinite sequence of sub-ranges is called the \"point of accumulation\" of the cascade of harmonics. As rises there is a succession of new windows with different values. The first one is for ; all subsequent windows involving odd occur in decreasing order of starting with arbitrarily large .\nBULLET::::- Beyond , almost all initial values eventually leave the interval and diverge.\n\nFor any value of there is at most one stable cycle. If a stable cycle exists, it is globally stable, attracting almost all points. Some values of with a stable cycle of some period have infinitely many unstable cycles of various periods.\n\nThe bifurcation diagram at right summarizes this. The horizontal axis shows the possible values of the parameter while the vertical axis shows the set of values of visited asymptotically from almost all initial conditions by the iterates of the logistic equation with that value.\nThe bifurcation diagram is a self-similar: if we zoom in on the above-mentioned value and focus on one arm of the three, the situation nearby looks like a shrunk and slightly distorted version of the whole diagram. The same is true for all other non-chaotic points. This is an example of the deep and ubiquitous connection between chaos and fractals.\n\nThe relative simplicity of the logistic map makes it a widely used point of entry into a consideration of the concept of chaos. A rough description of chaos is that chaotic systems exhibit a great sensitivity to initial conditions—a property of the logistic map for most values of between about 3.57 and 4 (as noted above). A common source of such sensitivity to initial conditions is that the map represents a repeated folding and stretching of the space on which it is defined. In the case of the logistic map, the quadratic difference equation describing it may be thought of as a stretching-and-folding operation on the interval .\n\nThe following figure illustrates the stretching and folding over a sequence of iterates of the map. Figure (a), left, shows a two-dimensional Poincaré plot of the logistic map's state space for , and clearly shows the quadratic curve of the difference equation (). However, we can embed the same sequence in a three-dimensional state space, in order to investigate the deeper structure of the map. Figure (b), right, demonstrates this, showing how initially nearby points begin to diverge, particularly in those regions of corresponding to the steeper sections of the plot.\n\nThis stretching-and-folding does not just produce a gradual divergence of the sequences of iterates, but an exponential divergence (see Lyapunov exponents), evidenced also by the complexity and unpredictability of the chaotic logistic map. In fact, exponential divergence of sequences of iterates explains the connection between chaos and unpredictability: a small error in the supposed initial state of the system will tend to correspond to a large error later in its evolution. Hence, predictions about future states become progressively (indeed, exponentially) worse when there are even very small errors in our knowledge of the initial state. This quality of unpredictability and apparent randomness led the logistic map equation to be used as a pseudo-random number generator in early computers.\n\nSince the map is confined to an interval on the real number line, its dimension is less than or equal to unity. Numerical estimates yield a correlation dimension of (Grassberger, 1983), a Hausdorff dimension of about 0.538 (Grassberger 1981), and an information dimension of approximately 0.5170976 (Grassberger 1983) for (onset of chaos). Note: It can be shown that the correlation dimension is certainly between 0.4926 and 0.5024.\n\nIt is often possible, however, to make precise and accurate statements about the \"likelihood\" of a future state in a chaotic system. If a (possibly chaotic) dynamical system has an attractor, then there exists a probability measure that gives the long-run proportion of time spent by the system in the various regions of the attractor. In the case of the logistic map with parameter and an initial state in , the attractor is also the interval and the probability measure corresponds to the beta distribution with parameters and . Specifically, the invariant measure is\n\nUnpredictability is not randomness, but in some circumstances looks very much like it. Hence, and fortunately, even if we know very little about the initial state of the logistic map (or some other chaotic system), we can still say something about the distribution of states arbitrarily far into the future, and use this knowledge to inform decisions based on the state of the system.\n\nAlthough exact solutions to the recurrence relation are only available in a small number of cases, a closed-form upper bound on the logistic map is known when . There are two aspects of the behavior of the logistic map that should be captured by an upper bound in this regime: the asymptotic geometric decay with constant , and the fast initial decay when is close to 1, driven by the term in the recurrence relation. The following bound captures both of these effects:\n\nThe special case of can in fact be solved exactly, as can the case with ; however, the general case can only be predicted statistically. \nThe solution when is,\n\nwhere the initial condition parameter is given by\n\nFor rational , after a finite number of iterations maps into a periodic sequence. But almost all are irrational, and, for irrational , never repeats itself – it is non-periodic. This solution equation clearly demonstrates the two key features of chaos – stretching and folding: the factor shows the exponential growth of stretching, which results in sensitive dependence on initial conditions, while the squared sine function keeps folded within the range .\n\nFor an equivalent solution in terms of complex numbers instead of trigonometric functions is\n\nwhere is either of the complex numbers\n\nwith modulus equal to 1. Just as the squared sine function in the trigonometric solution leads to neither shrinkage nor expansion of the set of points visited, in the latter solution this effect is accomplished by the unit modulus of .\n\nBy contrast, the solution when is\n\nfor . Since for any value of other than the unstable fixed point 0, the term goes to 0 as goes to infinity, so goes to the stable fixed point .\n\nFor the case, from almost all initial conditions the iterate sequence is chaotic. Nevertheless, there exist an infinite number of initial conditions that lead to cycles, and indeed there exist cycles of length for \"all\" integers . We can exploit the relationship of the logistic map to the dyadic transformation (also known as the \"bit-shift map\") to find cycles of any length. If follows the logistic map and follows the \"dyadic transformation\"\n\nthen the two are related by a homeomorphism\n\nThe reason that the dyadic transformation is also called the bit-shift map is that when is written in binary notation, the map moves the binary point one place to the right (and if the bit to the left of the binary point has become a \"1\", this \"1\" is changed to a \"0\"). A cycle of length 3, for example, occurs if an iterate has a 3-bit repeating sequence in its binary expansion (which is not also a one-bit repeating sequence): 001, 010, 100, 110, 101, or 011. The iterate 001001001… maps into 010010010..., which maps into 100100100..., which in turn maps into the original 001001001...; so this is a 3-cycle of the bit shift map. And the other three binary-expansion repeating sequences give the 3-cycle 110110110… → 101101101… → 011011011… → 110110110.… Either of these 3-cycles can be converted to fraction form: for example, the first-given 3-cycle can be written as → → → . Using the above translation from the bit-shift map to the formula_10 logistic map gives the corresponding logistic cycle 0.611260467… → 0.950484434… → 0.188255099… → 0.611260467.… We could similarly translate the other bit-shift 3-cycle into its corresponding logistic cycle. Likewise, cycles of any length can be found in the bit-shift map and then translated into the corresponding logistic cycles.\n\nHowever, since almost all numbers in are irrational, almost all initial conditions of the bit-shift map lead to the non-periodicity of chaos. This is one way to see that the logistic map is chaotic for almost all initial conditions.\n\nThe number of cycles of (minimal) length for the logistic map with (tent map with ) is a known integer sequence : 2, 1, 2, 3, 6, 9, 18, 30, 56, 99, 186, 335, 630, 1161…. This tells us that the logistic map with has 2 fixed points, 1 cycle of length 2, 2 cycles of length 3 and so on. This sequence takes a particularly simple form for prime : . For example: 2 ⋅  = 630 is the number of cycles of length 13. Since this case of the logistic map is chaotic for almost all initial conditions, all of these finite-length cycles are unstable.\n\nUniversality of one-dimensional maps with parabolic maxima and Feigenbaum constants formula_11,formula_12 is well visible with map proposed as a toy \nmodel for discrete laser dynamics: \nformula_13,\nwhere formula_14 stands for electric field amplitude, formula_15 is laser gain as bifurcation parameter. \n\nThe gradual increase of formula_15 at interval formula_17 changes dynamics from regular to chaotic one with qualitatively the same bifurcation diagram as those for logistic map.\n\nBULLET::::- Logistic function, solution of the logistic map's continuous counterpart: the Logistic differential equation.\nBULLET::::- Lyapunov stability#Definition for discrete-time systems\nBULLET::::- Malthusian growth model\nBULLET::::- Periodic points of complex quadratic mappings, of which the logistic map is a special case confined to the real line\nBULLET::::- Radial basis function network, which illustrates the inverse problem for the logistic map.\nBULLET::::- Schröder's equation\nBULLET::::- Stiff equation\n\n\nBULLET::::- Logistic Map. Contains an interactive computer simulation of the logistic map.\nBULLET::::- The Chaos Hypertextbook. An introductory primer on chaos and fractals.\nBULLET::::- Interactive Logistic map with iteration and bifurcation diagrams in Java.\nBULLET::::- Interactive Logistic map showing fixed points.\nBULLET::::- The Logistic Map and Chaos by Elmer G. Wiens\nBULLET::::- Complexity & Chaos (audiobook) by Roger White. Chapter 5 covers the Logistic Equation.\nBULLET::::- \"History of iterated maps,\" in \"A New Kind of Science\" by Stephen Wolfram. Champaign, IL: Wolfram Media, p. 918, 2002.\nBULLET::::- \"A very brief history of universality in period doubling\" by P. Cvitanović\nBULLET::::- \"A not so short history of Universal Function\" by P. Cvitanović\nBULLET::::- Discrete Logistic Equation by Marek Bodnar after work by Phil Ramsden, Wolfram Demonstrations Project.\nBULLET::::- Multiplicative coupling of 2 logistic maps by C. Pellicer-Lostao and R. Lopez-Ruiz after work by Ed Pegg Jr, Wolfram Demonstrations Project.\nBULLET::::- Using SAGE to investigate the discrete logistic equation\n"}
{"id": "18138", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18138", "title": "Levant", "text": "Levant\n\nThe Levant () is an approximate historical geographical term referring to a large area in the Eastern Mediterranean region of Western Asia. In its narrowest sense, it is equivalent to the historical region of Syria, which included present-day Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Israel and Palestine. In its widest historical sense, the Levant included all of the Eastern Mediterranean with its islands; that is, it included all of the countries along the Eastern Mediterranean shores, extending from Greece to Cyrenaica in eastern Libya.\n\nThe term entered English in the late 15th century from French. It derives from the Italian \"Levante\", meaning \"rising\", implying the rising of the sun in the east, and is broadly equivalent to the term \"Al-Mashriq\" (, ), meaning \"the east, where the sun rises\". \n\nIn the 13th and 14th centuries, the term \"levante\" was used for Italian maritime commerce in the Eastern Mediterranean, including Greece, Anatolia, Syria-Palestine, and Egypt, that is, the lands east of Venice. Eventually the term was restricted to the Muslim countries of Syria-Palestine and Egypt. In 1581, England set up the Levant Company to monopolize commerce with the Ottoman Empire. The name \"Levant States\" was used to refer to the French mandate over Syria and Lebanon after World War I. This is probably the reason why the term \"Levant\" has come to be used more specifically to refer to modern Syria, Lebanon, Palestine, Israel, Jordan, and Cyprus. Some scholars mistakenly believed that it derives from the name of Lebanon. Today the term is often used in conjunction with prehistoric or ancient historical references. It has the same meaning as \"Syria-Palestine\" or \"Ash-Shaam\" (, ), the area that is bounded by the Taurus Mountains of Turkey in the North, the Mediterranean Sea in the west, and the north Arabian Desert and Mesopotamia in the east. Typically, it does not include Anatolia (also called Asia Minor), the Caucasus Mountains, or any part of the Arabian Peninsula proper. Cilicia (in Asia Minor) and the Sinai Peninsula (Asian Egypt) are sometimes included.\n\nThe term \"Levant\" was widely used to describe the region from the 18th to the mid-19th centuries, and has had steady but lower usage since the late 19th century; several dictionaries consider it to be archaic today. Both the noun \"Levant\" and the adjective \"Levantine\" are now commonly used to describe the ancient and modern culture area formerly called Syro-Palestinian or Biblical: archaeologists now speak of the Levant and of Levantine archaeology; food scholars speak of Levantine cuisine; and the Latin Christians of the Levant continue to be called Levantine Christians.\n\nThe Levant has been described as the \"crossroads of western Asia, the eastern Mediterranean, and northeast Africa\", and the \"northwest of the Arabian plate\". The populations of the Levant share not only the geographic position, but cuisine, some customs, and history. They are often referred to as \"Levantines\".\n\nThe term \"Levant\", which appeared in English in 1497, originally meant the East in general or \"Mediterranean lands east of Italy\". It is borrowed from the French \"levant\" \"rising\", referring to the rising of the sun in the east, or the point where the sun rises. The phrase is ultimately from the Latin word \"levare,\" meaning 'lift, raise'. Similar etymologies are found in Greek Ἀνατολή (\"Anatolē\", \"cf.\" Anatolia), in Germanic \"Morgenland\" (literally, \"morning land\"), in Italian (as in \"Riviera di Levante\", the portion of the Liguria coast east of Genoa), in Hungarian \"Kelet\", in Spanish and Catalan \"Levante\" and \"Llevant\", (\"the place of rising\"), and in Hebrew (, \"mizrah\", \"east\"). Most notably, \"Orient\" and its Latin source \"oriens\" meaning \"east\", is literally \"rising\", deriving from Latin \"orior\" \"rise\".\n\nThe notion of the Levant has undergone a dynamic process of historical evolution in usage, meaning, and understanding. While the term \"Levantine\" originally referred to the European residents of the eastern Mediterranean region, it later came to refer to regional \"native\" and \"minority\" groups.\n\nThe term became current in English in the 16th century, along with the first English merchant adventurers in the region; English ships appeared in the Mediterranean in the 1570s, and the English merchant company signed its agreement (\"capitulations\") with the Ottoman Sultan in 1579. The English Levant Company was founded in 1581 to trade with the Ottoman Empire, and in 1670 the French was founded for the same purpose. At this time, the Far East was known as the \"Upper Levant\".\n\nIn early 19th-century travel writing, the term sometimes incorporated certain Mediterranean provinces of the Ottoman empire, as well as independent Greece (and especially the Greek islands). In 19th-century archaeology, it referred to overlapping cultures in this region during and after prehistoric times, intending to reference the place instead of any one culture. The French mandate of Syria and Lebanon (1920–1946) was called the Levant states.\n\nToday, \"Levant\" is the term typically used by archaeologists and historians with reference to the history of the region. Scholars have adopted the term Levant to identify the region due to it being a \"wider, yet relevant, cultural corpus\" that does not have the \"political overtones\" of Syria-Palestine. The term is also used for modern events, peoples, states or parts of states in the same region, namely Cyprus, Egypt, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Palestine, Syria, and Turkey are sometimes considered Levant countries (compare with Near East, Middle East, Eastern Mediterranean and Western Asia). Several researchers include the island of Cyprus in Levantine studies, including the Council for British Research in the Levant, the UCLA Near Eastern Languages and Cultures department, \"Journal of Levantine Studies\" and the UCL Institute of Archaeology, the last of which has dated the connection between Cyprus and mainland Levant to the early Iron Age. Archaeologists seeking a neutral orientation that is neither biblical nor national have used terms such as Levantine archaeology and archaeology of the Southern Levant.\n\nWhile the usage of the term \"Levant\" in academia has been restricted to the fields of archeology and literature, there is a recent attempt to reclaim the notion of the Levant as a category of analysis in political and social sciences. Two academic journals were recently launched: \"Journal of Levantine Studies\", published by the Van Leer Jerusalem Institute and \"The Levantine Review\", published by Boston College.\n\nThe word \"Levant\" has been used in some translations of the term \"ash-Shām\" as used by the organization known as ISIL, ISIS, and other names, though there is disagreement as to whether this translation is accurate.\n\nThe largest religious group in the Levant are the Muslims and the largest cultural-linguistic group are Arabs, due to the Muslim conquest of the Levant in the 7th century and subsequent Arabization of the region. Other large ethnic groups in the Levant include Jews, Kurds, Turks, Turkmens, Assyrians and Armenians.\n\nThe majority of Muslim Levantines are Sunni with Alawi and Shia minorities. There are also Jews, Christians, Yazidi Kurds, Druze, and other smaller sects. \n\nUntil the establishment of the modern State of Israel in 1948, Jews lived throughout the Levant alongside Muslims and Christians; since then, almost all have been expelled from their homes and sought refuge in Israel.\n\nThere are many Levantine Christian groups such as Greek, Oriental Orthodox (mainly Syriac Orthodox, Coptic, Georgian, and Maronite), Roman Catholic, Nestorian, and Protestant. Armenians mostly belong to the Armenian Apostolic Church. There are Levantines or Franco-Levantines who are mostly Roman Catholic. There are also Circassians, Turks, Samaritans, and Nawars. There are Assyrian peoples belonging to the Assyrian Church of the East (autonomous) and the Chaldean Catholic Church (Catholic).\n\nIn addition, this region has a number of sites that are of religious significance, such as Al-Aqsa Mosque, the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, and the Western Wall in Jerusalem.\n\nMost populations in the Levant speak Levantine Arabic (, ), usually classified as the varieties North Levantine Arabic in Lebanon, Syria, and parts of Turkey, and South Levantine Arabic in Palestine and Jordan. Each of these encompasses a spectrum of regional or urban/rural variations. In addition to the varieties normally grouped together as \"Levantine\", a number of other varieties and dialects of Arabic are spoken in the Levant area, such as Levantine Bedawi Arabic and Mesopotamian Arabic.\n\nAmong the languages of Israel, the official language is Hebrew; Arabic was until July 19, 2018, also an official language. The Arab minority, in 2018 about 21% of the population of Israel, speaks a dialect of Levantine Arabic essentially indistinguishable from the forms spoken in the Palestinian territories.\n\nOf the languages of Cyprus, the majority language is Greek, followed by Turkish (in the north). Two minority languages are recognized: Armenian, and Cypriot Maronite Arabic, a hybrid of mostly medieval Arabic vernaculars with strong influence from contact with Greek, spoken by approximately 1000 people.\n\nSome communities and populations speak Aramaic, Greek, Armenian, Circassian, French, or English.\n\nOverlapping regional designations\nBULLET::::- Fertile Crescent\nBULLET::::- Mashriq\nBULLET::::- Mesopotamia\nBULLET::::- Near East and Middle East\nBULLET::::- Western Asia\n\nSub-regional designations\nBULLET::::- Southern Levant\n\nOther\nBULLET::::- French post offices in the Ottoman Empire (\"Levant\" stamps)\nBULLET::::- History of the Levant\nBULLET::::- Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (Referred to in current events as ISIL or ISIS)\nBULLET::::- Levantines (Latin Christians), Catholic Europeans in the Levant\nBULLET::::- Levantine Sea\n\n\"Other places in the east of a larger region\"\nBULLET::::- Levante, Spain\nBULLET::::- Riviera di Levante, Italy\n\n\nBULLET::::- Julia Chatzipanagioti: Griechenland, Zypern, Balkan und Levante. Eine kommentierte Bibliographie der Reiseliteratur des 18. Jahrhunderts. 2 Vol. Eutin 2006.\nBULLET::::- Levantine Heritage site. Includes many oral and scholarly histories, and genealogies for some Levantine Turkish families.\nBULLET::::- Philip Mansel, \"Levant: Splendour and Catastrophe on the Mediterranean\", London, John Murray, 11 November 2010, hardback, 480 pages, , New Haven, Yale University Press, 24 May 2011, hardback, 470 pages,\n\nBULLET::::- \"France and the Levant\"\n"}
{"id": "18139", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18139", "title": "League of Nations mandate", "text": "League of Nations mandate\n\nA League of Nations mandate was a legal status for certain territories transferred from the control of one country to another following World War I, or the legal instruments that contained the internationally agreed-upon terms for administering the territory on behalf of the League of Nations. These were of the nature of both a treaty and a constitution, which contained minority rights clauses that provided for the rights of petition and adjudication by the International Court. \n\nThe mandate system was established under Article 22 of the Covenant of the League of Nations, entered into force on 28 June 1919. With the dissolution of the League of Nations after World War II, it was stipulated at the Yalta Conference that the remaining Mandates should be placed under the trusteeship of the United Nations, subject to future discussions and formal agreements. Most of the remaining mandates of the League of Nations (with the exception of South-West Africa) thus eventually became United Nations Trust Territories.\n\nTwo governing principles formed the core of the Mandate System, being non-annexation of the territory and its administration as a “sacred trust of civilization” to develop the territory for the benefit of its native people.\n\nThe mandate system was established by Article 22 of the Covenant of the League of Nations, drafted by the victors of World War I. The article referred to territories which after the war were no longer ruled by their previous sovereign, but their peoples were not considered \"able to stand by themselves under the strenuous conditions of the modern world\". The article called for such people's tutelage to be \"entrusted to advanced nations who by reason of their resources, their experience or their geographical position can best undertake this responsibility\".\n\nAll of the territories subject to League of Nations mandates were previously controlled by states defeated in World War I, principally Imperial Germany and the Ottoman Empire. The mandates were fundamentally different from the protectorates in that the Mandatory power undertook obligations to the inhabitants of the territory and to the League of Nations.\n\nThe process of establishing the mandates consisted of two phases:\nBULLET::::1. The formal removal of sovereignty of the state previously controlling the territory.\nBULLET::::2. The transfer of mandatory powers to individual states among the Allied Powers.\n\nThe divestiture of Germany's overseas colonies, along with three territories disentangled from its European homeland area (the Free City of Danzig, Memel Territory, and Saar), was accomplished in the Treaty of Versailles (1919), with the territories being allotted among the Allies on 7 May of that year. Ottoman territorial claims were first addressed in the Treaty of Sèvres (1920) and finalized in the Treaty of Lausanne (1923). The Turkish territories were allotted among the Allied Powers at the San Remo conference in 1920.\n\nThe League of Nations decided the exact level of control by the Mandatory power over each mandate on an individual basis. However, in every case the Mandatory power was forbidden to construct fortifications or raise an army within the territory of the mandate, and was required to present an annual report on the territory to the Permanent Mandates Commission of the League of Nations.\n\nThe mandates were divided into three distinct groups based upon the level of development each population had achieved at that time.\n\nThe first group, or \"Class A mandates\", were territories formerly controlled by the Ottoman Empire that were deemed to \"... have reached a stage of development where their existence as independent nations can be provisionally recognized subject to the rendering of administrative advice and assistance by a Mandatory until such time as they are able to stand alone. The wishes of these communities must be a principal consideration in the selection of the Mandatory.\"\n\nThe Class A mandates were:\nBULLET::::- Palestine (United Kingdom), 29 September 1923 – 15 May 1948. In April 1921, the Emirate of Transjordan provisionally became an autonomous area under the United Kingdom, and it became the independent Hashemite Kingdom of Transjordan (later Jordan) on 17 June 1946 upon joint ratification of the Treaty of London of 1946. A United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine for peacefully dividing the remainder of the Mandate failed. The Mandate terminated at midnight between 14 May and 15 May 1948. On the evening of 14 May, the Chairman of the Jewish Agency for Palestine had declared the establishment of the State of Israel. Following the war, 75% of the area west of the Jordan River was controlled by the new State of Israel. Other parts, until 1967, formed the West Bank of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the All-Palestine Government under the Egyptian-controlled Gaza Strip.\nBULLET::::- Syria (France), 29 September 1923 – 24 October 1945: This mandate included Lebanon. Hatay Province (a former Ottoman Alexandretta sandjak) broke away from the mandate on 2 September 1938 to become a separate French protectorate, which lasted until Hatay Province was ceded to the new Republic of Turkey on 29 June 1939. When Syria and Lebanon joined the United Nations on 24 October 1945 as independent states, the French Mandate was by that action terminated.\nBULLET::::- Mesopotamia (United Kingdom), not enacted and replaced by the Anglo-Iraqi Treaty of October 1922. Iraq attained independence from the United Kingdom on 3 October 1932.\n\nThe second group of mandates, or \"Class B mandates\", were all former (German territories) in West and Central Africa which were deemed to require a greater level of control by the mandatory power: \"...the Mandatory must be responsible for the administration of the territory under conditions which will guarantee freedom of conscience and religion.\" The mandatory power was forbidden to construct military or naval bases within the mandates.\n\nThe Class B mandates were:\nBULLET::::- Ruanda-Urundi (Belgium), from 20 July 1922 to 13 December 1946. Formerly two separate German protectorates, they were joined as a single mandate on 20 July 1922. From 1 March 1926 to 30 June 1960, Ruanda-Urundi was in administrative union with the neighboring colony of Belgian Congo. After 13 December 1946, it became a United Nations Trust Territory, remaining under Belgian administration until the separate nations of Rwanda and Burundi gained independence on 1 July 1962.\nBULLET::::- Tanganyika (United Kingdom), from 20 July 1922 to 11 December 1946. It became a United Nations Trust Territory on 11 December 1946, and was granted internal self-rule on 1 May 1961. On 9 December 1961, it became independent while retaining the British monarch as nominal head of state, transforming into a republic on the same day the next year. On 26 April 1964, Tanganyika merged with the neighboring island of Zanzibar to become the modern nation of Tanzania.\nBULLET::::- Kamerun was split on 20 July 1922 into British Cameroons (under a Resident) and French Cameroun (under a Commissioner until 27 August 1940, then under a governor), on 13 December 1946 transformed into United Nations Trust Territories, again a British (successively under senior district officers officiating as Resident, a Special Resident and Commissioners) and a French Trust (under a )\nBULLET::::- Togoland was split into British Togoland (under an Administrator, a post filled by the colonial Governor of the British Gold Coast (present Ghana) except 30 September 1920 – 11 October 1923 Francis Walter Fillon Jackson) and French Togoland (under a Commissioner) (United Kingdom and France), 20 July 1922 separate Mandates, transformed on 13 December 1946 into United Nations trust territories, French Togoland (under a Commissioner till 30 August 1956, then under a High Commissioner as Autonomous Republic of Togo) and British Togoland (as before; on 13 December 1956 it ceased to exist as it became part of Ghana).\n\nThe \"Class C mandates\", including South West Africa and certain of the South Pacific Islands, were considered to be \"best administered under the laws of the Mandatory as integral portions of its territory\"\n\nThe Class C mandates were former German possessions:\nBULLET::::- former German New Guinea became the Territory of New Guinea (Australia) from 17 December 1920 under an (at first Military) Administrator; after (wartime) Japanese/U.S. military commands from 8 December 1946 under UN mandate as North East New Guinea (under Australia, as administrative unit), until it became part of present Papua New Guinea at independence in 1975\nBULLET::::- Nauru, formerly part of German New Guinea (Australia in effective control, formally together with United Kingdom and New Zealand) from 17 December 1920, 1 November 1947 made into a United Nations trust territory (same three powers) until its 31 January 1968 independence as a Republic – all that time under an Administrator\nBULLET::::- former German Samoa (New Zealand) 17 December 1920 a League of Nations mandate, renamed Western Samoa (as opposed to American Samoa), from 25 January 1947 a United Nations trust territory until its 1 January 1962 independence\nBULLET::::- South Pacific Mandate (Japan)\nBULLET::::- South West Africa (South Africa)\nBULLET::::- from 1 October 1922, Walvis Bay's administration (still merely having a Magistrate until its 16 March 1931 Municipal status, hence a Mayor) was also assigned to the mandate\n\nAccording to the Council of the League of Nations, meeting of August 1920: \"draft mandates adopted by the Allied and Associated Powers would not be definitive until they had been considered and approved by the League ... the legal title held by the mandatory Power must be a double one: one conferred by the Principal Powers and the other conferred by the League of Nations,\"\n\nThree steps were required to establish a Mandate under international law:\n(1) The Principal Allied and Associated Powers confer a mandate on one of their number or on a third power; (2) the principal powers officially notify the council of the League of Nations that a certain power has been appointed mandatory for such a certain defined territory; and (3) the council of the League of Nations takes official cognisance of the appointment of the mandatory power and informs the latter that it [the council] considers it as invested with the mandate, and at the same time notifies it of the terms of the mandate, after ascertaining whether they are in conformance with the provisions of the covenant.\"\n\nThe U.S. State Department \"Digest of International Law\" says that the terms of the Treaty of Lausanne provided for the application of the principles of state succession to the \"A\" Mandates. The Treaty of Versailles (1920) provisionally recognized the former Ottoman communities as independent nations. It also required Germany to recognize the disposition of the former Ottoman territories and to recognize the new states laid down within their boundaries. The terms of the Treaty of Lausanne (1923) required the newly created states that acquired the territory detached from the Ottoman Empire to pay annuities on the Ottoman public debt and to assume responsibility for the administration of concessions that had been granted by the Ottomans. The treaty also let the States acquire, without payment, all the property and possessions of the Ottoman Empire situated within their territory. The treaty provided that the League of Nations was responsible for establishing an arbitral court to resolve disputes that might arise and stipulated that its decisions were final.\n\nA disagreement regarding the legal status and the portion of the annuities to be paid by the \"A\" mandates was settled when an Arbitrator ruled that some of the mandates contained more than one State:The difficulty arises here how one is to regard the Asiatic countries under the British and French mandates. Iraq is a Kingdom in regard to which Great Britain has undertaken responsibilities equivalent to those of a Mandatory Power. Under the British mandate, Palestine and Transjordan have each an entirely separate organization. We are, therefore, in the presence of three States sufficiently separate to be considered as distinct Parties. France has received a single mandate from the Council of the League of Nations, but in the countries subject to that mandate, one can distinguish two distinct States: Syria and the Lebanon, each State possessing its own constitution and a nationality clearly different from the other.\n\nAfter the United Nations was founded in 1945 and the League of Nations was disbanded, all but one of the mandated territories that remained under the control of the mandatory power became United Nations trust territories, a roughly equivalent status. In each case, the colonial power that held the mandate on each territory became the administering power of the trusteeship, except that Japan, which had been defeated in World War II, lost its mandate over the South Pacific islands, which became a \"strategic trust territory\" known as the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands under United States administration.\n\nThe sole exception to the transformation of the League of Nations mandates into UN trusteeships was that South Africa refused to place South-West Africa under trusteeship. Instead, South Africa proposed that it be allowed to annex South-West Africa, a proposal rejected by the United Nations General Assembly. The International Court of Justice held that South Africa continued to have international obligations under the mandate for South-West Africa. The territory finally attained independence in 1990 as Namibia, after a long guerrilla war of independence against the apartheid regime.\n\nNearly all the former League of Nations mandates had become sovereign states by 1990, including all of the former United Nations Trust Territories with the exception of a few successor entities of the gradually dismembered Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands (formerly Japan's South Pacific Trust Mandate). These exceptions include the Northern Mariana Islands which is a commonwealth in political union with the United States with the status of unincorporated organized territory. The Northern Mariana Islands does elect its own governor to serve as territorial head of government, but it remains a U.S. territory with its head of state being the President of the United States and federal funds to the Commonwealth administered by the Office of Insular Affairs of the United States Department of the Interior.\n\nRemnant Micronesia and the Marshall Islands, the heirs of the last territories of the Trust, attained final independence on 22 December 1990. (The UN Security Council ratified termination of trusteeship, effectively dissolving trusteeship status, on 10 July 1987). The Republic of Palau, split off from the Federated States of Micronesia, became the last to get its independence effectively on 1 October 1994.\n\nBULLET::::- Nele Matz, Civilization and the Mandate System under the League of Nations as Origin of Trusteeship, in: A. von Bogdandy and R. Wolfrum, (eds.), Max Planck Yearbook of United Nations Law, Volume 9, 2005, p. 47–95.\nBULLET::::- Pugh, Jeffrey, “Whose Brother’s Keeper? International Trusteeship and the Search for Peace in the Palestinian Territories,” \"International Studies Perspectives\" 13, no. 4 (November 2012): 321–343.\nBULLET::::- Tamburini, Francesco \"I mandati della Società delle Nazioni\", in «Africana, Rivista di Studi Extraeuropei», n.XV – 2009, pp. 99–122.\nBULLET::::- Anghie, Antony \"Colonialism and the Birth of International Institutions: Sovereignty, Economy, and the Mandate System of the League of Nations\" 34(3) New York University Journal of International Law and Politics 513 (2002)\nBULLET::::- WorldStatesmen – links to each present nation\n\nBULLET::::- Anghie, Antony. \"Colonialism and the Birth of International Institutions: Sovereignty, Economy, and the Mandate System of the League of Nations.\" \"NYUJ Int'l L. & Pol.\" 34 (2001): 513.\nBULLET::::- Bruce, Scot David, \"Woodrow Wilson's Colonial Emissary: Edward M. House and the Origins of the Mandate System, 1917–1919\" (University of Nebraska Press, 2013).\nBULLET::::- Callahan, Michael D. \"Mandates and empire: the League of Nations and Africa, 1914–1931\" (Brighton: Sussex Academic Press, 1999)\nBULLET::::- Haas, Ernst B. \"The reconciliation of conflicting colonial policy aims: acceptance of the League of Nations mandate system,\" \"International Organization\" (1952) 6#4 pp: 521–536.\nBULLET::::- Hall, H. Duncan. \"Mandates, Dependencies and Trusteeship\" (1948) online\nBULLET::::- Margalith, Aaron M. \"The International Mandates\" (1930) online\nBULLET::::- Matz, Nele. \"Civilization and the Mandate System under the League of Nations as Origin of Trusteeship.\" \"Max Planck Yearbook of United Nations Law\" (2005) 9#1 pp. 47–95. online\nBULLET::::- Pedersen, Susan. \"The Guardians: the League of Nations and the Crisis of Empire,\" (New York: Oxford University Press, 2015)\nBULLET::::- Sluglett, Peter. \"An improvement on colonialism? The 'A' mandates and their legacy in the Middle East,\" \"International Affairs\" (2014) 90#2 pp. 413–427. On the former Arab provinces of the Ottoman Empire\nBULLET::::- Wright, Quincy. \"Mandates under the League of Nations\" (1930), 730 pp; Comprehensive coverage\n"}
{"id": "18142", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18142", "title": "Loudon Classic", "text": "Loudon Classic\n\nThe Loudon Classic, held at the New Hampshire Motor Speedway (formerly Bryar Motorsport Park and New Hampshire International Speedway) is the longest running motorcycle race in the United States, and is held every year on Father's Day. While it is popularly known as Laconia, the location of the race was moved from Belknap Recreation Area to Loudon in 1964.\n"}
{"id": "18143", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18143", "title": "Lincoln, New Hampshire", "text": "Lincoln, New Hampshire\n\nLincoln is a town in Grafton County, New Hampshire, United States. It is the second-largest town by area in New Hampshire. The population was 1,662 at the 2010 census. The town is home to the New Hampshire Highland Games and to a portion of Franconia Notch State Park. Set in the White Mountains, large portions of the town are within the White Mountain National Forest. The Appalachian Trail crosses in the northeast. Lincoln is the location of the Loon Mountain ski resort and associated recreation-centered development.\n\nThe primary settlement in town, where 993 people resided at the 2010 census, is defined as the Lincoln census-designated place (CDP) and is located along New Hampshire Route 112 east of Interstate 93. The town also includes the former village sites of Stillwater and Zealand (sometimes known as Pullman) in the town's remote eastern and northern sections respectively, which are now within the White Mountain National Forest.\n\nIn 1764, Colonial Governor Benning Wentworth granted to a group of approximately 70 land investors from Connecticut. Lincoln was named after Henry Fiennes Pelham-Clinton, 2nd Duke of Newcastle, 9th Earl of Lincoln – a cousin of the Wentworth governors. He held the position of comptroller of customs for the port of London under George II and George III, which was important to trade between America and England.\n\nThe town was settled about 1782. The 1790 census indicates that it had 22 inhabitants. Rocky soil yielded poor farming, but the area's abundant timber, combined with water power to run sawmills on the Pemigewasset River and its East Branch, helped Lincoln develop into a center for logging. By 1853, the Merrimack River Lumber Company was operating. The railroad transported freight, and increasingly brought tourists to the beautiful mountain region. In 1892, James E. Henry bought approximately of virgin timber and established a logging enterprise at what is today the center of Lincoln. In 1902, he built a pulp and paper mill. He erected the Lincoln House hotel in 1903, although a 1907 fire would nearly raze the community. Until he died in 1912, Henry controlled his company town, installing relatives in positions of civic authority.\n\nIn 1917, Henry's heirs sold the business to the Parker Young Company, which in turn sold it to the Marcalus Manufacturing Company in 1946. Franconia Paper took over in 1950, producing 150 tons of paper a day until bankruptcy in 1971, at which time new river classification standards discouraged further papermaking in Lincoln.\n\nTourism is today the principal business. Nearby Loon Mountain has long drawn skiers, and in recent years has attempted to convert itself into a four-season attraction. The Flume is one of the most visited attractions in the state. Discovered in 1808, it is a natural canyon extending at the base of Mount Liberty. Walls of Conway granite rise to a height of and are only apart.\n\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and is water, comprising 0.43% of the town. It is the second-largest town in area in New Hampshire, after Pittsburg.\n\nLincoln is drained by the Pemigewasset River and its East Branch. Lincoln lies almost fully within the Merrimack River watershed, with the western edge of town in the Connecticut River watershed. Kancamagus Pass, elevation , is on the Kancamagus Highway at the eastern boundary. The highest point in Lincoln is either the summit of Mount Carrigain, at above sea level, plus or minus , or the summit of Mount Bond at .\n\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 1,662 people, 794 households, and 439 families residing in the town. There were 2,988 housing units, of which 2,194, or 73.4%, were vacant. 2,083 of the vacant units were for seasonal or recreational use. The racial makeup of the town was 96.9% white, 0.3% African American, 0.1% Native American, 1.7% Asian, 0.0% Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander, 0.3% some other race, and 0.6% from two or more races. 1.7% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\n\nOf the 794 households, 21.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 43.1% were headed by married couples living together, 7.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 44.7% were non-families. 37.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.4% were someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.09, and the average family size was 2.75.\n\nIn the town, 18.7% of the population were under the age of 18, 6.8% were from 18 to 24, 19.4% from 25 to 44, 34.8% from 45 to 64, and 20.4% were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 48.5 years. For every 100 females, there were 105.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 103.3 males.\n\nFor the period 2011-2015, the estimated median annual income for a household was $37,095, and the median income for a family was $55,326. Male full-time workers had a median income of $31,106 versus $27,381 for females. The per capita income for the town was $24,109. 21.0% of the population and 9.1% of families were below the poverty line. 20.2% of the population under the age of 18 and 8.6% of those 65 or older were living in poverty.\n\nBULLET::::- White Mountain art\n\nBULLET::::- Clark's Trading Post\nBULLET::::- Franconia Notch State Park, including:\nBULLET::::- Flume Gorge\nBULLET::::- Lonesome Lake\nBULLET::::- Hobo Railroad\nBULLET::::- Loon Mountain ski resort\nBULLET::::- Whale's Tale Water Park\n\nBULLET::::- Lincoln Public Library\nBULLET::::- New Hampshire Highland Games\nBULLET::::- White Mountain Snowmobile Club\nBULLET::::- New Hampshire Economic and Labor Market Information Bureau Profile\n"}
{"id": "18145", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18145", "title": "List of laser applications", "text": "List of laser applications\n\nMany scientific, military, medical and commercial laser applications have been developed since the invention of the laser in 1958. The coherency, high monochromaticity, and ability to reach extremely high powers are all properties which allow for these specialized applications.\n\nIn science, lasers are used in many ways, including:\nBULLET::::- A wide variety of interferometric techniques\"\nBULLET::::- Raman spectroscopy\nBULLET::::- Laser induced breakdown spectroscopy\nBULLET::::- Atmospheric \"remote sensing\"\nBULLET::::- Investigating nonlinear optics phenomena\nBULLET::::- Holographic techniques employing lasers also contribute to a number of measurement techniques.\nBULLET::::- Laser based lidar (LIght raDAR) technology has application in geology, seismology, remote sensing and atmospheric physics.\nBULLET::::- Lasers have been used aboard spacecraft such as in the Cassini-Huygens mission.\nBULLET::::- In astronomy, lasers have been used to create artificial \"laser guide stars\", used as reference objects for adaptive optics telescopes.\n\nLasers may also be indirectly used in spectroscopy as a micro-sampling system, a technique termed Laser ablation (LA), which is typically applied to ICP-MS apparatus resulting in the powerful LA-ICP-MS.\n\nThe principles of laser spectroscopy are discussed by Demtröder.\n\nMost types of laser are an inherently pure source of light; they emit near-monochromatic light with a very well defined range of wavelengths. By careful design of the laser components, the purity of the laser light (measured as the \"linewidth\") can be improved more than the purity of any other light source. This makes the laser a very useful source for spectroscopy. The high intensity of light that can be achieved in a small, well collimated beam can also be used to induce a nonlinear optical effect in a sample, which makes techniques such as Raman spectroscopy possible. Other spectroscopic techniques based on lasers can be used to make extremely sensitive detectors of various molecules, able to measure molecular concentrations in the parts-per-10 (ppt) level. Due to the high power densities achievable by lasers, beam-induced atomic emission is possible: this technique is termed Laser induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS).\n\nHeat treating with lasers allows selective surface hardening against wear with little or no distortion of the component. Because this eliminates much part reworking that is currently done, the laser system's capital cost is recovered in a short time. An inert, absorbent coating for laser heat treatment has also been developed that eliminates the fumes generated by conventional paint coatings during the heat-treating process with CO2 laser beams.\n\nOne consideration crucial to the success of a heat treatment operation is control of the laser beam irradiance on the part surface. The optimal irradiance distribution is driven by the thermodynamics of the laser-material interaction and by the part geometry.\n\nTypically, irradiances between 500-5000 W/cm^2 satisfy the thermodynamic constraints and allow the rapid surface heating and minimal total heat input required. For general heat treatment, a uniform square or rectangular beam is one of the best options. For some special applications or applications where the heat treatment is done on an edge or corner of the part, it may be better to have the irradiance decrease near the edge to prevent melting.\n\nResearch shows that scientists may one day be able to induce rain and lightning storms (as well as micro-manipulating some other weather phenomena) using high energy lasers. Such a breakthrough could potentially eradicate droughts, help alleviate weather related catastrophes, and allocate weather resources to areas in need.\n\nWhen the Apollo astronauts visited the moon, they planted retroreflector arrays to make possible the Lunar Laser Ranging Experiment. Laser beams are focused through large telescopes on Earth aimed toward the arrays, and the time taken for the beam to be reflected back to Earth measured to determine the distance between the Earth and Moon with high accuracy.\n\nSome laser systems, through the process of mode locking, can produce extremely brief pulses of light - as short as picoseconds or femtoseconds (10 - 10 seconds). Such pulses can be used to initiate and analyze chemical reactions, a technique known as \"photochemistry\". The short pulses can be used to probe the process of the reaction at a very high temporal resolution, allowing the detection of short-lived intermediate molecules. This method is particularly useful in biochemistry, where it is used to analyse details of protein folding and function.\n\nLaser barcode scanners are ideal for applications that require high speed reading of linear codes or stacked symbols.\n\nA technique that has recent success is \"laser cooling\". This involves atom trapping, a method where a number of atoms are confined in a specially shaped arrangement of electric and magnetic fields. Shining particular wavelengths of light at the ions or atoms slows them down, thus \"cooling\" them. As this process is continued, they all are slowed and have the same energy level, forming an unusual arrangement of matter known as a Bose–Einstein condensate.\n\nSome of the world's most powerful and complex arrangements of multiple lasers and optical amplifiers are used to produce extremely high intensity pulses of light of extremely short duration, e.g. laboratory for laser energetics, National Ignition Facility, GEKKO XII, Nike laser, Laser Mégajoule, HiPER. These pulses are arranged such that they impact pellets of tritium–deuterium simultaneously from all directions, hoping that the squeezing effect of the impacts will induce atomic fusion in the pellets. This technique, known as \"inertial confinement fusion\", so far has not been able to achieve \"breakeven\", that is, so far the fusion reaction generates less power than is used to power the lasers, but research continues.\n\nConfocal laser scanning microscopy and Two-photon excitation microscopy make use of lasers to obtain blur-free images of thick specimens at various depths. Laser capture microdissection use lasers to procure specific cell populations from a tissue section under microscopic visualization.\n\nAdditional laser microscopy techniques include harmonic microscopy, four-wave mixing microscopy and interferometric microscopy.\n\nMilitary uses of lasers include applications such as target designation and ranging, defensive countermeasures, communications and directed energy weapons.\n\nA laser weapon is directed-energy weapon based on lasers.\n\nDefensive countermeasure applications can range from compact, low power infrared countermeasures to high power, airborne laser systems. IR countermeasure systems use lasers to confuse the seeker heads on infrared homing missiles.\n\nSome weapons simply use a laser to disorient a person. One such weapon is the Thales Green Laser Optical Warner.\n\nLaser guidance is a technique of guiding a missile or other projectile or vehicle to a target by means of a laser beam.\n\nAnother military use of lasers is as a \"laser target designator\". This is a low-power laser pointer used to indicate a target for a precision-guided munition, typically launched from an aircraft. The guided munition adjusts its flight-path to home in to the laser light reflected by the target, enabling a great precision in aiming. The beam of the laser target designator is set to a pulse rate that matches that set on the guided munition to ensure munitions strike their designated targets and do not follow other laser beams which may be in use in the area. The laser designator can be shone onto the target by an aircraft or nearby infantry. Lasers used for this purpose are usually infrared lasers, so the enemy cannot easily detect the guiding laser light.\n\nThe laser has in most firearms applications been used as a tool to enhance the targeting of other weapon systems. For example, a \"laser sight\" is a small, usually visible-light laser placed on a handgun or a rifle and aligned to emit a beam parallel to the barrel. Since a laser beam has low divergence, the laser light appears as a small spot even at long distances; the user places the spot on the desired target and the barrel of the gun is aligned (but not necessarily allowing for bullet drop, windage, distance between the direction of the beam and the axis of the barrel, and the target mobility while the bullet travels).\n\nMost laser sights use a red laser diode. Others use an infrared diode to produce a dot invisible to the naked human eye but detectable with night vision devices. The firearms adaptive target acquisition module LLM01 laser light module combines visible and infrared laser diodes. In the late 1990s, green diode pumped solid state laser (DPSS) laser sights (532 nm) became available. Modern laser sights are small and light enough for attachment to firearms.\n\nIn 2007, LaserMax, a company specializing in manufacturing lasers for military and police firearms, introduced the first mass-production green laser available for small arms. This laser mounts to the underside of a handgun or long arm on the accessory rail. The green laser is supposed to be more visible than the red laser in bright lighting conditions because, for the same wattage, green light appears brighter than red light.\n\nA non-lethal laser weapon was developed by the U.S. Air Force to temporarily impair an adversary's ability to fire a weapon or to otherwise threaten enemy forces. This unit illuminates an opponent with harmless low-power laser light and can have the effect of dazzling or disorienting the subject or causing them to flee. Several types of dazzlers are now available, and some have been used in combat.\n\nThere remains the possibility of using lasers to blind, since this requires such lower power levels, and is easily achievable in a man-portable unit. However, most nations regard the deliberate permanent blinding of the enemy as forbidden by the rules of war (see Protocol on Blinding Laser Weapons). Although several nations have developed blinding laser weapons, such as China's ZM-87, none of these are believed to have made it past the prototype stage.\n\nIn addition to the applications that cross over with military applications, a widely known law enforcement use of lasers is for lidar to measure the speed of vehicles.\n\nA holographic weapon sight uses a laser diode to illuminate a hologram of a reticle built into a flat glass optical window of the sight. The user looks through the optical window and sees a cross hair reticle image superimposed at a distance on the field of view.\n\nBULLET::::- Cosmetic surgery (removing tattoos, scars, stretch marks, sunspots, wrinkles, birthmarks, and hairs): see laser hair removal. Laser types used in dermatology include ruby (694 nm), alexandrite (755 nm), pulsed diode array (810 nm), Nd:YAG (1064 nm), Ho:YAG (2090 nm), and Er:YAG (2940 nm).\nBULLET::::- Eye surgery and refractive surgery\nBULLET::::- Soft tissue surgery: CO,\nBULLET::::- Laser scalpel (General surgery, gynecological, urology, laparoscopic)\nBULLET::::- Photobiomodulation (i.e. laser therapy)\nBULLET::::- \"No-Touch\" removal of tumors, especially of the brain and spinal cord.\nBULLET::::- Intelligent laser speckle classification for skin health assessments (especially regarding damage caused through ageing)\nBULLET::::- In dentistry for caries removal, endodontic/periodontic procedures, tooth whitening, and oral surgery\nBULLET::::- Cancer treatment\nBULLET::::- Burn and surgical scar management: scar contracture CO2 (especially the newer fractionated CO2 lasers), redness and itch (Pulsed Dye laser - PDL), post-inflammatory hyper-pigmentation (Q-switched lasers :Ruby, Alexandrite), burn scar unwanted hair growth and trapped hairs (Ruby, IPL and numerous hair removal lasers)\n\nIndustrial laser applications can be divided into two categories depending on the power of the laser: material processing and micro-material processing.\n\nIn material processing, lasers with average optical power above 1 kilowatt are used mainly for industrial materials processing applications. Beyond this power threshold there are thermal issues related to the optics that separate these lasers from their lower-power counterparts. Laser systems in the 50-300W range are used primarily for pumping, plastic welding and soldering applications. Lasers above 300W are used in brazing, thin metal welding, and sheet metal cutting applications. The required brightness (as measured in by the beam parameter product) is higher for cutting applications than for brazing and thin metal welding. High power applications, such as hardening, cladding, and deep penetrating welding, require multiple kW of optical power, and are used in a broad range of industrial processes.\n\nMicro material processing is a category that includes all laser material processing applications under 1 kilowatt. The use of lasers in Micro Materials Processing has found broad application in the development and manufacturing of screens for smartphones, tablet computers, and LED TVs.\n\nA detailed list of industrial and commercial laser applications includes:\n\nBULLET::::- Laser cutting\nBULLET::::- Laser welding\nBULLET::::- Laser drilling\nBULLET::::- Laser marking\nBULLET::::- Laser cladding, a surface engineering process applied to mechanical components for reconditioning, repair work or hardfacing\nBULLET::::- Photolithography\nBULLET::::- Optical communications over optical fiber or in free space\nBULLET::::- Laser peening\nBULLET::::- Guidance systems (e.g., ring laser gyroscopes)\nBULLET::::- Laser rangefinder / surveying,\nBULLET::::- Lidar / pollution monitoring,\nBULLET::::- Digital minilabs\nBULLET::::- Barcode readers\nBULLET::::- Laser engraving of printing plate\nBULLET::::- Laser bonding of additive marking materials for decoration and identification,\nBULLET::::- Laser pointers\nBULLET::::- Laser mice\nBULLET::::- Laser accelerometers\nBULLET::::- OLED display manufacturing\nBULLET::::- Holography\nBULLET::::- Bubblegrams\nBULLET::::- Optical tweezers\nBULLET::::- Writing subtitles onto motion picture films.\nBULLET::::- Power beaming, which is a possible solution to transfer energy to the climber of a Space elevator\nBULLET::::- 3D laser scanners for accurate 3D measurement\nBULLET::::- Laser line levels are used in surveying and construction. Lasers are also used for guidance for aircraft.\nBULLET::::- Extensively in both consumer and industrial imaging equipment.\nBULLET::::- In laser printers: gas and diode lasers play a key role in manufacturing high resolution printing plates and in image scanning equipment.\nBULLET::::- Diode lasers are used as a lightswitch in industry, with a laser beam and a receiver which will switch on or off when the beam is interrupted, and because a laser can keep the light intensity over larger distances than a normal light, and is more precise than a normal light it can be used for product detection in automated production.\nBULLET::::- Laser alignment\nBULLET::::- Additive manufacturing\nBULLET::::- Plastic welding\nBULLET::::- Metrology - handheld and robotic laser systems for Aerospace, Automotive and Rail applications\nBULLET::::- To store and retrieve data in optical discs, such as CDs and DVDs\nBULLET::::- Blu-ray\n\nBULLET::::- Laser lighting displays accompany many music concerts\nBULLET::::- Laser tag\nBULLET::::- Laser harp: a musical instrument were the strings are replaced with laser beams\nBULLET::::- As a light source for digital cinema projectors\n\nIn surveying and construction, the laser level is affixed to a tripod, leveled and then spun to illuminate a horizontal plane. The laser beam projector employs a rotating head with a mirror for sweeping the laser beam about a vertical axis. If the mirror is not self-leveling, it is provided with visually readable level vials and manually adjustable screws for orienting the projector. A staff carried by the operator is equipped with a movable sensor, which can detect the laser beam and gives a signal when the sensor is in line with the beam (usually an audible beep). The position of the sensor on the graduated staff allows comparison of elevations between different points on the terrain.\n\nA tower-mounted laser level is used in combination with a sensor on a wheel tractor-scraper in the process of land laser leveling to bring land (for example, an agricultural field) to near-flatness with a slight grade for drainage. The laser line level was invented in 1996 by Steve J. Orosz, Jr.[1] This type of level does not require a heavy motor to create the illusion of a line from a dot, rather, it uses a lens to transform the dot into a line.\n\nLaser beams are used to disperse birds from agricultural land, industrial sites, rooftops and from airport runways. Birds tend to perceive the laser beam as a physical stick. By moving the laser beam towards the birds, they get scared and fly away. On the market are manual operated laser torches or automated robots to move the laser beam automatically.\n\nBULLET::::- List of laser articles\nBULLET::::- Non-lethal weapon\n\nBULLET::::- Coherent.com article on Applications for lasers\n"}
{"id": "18148", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18148", "title": "Left-arm orthodox spin", "text": "Left-arm orthodox spin\n\nLeft-arm orthodox spin, also known as slow left-arm orthodox spin bowling, is a type of left-arm finger off spin bowling in the sport of cricket. \nLeft-arm orthodox spin is bowled by a left-arm bowler using the fingers to spin the ball from right to left of the cricket pitch (from the bowler's perspective).\n\nLeft arm orthodox spin bowlers generally attempt to drift the ball in the air into a right-handed batsman, and then turn it away from the batsman (towards off-stump) upon landing on the pitch. The drift and turn in the air are attacking techniques. The stock delivery of a left-arm orthodox spin bowler is the left-arm orthodox spinner.\n\nThe major variations of a left-arm orthodox spin bowler are the topspinner (which turns less and bounces higher in the cricket pitch), the arm ball (which does not turn at all, drifts into a right-handed batsman in the direction of the bowler's arm movement; also called a 'floater') and the left-arm spinner's version of a doosra (which turns the other way).\n"}
{"id": "18151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18151", "title": "Laser construction", "text": "Laser construction\n\nA laser is constructed from three principal parts:\n\nBULLET::::- An energy source (usually referred to as the \"pump\" or \"pump source\"),\nBULLET::::- A \"gain medium\" or \"laser medium\", and\nBULLET::::- Two or more mirrors that form an \"optical resonator\".\n\nThe \"pump source\" is the part that provides energy to the laser system. Examples of pump sources include electrical discharges, flashlamps, arc lamps, light from another laser, chemical reactions and even explosive devices. The type of pump source used principally depends on the \"gain medium\", and this also determines how the energy is transmitted to the medium. A helium–neon (HeNe) laser uses an electrical discharge in the helium-neon gas mixture, a Nd:YAG laser uses either light focused from a xenon flash lamp or diode lasers, and excimer lasers use a chemical reaction.\n\nThe \"gain medium\" is the major determining factor of the wavelength of operation, and other properties, of the laser. \"Gain media\" in different materials have linear spectra or wide spectra. \"Gain media\" with wide spectra allow tuning of the laser frequency. There are hundreds if not thousands of different gain media in which laser operation has been achieved (see list of laser types for a list of the most important ones). The gain medium is excited by the pump source to produce a population inversion, and it is in the gain medium where spontaneous and stimulated emission of photons takes place, leading to the phenomenon of optical gain, or amplification.\n\nExamples of different gain media include:\nBULLET::::- Liquids, such as dye lasers. These are usually organic chemical solvents, such as methanol, ethanol or ethylene glycol, to which are added chemical dyes such as coumarin, rhodamine, and fluorescein. The exact chemical configuration of the dye molecules determines the operation wavelength of the dye laser.\nBULLET::::- Gases, such as carbon dioxide, argon, krypton and mixtures such as helium–neon. These lasers are often pumped by electrical discharge.\nBULLET::::- Solids, such as crystals and glasses. The solid \"host\" materials are usually doped with an impurity such as chromium, neodymium, erbium or titanium ions. Typical hosts include YAG (yttrium aluminium garnet), YLF (yttrium lithium fluoride), sapphire (aluminium oxide) and various glasses. Examples of solid-state laser media include Nd:YAG, Ti:sapphire, Cr:sapphire (usually known as ruby), Cr:LiSAF (chromium-doped lithium strontium aluminium fluoride), Er:YLF, Nd:glass, and Er:glass. Solid-state lasers are usually pumped by flashlamps or light from another laser.\nBULLET::::- Semiconductors, a type of solid, crystal with uniform dopant distribution or material with differing dopant levels in which the movement of electrons can cause laser action. Semiconductor lasers are typically very small, and can be pumped with a simple electric current, enabling them to be used in consumer devices such as compact disc players. See laser diode.\n\nThe \"optical resonator\", or \"optical cavity\", in its simplest form is two parallel mirrors placed around the gain medium, which provide feedback of the light. The mirrors are given optical coatings which determine their reflective properties. Typically, one will be a high reflector, and the other will be a partial reflector. The latter is called the output coupler, because it allows some of the light to leave the cavity to produce the laser's output beam.\n\nLight from the medium, produced by spontaneous emission, is reflected by the mirrors back into the medium, where it may be amplified by stimulated emission. The light may reflect from the mirrors and thus pass through the gain medium many hundreds of times before exiting the cavity. In more complex lasers, configurations with four or more mirrors forming the cavity are used. The design and alignment of the mirrors with respect to the medium is crucial for determining the exact operating wavelength and other attributes of the laser system.\n\nOther optical devices, such as spinning mirrors, modulators, filters, and absorbers, may be placed within the optical resonator to produce a variety of effects on the laser output, such as altering the wavelength of operation or the production of pulses of laser light.\n\nSome lasers do not use an optical cavity, but instead rely on very high optical gain to produce significant amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) without needing feedback of the light back into the gain medium. Such lasers are said to be superluminescent, and emit light with low coherence but high bandwidth. Since they do not use optical feedback, these devices are often not categorized as lasers.\n\nBULLET::::- Injection seeder\nBULLET::::- Mode locking\nBULLET::::- Q-switching\nBULLET::::- List of laser articles\n\nBULLET::::- Koechner, Walter (1992). \"Solid-State Laser Engineering\", 3rd ed., Springer-Verlag.\n\nBULLET::::- Sam's Laser FAQ A Practical Guide to Lasers for Experimenters and Hobbyists\n"}
{"id": "18152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18152", "title": "Logical conjunction", "text": "Logical conjunction\n\nIn logic, mathematics and linguistics, And (∧) is the truth-functional operator of logical conjunction; the \"and\" of a set of operands is true if and only if \"all\" of its operands are true. The logical connective that represents this operator is typically written as or .\n\nformula_1 is true only if formula_2 is true and formula_3 is true.\n\nAn operand of a conjunction is a conjunct.\n\nThe term \"logical conjunction\" is also used for the greatest lower bound in lattice theory.\n\nRelated concepts in other fields are:\n\nBULLET::::- In natural language, the coordinating conjunction \"and\".\nBULLET::::- In programming languages, the short-circuit and control structure.\nBULLET::::- In set theory, intersection.\nBULLET::::- In predicate logic, universal quantification.\n\nAnd is usually denoted by an infix operator: in mathematics and logic, it is denoted by ', ' or '; in electronics, '; and in programming languages, codice_1, codice_2, or codice_3. In Jan Łukasiewicz's prefix notation for logic, the operator is K, for Polish \"koniunkcja\".\n\nLogical conjunction is an operation on two logical values, typically the values of two propositions, that produces a value of \"true\" if and only if both of its operands are true.\n\nThe conjunctive identity is true, which is to say that AND-ing an expression with true will never change the value of the expression. In keeping with the concept of vacuous truth, when conjunction is defined as an operator or function of arbitrary arity, the empty conjunction (AND-ing over an empty set of operands) is often defined as having the result true.\n\nThe truth table of formula_1:\n\nIn systems where logical conjunction is not a primitive, it may be defined as\nor\n\nAs a rule of inference, conjunction introduction is a classically valid, simple argument form. The argument form has two premises, \"A\" and \"B\". Intuitively, it permits the inference of their conjunction.\n\nor in logical operator notation:\n\nHere is an example of an argument that fits the form \"conjunction introduction\":\n\nConjunction elimination is another classically valid, simple argument form. Intuitively, it permits the inference from any conjunction of either element of that conjunction.\n\n...or alternatively,\n\nIn logical operator notation:\n\n...or alternatively,\n\nA conjunction formula_17 is be proven false by establishing either formula_18 or formula_19. \nIn terms of the object language, this reads\n\nThis formula can be seen as a special case of\n\nwhen formula_22 is a false proposition.\n\nIf formula_2 implies formula_19, then both formula_18 as well as formula_2 prove the conjunction false:\nIn other words, a conjunction can actually be proven false just by knowing about the relation of its conjuncts and not necessary about their truth values.\n\nThis formula can be seen as a special case of\n\nwhen formula_22 is a false proposition.\n\nEither of the above are constructively valid proofs by contradiction.\n\ncommutativity: yes\nformula_1\n    formula_31    \nformula_32\n\n    formula_31    \n\nassociativity: yes\nformula_34\nformula_35\nformula_36\n    formula_31    \n\nformula_38\nformula_35\nformula_40\n\nformula_35\n    formula_31    \n    formula_31    \nformula_35\n\ndistributivity: with various operations, especially with \"or\"\nformula_34\nformula_46\nformula_47\n    formula_31    \n\nformula_38\nformula_50\nformula_51\n\nformula_46\n    formula_31    \n    formula_31    \nformula_50\n\n! bgcolor=\"#ccccff\"others\nwith exclusive or:\nformula_34\nformula_46\nformula_58\n    formula_31    \n\nformula_38\nformula_61\nformula_51\n\nformula_46\n    formula_31    \n    formula_31    \nformula_61\n\nwith material nonimplication:\nformula_34\nformula_46\nformula_69\n    formula_31    \n\nformula_38\nformula_72\nformula_51\n\nformula_46\n    formula_31    \n    formula_31    \nformula_72\n\nwith itself:\nformula_34\nformula_46\nformula_36\n    formula_31    \n\nformula_38\nformula_46\nformula_51\n\nformula_46\n    formula_31    \n    formula_31    \nformula_46\n\nidempotency: yes<br>\nformula_89\nformula_90\nformula_89\n    formula_31    \nformula_93\n\nformula_90\n    formula_31    \n\nmonotonicity: yes\nformula_96\n    formula_97    \n\nformula_51\nformula_99\nformula_36\n\n    formula_97    \n    formula_31    \nformula_99\n\ntruth-preserving: yes<br>\nWhen all inputs are true, the output is true.\nformula_1\n    formula_97    \nformula_1\n\n    formula_97    \n\nfalsehood-preserving: yes<br>\nWhen all inputs are false, the output is false.\nformula_1\n    formula_97    \nformula_110\n\n    formula_97    \n\nWalsh spectrum: (1,-1,-1,1)\n\nNonlinearity: 1 (the function is bent)\n\nIf using binary values for true (1) and false (0), then \"logical conjunction\" works exactly like normal arithmetic multiplication.\n\nIn high-level computer programming and digital electronics, logical conjunction is commonly represented by an infix operator, usually as a keyword such as \"codice_4\", an algebraic multiplication, or the ampersand symbol codice_1 (sometimes doubled as in codice_2). Many languages also provide short-circuit control structures corresponding to logical conjunction.\n\nLogical conjunction is often used for bitwise operations, where codice_7 corresponds to false and codice_8 to true:\n\nBULLET::::- codice_9  =  codice_7,\nBULLET::::- codice_11  =  codice_7,\nBULLET::::- codice_13  =  codice_7,\nBULLET::::- codice_15  =  codice_8.\n\nThe operation can also be applied to two binary words viewed as bitstrings of equal length, by taking the bitwise AND of each pair of bits at corresponding positions. For example:\n\nBULLET::::- codice_17  =  codice_18.\n\nThis can be used to select part of a bitstring using a bit mask. For example, codice_19  =  codice_20 extracts the fifth bit of an 8-bit bitstring.\n\nIn computer networking, bit masks are used to derive the network address of a subnet within an existing network from a given IP address, by ANDing the IP address and the subnet mask.\n\nLogical conjunction \"codice_4\" is also used in SQL operations to form database queries.\n\nThe Curry–Howard correspondence relates logical conjunction to product types.\n\nThe membership of an element of an intersection set in set theory is defined in terms of a logical conjunction: \"x\" ∈ \"A\" ∩ \"B\" if and only if (\"x\" ∈ \"A\") ∧ (\"x\" ∈ \"B\"). Through this correspondence, set-theoretic intersection shares several properties with logical conjunction, such as associativity, commutativity, and idempotence.\n\nAs with other notions formalized in mathematical logic, the logical conjunction \"and\" is related to, but not the same as, the grammatical conjunction \"and\" in natural languages.\n\nEnglish \"and\" has properties not captured by logical conjunction. For example, \"and\" sometimes implies order having the sense of \"then\". For example, \"They got married and had a child\" in common discourse means that the marriage came before the child.\n\nThe word \"and\" can also imply a partition of a thing into parts, as \"The American flag is red, white, and blue.\" Here it is not meant that the flag is \"at once\" red, white, and blue, but rather that it has a part of each color.\n\nBULLET::::- And-inverter graph\nBULLET::::- AND gate\nBULLET::::- Bitwise AND\nBULLET::::- Boolean algebra (logic)\nBULLET::::- Boolean algebra topics\nBULLET::::- Boolean conjunctive query\nBULLET::::- Boolean domain\nBULLET::::- Boolean function\nBULLET::::- Boolean-valued function\nBULLET::::- Conjunction elimination\nBULLET::::- De Morgan's laws\nBULLET::::- First-order logic\nBULLET::::- Fréchet inequalities\nBULLET::::- Grammatical conjunction\nBULLET::::- Logical disjunction\nBULLET::::- Logical negation\nBULLET::::- Logical graph\nBULLET::::- Operation\nBULLET::::- Peano–Russell notation\nBULLET::::- Propositional calculus\nBULLET::::- Wolfram MathWorld: Conjunction\n"}
{"id": "18153", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18153", "title": "Logical connective", "text": "Logical connective\n\nIn logic, a logical connective (also called a logical operator, sentential connective, or sentential operator) is a symbol or word used to connect two or more sentences (of either a formal or a natural language) in a grammatically valid way, such that the value of the compound sentence produced depends only on that of the original sentences and on the meaning of the connective.\n\nThe most common logical connectives are binary connectives (also called dyadic connectives) which join two sentences which can be thought of as the function's operands. Also commonly, negation is considered to be a unary connective.\n\nLogical connectives along with quantifiers are the two main types of logical constants used in formal systems such as propositional logic and predicate logic. Semantics of a logical connective is often, but not always, presented as a truth function.\n\nA logical connective is similar to but not equivalent to a conditional operator.\n\nIn the grammar of natural languages two sentences may be joined by a grammatical conjunction to form a \"grammatically\" compound sentence. Some but not all such grammatical conjunctions are truth functional. For example, consider the following sentences:\n\nThe words \"and\" and \"so\" are \"grammatical\" conjunctions joining the sentences (A) and (B) to form the compound sentences (C) and (D). The \"and\" in (C) is a \"logical\" connective, since the truth of (C) is completely determined by (A) and (B): it would make no sense to affirm (A) and (B) but deny (C). However, \"so\" in (D) is not a logical connective, since it would be quite reasonable to affirm (A) and (B) but deny (D): perhaps, after all, Jill went up the hill to fetch a pail of water, not because Jack had gone up the hill at all.\n\nVarious English words and word pairs express logical connectives, and some of them are synonymous. Examples are:\n\n! Word !! Connective !! Symbol !! Logical gate\n\nIn formal languages, truth functions are represented by unambiguous symbols. These symbols are called \"logical connectives\", \"logical operators\", \"propositional operators\", or, in classical logic, \"truth-functional connectives\". See well-formed formula for the rules which allow new well-formed formulas to be constructed by joining other well-formed formulas using truth-functional connectives.\n\nLogical connectives can be used to link more than two statements, so one can speak about \"-ary logical connective\".\n\n ! colspan=2  Symbol, name\n\nCommonly used logical connectives include\nBULLET::::- Negation (not): ¬ , N (prefix), ~\nBULLET::::- Conjunction (and): ∧ , K (prefix), & , ∙\nBULLET::::- Disjunction (or): ∨, A (prefix)\nBULLET::::- Material implication (if...then): → , C (prefix), ⇒ , ⊃\nBULLET::::- Biconditional (if and only if): ↔ , E (prefix), ≡ , =\n\nAlternative names for biconditional are \"iff\", \"xnor\", and \"bi-implication\".\n\nFor example, the meaning of the statements \"it is raining\" and \"I am indoors\" is transformed when the two are combined with logical connectives. For statement \"P\" = \"It is raining\" and \"Q\" = \"I am indoors\":\nBULLET::::- It is not raining (\"P\")\nBULLET::::- It is raining and I am indoors (formula_2)\nBULLET::::- It is raining or I am indoors (formula_3)\nBULLET::::- If it is raining, then I am indoors (formula_4)\nBULLET::::- If I am indoors, then it is raining (formula_5)\nBULLET::::- I am indoors if and only if it is raining (formula_6)\n\nIt is also common to consider the \"always true\" formula and the \"always false\" formula to be connective:\nBULLET::::- True formula (⊤, 1, V [prefix], or T)\nBULLET::::- False formula (⊥, 0, O [prefix], or F)\n\nBULLET::::- Negation: the symbol ¬ appeared in Heyting in 1929. (compare to Frege's symbol ⫟ in his Begriffsschrift); the symbol ~ appeared in Russell in 1908; an alternative notation is to add a horizontal line on top of the formula, as in formula_7; another alternative notation is to use a prime symbol as in P'.\nBULLET::::- Conjunction: the symbol ∧ appeared in Heyting in 1929 (compare to Peano's use of the set-theoretic notation of intersection ∩); & appeared at least in Schönfinkel in 1924; . comes from Boole's interpretation of logic as an elementary algebra.\nBULLET::::- Disjunction: the symbol ∨ appeared in Russell in 1908 (compare to Peano's use of the set-theoretic notation of union ∪); the symbol + is also used, in spite of the ambiguity coming from the fact that the + of ordinary elementary algebra is an exclusive or when interpreted logically in a two-element ring; punctually in the history a + together with a dot in the lower right corner has been used by Peirce,\nBULLET::::- Implication: the symbol → can be seen in Hilbert in 1917; ⊃ was used by Russell in 1908 (compare to Peano's inverted C notation); ⇒ was used in Vax.\nBULLET::::- Biconditional: the symbol ≡ was used at least by Russell in 1908; ↔ was used at least by Tarski in 1940; ⇔ was used in Vax; other symbols appeared punctually in the history such as ⊃⊂ in Gentzen, ~ in Schönfinkel or ⊂⊃ in Chazal.\nBULLET::::- True: the symbol 1 comes from Boole's interpretation of logic as an elementary algebra over the two-element Boolean algebra; other notations include formula_8 to be found in Peano.\nBULLET::::- False: the symbol 0 comes also from Boole's interpretation of logic as a ring; other notations include formula_9 to be found in Peano.\n\nSome authors used letters for connectives at some time of the history: u. for conjunction (German's \"und\" for \"and\") and o. for disjunction (German's \"oder\" for \"or\") in earlier works by Hilbert (1904); N\"p for negation, K\"pq for conjunction, D\"pq for alternative denial, A\"pq for disjunction, X\"pq for joint denial, C\"pq for implication, E\"pq\" for biconditional in Łukasiewicz (1929); cf. Polish notation.\n\nSuch a logical connective as converse implication \"←\" is actually the same as material conditional with swapped arguments; thus, the symbol for converse implication is redundant. In some logical calculi (notably, in classical logic) certain essentially different compound statements are logically equivalent. A less trivial example of a redundancy is the classical equivalence between and . Therefore, a classical-based logical system does not need the conditional operator \"→\" if \"¬\" (not) and \"∨\" (or) are already in use, or may use the \"→\" only as a syntactic sugar for a compound having one negation and one disjunction.\n\nThere are sixteen Boolean functions associating the input truth values and with four-digit binary outputs. These correspond to possible choices of binary logical connectives for classical logic. Different implementations of classical logic can choose different functionally complete subsets of connectives.\n\nOne approach is to choose a \"minimal\" set, and define other connectives by some logical form, as in the example with the material conditional above.\nThe following are the minimal functionally complete sets of operators in classical logic whose arities do not exceed 2:\nBULLET::::- One element: {↑}, {↓}.\nBULLET::::- Two elements: formula_10, formula_11, formula_12, formula_13, formula_14, formula_15, formula_16, formula_17, formula_18, formula_19, formula_20, formula_21, formula_22, formula_23, formula_24, formula_25, formula_26, formula_27.\nBULLET::::- Three elements: formula_28, formula_29, formula_30, formula_31, formula_32, formula_33.\n\nAnother approach is to use with equal rights connectives of a certain convenient and functionally complete, but \"not minimal\" set. This approach requires more propositional axioms, and each equivalence between logical forms must be either an axiom or provable as a theorem.\n\nThe situation, however, is more complicated in intuitionistic logic. Of its five connectives, {∧, ∨, →, ¬, ⊥}, only negation \"¬\" can be reduced to other connectives (see details). Neither conjunction, disjunction, nor material conditional has an equivalent form constructed of the other four logical connectives.\n\nSome logical connectives possess properties which may be expressed in the theorems containing the connective. Some of those properties that a logical connective may have are:\n\nBULLET::::- Associativity: Within an expression containing two or more of the same associative connectives in a row, the order of the operations does not matter as long as the sequence of the operands is not changed.\nBULLET::::- Commutativity: The operands of the connective may be swapped preserving logical equivalence to the original expression.\nBULLET::::- Distributivity: A connective denoted by · distributes over another connective denoted by +, if for all operands , , .\nBULLET::::- Idempotence: Whenever the operands of the operation are the same, the compound is logically equivalent to the operand.\nBULLET::::- Absorption: A pair of connectives ∧, ∨ satisfies the absorption law if formula_34 for all operands , .\nBULLET::::- Monotonicity: If \"f\"(\"a\", ..., \"a\") ≤ \"f\"(\"b\", ..., \"b\") for all \"a\", ..., \"a\", \"b\", ..., \"b\" ∈ {0,1} such that \"a\" ≤ \"b\", \"a\" ≤ \"b\", ..., \"a\" ≤ \"b\". E.g., ∨, ∧, ⊤, ⊥.\nBULLET::::- Affinity: Each variable always makes a difference in the truth-value of the operation or it never makes a difference. E.g., ¬, ↔, formula_1, ⊤, ⊥.\nBULLET::::- Duality: To read the truth-value assignments for the operation from top to bottom on its truth table is the same as taking the complement of reading the table of the same or another connective from bottom to top. Without resorting to truth tables it may be formulated as . E.g., ¬.\nBULLET::::- Truth-preserving: The compound all those argument are tautologies is a tautology itself. E.g., ∨, ∧, ⊤, →, ↔, ⊂ (see validity).\nBULLET::::- Falsehood-preserving: The compound all those argument are contradictions is a contradiction itself. E.g., ∨, ∧, formula_1, ⊥, ⊄, ⊅ (see validity).\nBULLET::::- Involutivity (for unary connectives): . E.g. negation in classical logic.\n\nFor classical and intuitionistic logic, the \"=\" symbol means that corresponding implications \"…→…\" and \"…←…\" for logical compounds can be both proved as theorems, and the \"≤\" symbol means that \"…→…\" for logical compounds is a consequence of corresponding \"…→…\" connectives for propositional variables. Some many-valued logics may have incompatible definitions of equivalence and order (entailment).\n\nBoth conjunction and disjunction are associative, commutative and idempotent in classical logic, most varieties of many-valued logic and intuitionistic logic. The same is true about distributivity of conjunction over disjunction and disjunction over conjunction, as well as for the absorption law.\n\nIn classical logic and some varieties of many-valued logic, conjunction and disjunction are dual, and negation is self-dual, the latter is also self-dual in intuitionistic logic. \n\nAs a way of reducing the number of necessary parentheses, one may introduce precedence rules: ¬ has higher precedence than ∧, ∧ higher than ∨, and ∨ higher than →. So for example, formula_37 is short for formula_38.\n\nHere is a table that shows a commonly used precedence of logical operators.\n\nHowever, not all compilers use the same order; for instance, an ordering in which disjunction is lower precedence than implication or bi-implication has also been used. Sometimes precedence between conjunction and disjunction is unspecified requiring to provide it explicitly in given formula with parentheses. The order of precedence determines which connective is the \"main connective\" when interpreting a non-atomic formula.\n\nA truth-functional approach to logical operators is implemented as logic gates in digital circuits. Practically all digital circuits (the major exception is DRAM) are built up from NAND, NOR, NOT, and transmission gates; see more details in Truth function in computer science. Logical operators over bit vectors (corresponding to finite Boolean algebras) are bitwise operations.\n\nBut not every usage of a logical connective in computer programming has a Boolean semantic. For example, lazy evaluation is sometimes implemented for and , so these connectives are not commutative if either or both of the expressions , have side effects. Also, a conditional, which in some sense corresponds to the material conditional connective, is essentially non-Boolean because for codice_1 the consequent Q is not executed if the antecedent P is false (although a compound as a whole is successful ≈ \"true\" in such case). This is closer to intuitionist and constructivist views on the material conditional, rather than to classical logic's ones.\n\nBULLET::::- Boolean domain\nBULLET::::- Boolean function\nBULLET::::- Boolean logic\nBULLET::::- Boolean-valued function\nBULLET::::- List of Boolean algebra topics\nBULLET::::- Logical constant\nBULLET::::- Modal operator\nBULLET::::- Propositional calculus\nBULLET::::- Truth function\nBULLET::::- Truth table\nBULLET::::- Truth values\nBULLET::::- Bocheński, Józef Maria (1959), \"A Précis of Mathematical Logic\", translated from the French and German editions by Otto Bird, D. Reidel, Dordrecht, South Holland.\n\nBULLET::::- Lloyd Humberstone (2010), \"Sentence Connectives in Formal Logic\", Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (An abstract algebraic logic approach to connectives.)\nBULLET::::- John MacFarlane (2005), \"Logical constants\", Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.\n"}
{"id": "18154", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18154", "title": "Propositional calculus", "text": "Propositional calculus\n\nPropositional calculus is a branch of logic. It is also called propositional logic, statement logic, sentential calculus, sentential logic, or sometimes zeroth-order logic. It deals with propositions (which can be true or false) and argument flow. Compound propositions are formed by connecting propositions by logical connectives. The propositions without logical connectives are called atomic propositions.\n\nUnlike first-order logic, propositional logic does not deal with non-logical objects, predicates about them, or quantifiers. However, all the machinery of propositional logic is included in first-order logic and higher-order logics. In this sense, propositional logic is the foundation of first-order logic and higher-order logic.\n\nLogical connectives are found in natural languages. In English for example, some examples are \"and\" (conjunction), \"or\" (disjunction), \"not\" (negation) and \"if\" (but only when used to denote material conditional).\n\nThe following is an example of a very simple inference within the scope of propositional logic:\n\nBoth premises and the conclusion are propositions. The premises are taken for granted and then with the application of modus ponens (an inference rule) the conclusion follows.\n\nAs propositional logic is not concerned with the structure of propositions beyond the point where they can't be decomposed any more by logical connectives, this inference can be restated replacing those \"atomic\" statements with statement letters, which are interpreted as variables representing statements:\n\nThe same can be stated succinctly in the following way:\n\nWhen is interpreted as \"It's raining\" and as \"it's cloudy\" the above symbolic expressions can be seen to exactly correspond with the original expression in natural language. Not only that, but they will also correspond with any other inference of this \"form\", which will be valid on the same basis that this inference is.\n\nPropositional logic may be studied through a formal system in which formulas of a formal language may be interpreted to represent propositions. A system of inference rules and axioms allows certain formulas to be derived. These derived formulas are called theorems and may be interpreted to be true propositions. A constructed sequence of such formulas is known as a \"derivation\" or \"proof\" and the last formula of the sequence is the theorem. The derivation may be interpreted as proof of the proposition represented by the theorem.\n\nWhen a formal system is used to represent formal logic, only statement letters are represented directly. The natural language propositions that arise when they're interpreted are outside the scope of the system, and the relation between the formal system and its interpretation is likewise outside the formal system itself.\n\nIn classical truth-functional propositional logic, formulas are interpreted as having precisely one of two possible truth values, the truth value of \"true\" or the truth value of \"false\". The principle of bivalence and the law of excluded middle are upheld. Truth-functional propositional logic defined as such and systems isomorphic to it are considered to be zeroth-order logic. However, alternative propositional logics are possible. See Other logical calculi below.\n\nAlthough propositional logic (which is interchangeable with propositional calculus) had been hinted by earlier philosophers, it was developed into a formal logic (Stoic logic) by Chrysippus in the 3rd century BC and expanded by his successor Stoics. The logic was focused on propositions. This advancement was different from the traditional syllogistic logic which was focused on terms. However, later in antiquity, the propositional logic developed by the Stoics was no longer understood . Consequently, the system was essentially reinvented by Peter Abelard in the 12th century.\n\nPropositional logic was eventually refined using symbolic logic. The 17th/18th-century mathematician Gottfried Leibniz has been credited with being the founder of symbolic logic for his work with the calculus ratiocinator. Although his work was the first of its kind, it was unknown to the larger logical community. Consequently, many of the advances achieved by Leibniz were recreated by logicians like George Boole and Augustus De Morgan completely independent of Leibniz.\n\nJust as propositional logic can be considered an advancement from the earlier syllogistic logic, Gottlob Frege's predicate logic was an advancement from the earlier propositional logic. One author describes predicate logic as combining \"the distinctive features of syllogistic logic and propositional logic.\" Consequently, predicate logic ushered in a new era in logic's history; however, advances in propositional logic were still made after Frege, including Natural Deduction, Truth-Trees and Truth-Tables. Natural deduction was invented by Gerhard Gentzen and Jan Łukasiewicz. Truth-Trees were invented by Evert Willem Beth. The invention of truth-tables, however, is of uncertain attribution.\n\nWithin works by Frege and Bertrand Russell, are ideas influential to the invention of truth tables. The actual tabular structure (being formatted as a table), itself, is generally credited to either Ludwig Wittgenstein or Emil Post (or both, independently). Besides Frege and Russell, others credited with having ideas preceding truth-tables include Philo, Boole, Charles Sanders Peirce, and Ernst Schröder. Others credited with the tabular structure include Jan Łukasiewicz, Ernst Schröder, Alfred North Whitehead, William Stanley Jevons, John Venn, and Clarence Irving Lewis. Ultimately, some have concluded, like John Shosky, that \"It is far from clear that any one person should be given the title of 'inventor' of truth-tables.\".\n\nIn general terms, a calculus is a formal system that consists of a set of syntactic expressions (\"well-formed formulas\"), a distinguished subset of these expressions (axioms), plus a set of formal rules that define a specific binary relation, intended to be interpreted as logical equivalence, on the space of expressions.\n\nWhen the formal system is intended to be a logical system, the expressions are meant to be interpreted as statements, and the rules, known to be \"inference rules\", are typically intended to be truth-preserving. In this setting, the rules (which may include axioms) can then be used to derive (\"infer\") formulas representing true statements from given formulas representing true statements.\n\nThe set of axioms may be empty, a nonempty finite set, or a countably infinite set (see axiom schema). A formal grammar recursively defines the expressions and well-formed formulas of the language. In addition a semantics may be given which defines truth and valuations (or interpretations).\n\nThe language of a propositional calculus consists of\nBULLET::::1. a set of primitive symbols, variously referred to as \"atomic formulas\", \"placeholders\", \"proposition letters\", or \"variables\", and\nBULLET::::2. a set of operator symbols, variously interpreted as \"logical operators\" or \"logical connectives\".\n\nA \"well-formed formula\" is any atomic formula, or any formula that can be built up from atomic formulas by means of operator symbols according to the rules of the grammar.\n\nMathematicians sometimes distinguish between propositional constants, propositional variables, and schemata. Propositional constants represent some particular proposition, while propositional variables range over the set of all atomic propositions. Schemata, however, range over all propositions. It is common to represent propositional constants by , , and , propositional variables by , , and , and schematic letters are often Greek letters, most often , , and .\n\nThe following outlines a standard propositional calculus. Many different formulations exist which are all more or less equivalent but differ in the details of:\nBULLET::::1. their language, that is, the particular collection of primitive symbols and operator symbols,\nBULLET::::2. the set of axioms, or distinguished formulas, and\nBULLET::::3. the set of inference rules.\n\nAny given proposition may be represented with a letter called a 'propositional constant', analogous to representing a number by a letter in mathematics, for instance, . All propositions require exactly one of two truth-values: true or false. For example, let be the proposition that it is raining outside. This will be true () if it is raining outside and false otherwise ().\n\nBULLET::::- We then define truth-functional operators, beginning with negation. represents the negation of , which can be thought of as the denial of . In the example above, expresses that it is not raining outside, or by a more standard reading: \"It is not the case that it is raining outside.\" When is true, is false; and when is false, is true. always has the same truth-value as .\nBULLET::::- Conjunction is a truth-functional connective which forms a proposition out of two simpler propositions, for example, and . The conjunction of and is written , and expresses that each are true. We read as \" and \". For any two propositions, there are four possible assignments of truth values:\nBULLET::::1. is true and is true\nBULLET::::2. is true and is false\nBULLET::::3. is false and is true\nBULLET::::4. is false and is false\nBULLET::::- Disjunction resembles conjunction in that it forms a proposition out of two simpler propositions. We write it , and it is read \" or \". It expresses that either or is true. Thus, in the cases listed above, the disjunction of with is true in all cases except case 4. Using the example above, the disjunction expresses that it is either raining outside or there is a cold front over Kansas. (Note, this use of disjunction is supposed to resemble the use of the English word \"or\". However, it is most like the English inclusive \"or\", which can be used to express the truth of at least one of two propositions. It is not like the English exclusive \"or\", which expresses the truth of exactly one of two propositions. That is to say, the exclusive \"or\" is false when both and are true (case 1). An example of the exclusive or is: You may have a bagel or a pastry, but not both. Often in natural language, given the appropriate context, the addendum \"but not both\" is omitted but implied. In mathematics, however, \"or\" is always inclusive or; if exclusive or is meant it will be specified, possibly by \"xor\".)\nBULLET::::- Material conditional also joins two simpler propositions, and we write , which is read \"if then \". The proposition to the left of the arrow is called the antecedent and the proposition to the right is called the consequent. (There is no such designation for conjunction or disjunction, since they are commutative operations.) It expresses that is true whenever is true. Thus is true in every case above except case 2, because this is the only case when is true but is not. Using the example, if then expresses that if it is raining outside then there is a cold-front over Kansas. The material conditional is often confused with physical causation. The material conditional, however, only relates two propositions by their truth-values—which is not the relation of cause and effect. It is contentious in the literature whether the material implication represents logical causation.\nBULLET::::- Biconditional joins two simpler propositions, and we write , which is read \" if and only if \". It expresses that and have the same truth-value, and so, in cases 1 and 4, is true if and only if is true, and false otherwise.\n\nIt is extremely helpful to look at the truth tables for these different operators, as well as the method of analytic tableaux.\n\nPropositional logic is closed under truth-functional connectives. That is to say, for any proposition , is also a proposition. Likewise, for any propositions and , is a proposition, and similarly for disjunction, conditional, and biconditional. This implies that, for instance, is a proposition, and so it can be conjoined with another proposition. In order to represent this, we need to use parentheses to indicate which proposition is conjoined with which. For instance, is not a well-formed formula, because we do not know if we are conjoining with or if we are conjoining with . Thus we must write either to represent the former, or to represent the latter. By evaluating the truth conditions, we see that both expressions have the same truth conditions (will be true in the same cases), and moreover that any proposition formed by arbitrary conjunctions will have the same truth conditions, regardless of the location of the parentheses. This means that conjunction is associative, however, one should not assume that parentheses never serve a purpose. For instance, the sentence does not have the same truth conditions of , so they are different sentences distinguished only by the parentheses. One can verify this by the truth-table method referenced above.\n\nNote: For any arbitrary number of propositional constants, we can form a finite number of cases which list their possible truth-values. A simple way to generate this is by truth-tables, in which one writes , , ..., , for any list of propositional constants—that is to say, any list of propositional constants with entries. Below this list, one writes rows, and below one fills in the first half of the rows with true (or T) and the second half with false (or F). Below one fills in one-quarter of the rows with T, then one-quarter with F, then one-quarter with T and the last quarter with F. The next column alternates between true and false for each eighth of the rows, then sixteenths, and so on, until the last propositional constant varies between T and F for each row. This will give a complete listing of cases or truth-value assignments possible for those propositional constants.\n\nThe propositional calculus then defines an \"argument\" to be a list of propositions. A valid argument is a list of propositions, the last of which follows from—or is implied by—the rest. All other arguments are invalid. The simplest valid argument is modus ponens, one instance of which is the following list of propositions:\n\nThis is a list of three propositions, each line is a proposition, and the last follows from the rest. The first two lines are called premises, and the last line the conclusion. We say that any proposition follows from any set of propositions formula_6, if must be true whenever every member of the set formula_6 is true. In the argument above, for any and , whenever and are true, necessarily is true. Notice that, when is true, we cannot consider cases 3 and 4 (from the truth table). When is true, we cannot consider case 2. This leaves only case 1, in which is also true. Thus is implied by the premises.\n\nThis generalizes schematically. Thus, where and may be any propositions at all,\n\nOther argument forms are convenient, but not necessary. Given a complete set of axioms (see below for one such set), modus ponens is sufficient to prove all other argument forms in propositional logic, thus they may be considered to be a derivative. Note, this is not true of the extension of propositional logic to other logics like first-order logic. First-order logic requires at least one additional rule of inference in order to obtain completeness.\n\nThe significance of argument in formal logic is that one may obtain new truths from established truths. In the first example above, given the two premises, the truth of is not yet known or stated. After the argument is made, is deduced. In this way, we define a deduction system to be a set of all propositions that may be deduced from another set of propositions. For instance, given the set of propositions formula_9, we can define a deduction system, , which is the set of all propositions which follow from . Reiteration is always assumed, so formula_10. Also, from the first element of , last element, as well as modus ponens, is a consequence, and so formula_11. Because we have not included sufficiently complete axioms, though, nothing else may be deduced. Thus, even though most deduction systems studied in propositional logic are able to deduce formula_12, this one is too weak to prove such a proposition.\n\nA propositional calculus is a formal system formula_13, where:\n\nBULLET::::- The \"alpha set\" formula_14 is a countably infinite set of elements called \"proposition symbols\" or \"propositional variables\". Syntactically speaking, these are the most basic elements of the formal language formula_15, otherwise referred to as \"atomic formulas\" or \"terminal elements\". In the examples to follow, the elements of formula_14 are typically the letters , , , and so on.\nBULLET::::- The \"omega set\" is a finite set of elements called \"operator symbols\" or \"logical connectives\". The set is partitioned into disjoint subsets as follows:\n\nBULLET::::- The \"zeta set\" formula_25 is a finite set of \"transformation rules\" that are called \"inference rules\" when they acquire logical applications.\nBULLET::::- The \"iota set\" formula_26 is a countable set of \"initial points\" that are called \"axioms\" when they receive logical interpretations.\n\nThe \"language\" of formula_15, also known as its set of \"formulas\", \"well-formed formulas\", is inductively defined by the following rules:\n\nBULLET::::1. Base: Any element of the alpha set formula_14 is a formula of formula_15.\nBULLET::::2. If formula_30 are formulas and formula_31 is in formula_18, then formula_33 is a formula.\nBULLET::::3. Closed: Nothing else is a formula of formula_15.\n\nRepeated applications of these rules permits the construction of complex formulas. For example:\n\nBULLET::::1. By rule 1, is a formula.\nBULLET::::2. By rule 2, formula_35 is a formula.\nBULLET::::3. By rule 1, is a formula.\nBULLET::::4. By rule 2, formula_36 is a formula.\n\nLet formula_37, where formula_14, formula_39, formula_25, formula_26 are defined as follows:\n\nBULLET::::- The alpha set formula_14, is a countably infinite set of symbols, for example:\n\nBULLET::::- Of the three connectives for conjunction, disjunction, and implication (formula_44, and ), one can be taken as primitive and the other two can be defined in terms of it and negation (). Indeed, all of the logical connectives can be defined in terms of a sole sufficient operator. The biconditional () can of course be defined in terms of conjunction and implication, with formula_45 defined as formula_46.\n\nBULLET::::- An axiom system discovered by Jan Łukasiewicz formulates a propositional calculus in this language as follows. The axioms are all substitution instances of:\n\nBULLET::::- The rule of inference is modus ponens (i.e., from and formula_53, infer ). Then formula_54 is defined as formula_55, and formula_56 is defined as formula_57. This system is used in Metamath set.mm formal proof database.\n\nLet formula_58, where formula_14, formula_39, formula_25, formula_26 are defined as follows:\n\nBULLET::::- The alpha set formula_14, is a countably infinite set of symbols, for example:\nBULLET::::- formula_43\nBULLET::::- The omega set formula_47 partitions as follows:\nBULLET::::- formula_19\nBULLET::::- formula_67\n\nIn the following example of a propositional calculus, the transformation rules are intended to be interpreted as the inference rules of a so-called \"natural deduction system\". The particular system presented here has no initial points, which means that its interpretation for logical applications derives its theorems from an empty axiom set.\n\nBULLET::::- The set of initial points is empty, that is, formula_68.\nBULLET::::- The set of transformation rules, formula_25, is described as follows:\n\nOur propositional calculus has eleven inference rules. These rules allow us to derive other true formulas given a set of formulas that are assumed to be true. The first ten simply state that we can infer certain well-formed formulas from other well-formed formulas. The last rule however uses hypothetical reasoning in the sense that in the premise of the rule we temporarily assume an (unproven) hypothesis to be part of the set of inferred formulas to see if we can infer a certain other formula. Since the first ten rules don't do this they are usually described as \"non-hypothetical\" rules, and the last one as a \"hypothetical\" rule.\n\nIn describing the transformation rules, we may introduce a metalanguage symbol formula_70. It is basically a convenient shorthand for saying \"infer that\". The format is formula_71, in which is a (possibly empty) set of formulas called premises, and is a formula called conclusion. The transformation rule formula_71 means that if every proposition in is a theorem (or has the same truth value as the axioms), then is also a theorem. Note that considering the following rule Conjunction introduction, we will know whenever has more than one formula, we can always safely reduce it into one formula using conjunction. So for short, from that time on we may represent as one formula instead of a set. Another omission for convenience is when is an empty set, in which case may not appear.\n\nBULLET::::- Negation introduction: From formula_53 and formula_74, infer formula_35.\nBULLET::::- Negation elimination: From formula_35, infer formula_78.\nBULLET::::- Double negation elimination: From formula_80, infer .\nBULLET::::- Conjunction introduction: From and , infer formula_82.\nBULLET::::- Conjunction elimination: From formula_82, infer .\nBULLET::::- Disjunction introduction: From , infer formula_88.\nBULLET::::- Disjunction elimination: From formula_88 and formula_78 and formula_94, infer .\nBULLET::::- Biconditional introduction: From formula_53 and formula_97, infer formula_98.\nBULLET::::- Biconditional elimination: From formula_98, infer formula_53.\nBULLET::::- Modus ponens (conditional elimination) : From and formula_53, infer .\nBULLET::::- Conditional proof (conditional introduction) : From [accepting allows a proof of ], infer formula_53.\n\n+ Basic and Derived Argument Forms\n! Name\n! Sequent\n! Description\n\nOne of the main uses of a propositional calculus, when interpreted for logical applications, is to determine relations of logical equivalence between propositional formulas. These relationships are determined by means of the available transformation rules, sequences of which are called \"derivations\" or \"proofs\".\n\nIn the discussion to follow, a proof is presented as a sequence of numbered lines, with each line consisting of a single formula followed by a \"reason\" or \"justification\" for introducing that formula. Each premise of the argument, that is, an assumption introduced as an hypothesis of the argument, is listed at the beginning of the sequence and is marked as a \"premise\" in lieu of other justification. The conclusion is listed on the last line. A proof is complete if every line follows from the previous ones by the correct application of a transformation rule. (For a contrasting approach, see proof-trees).\n\nBULLET::::- To be shown that .\nBULLET::::- One possible proof of this (which, though valid, happens to contain more steps than are necessary) may be arranged as follows:\n\n+ Example of a Proof\n! Number\n! Formula\n! Reason\n\nInterpret formula_148 as \"Assuming , infer \". Read formula_149 as \"Assuming nothing, infer that implies \", or \"It is a tautology that implies \", or \"It is always true that implies \".\n\nThe crucial properties of this set of rules are that they are \"sound\" and \"complete\". Informally this means that the rules are correct and that no other rules are required. These claims can be made more formal as follows.\n\nWe define a \"truth assignment\" as a function that maps propositional variables to true or false. Informally such a truth assignment can be understood as the description of a possible state of affairs (or possible world) where certain statements are true and others are not. The semantics of formulas can then be formalized by defining for which \"state of affairs\" they are considered to be true, which is what is done by the following definition.\n\nWe define when such a truth assignment satisfies a certain well-formed formula with the following rules:\nBULLET::::- satisfies the propositional variable if and only if\nBULLET::::- satisfies if and only if does not satisfy\nBULLET::::- satisfies if and only if satisfies both and\nBULLET::::- satisfies if and only if satisfies at least one of either or\nBULLET::::- satisfies if and only if it is not the case that satisfies but not\nBULLET::::- satisfies if and only if satisfies both and or satisfies neither one of them\n\nWith this definition we can now formalize what it means for a formula to be implied by a certain set of formulas. Informally this is true if in all worlds that are possible given the set of formulas the formula also holds. This leads to the following formal definition: We say that a set of well-formed formulas \"semantically entails\" (or \"implies\") a certain well-formed formula if all truth assignments that satisfy all the formulas in also satisfy .\n\nFinally we define \"syntactical entailment\" such that is syntactically entailed by if and only if we can derive it with the inference rules that were presented above in a finite number of steps. This allows us to formulate exactly what it means for the set of inference rules to be sound and complete:\n\nSoundness: If the set of well-formed formulas syntactically entails the well-formed formula then semantically entails .\n\nCompleteness: If the set of well-formed formulas semantically entails the well-formed formula then syntactically entails .\n\nFor the above set of rules this is indeed the case.\n\nNotational conventions: Let be a variable ranging over sets of sentences. Let and range over sentences. For \" syntactically entails \" we write \" proves \". For \" semantically entails \" we write \" implies \".\n\nWe want to show: (if proves , then implies ).\n\nWe note that \" proves \" has an inductive definition, and that gives us the immediate resources for demonstrating claims of the form \"If proves , then ...\". So our proof proceeds by induction.\nNotice that Basis Step II can be omitted for natural deduction systems because they have no axioms. When used, Step II involves showing that each of the axioms is a (semantic) logical truth.\n\nThe Basis steps demonstrate that the simplest provable sentences from are also implied by , for any . (The proof is simple, since the semantic fact that a set implies any of its members, is also trivial.) The Inductive step will systematically cover all the further sentences that might be provable—by considering each case where we might reach a logical conclusion using an inference rule—and shows that if a new sentence is provable, it is also logically implied. (For example, we might have a rule telling us that from \"\" we can derive \" or \". In III.a We assume that if is provable it is implied. We also know that if is provable then \" or \" is provable. We have to show that then \" or \" too is implied. We do so by appeal to the semantic definition and the assumption we just made. is provable from , we assume. So it is also implied by . So any semantic valuation making all of true makes true. But any valuation making true makes \" or \" true, by the defined semantics for \"or\". So any valuation which makes all of true makes \" or \" true. So \" or \" is implied.) Generally, the Inductive step will consist of a lengthy but simple case-by-case analysis of all the rules of inference, showing that each \"preserves\" semantic implication.\n\nBy the definition of provability, there are no sentences provable other than by being a member of , an axiom, or following by a rule; so if all of those are semantically implied, the deduction calculus is sound.\n\nWe adopt the same notational conventions as above.\n\nWe want to show: If implies , then proves . We proceed by contraposition: We show instead that if does not prove then does not imply . If we show that there is a model where does not hold despite being true, then obviously does not imply . The idea is to build such a model out of our very assumption that does not prove .\n\nQED\n\nIf a formula is a tautology, then there is a truth table for it which shows that each valuation yields the value true for the formula. Consider such a valuation. By mathematical induction on the length of the subformulas, show that the truth or falsity of the subformula follows from the truth or falsity (as appropriate for the valuation) of each propositional variable in the subformula. Then combine the lines of the truth table together two at a time by using \"( is true implies ) implies (( is false implies ) implies )\". Keep repeating this until all dependencies on propositional variables have been eliminated. The result is that we have proved the given tautology. Since every tautology is provable, the logic is complete.\n\nAn interpretation of a truth-functional propositional calculus formula_152 is an assignment to each propositional symbol of formula_152 of one or the other (but not both) of the truth values truth (T) and falsity (F), and an assignment to the connective symbols of formula_152 of their usual truth-functional meanings. An interpretation of a truth-functional propositional calculus may also be expressed in terms of truth tables.\n\nFor formula_155 distinct propositional symbols there are formula_156 distinct possible interpretations. For any particular symbol formula_157, for example, there are formula_158 possible interpretations:\nBULLET::::1. formula_157 is assigned T, or\nBULLET::::2. formula_157 is assigned F.\nFor the pair formula_157, formula_162 there are formula_163 possible interpretations:\nBULLET::::1. both are assigned T,\nBULLET::::2. both are assigned F,\nBULLET::::3. formula_157 is assigned T and formula_162 is assigned F, or\nBULLET::::4. formula_157 is assigned F and formula_162 is assigned T.\n\nSince formula_152 has formula_169, that is, denumerably many propositional symbols, there are formula_170, and therefore uncountably many distinct possible interpretations of formula_152.\n\nIf and are formulas of formula_152 and formula_173 is an interpretation of formula_152 then:\n\nBULLET::::- A sentence of propositional logic is \"true under an interpretation\" formula_173 iff formula_173 assigns the truth value T to that sentence. If a sentence is true under an interpretation, then that interpretation is called a \"model\" of that sentence.\nBULLET::::- is \"false under an interpretation\" formula_173 iff is not true under formula_173.\nBULLET::::- A sentence of propositional logic is \"logically valid\" if it is true under every interpretation.\nBULLET::::- A sentence of propositional logic is a \"semantic consequence\" of a sentence iff there is no interpretation under which is true and is false.\nBULLET::::- A sentence of propositional logic is \"consistent\" iff it is true under at least one interpretation. It is inconsistent if it is not consistent.\n\nSome consequences of these definitions:\n\nBULLET::::- For any given interpretation a given formula is either true or false.\nBULLET::::- No formula is both true and false under the same interpretation.\nBULLET::::- is false for a given interpretation iff formula_180 is true for that interpretation; and is true under an interpretation iff formula_180 is false under that interpretation.\nBULLET::::- If and formula_182 are both true under a given interpretation, then is true under that interpretation.\nBULLET::::- If formula_183 and formula_184, then formula_185.\nBULLET::::- formula_180 is true under formula_173 iff is not true under formula_173.\nBULLET::::- formula_182 is true under formula_173 iff either is not true under formula_173 or is true under formula_173.\nBULLET::::- A sentence of propositional logic is a semantic consequence of a sentence iff formula_182 is logically valid, that is, formula_194 iff formula_195.\n\nIt is possible to define another version of propositional calculus, which defines most of the syntax of the logical operators by means of axioms, and which uses only one inference rule.\n\nLet , , and stand for well-formed formulas. (The well-formed formulas themselves would not contain any Greek letters, but only capital Roman letters, connective operators, and parentheses.) Then the axioms are as follows:\n\n+ Axioms\n! Name\n! Axiom Schema\n! Description\n\nBULLET::::- Axiom may be considered to be a \"distributive property of implication with respect to implication.\"\nBULLET::::- Axioms and correspond to \"conjunction elimination\". The relation between and reflects the commutativity of the conjunction operator.\nBULLET::::- Axiom corresponds to \"conjunction introduction.\"\nBULLET::::- Axioms and correspond to \"disjunction introduction.\" The relation between and reflects the commutativity of the disjunction operator.\nBULLET::::- Axiom corresponds to \"reductio ad absurdum.\"\nBULLET::::- Axiom says that \"anything can be deduced from a contradiction.\"\nBULLET::::- Axiom is called \"tertium non datur\" (Latin: \"a third is not given\") and reflects the semantic valuation of propositional formulas: a formula can have a truth-value of either true or false. There is no third truth-value, at least not in classical logic. Intuitionistic logicians do not accept the axiom .\n\nThe inference rule is modus ponens:\n\nLet a demonstration be represented by a sequence, with hypotheses to the left of the turnstile and the conclusion to the right of the turnstile. Then the deduction theorem can be stated as follows:\n\nThis deduction theorem (DT) is not itself formulated with propositional calculus: it is not a theorem of propositional calculus, but a theorem about propositional calculus. In this sense, it is a meta-theorem, comparable to theorems about the soundness or completeness of propositional calculus.\n\nOn the other hand, DT is so useful for simplifying the syntactical proof process that it can be considered and used as another inference rule, accompanying modus ponens. In this sense, DT corresponds to the natural conditional proof inference rule which is part of the first version of propositional calculus introduced in this article.\n\nThe converse of DT is also valid:\nin fact, the validity of the converse of DT is almost trivial compared to that of DT:\n\nThe converse of DT has powerful implications: it can be used to convert an axiom into an inference rule. For example, the axiom AND-1,\ncan be transformed by means of the converse of the deduction theorem into the inference rule\nwhich is conjunction elimination, one of the ten inference rules used in the first version (in this article) of the propositional calculus.\n\nThe following is an example of a (syntactical) demonstration, involving only axioms and :\n\nProve: formula_222 (Reflexivity of implication).\n\nProof:\nBULLET::::1. formula_223\nBULLET::::- Axiom with formula_224\nBULLET::::2. formula_225\nBULLET::::- Axiom with formula_226\nBULLET::::3. formula_227\nBULLET::::- From (1) and (2) by modus ponens.\nBULLET::::4. formula_228\nBULLET::::- Axiom with formula_229\nBULLET::::5. formula_222\nBULLET::::- From (3) and (4) by modus ponens.\n\nThe preceding alternative calculus is an example of a Hilbert-style deduction system. In the case of propositional systems the axioms are terms built with logical connectives and the only inference rule is modus ponens. Equational logic as standardly used informally in high school algebra is a different kind of calculus from Hilbert systems. Its theorems are equations and its inference rules express the properties of equality, namely that it is a congruence on terms that admits substitution.\n\nClassical propositional calculus as described above is equivalent to Boolean algebra, while intuitionistic propositional calculus is equivalent to Heyting algebra. The equivalence is shown by translation in each direction of the theorems of the respective systems. Theorems formula_198 of classical or intuitionistic propositional calculus are translated as equations formula_232 of Boolean or Heyting algebra respectively. Conversely theorems formula_233 of Boolean or Heyting algebra are translated as theorems formula_234 of classical or intuitionistic calculus respectively, for which formula_235 is a standard abbreviation. In the case of Boolean algebra formula_233 can also be translated as formula_237, but this translation is incorrect intuitionistically.\n\nIn both Boolean and Heyting algebra, inequality formula_238 can be used in place of equality. The equality formula_233 is expressible as a pair of inequalities formula_238 and formula_241. Conversely the inequality formula_238 is expressible as the equality formula_243, or as formula_244. The significance of inequality for Hilbert-style systems is that it corresponds to the latter's deduction or entailment symbol formula_70. An entailment\n\nis translated in the inequality version of the algebraic framework as\n\nConversely the algebraic inequality formula_238 is translated as the entailment\n\nThe difference between implication formula_250 and inequality or entailment formula_238 or formula_249 is that the former is internal to the logic while the latter is external. Internal implication between two terms is another term of the same kind. Entailment as external implication between two terms expresses a metatruth outside the language of the logic, and is considered part of the metalanguage. Even when the logic under study is intuitionistic, entailment is ordinarily understood classically as two-valued: either the left side entails, or is less-or-equal to, the right side, or it is not.\n\nSimilar but more complex translations to and from algebraic logics are possible for natural deduction systems as described above and for the sequent calculus. The entailments of the latter can be interpreted as two-valued, but a more insightful interpretation is as a set, the elements of which can be understood as abstract proofs organized as the morphisms of a category. In this interpretation the cut rule of the sequent calculus corresponds to composition in the category. Boolean and Heyting algebras enter this picture as special categories having at most one morphism per homset, i.e., one proof per entailment, corresponding to the idea that existence of proofs is all that matters: any proof will do and there is no point in distinguishing them.\n\nIt is possible to generalize the definition of a formal language from a set of finite sequences over a finite basis to include many other sets of mathematical structures, so long as they are built up by finitary means from finite materials. What's more, many of these families of formal structures are especially well-suited for use in logic.\n\nFor example, there are many families of graphs that are close enough analogues of formal languages that the concept of a calculus is quite easily and naturally extended to them. Indeed, many species of graphs arise as \"parse graphs\" in the syntactic analysis of the corresponding families of text structures. The exigencies of practical computation on formal languages frequently demand that text strings be converted into pointer structure renditions of parse graphs, simply as a matter of checking whether strings are well-formed formulas or not. Once this is done, there are many advantages to be gained from developing the graphical analogue of the calculus on strings. The mapping from strings to parse graphs is called \"parsing\" and the inverse mapping from parse graphs to strings is achieved by an operation that is called \"traversing\" the graph.\n\nPropositional calculus is about the simplest kind of logical calculus in current use. It can be extended in several ways. (Aristotelian \"syllogistic\" calculus, which is largely supplanted in modern logic, is in \"some\" ways simpler – but in other ways more complex – than propositional calculus.) The most immediate way to develop a more complex logical calculus is to introduce rules that are sensitive to more fine-grained details of the sentences being used.\n\nFirst-order logic (a.k.a. first-order predicate logic) results when the \"atomic sentences\" of propositional logic are broken up into terms, variables, predicates, and quantifiers, all keeping the rules of propositional logic with some new ones introduced. (For example, from \"All dogs are mammals\" we may infer \"If Rover is a dog then Rover is a mammal\".) With the tools of first-order logic it is possible to formulate a number of theories, either with explicit axioms or by rules of inference, that can themselves be treated as logical calculi. Arithmetic is the best known of these; others include set theory and mereology. Second-order logic and other higher-order logics are formal extensions of first-order logic. Thus, it makes sense to refer to propositional logic as \"\"zeroth-order logic\"\", when comparing it with these logics.\n\nModal logic also offers a variety of inferences that cannot be captured in propositional calculus. For example, from \"Necessarily \" we may infer that . From we may infer \"It is possible that \". The translation between modal logics and algebraic logics concerns classical and intuitionistic logics but with the introduction of a unary operator on Boolean or Heyting algebras, different from the Boolean operations, interpreting the possibility modality, and in the case of Heyting algebra a second operator interpreting necessity (for Boolean algebra this is redundant since necessity is the De Morgan dual of possibility). The first operator preserves 0 and disjunction while the second preserves 1 and conjunction.\n\nMany-valued logics are those allowing sentences to have values other than \"true\" and \"false\". (For example, \"neither\" and \"both\" are standard \"extra values\"; \"continuum logic\" allows each sentence to have any of an infinite number of \"degrees of truth\" between \"true\" and \"false\".) These logics often require calculational devices quite distinct from propositional calculus. When the values form a Boolean algebra (which may have more than two or even infinitely many values), many-valued logic reduces to classical logic; many-valued logics are therefore only of independent interest when the values form an algebra that is not Boolean.\n\nFinding solutions to propositional logic formulas is an NP-complete problem. However, practical methods exist (e.g., DPLL algorithm, 1962; Chaff algorithm, 2001) that are very fast for many useful cases. Recent work has extended the SAT solver algorithms to work with propositions containing arithmetic expressions; these are the SMT solvers.\n\nBULLET::::- First-order logic\nBULLET::::- Second-order propositional logic\nBULLET::::- Second-order logic\nBULLET::::- Higher-order logic\n\nBULLET::::- Boolean algebra (logic)\nBULLET::::- Boolean algebra (structure)\nBULLET::::- Boolean algebra topics\nBULLET::::- Boolean domain\nBULLET::::- Boolean function\nBULLET::::- Boolean-valued function\nBULLET::::- Categorical logic\nBULLET::::- Combinational logic\nBULLET::::- Combinatory logic\nBULLET::::- Conceptual graph\nBULLET::::- Disjunctive syllogism\nBULLET::::- Entitative graph\nBULLET::::- Equational logic\nBULLET::::- Existential graph\nBULLET::::- Frege's propositional calculus\nBULLET::::- Implicational propositional calculus\nBULLET::::- Intuitionistic propositional calculus\nBULLET::::- Jean Buridan\nBULLET::::- \"Laws of Form\"\nBULLET::::- Logical graph\nBULLET::::- Logical NOR\nBULLET::::- Logical value\nBULLET::::- Operation (mathematics)\nBULLET::::- Paul of Venice\nBULLET::::- Peirce's law\nBULLET::::- Peter of Spain (author)\nBULLET::::- Propositional formula\nBULLET::::- Symmetric difference\nBULLET::::- Truth function\nBULLET::::- Truth table\nBULLET::::- Walter Burley\nBULLET::::- William of Sherwood\nBULLET::::- Brown, Frank Markham (2003), \"Boolean Reasoning: The Logic of Boolean Equations\", 1st edition, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell, MA. 2nd edition, Dover Publications, Mineola, NY.\nBULLET::::- Chang, C.C. and Keisler, H.J. (1973), \"Model Theory\", North-Holland, Amsterdam, Netherlands.\nBULLET::::- Kohavi, Zvi (1978), \"Switching and Finite Automata Theory\", 1st edition, McGraw–Hill, 1970. 2nd edition, McGraw–Hill, 1978.\nBULLET::::- Korfhage, Robert R. (1974), \"Discrete Computational Structures\", Academic Press, New York, NY.\nBULLET::::- Lambek, J. and Scott, P.J. (1986), \"Introduction to Higher Order Categorical Logic\", Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.\nBULLET::::- Mendelson, Elliot (1964), \"Introduction to Mathematical Logic\", D. Van Nostrand Company.\n\nBULLET::::- Klement, Kevin C. (2006), \"Propositional Logic\", in James Fieser and Bradley Dowden (eds.), \"Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy\", Eprint.\nBULLET::::- Formal Predicate Calculus, contains a systematic formal development along the lines of Alternative calculus\nBULLET::::- \"forall x: an introduction to formal logic\", by P.D. Magnus, covers formal semantics and proof theory for sentential logic.\nBULLET::::- Chapter 2 / Propositional Logic from Logic In Action\nBULLET::::- Propositional sequent calculus prover on Project Nayuki. (\"note\": implication can be input in the form !XY, and a sequent can be a single formula prefixed with > and having no commas)\nBULLET::::- Propositional Logic - A Generative Grammar\n"}
{"id": "18155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18155", "title": "Lazy evaluation", "text": "Lazy evaluation\n\nIn programming language theory, lazy evaluation, or call-by-need is an evaluation strategy which delays the evaluation of an expression until its value is needed (non-strict evaluation) and which also avoids repeated evaluations (sharing). The sharing can reduce the running time of certain functions by an exponential factor over other non-strict evaluation strategies, such as call-by-name. \n\nHowever, for lengthy operations, it would be more appropriate to perform before any time-sensitive operations, such as handling user inputs in a video game.\n\nThe benefits of lazy evaluation include: \nBULLET::::- The ability to define control flow (structures) as abstractions instead of primitives.\nBULLET::::- The ability to define potentially infinite data structures. This allows for more straightforward implementation of some algorithms.\nBULLET::::- Performance increases by avoiding needless calculations, and avoiding error conditions when evaluating compound expressions.\n\nLazy evaluation is often combined with memoization, as described in Jon Bentley's \"Writing Efficient Programs\". After a function's value is computed for that parameter or set of parameters, the result is stored in a lookup table that is indexed by the values of those parameters; the next time the function is called, the table is consulted to determine whether the result for that combination of parameter values is already available. If so, the stored result is simply returned. If not, the function is evaluated and another entry is added to the lookup table for reuse.\n\nLazy evaluation can lead to reduction in memory footprint, since values are created when needed. However, lazy evaluation is difficult to combine with imperative features such as exception handling and input/output, because the order of operations becomes indeterminate. Lazy evaluation can introduce memory leaks.\n\nThe opposite of lazy evaluation is eager evaluation, sometimes known as strict evaluation. Eager evaluation is the evaluation strategy employed in most programming languages.\n\nLazy evaluation was introduced for lambda calculus by Christopher Wadsworth. For programming languages, it was independently introduced by Peter Henderson and James H. Morris and by Daniel P. Friedman and David S. Wise.\n\nDelayed evaluation is used particularly in functional programming languages. When using delayed evaluation, an expression is not evaluated as soon as it gets bound to a variable, but when the evaluator is forced to produce the expression's value. That is, a statement such as codice_1 (i.e. the assignment of the result of an expression to a variable) clearly calls for the expression to be evaluated and the result placed in codice_2, but what actually is in codice_2 is irrelevant until there is a need for its value via a reference to codice_2 in some later expression whose evaluation could itself be deferred, though eventually the rapidly growing tree of dependencies would be pruned to produce some symbol rather than another for the outside world to see.\n\nDelayed evaluation has the advantage of being able to create calculable infinite lists without infinite loops or size matters interfering in computation. For example, one could create a function that creates an infinite list (often called a \"stream\") of Fibonacci numbers. The calculation of the \"n\"-th Fibonacci number would be merely the extraction of that element from the infinite list, forcing the evaluation of only the first n members of the list.\n\nFor example, in the Haskell programming language, the list of all Fibonacci numbers can be written as:\n\nIn Haskell syntax, \"codice_5\" prepends an element to a list, codice_6 returns a list without its first element, and codice_7 uses a specified function (in this case addition) to combine corresponding elements of two lists to produce a third.\n\nProvided the programmer is careful, only the values that are required to produce a particular result are evaluated. However, certain calculations may result in the program attempting to evaluate an infinite number of elements; for example, requesting the length of the list or trying to sum the elements of the list with a fold operation would result in the program either failing to terminate or running out of memory.\n\nIn almost all common \"eager\" languages, \"if\" statements evaluate in a lazy fashion.\nevaluates (a), then if and only if (a) evaluates to true does it evaluate (b), otherwise it evaluates (c). That is, either (b) or (c) will not be evaluated. Conversely, in an eager language the expected behavior is that\nwill still evaluate (e) when computing the value of f(d, e) even though (e) is unused in function f. However, user-defined control structures depend on exact syntax, so for example\n(i) and (j) would both be evaluated in an eager language. While in a lazy language,\n(i) or (j) would be evaluated, but never both.\n\nLazy evaluation allows control structures to be defined normally, and not as primitives or compile-time techniques. If (i) or (j) have side effects or introduce run time errors, the subtle differences between (l) and (l') can be complex. It is usually possible to introduce user-defined lazy control structures in eager languages as functions, though they may depart from the language's syntax for eager evaluation: Often the involved code bodies (like (i) and (j)) need to be wrapped in a function value, so that they are executed only when called.\n\nShort-circuit evaluation of Boolean control structures is sometimes called \"lazy\".\n\nMany languages offer the notion of \"infinite data-structures\". These allow definitions of data to be given in terms of infinite ranges, or unending recursion, but the actual values are only computed when needed. Take for example this trivial program in Haskell:\n\nIn the function numberFromInfiniteList, the value of infinity is an infinite range, but until an actual value (or more specifically, a specific value at a certain index) is needed, the list is not evaluated, and even then it is only evaluated as needed (that is, until the desired index.)\n\nA compound expression might be in the form \"EasilyComputed or LotsOfWork\" so that if the easy part gives true a lot of work could be avoided. For instance, suppose a large number N is to be checked to determine if it is a prime number and a function IsPrime(N) is available, but alas, it can require a lot of computation to evaluate. Perhaps \"N=2 or [Mod(N,2)≠0 and IsPrime(N)]\" will help if there are to be many evaluations with arbitrary values for N.\n\nA compound expression might be in the form \"SafeToTry and Expression\" whereby if \"SafeToTry\" is false there should be no attempt at evaluating the \"Expression\" lest a run-time error be signalled, such as divide-by-zero or index-out-of-bounds, etc. For instance, the following pseudocode locates the last non-zero element of an array:\nShould all elements of the array be zero, the loop will work down to L = 0, and in this case the loop must be terminated without attempting to reference element zero of the array, which does not exist.\n\nIn computer windowing systems, the painting of information to the screen is driven by \"expose events\" which drive the display code at the last possible moment. By doing this, windowing systems avoid computing unnecessary display content updates.\n\nAnother example of laziness in modern computer systems is copy-on-write page allocation or demand paging, where memory is allocated only when a value stored in that memory is changed.\n\nLaziness can be useful for high performance scenarios. An example is the Unix mmap function, which provides \"demand driven\" loading of pages from disk, so that only those pages actually touched are loaded into memory, and unneeded memory is not allocated.\n\nMATLAB implements \"copy on edit\", where arrays which are copied have their actual memory storage replicated only when their content is changed, possibly leading to an \"out of memory\" error when updating an element afterwards instead of during the copy operation.\n\nSome programming languages delay evaluation of expressions by default, and some others provide functions or special syntax to delay evaluation. In Miranda and Haskell, evaluation of function arguments is delayed by default. In many other languages, evaluation can be delayed by explicitly suspending the computation using special syntax (as with Scheme's \"codice_8\" and \"codice_9\" and OCaml's \"codice_10\" and \"codice_11\") or, more generally, by wrapping the expression in a thunk. The object representing such an explicitly delayed evaluation is called a \"lazy future.\" Raku uses lazy evaluation of lists, so one can assign infinite lists to variables and use them as arguments to functions, but unlike Haskell and Miranda, Raku does not use lazy evaluation of arithmetic operators and functions by default.\n\nIn lazy programming languages such as Haskell, although the default is to evaluate expressions only when they are demanded, it is possible in some cases to make code more eager—or conversely, to make it more lazy again after it has been made more eager. This can be done by explicitly coding something which forces evaluation (which may make the code more eager) or avoiding such code (which may make the code more lazy). \"Strict\" evaluation usually implies eagerness, but they are technically different concepts.\n\nHowever, there is an optimisation implemented in some compilers called strictness analysis, which, in some cases, allows the compiler to infer that a value will always be used. In such cases, this may render the programmer's choice of whether to force that particular value or not, irrelevant, because strictness analysis will force strict evaluation.\n\nIn Haskell, marking constructor fields strict means that their values will always be demanded immediately. The codice_12 function can also be used to demand a value immediately and then pass it on, which is useful if a constructor field should generally be lazy. However, neither of these techniques implements \"recursive\" strictness—for that, a function called codice_13 was invented.\n\nAlso, pattern matching in Haskell 98 is strict by default, so the codice_14 qualifier has to be used to make it lazy.\n\nIn Python 2.x the codice_15 function computes a list of integers. The entire list is stored in memory when the first assignment statement is evaluated, so this is an example of eager or immediate evaluation:\nIn Python 3.x the codice_15 function returns a special range object which computes elements of the list on demand. Elements of the range object are only generated when they are needed (e.g., when codice_17 is evaluated in the following example), so this is an example of lazy or deferred evaluation:\n\nIn Python 2.x is possible to use a function called codice_18 which returns an object that generates the numbers in the range on demand. The advantage of codice_19 is that generated object will always take the same amount of memory.\n\nFrom version 2.2 forward, Python manifests lazy evaluation by implementing iterators (lazy sequences) unlike tuple or list sequences. For instance (Python 2):\n\nIn the .NET Framework it is possible to do lazy evaluation using the class System.Lazy<T>. The class can be easily exploited in F# using the lazy keyword, while the force method will force the evaluation. There are also specialized collections like Microsoft.FSharp.Collections.Seq that provide built-in support for lazy evaluation. \n\nlet fibonacci = Seq.unfold (fun (x, y) -> Some(x, (y, x + y))) (0I,1I)\nfibonacci > Seq.nth 1000\n\nIn C# and VB.NET, the class System.Lazy<T> is directly used. \n\npublic int Sum()\n\nOr with a more practical example: \n\n// recursive calculation of the n'th fibonacci number\npublic int Fib(int n)\n\npublic void Main()\n\nAnother way is to use the yield keyword: \n\n// eager evaluation \npublic IEnumerable<int> Fibonacci(int x)\n\n// lazy evaluation \npublic IEnumerable<int> LazyFibonacci(int x)\n\nBULLET::::- Combinatory logic\nBULLET::::- Currying\nBULLET::::- Dataflow\nBULLET::::- Eager evaluation\nBULLET::::- Functional programming\nBULLET::::- Futures and promises\nBULLET::::- Generator (computer programming)\nBULLET::::- Graph reduction\nBULLET::::- Incremental computing – a related concept whereby computations are only repeated if their inputs change. May be combined with lazy evaluation.\nBULLET::::- Lambda calculus\nBULLET::::- Lazy initialization\nBULLET::::- Look-ahead\nBULLET::::- Non-strict programming language\nBULLET::::- Normal order evaluation\nBULLET::::- Short-circuit evaluation (minimal)\n\nBULLET::::- PhD thesis, Oxford University\nBULLET::::- Design patterns\nBULLET::::- John Hughes. \"Why functional programming matters\". \"The Computer Journal\" - Special issue on lazy functional programming. Volume 32 Issue 2, April 1989.\nBULLET::::- Philip Wadler. \"How to replace failure by a list of successes a method for exception handling, backtracking, and pattern matching in lazy functional languages\". \"Functional Programming Languages and Computer Architecture\". Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 1985, Volume 201/1985, 113-128.\nBULLET::::- Laziness in strict languages\nBULLET::::- Philip Wadler, Walid Taha, and David MacQueen. \"How to add laziness to a strict language, without even being odd\". Workshop on Standard ML, Baltimore, September 1998.\nBULLET::::- Blog posts by computer scientists\nBULLET::::- Robert Harper. \"The Point of Laziness\"\nBULLET::::- Lennart Augustsson. \"More points for lazy evaluation\"\n\nBULLET::::- Lazy Evaluation at the Portland Pattern Repository\nBULLET::::- Lazy evaluation at Haskell Wiki\nBULLET::::- The Incomplete Guide to Lazy Evaluation (in Haskell) – A series of tutorials on lazy evaluation in Haskell: How it works, how it helps making code more modular, and other things.\nBULLET::::- Functional programming in Python becomes lazy\nBULLET::::- Lazy function argument evaluation in the D language\nBULLET::::- Lazy evaluation macros in Nemerle\nBULLET::::- Lambda calculus in Boost Libraries in C++ language\nBULLET::::- Lazy Evaluation in ANSI C++ by writing code in a style which uses classes to implement function closures.\n"}
{"id": "18156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18156", "title": "Lemuridae", "text": "Lemuridae\n\nLemuridae is a family of strepsirrhine primates native to Madagascar, and the Comoros Islands. They are represented by the Lemuriformes in Madagascar with one of the highest concentration of the lemurs. One of five families commonly known as lemurs. These animals were once thought to be the evolutionary predecessors of monkeys and apes, but this is no longer considered correct.\n\nLemurids are medium-sized arboreal primates, ranging from 32 to 56 cm in length, excluding the tail, and weighing from 0.7 to 5 kg. They have long, bushy tails and soft, woolly fur of varying coloration. The hindlegs are slightly longer than the forelegs, although not enough to hamper fully quadrupedal movement (unlike the sportive lemurs). Most species are highly agile, and regularly leap several metres between trees. They have a good sense of smell and binocular vision. Unlike most other lemurs, all but one species of lemurid (the ring-tailed lemur) lack a tapetum lucidum, a reflective layer in the eye that improves night vision. Historically among mammals, activity cycles are either strictly diurnal or nocturnal, however, these can widely vary across species. Lemur activity has in general evolved from nocturnal to diurnal. Some lemurs are also cathemeral, an activity pattern where an animal is neither strictly diurnal nor nocturnal.\n\nLemurids are herbivorous, eating fruit, leaves, and, in some cases, nectar. For the most part, they have the dental formula: . A lemur’s diet is one that is not restricted since their diet consists of frugivory, granivory, folivory, insectivory, omnivory, and gumnivory foods. Some Subfossil records have contributed to the knowledge of the currently extant lemurs from the Holocene by showing the changes in their dental records in habitats near human activity. This demonstrates that lemur species such as the lemur \"catta\" and the common brown lemur were forced to switch their primary diet to a group of secondary food sources.\n\nWith most lemurids, the mother gives birth to one or two young after a gestation period of between 120 and 140 days, depending on species. The ruffed lemur species are the only lemurids that have true litters, consisting of anywhere from two to six offspring. They are generally sociable animals, living in groups of up to thirty individuals in some species. In some cases, such as the ring-tailed lemur, the groups are long-lasting, with distinct dominance hierarchies, while in others, such as the common brown lemur, the membership of the groups varies from day to day, and seems to have no clear social structure.\n\nSome of the lemur traits include low basal metabolic rate, highly seasonal breeders, adaptations to unpredictable climate and female dominance. Female dominance amongst lemurs is when the females are sexually monomorphic and have priority access to food. Lemurs live in groups of 11 to 17 animals, where females tend to stay within their natal groups and the males migrate. Male lemurs are competitive to win their mates which causes instability among the other organisms. Lemurs are able to mark their territory by using scents from local areas.\n\nA number of lemur species are considered threatened; two species are critically endangered, one species is endangered, and five species are rated as vulnerable.\n\nThe highly seasonal dry deciduous forest of Madagascar alternates between dry and wet seasons, making it uniquely suitable for lemurs. Lemur species diversity increases as the number of tree species in an area increase and is also higher in forests that have been disturbed over undisturbed areas. Evidence from the Subfossil records show that many of the now extinct lemurs actually lived in much drier climates than the currently extant lemurs.\n\nThe family Lemuridae contains 21 extant species in five genera.\n\nFAMILY LEMURIDAE\nBULLET::::- Genus \"Lemur\"\nBULLET::::- Ring-tailed lemur, \"Lemur catta\"\nBULLET::::- Genus \"Eulemur\", true lemurs\"\nBULLET::::- Common brown lemur, \"Eulemur fulvus\"\nBULLET::::- Sanford's brown lemur, \"Eulemur sanfordi\"\nBULLET::::- White-headed lemur, \"Eulemur albifrons\"\nBULLET::::- Red lemur, \"Eulemur rufus\"\nBULLET::::- Red-fronted lemur, \"Eulemur rufifrons\"\nBULLET::::- Collared brown lemur, \"Eulemur collaris\"\nBULLET::::- Gray-headed lemur, \"Eulemur cinereiceps\"\nBULLET::::- Black lemur, \"Eulemur macaco\"\nBULLET::::- Blue-eyed black lemur, \"Eulemur flavifrons\"\nBULLET::::- Crowned lemur, \"Eulemur coronatus\"\nBULLET::::- Red-bellied lemur, \"Eulemur rubriventer\"\nBULLET::::- Mongoose lemur, \"Eulemur mongoz\"\nBULLET::::- Genus \"Varecia\", ruffed lemurs\nBULLET::::- Black-and-white ruffed lemur, \"Varecia variegata\"\nBULLET::::- Red ruffed lemur, \"Varecia rubra\"\nBULLET::::- Genus \"Hapalemur\", bamboo lemurs\nBULLET::::- Eastern lesser bamboo lemur (a.k.a. gray gentle bamboo lemur), \"Hapalemur griseus\"\nBULLET::::- Southern lesser bamboo lemur, \"Hapalemur meridionalis\"\nBULLET::::- Western lesser bamboo lemur, \"Hapalemur occidentalis\"\nBULLET::::- Lac Alaotra gentle lemur (a.k.a. \"bandro\"), \"Hapalemur alaotrensis\"\nBULLET::::- Golden bamboo lemur, \"Hapalemur aureus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus \"Prolemur\"\nBULLET::::- Greater bamboo lemur, \"Prolemur simus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Pachylemur\"\nBULLET::::- †\"Pachylemur insignis\"\nBULLET::::- †\"Pachylemur jullyi\"\n\nThis family was once broken into two subfamilies, Hapalemurinae (bamboo lemurs and the greater bamboo lemur) and Lemurinae (the rest of the family), but molecular evidence and the similarity of the scent glands have since placed the ring-tailed lemur with the bamboo lemurs and the greater bamboo lemur.\n\nLemur species in the genus \"Eulemur\" are known to interbreed, despite having dramatically different chromosome numbers. Red-fronted (2N=60) and collared (2N=50–52) brown lemurs were found to hybridize at Berenty Reserve, Madagascar.\n\nBULLET::::- Gender, K. (20 February 2014). Lemurs could be extinct 'very soon' experts warn. \"The Independent\". Retrieved from https://www.independent.co.uk/environment/lemurs-could-be-extinct-very-soon-experts-warn-9142615.html\n"}
{"id": "18157", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18157", "title": "Lucent", "text": "Lucent\n\nLucent Technologies, Inc., was an American multinational telecommunications equipment company headquartered in Murray Hill, New Jersey, in the United States. It was established on September 30, 1996, through the divestiture of the former AT&T Technologies business unit of AT&T Corporation, which included Western Electric and Bell Labs.\n\nLucent was merged with Alcatel SA of France on December 1, 2006, forming Alcatel-Lucent. Alcatel-Lucent was absorbed by Nokia in January 2016.\n\nLucent means \"they shine\" in Latin. The name was applied in 1996 at the time of the split from AT&T.\n\nThe name was widely criticised, as the logo was to be, both internally and externally. Corporate communications and business cards included the strapline 'Bell Labs Innovations' in a bid to retain the prestige of the internationally famous research lab, within a new business under an as-yet unknown name.\n\nThis same linguistic root also gives Lucifer, \"the light bearer\" (from lux, 'light', and ferre, 'to bear'), who is also a character in Dante's epic poem \"Inferno\". Shortly after the Lucent renaming in 1996, Lucent's Plan 9 project released a development of their work as the Inferno OS in 1997. This extended the 'Lucifer' and Dante references as a series of punning names for the components of Inferno - Dis, Limbo, Charon and Styx (9P Protocol). When the rights to Inferno were sold in 2000, the company Vita Nuova Holdings was formed to represent them. This continues the Dante theme, although moving away from his \"Divine Comedy\" to the poem \"La Vita Nuova\".\n\nThe Lucent logo, the Innovation Ring, was designed by Landor Associates, a prominent San Francisco-based branding consultancy. One source inside Lucent says that the logo is a Zen Buddhist symbol for \"eternal truth\", the Enso, turned 90 degrees and modified. Another source says it represents the mythic ouroboros, a snake holding its tail in its mouth. Lucent's logo also has been said to represent constant re-creating and re-thinking. Carly Fiorina picked the logo because her mother was a painter and she rejected the sterile geometric logos of most high tech companies.\n\nAfter the logo was compared in the media to the ring a coffee mug leaves on paper, a \"Dilbert\" comic strip showed Dogbert as an overpaid consultant designing a new company logo; he takes a piece of paper that his coffee cup was sitting on and calls it the \"Brown Ring of Quality\". A telecommunication commentator referred to the logo as \"a big red zero\" and predicted financial losses.\n\nOne of the primary reasons AT&T Corporation chose to spin off its equipment manufacturing business was to permit it to profit from sales to competing telecommunications providers; these customers had previously shown reluctance to purchase from a direct competitor. Bell Labs brought prestige to the new company, as well as the revenue from thousands of patents.\n\nAt the time of its spinoff, Lucent was placed under the leadership of Henry Schacht, who was brought in to oversee its transition from an arm of AT&T into an independent corporation. Richard McGinn, who was serving as President and COO, succeeded Schacht as CEO in 1997 while Schacht remained chairman of the board. Lucent became a \"darling\" stock of the investment community in the late 1990s, and its split-adjusted spinoff price of $7.56/share rose to a high of $84. Its market capitalization reached a high of $258 billion, and it was at the time the most widely held company with 5.3 million shareholders.\n\nIn 1997, Lucent acquired Milpitas-based voicemail market leader Octel Communications Corporation for $2.1 billion, a move which immediately rendered the Business Systems Group profitable. By 1999 Lucent stock continued to soar and in that year Lucent acquired Ascend Communications, an Alameda, California–based manufacturer of communications equipment for US$24 billion. Lucent held discussions to acquire Juniper Networks but decided instead to build its own routers.\n\nIn 1997, Lucent acquired Livingston Enterprises Inc. for $650 million in stock. Livingston was known most for the creation of the RADIUS protocol and their PortMaster product that was used widely by dial-up internet service providers.\n\nIn 1995, Carly Fiorina led corporate operations. In that capacity, she reported to Lucent chief executive Henry B. Schacht. She played a key role in planning and implementing the 1996 initial public offering of a successful stock and company launch strategy. Under her guidance, the spin-off raised 3 billion.\n\nLater in 1996, Fiorina was appointed president of Lucent's consumer products sector, reporting to president and chief operating officer Rich McGinn. In 1997, she was named group president for Lucent's 19 billion global service-provider business, overseeing marketing and sales for the company's largest customer segment. That year, Fiorina chaired a 2.5 billion joint venture between Lucent's consumer communications and Royal Philips Electronics, under the name Philips Consumer Communications (PCC). The focus of the venture was to bring both companies to the top three in technology, distribution, and brand recognition.\n\nUltimately, the project struggled and dissolved a year later after it garnered only 2% market share in mobile phones. Losses were at $500 million on sales of $2.5 billion. As a result of the failed joint venture, Philips announced the closure of one-quarter of the company's 230 factories worldwide, and Lucent closed down its wireless handset portion of the venture. Analysts suggested that the joint venture's failure was due to a combination of technology and management problems. Upon the end of the joint venture, PCC sent 5,000 employees back to Philips, many of which were laid off, and 8,400 employees back to Lucent.\n\nUnder Fiorina, the company added 22,000 jobs and revenues seemed to grow from 19 billion to 38 billion. However, the real cause of Lucent spurring sales under Fiorina was by lending money to their own customers. According to \"Fortune\" magazine, \"In a neat bit of accounting magic, money from the loans began to appear on Lucent’s income statement as new revenue while the dicey debt got stashed on its balance sheet as an allegedly solid asset\". Lucent's stock price grew 10-fold.\n\nAt the start of 2000, Lucent's \"private bubble\" burst, while competitors like Nortel Networks and Alcatel were still going strong; it would be many months before the rest of the telecom industry bubble collapsed. Previously Lucent had 14 straight quarters where it exceeded analysts' expectations, leading to high expectations for the 15th quarter, ending Dec. 31, 1999. On January 6, 2000, Lucent made the first of a string of announcements that it had missed its quarterly estimates, as CEO Rich McGinn grimly announced that Lucent had run into special problems during that quarter—including disruptions in its optical networking business—and reported flat revenues and a big drop in profits. That caused the stock to plunge by 28%, shaving $64 billion off of the company's market capitalization. When it was later revealed that it had used dubious accounting and sales practices to generate some of its earlier quarterly numbers, Lucent fell from grace. It was said that \"Rich McGinn couldn't accept Lucent's fall from its early triumphs.\" He described himself once as imposing \"audacious\" goals on his managers, believing the stretch for performance would produce dream results. Henry Schacht defended the corporate culture that McGinn created and also noted that McGinn did not sell any Lucent shares while serving as CEO. In November 2000, the company disclosed to the Securities and Exchange Commission that it had a $125 million accounting error for the third quarter of 2000, and by December 2000 it reported it had overstated its revenues for its latest quarter by nearly $700 million. Although no wrongdoing was found on his part, McGinn was forced to resign as CEO and he was replaced by Schacht on an interim basis. Subsequently, its CFO, Deborah Hopkins, left the company in May 2001 with Lucent's stock at $9.06 whereas at the time she was hired it was at $46.82.\n\nIn 2001 there were merger discussions between Lucent and Alcatel, which would have seen Lucent acquired at its current market price without a premium; the newly combined entity would have been headquartered in Murray Hill. However, these negotiations collapsed when Schacht insisted on an equal 7-7 split of the merged company's board of directors, while Alcatel chief executive officer Serge Tchuruk wanted 8 of the 14 board seats for Alcatel due to it being in a stronger position. The failure of the merger talks caused Lucent's share price to collapse, and by October 2002 the stock price had bottomed at 55 cents per share.\n\nPatricia Russo, formerly Lucent's EVP of the Corporate Office who then left for Eastman Kodak to serve as COO, was named permanent Chairman and CEO of Lucent in 2002, succeeding Schacht who remained on the Board of Directors.\n\nIn April 2000, Lucent sold its Consumer Products unit to VTech and Consumer Phone Services. In October 2000, Lucent spun off its Business Systems arm into Avaya, Inc., and in June 2002, it spun off its microelectronics division into Agere Systems. The spinoffs of enterprise networking and wireless, the industry's key growth businesses from 2003 onward, meant that Lucent no longer had the capacity to serve this market.\n\nLucent was reduced to 30,500 employees, down from about 165,000 employees at its zenith. The layoffs of so many experienced employees meant that the company was in a weakened position and unable to reestablish itself when the market recovered in 2003. By early 2003, Lucent's market value was $15.6 billion (which includes $6.8 billion of current value for two companies that Lucent had recently spun off, Avaya and Agere Systems), making the shares worth around $2.13, a far cry from its dotcom bubble peak of around $84, when Lucent was worth $258 billion.\n\nLucent continued to be active in the areas of telephone switching, optical, data and wireless networking.\n\nOn April 2, 2006, Lucent announced a merger agreement with Alcatel, which was 1.5 times the size of Lucent. Serge Tchuruk became non-executive chairman, and Russo served as CEO of the newly merged company, Alcatel-Lucent, until they were both forced to resign at the end of 2008. The merger failed to produce the expected synergies, and there were significant write-downs of Lucent's assets that Alcatel purchased.\n\nLucent was divided into several core groups:\nBULLET::::- Network Solutions Group served landline/cellular telephone service providers by providing equipment and other solutions necessary to provide telephone service, including networking equipment.\nBULLET::::- Lucent Worldwide Services (LWS) provided network services to telecom companies and business; clients included AT&T Corporation and Verizon. Divisions of LWS included the AT&T Customer Business Unit, known as ACBU; and another group for Southwestern Bell and other Bell companies. Both divisions were responsible for the installation of telecom equipment ranging from 2-pair copper to multi-wire fiber optics. Each group also installed the first true national cellular service with LTE speeds in the 1990s.\nBULLET::::- Bell Labs was created in 1925 as the R&D firm of the Bell System. It was an AT&T subsidiary set up as dual ownership by AT&T and Western Electric, the manufacturing arm of AT&T.\n\nThe Murray Hill anechoic chamber, built in 1940, is the world's oldest wedge-based anechoic chamber. The interior room measures approximately high by wide by deep. The exterior concrete and brick walls are about thick to keep outside noise from entering the chamber. The chamber absorbs over 99.995% of the incident acoustic energy above 200 Hz. At one time the Murray Hill chamber was cited in the Guinness Book of World Records as the world's quietest room. It is possible to hear the sounds of skeletal joints and heart beats very prominently.\n\nThe Murray Hill facility was the global headquarters for Lucent Technologies. The Murray Hill facility also has the largest copper-roof in the world. When Lucent Technologies was experiencing financial troubles in 2000 and 2001, one out of every three fluorescent lights was turned off in the facility. The same was done in the Naperville, Illinois, and Allentown, Pennsylvania, facilities for a while. The facility had a cricket field and featured a nearby station from which enthusiasts could control RC airplanes and helicopters.\n\nBULLET::::- Lazonick, William, and Edward March (2011) \"The Rise and Demise of Lucent Technologies,\" \"Journal of Strategic Management Education\", vol. 7, no. 4., online\n"}
{"id": "18158", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18158", "title": "Lupercalia", "text": "Lupercalia\n\nLupercalia was an ancient, possibly pre-Roman pastoral annual festival, observed in the city of Rome between 13–15 February to avert evil spirits and purify the city, releasing health and fertility. Lupercalia was also called \"dies Februatus\", after the instruments of purification called \"februa\", which gave February \"(Februarius)\" its name.\n\nThe festival was later known as Februa (\"Purifications\" or \"Purgings\") after the ' which was used on the day. It was also known as ' and gave its name to Juno Februalis, Februlis, or Februata in her role as its patron deity; to a god called Februus, and to February ('), the month during which it occurred. Ovid connects ' to an Etruscan word for \"purging\". Some sources connect the Latin word for fever (\"\") with the same idea of purification or purging, due to the sweating commonly seen in association with fevers.\n\nThe name \"Lupercalia\" was believed in antiquity to evince some connection with the Ancient Greek festival of the Arcadian Lykaia, a wolf festival (, \"lýkos\"; ), and the worship of \"Lycaean Pan\", assumed to be a Greek equivalent to Faunus, as instituted by Evander. Justin describes a cult image of \"the Lycaean god, whom the Greeks call Pan and the Romans Lupercus,\" as nude, save for a goatskin girdle. It stood in the Lupercal, the cave where tradition held that Romulus and Remus were suckled by the she-wolf (Lupa). The cave lay at the foot of the Palatine Hill, on which Romulus was thought to have founded Rome.\n\nThe rites were confined to the Lupercal cave, the Palatine Hill, and the Forum, all of which were central locations in Rome's foundation myth. Near the cave stood a sanctuary of Rumina, goddess of breastfeeding; and the wild fig-tree (\"Ficus Ruminalis\") to which Romulus and Remus were brought by the divine intervention of the river-god Tiberinus; some Roman sources name the wild fig tree \"caprificus\", literally \"goat fig\". Like the cultivated fig, its fruit is pendulous, and the tree exudes a milky sap if cut, which makes it a good candidate for a cult of breastfeeding.\n\nThe Lupercalia had its own priesthood, the \"Luperci\" (\"brothers of the wolf\"), whose institution and rites were attributed either to the Arcadian culture-hero Evander, or to Romulus and Remus, erstwhile shepherds who had each established a group of followers. The \"Luperci\" were young men (\"iuvenes\"), usually between the ages of 20 and 40. They formed two religious \"collegia\" (associations) based on ancestry; the \"Quinctiliani\" (named after gens Quinctia) and the \"Fabiani\" (named after \"gens\" Fabia). Each college was headed by a \"magister\". In 44 BC, a third college, the \"Juliani\", was instituted in honor of Julius Caesar; its first \"magister\" was Mark Antony. The college of \"Juliani\" disbanded or lapsed following Caesar's assassination, and was not re-established in the reforms of his successor, Augustus. In the Imperial era, membership of the two traditional \"collegia\" was opened to \"iuvenes\" of equestrian status.\n\nAt the Lupercal altar, a male goat (or goats) and a dog were sacrificed by one or another of the \"Luperci\", under the supervision of the Flamen dialis, Jupiter's chief priest. An offering was also made of salted mealcakes, prepared by the Vestal Virgins. After the blood sacrifice, two \"Luperci\" approached the altar. Their foreheads were anointed with blood from the sacrificial knife, then wiped clean with wool soaked in milk, after which they were expected to smile and/or laugh.\n\nThe sacrificial feast followed, after which the Luperci cut thongs (known as \"\") from the flayed skin of the animal, and ran with these, naked or near-naked, along the old Palatine boundary, in an anticlockwise direction around the hill. In Plutarch's description of the Lupercalia, written during the early Empire,\n...many of the noble youths and of the magistrates run up and down through the city naked, for sport and laughter striking those they meet with shaggy thongs. And many women of rank also purposely get in their way, and like children at school present their hands to be struck, believing that the pregnant will thus be helped in delivery, and the barren to pregnancy.\nThe \"Luperci\" completed their circuit of the Palatine, then returned to the \"Lupercal\" cave. \nThe Februa was of ancient and possibly Sabine origin. After February was added to the Roman calendar, Februa occurred on its fifteenth day (\"\"). Of its various rituals, the most important came to be those of the Lupercalia. The Romans themselves attributed the instigation of the Lupercalia to Evander, a culture hero from Arcadia who was credited with bringing the Olympic pantheon, Greek laws and alphabet to Italy, where he founded the city of Pallantium on the future site of Rome, 60 years before the Trojan War.\n\nLupercalia was celebrated in parts of Italy and Gaul; \"Luperci\" are attested by inscriptions at Velitrae, Praeneste, Nemausus (modern Nîmes) and elsewhere. The ancient cult of the Hirpi Sorani (\"wolves of Soranus\", from Sabine \"hirpus\" \"wolf\"), who practiced at Mt. Soracte, north of Rome, had elements in common with the Roman Lupercalia.\n\nDescriptions of the Lupercalia festival of 44 BC attest to its continuity; Julius Caesar used it as the backdrop for his (possibly staged) public refusal of a golden crown offered to him by Mark Antony. The Lupercal cave was restored or rebuilt by Augustus, and has been speculated to be identical with a grotto discovered in 2007, below the remains of Augustus' residence; according to scholarly consensus, the grotto is a nymphaeum, not the Lupercal. The Lupercalia festival is marked on a calendar of 354 alongside traditional and Christian festivals. Despite the banning in 391 of all non-Christian cults and festivals, Lupercalia was celebrated by the nominally Christian populace on a regular basis into the reign of the emperor Anastasius. Pope Gelasius I (494–96) claimed that only the \"vile rabble\" were involved in the festival and sought its forceful abolition; the Senate protested that the Lupercalia was essential to Rome's safety and well-being. This prompted Gelasius' scornful suggestion that \"If you assert that this rite has salutary force, celebrate it yourselves in the ancestral fashion; run nude yourselves that you may properly carry out the mockery.\"\n\nThere is no contemporary evidence to support the popular notions that Gelasius abolished the Lupercalia, or that he, or any other prelate, replaced it with the Feast of the Purification of the Blessed Virgin Mary. A literary association between Lupercalia and the romantic elements of Saint Valentine's Day dates back to Chaucer and poetic traditions of courtly love.\n\nHorace's Ode III, 18 alludes to the Lupercalia. The festival or its associated rituals gave its name to the Roman month of February (\"\") and thence to the modern month. The Roman god Februus personified both the month and purification, but seems to postdate both.\n\nWilliam Shakespeare's play \"Julius Caesar\" begins during the Lupercalia. Mark Antony is instructed by Caesar to strike his wife Calpurnia, in the hope that she will be able to conceive.\n\nResearch published in 2019 suggests that the word Leprechaun derives from \"Lupercus\".\n\nBULLET::::- A. M. Franklin, \"The Lupercalia\" (doctoral dissertation, 1921, 102pp.)\nBULLET::::- Liebler, Naomi Conn (1988). \"The Ritual Ground of Julius Caesar\".\nBULLET::::- Pauly-Wissowa\n\nBULLET::::- Beard, Mary; North, John; Price, Simon. \"Religions of Rome: A History.\" Cambridge University Press, 1998, vol. 1, limited preview online; search \"Lupercalia.\"\nBULLET::::- Lincoln, Bruce. \"Authority: Construction and Corrosion.\" University of Chicago Press, 1994, pp. 43–44 online on Julius Caesar and the politicizing of the Lupercalia; valuable list of sources pp. 182–183.\nBULLET::::- North, John. \"Roman Religion\". The Classical Association, 2000, pp. 47 online and 50 on the problems of interpreting evidence for the Lupercalia.\nBULLET::::- Markus, R.A. \"The End of Ancient Christianity.\" Cambridge University Press, 1990, pp. 131–134 online, on the continued celebration of the Lupercalia among \"uninhibited Christians\" into the 5th century, and the reasons for the \"brutal intervention\" by Pope Gelasius.\nBULLET::::- Rissanen, Mika. \"The Hirpi Sorani and the Wolf Cults of Central Italy.\" Arctos 46 (2012), pp. 115–135, on the common elements between the Lupercalia and other wolf cults of Central Italy.\nBULLET::::- Vuković, Krešimir \"Roman Myth and Ritual: the Groups of Luperci and Epigraphic Evidence\" 78 (2016): 43-52.\nBULLET::::- Vuković, Krešimir \"The Topography of the Lupercalia\", in \"The Papers of the British School at Rome\" 86 (2018): 1-24.\nBULLET::::- Wiseman, T.P. \"The Lupercalia.\" In \"Remus: A Roman Myth\". Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1995, pp. 77–88, limited preview online, discussion of the Lupercalia in the context of myth and ritual.\nBULLET::::- Wiseman, T.P. \"The God of the Lupercal,\" in Idem, \"Unwritten Rome\". Exeter, University of Exeter Press, 2008.\nBULLET::::- Gardner, Constance \"Lupercalia\"\n\nBULLET::::- William Smith, \"Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities,\" 1875: Lupercalia\n"}
{"id": "18162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18162", "title": "Lists of atheists", "text": "Lists of atheists\n\nAtheism is, in a broad sense, the lack of belief in the existence of deities. In a narrower sense, atheism is simply the absence of belief that any deities exist. This is a compilation of the various lists of atheists with articles in Wikipedia. Living persons in these lists are people whose atheism is relevant to their notable activities or public life, and who have publicly identified themselves as atheists.\n\nBULLET::::- List of atheist Americans\nBULLET::::- List of atheist Armenians\nBULLET::::- List of Dutch atheists\nBULLET::::- List of South African atheists\n\nBULLET::::- List of atheist activists and educators\nBULLET::::- List of atheist authors\nBULLET::::- List of atheist philosophers\nBULLET::::- List of atheists (miscellaneous) - shorter groups: Business, Comedians, Historians, Military, Social Scientists, Sports, Visual arts\nBULLET::::- List of atheists in film, radio, television and theater\nBULLET::::- List of atheists in music\nBULLET::::- List of atheists in politics and law\nBULLET::::- List of atheists in science and technology\n\nBULLET::::- List of atheists (surnames A to B)\nBULLET::::- List of atheists (surnames C to D)\nBULLET::::- List of atheists (surnames E to G)\nBULLET::::- List of atheists (surnames H to K)\nBULLET::::- List of atheists (surnames L to M)\nBULLET::::- List of atheists (surnames N to Q)\nBULLET::::- List of atheists (surnames R to S)\nBULLET::::- List of atheists (surnames T to Z)\n\nBULLET::::- Lists about skepticism\nBULLET::::- Lists of people by belief (including non-beliefs)\nBULLET::::- List of lists of lists\n"}
{"id": "18163", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18163", "title": "List of Buddhists", "text": "List of Buddhists\n\nThis is a list of notable Buddhists, encompassing all the major branches of the religion (i.e. in Buddhism), and including interdenominational and eclectic Buddhist practitioners. This list includes both formal teachers of Buddhism, and people notable in other areas who are publicly Buddhist or who have espoused Buddhism.\n\nIndividuals are grouped by nationality, except in cases where their influence was felt elsewhere. Gautama Buddha and his immediate disciples ('Buddhists') are listed separately from later Indian Buddhist thinkers, teachers and contemplatives.\n\nBULLET::::- The Buddha, Siddhārtha Gautama\n\nClergy\nBULLET::::- Ājñāta­kauṇḍinya, the first arhat and one of the first five ascetics\nBULLET::::- Ānanda, the Buddha's cousin, personal attendant of the Buddha and a chief disciple\nBULLET::::- Aṅgulimāla, serial killer who attained to sainthood after renouncing wickedness\nBULLET::::- Anuruddhā, one of the ten principal disciples\nBULLET::::- Aśvajit, one of the first five ascetics\nBULLET::::- Bhadrika, one of the first five ascetics\nBULLET::::- Devadatta, another cousin of Siddhārtha and later rival who attempted to assassinate the Buddha\nBULLET::::- Gavāṃpati\nBULLET::::- Gayākāśyapa\nBULLET::::- Kālodayin\nBULLET::::- Kapphiṇa\nBULLET::::- Kātyāyana, foremost in explaining the Dharma\nBULLET::::- Khemā, a chief of the women disciples\nBULLET::::- Kisā Gautamī\nBULLET::::- Koṣṭhila\nBULLET::::- Mahākāśyapa\nBULLET::::- Mahākauṣṭhila, foremost in eloquence\nBULLET::::- Mahānāma, one of the first five ascetics\nBULLET::::- Mahāprajāpatī Gautamī, Buddha's aunt and foster mother, as well as the first woman to be ordained\nBULLET::::- Maudgalyāyana, one of two chief disciples of the Buddha\nBULLET::::- Nanda, younger half-brother of the Buddha\nBULLET::::- Nandika\nBULLET::::- Nadīkāśyapa\nBULLET::::- Paṭācārā\nBULLET::::- Pilindavatsa\nBULLET::::- Piṇḍola Bhāradvāja\nBULLET::::- Pūrṇamaitrāyaṇīputra, one of the ten principal disciples\nBULLET::::- Rāhula, son of Siddhārtha and Yasodharā\nBULLET::::- Revata\nBULLET::::- Śāriputra one of two chief disciples of the Buddha\nBULLET::::- Subhūti, one of the ten principal disciples\nBULLET::::- Śuddhipanthakena\nBULLET::::- Suvāhu\nBULLET::::- Sundarī Nandā, the Buddha's half-sister\nBULLET::::- Sunīta, a low-caste man who reached enlightenment\nBULLET::::- Upāli, foremost disciple in knowledge of the Vinaya\nBULLET::::- Utpalavarṇā\nBULLET::::- Uruvilvā­kāśyapa\nBULLET::::- Vāgīśa\nBULLET::::- Vakkula\nBULLET::::- Vāṣpa, one of the first five ascetics\nBULLET::::- Yasodharā, Siddhārtha's wife before he renounced the palace life\n\nLaity\nBULLET::::- Āmrapālī, royal courtesan\nBULLET::::- Anāthapiṇḍada, wealthy merchant and banker\nBULLET::::- Ajātaśatru, king of Magadha, son of Bimbisāra\nBULLET::::- Bimbisāra, king of Magadha\nBULLET::::- Chandaka, prince Siddhārtha's charioteer\nBULLET::::- Citra, wealthy merchant\nBULLET::::- Cunda Karmāraputra, a smith who gave the Buddha his last meal\nBULLET::::- Hastaka Āṭavika, saved by the Buddha from a demon\nBULLET::::- Kubjottarā, a chief woman disciple and servant of Queen Śyāmāvatī\nBULLET::::- Prasenajit, King of Kosala\nBULLET::::- Śyāmāvatī, a queen of Kauśāmbī\nBULLET::::- Śuddhodana, the Buddha's father\nBULLET::::- Velukantakiyā\nBULLET::::- Viśākhā, an aristocratic woman and chief female disciple\n\nBULLET::::- Aryadeva, foremost disciple of Nagarjuna, continued the philosophical school of Madhyamaka\nBULLET::::- Asanga, founder of the Yogacara school, widely considered the most important Mahayana philosopher along with Nagarjuna\nBULLET::::- Atiśa, holder of the \"mind training\" teachings, considered an indirect founder of the Gelug school of Tibetan Buddhism\nBULLET::::- Bhāviveka, early expositor of the Svatantrika branch of the Madhyamaka school\nBULLET::::- Bodhidharma, founder of Chan Buddhism\nBULLET::::- Bodhiruci, patriarch of the Dilun () school\nBULLET::::- Batuo, founding abbot and patriarch of the Shaolin Monastery\nBULLET::::- Buddhaghosa, Theravadin commentator\nBULLET::::- Buddhapālita, early expositor of the Prasaṅgika branch of the Madhyamaka school\nBULLET::::- Chandragomin, renowned grammarian\nBULLET::::- Candrakīrti, considered the greatest exponent of Prasaṅgika\nBULLET::::- Dharmakirti, famed logician, author of the \"Seven Treatises\"; student of Dignāga's student, Īśvārasēna; said to have debated famed Hindu scholar Adi Shankara\nBULLET::::- Dignāga, famed logician\nBULLET::::- Garab Dorje, Indian founder of Dzogchen (Great Perfection) tradition\nBULLET::::- Kamalaśīla (8th century), author of important texts on meditation\nBULLET::::- Luipa, one of the eighty-four tantric Mahasiddhas\nBULLET::::- Nagarjuna, founder of the Madhyamaka school, widely considered the most important Mahayana philosopher (with Asanga)\nBULLET::::- Nadapada (Tib. \"Naropa\"), Tilopa's primary disciple, teacher of Marpa the Translator and Khungpo Nyaljor\nBULLET::::- Padmasambhava (Tib. \"Guru Rinpoche\"), Indian founder of Tibetan Buddhism\nBULLET::::- Saraha, famed mahasiddha, forefather of the Kagyu lineage\nBULLET::::- Śāntarakṣita, abbot of Nalanda, founder of the Yogacara who helped Padmasambhava establish Buddhism in Tibet\nBULLET::::- Shantideva (8th century), author of the \"Bodhisattvacaryāvatāra\"\nBULLET::::- Tilopa, recipient of four separate transmissions from Nagarjuna, Nagpopa, Luipa, and Khandro Kalpa Zangmo; Naropa's teacher\nBULLET::::- Vasubandhu, author of the \"Abhidharmakōśa\" and various Yogacara treatises; these may or may not be the same person\n\nBULLET::::- Dharmaraksita (3rd century BCE), Greek Buddhist missionary sent by emperor Ashoka, and a teacher of the monk Nagasena\nBULLET::::- Mahadharmaraksita (2nd century BCE), Greek Buddhist master during the time of Menander\nBULLET::::- Nāgasena (2nd century BCE), Buddhist sage questioned about Buddhism by Milinda, the Indo-Greek king in the \"Milinda Pañha\"\n\nBULLET::::- An Shigao, Parthian monk and the first known Buddhist missionary to China, in 148 CE\nBULLET::::- Dharmarakṣa, Yuezhi monk, the first known translator of the Lotus Sutra into Chinese\nBULLET::::- Jñānagupta (561-592), monk and translator from Gandhara, Pakistan\nBULLET::::- Kumārajīva (c. 401), Kuchan monk and one of the most important translators\nBULLET::::- Lokaksema, Kushan monk, first translator of Mahayana scriptures into Chinese, around 180 CE\nBULLET::::- Prajñā (c. 810), monk and translator from Kabul, who translated important texts into Chinese and educated the Japanese Kūkai in Sanskrit texts\n\nBULLET::::- Baizhang Huaihai\nBULLET::::- Bodhidharma, first patriarch of Chan Buddhism in China\nBULLET::::- Dahui Zonggao, 12th-century kōan master\nBULLET::::- Daman Hongren, fifth patriarch of Chan Buddhism in China\nBULLET::::- Dayi Daoxin, fourth patriarch of Chan Buddhism in China\nBULLET::::- Dazu Huike, second patriarch of Chan Buddhism in China\nBULLET::::- Faxian, translator and pilgrim\nBULLET::::- Fazang\nBULLET::::- Guifeng Zongmi, fifth patriarch of the Huayan school\nBULLET::::- Hong Yi, calligraphist, painter, master of seal carving\nBULLET::::- Huangbo Xiyun, 9th-century teacher of Linji Yixuan\nBULLET::::- Huineng, sixth and last patriarch of Chan Buddhism in China\nBULLET::::- Ingen, 17th-century Chinese Chan monk, founder of the Ōbaku sect of Zen\nBULLET::::- Ji Gong, a Buddhist monk revered as a deity in Taoism\nBULLET::::- Jizang, founder of East Asian Mādhyamaka\nBULLET::::- Jnanayasas, translator\nBULLET::::- Linji Yixuan, 9th-century Chinese monk, founder of the Linji school of Chan Buddhism\nBULLET::::- Mazu Daoyi, 8th-century Chan master\nBULLET::::- Moheyan, 8th-century Chinese monk, advocate of “sudden” enlightenment\nBULLET::::- Sanghapala, 6th-century monk (Mon-Khmer?) who translated many texts to Chinese\nBULLET::::- Sengcan, third patriarch of Chan Buddhism in China\nBULLET::::- Wumen Huikai, author of the \"Gateless Gate\"\nBULLET::::- Xuanzang, brought Yogacara to China to found the East Asian Yogācāra school; significant pilgrim, translator\nBULLET::::- Xueting Fuyu, 13th-century Shaolin Monastery abbot of the Caodong school\nBULLET::::- Yijing, pilgrim and translator\nBULLET::::- Yunmen Wenyan, founder of one of the five schools of Chan Buddhism\nBULLET::::- Yuquan Shenxiu, Tang dynasty, patriarch of \"Northern School\" sect of Chan Buddhism\nBULLET::::- Zhaozhou, 9th-century Chan master; noted for \"Mu\" koan\nBULLET::::- Zhiyi, founder of the Tiantai school\n\nBULLET::::- Gampopa, student of Jetsun Milarepa and founder of the Karma Kagyu lineage of Tibetan Buddhism\nBULLET::::- Jigten Sumgön, founder of Drikung Kagyu Lineage\nBULLET::::- Dolpopa Sherab Gyaltsen, founder of the Jonang school and advocate of the shentong philosophy\nBULLET::::- Jamgon Kongtrul\nBULLET::::- Longchenpa, one of the greatest Nyingma philosophers\nBULLET::::- Mandarava, important female student and consort of Padmasambhava\nBULLET::::- Marpa Lotsawa, student of Naropa and a founder of the Kagyu lineage of Tibetan Buddhism\nBULLET::::- Milarepa, foremost student of Marpa Lotsawa\nBULLET::::- Padmasambhava, Indian founder of Nyingma school of Tibetan Buddhism\nBULLET::::- Sakya Pandita, one of the greatest Sakya philosophers\nBULLET::::- Taranatha, important Jonang scholar\nBULLET::::- Je Tsongkhapa, 14th-century Tibetan monk, founder of the Gelug school of Tibetan Buddhism, based upon the Kadam\nBULLET::::- Yeshe Tsogyal, important female student and consort of Padmasambhava\nBULLET::::- Rongzom Mahapandita, important Nyingma scholar and meditation master of Nyingma lineage of Tibetan Buddhism\nBULLET::::- Karmapa, the founder of Karma Kagyu or Kamtsang Kagyu lineage of Tibetan Buddhism\n\nBULLET::::- Bankei Yōtaku (1622–1693), Zen master of the Rinzai school\nBULLET::::- Dōgen Zenji (1200–1253), founder of the Sōtō school of Zen, based upon the Caodong school\nBULLET::::- Eisai (1141–1215), travelled to China and returned to found the Rinzai school of Zen]\nBULLET::::- Hakuin Ekaku (1686–1769), Rinzai school of Zen]\nBULLET::::- Hōnen (1133–1212), founder of the Jōdo-shū school of Pure Land Buddhism\nBULLET::::- Ikkyū (1374–1481), Zen Buddhist monk and poet\nBULLET::::- Ippen (1234–1289), founder of the Ji-shū sect of Pure Land Buddhism\nBULLET::::- Kūkai (774–835), founder of Shingon Buddhism\nBULLET::::- Myōe (1173–1232), monk of Kegon and Shingon Buddhism, known for his propagation of the Mantra of Light\nBULLET::::- Nakahara Nantenbō (1839–1925), Zen master and artist\nBULLET::::- Nichiren (1222–1282), founder of Nichiren Buddhism\nBULLET::::- Nikkō (1246–1333), founder of Nichiren Shōshū\nBULLET::::- Rōben (689–773), invited Simsang to Japan and founded the Kegon tradition based upon the Korean Hwaeom school\nBULLET::::- Ryōkan (1758–1831), Zen monk and poet\nBULLET::::- Saichō (767–822), founded Tendai school in Japan, also known by the posthumous title Dengyō Daishi\nBULLET::::- Shinran (1173–1263), founder of the Jōdo Shinshū school of Pure Land Buddhism and disciple of Hōnen\nBULLET::::- Takuan Sōhō (1573–1645), Zen teacher, and, according to legend, mentor of the swordsman Miyamoto Musashi\nBULLET::::- Gempō Yamamoto (1866–1961), Zen master\nBULLET::::- Shinjō Itō (1906–1989), founder of Shinnyo-en\n\nBULLET::::- Gihwa (1376–1433), Korean Seon monk; wrote commentaries on the Diamond Sutra and Sutra of Perfect Enlightenment\nBULLET::::- Jinul, Korean Seon monk (1158–1210); founder of modern Korean gong'an meditation system\nBULLET::::- Uisang (7th century), Korean monk, founder of Hwaeom tradition, based upon the Chinese Huayan school\nBULLET::::- Woncheuk\nBULLET::::- Wonhyo (617–668), Korean monk; prolific commentator on Mahayana sutras\n\nBULLET::::- Shin Arahan, primate of Pagan Kingdom, 1056–1115\nBULLET::::- Ledi Sayadaw, propagator of vipassanā\nBULLET::::- Mahasi Sayadaw, propagator of vipassanā\nBULLET::::- Sayadaw U Tejaniya, propagator of vipassanā\nBULLET::::- Mogok Sayadaw, propagator of vipassanā\nBULLET::::- Webu Sayadaw, propagator of vipassanā\nBULLET::::- Panditarama Sayadaw, propagator of vipassanā\nBULLET::::- Mingun Sayadaw, first monk in Myanmar to be awarded the title of Tipitakadhara, meaning Keeper and Guardian of the Tipitaka\nBULLET::::- Maha Bodhi Ta Htaung Sayadaw, founder of Maha Bodhi Tahtaung\nBULLET::::- Sitagu Sayadaw, founder and Supreme Head of the Sitagu Buddhist Academies\nBULLET::::- Ashin Nandamalabhivamsa, rector of International Theravada Buddhist Missionary University\nBULLET::::- Ashin Sandadika, well-known monk\nBULLET::::- Ba Khin, propagator of vipassana meditation in the Ledi tradition\n\nBULLET::::- Buddhadasa, well-known monk and philosopher\nBULLET::::- Ajahn Chah, monk well known for his students from all over the world\nBULLET::::- Ajahn Maha Bua, well-known monk in the Thai Forest Tradition\nBULLET::::- Mun Bhuridatta, monk who established Thai Forest Tradition\nBULLET::::- Ajahn Sao Kantasīlo, one of the pioneers of the Dhammayuttika Nikaya\nBULLET::::- Luang Pu Sodh Candasaro monk who founded the Dhammakaya Movement\nBULLET::::- Somdej Toh, monk who was the preceptor and teacher of King Rama IV\n\nBULLET::::- Anawrahta (1015–1078), founder of the Pagan Kingdom and credited with introducing Theravada Buddhism there and reintroducing it in Ceylon\nBULLET::::- Ashoka (304–232 BC), Mauryan Emperor of ancient India, and the first Buddhist ruler to send Buddhist missionaries outside of India throughout the Old World (阿育王)\nBULLET::::- Brihadratha Maurya, last ruler of the Maurya Empire\nBULLET::::- Harsha (606–648), Indian emperor who converted to Buddhism\nBULLET::::- Jayavarman VII (1181–1219), king of Cambodia\nBULLET::::- Kanishka the Great, ruler of the Kushan Empire\nBULLET::::- Kublai Khan, Mongol khagan and founder of the Yuan dynasty of China\nBULLET::::- Hulagu Khan, Mongol ruler who conquered much of Southwest Asia, he converted to Buddhism on his deathbed, spending most of his life as a Nestorian Christian\nBULLET::::- Menander I (Pali: Milinda), 2nd century BCE, a king of the Indo-Greek Kingdom of Northwestern India who questioned Nāgasena about Buddhism in the \"Milinda Pañha\" and is said to have become an arhat\nBULLET::::- Mindon Min (1808–1878), penultimate King of Burma and facilitator of the Fifth Buddhist council\nBULLET::::- Emperor Ming of Han\nBULLET::::- Mongkut, king of Thailand and founder of the Dhammayuttika Nikaya\nBULLET::::- Prince Shōtoku (574–622), mythologized crown prince and regent of Japan\nBULLET::::- Theodorus (1st century BCE), Indo-Greek governor, author of a Buddhist dedication\nBULLET::::- Wu Zetian (625–705), only female Empress Regnant in Chinese history\nBULLET::::- Emperor Wu of Liang (梁武帝) (502–549)\nBULLET::::- Devanampiya Tissa of Anuradhapura (307 BCE–267 BCE), King of Anuradhapura\n\nBULLET::::- Ajahn Amaro (1956–)\nBULLET::::- Ajahn Buddhadasa Bhikkhu (1906–1993)\nBULLET::::- Ajahn Brahm (1951– )\nBULLET::::- Ajahn Chah (1918–1992)\nBULLET::::- Ajahn Jayasaro (1958-)\nBULLET::::- Ajahn Sumedho (1934– )\nBULLET::::- Ayya Khema (1923–1997)\nBULLET::::- Ba Khin (1899–1971)\nBULLET::::- Balangoda Ananda Maitreya Thero (1896–1998)\nBULLET::::- Bhante Sujato\nBULLET::::- Bhikkhu Anālayo (1962–)\nBULLET::::- Bhikkhu Bodhi (1944–)\nBULLET::::- Bhikkhu Kiribathgoda Gnanananda (1961–)\nBULLET::::- Bour Kry (1945–)\nBULLET::::- Charles Henry Allan Bennett (1872–1923)\nBULLET::::- Dipa Ma (1911–1989)\nBULLET::::- Henepola Gunaratana (1927–)\nBULLET::::- Ledi Sayadaw (1846–1923)\nBULLET::::- Mahasi Sayadaw (1904–1982)\nBULLET::::- Mun Bhuridatta (1870–1949)\nBULLET::::- Ñāṇamoli Bhikkhu (1905–1960)\nBULLET::::- Nyānaponika Mahāthera (1901–1994)\nBULLET::::- Nyānatiloka Mahāthera (1878–1957)\nBULLET::::- Ñāṇavīra Thera (1920–1965)\nBULLET::::- Preah Maha Ghosananda (1929–2007)\nBULLET::::- S. N. Goenka (1924–2013), non-sectarian Burmese-Indian teacher of Vipassanā meditation who was awarded Padma Bhushan in 2012\nBULLET::::- Thanissaro Bhikkhu (1949–)\n\nBULLET::::- In Thailand, Ajahn is mean monk teachers (Have to been a monk more 10 year)\n\nFor Theravada , Bhikkhu(male) and Bhikkhuni(female) mean monk in Pali (Theravada use Pali language for studying Tripitaka)\n\nBULLET::::- Anagarika Govinda (1898–1985)\nBULLET::::- B. Alan Wallace (1950–)\nBULLET::::- Chagdud Tulku Rinpoche (1930–2002)\nBULLET::::- Chögyam Trungpa (1940–1987)\nBULLET::::- Chökyi Nyima Rinpoche (1951–)\nBULLET::::- Dhardo Rimpoche (1917–1990)\nBULLET::::- Dilgo Khyentse (1910–1991)\nBULLET::::- Dudjom Jigdral Yeshe Dorje (1904–1987)\nBULLET::::- Gyaincain Norbu, the 11th Panchen Lama (controversial; born 1990)\nBULLET::::- Kalu Rinpoche (1905–1989)\nBULLET::::- Karma Thinley Rinpoche (1931–)\nBULLET::::- Kelsang Gyatso\nBULLET::::- Matthieu Ricard (1946–)\nBULLET::::- Ole Nydahl (1941–)\nBULLET::::- Rangjung Rigpe Dorje, 16th Karmapa (1924–1981)\nBULLET::::- Sakyong Mipham\nBULLET::::- 14th Dalai Lama (1935–)\nBULLET::::- Tenzin Palmo (1943–)\nBULLET::::- Thubten Yeshe (known as Lama Yeshe) (1935–1984), Tibetan lama who, while exiled in Nepal, co-founded Kopan Monastery (1969) and the Foundation for the Preservation of the Mahayana Tradition (1975). He followed the Gelug tradition.\nBULLET::::- Thubten Zopa Rinpoche\nBULLET::::- Trijang Lobsang Yeshe Tenzin Gyatso(1901–1981)\nBULLET::::- Tsoknyi Rinpoche (1966–)\nBULLET::::- Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche (1920–1996), Dzogchen, Mahamudra and the Chokling Tersar\nBULLET::::- Yongey Mingyur Rinpoche (1975–)\nBULLET::::- Gelek Rimpoche\nBULLET::::- Tsem Tulku Rinpoche (1965–)\nBULLET::::- Dagyab Kyabgoen Rinpoche\nBULLET::::- Yongey Mingyur Rinpoche\nBULLET::::- Sakya Trizin\nBULLET::::- Thubten Chodron\nBULLET::::- Robina Courtin\nBULLET::::- Robert Thurman\nBULLET::::- Sharon Salzberg\nBULLET::::- Mark Epstein\n\nBULLET::::- Namkhai Norbu (1938–2018)\nBULLET::::- Tenzin Wangyal Rinpoche (1961–)\n\nAmerican\nBULLET::::- Adyashanti\nBULLET::::- Robert Baker Aitken (1917–2010)\nBULLET::::- Anne Hopkins Aitken (1911–1994)\nBULLET::::- Reb Anderson (1943–)\nBULLET::::- Zentatsu Richard Baker (1936–)\nBULLET::::- Joko Beck (1917–2011)\nBULLET::::- Sherry Chayat (1943–)\nBULLET::::- Issan Dorsey (1933–1990)\nBULLET::::- Zoketsu Norman Fischer (1946–)\nBULLET::::- James Ishmael Ford (1948–)\nBULLET::::- Tetsugen Bernard Glassman (1939–2018)\nBULLET::::- Paul Haller\nBULLET::::- Cheri Huber (1944)\nBULLET::::- Soenghyang (Barbara Rhodes, 1948–)\nBULLET::::- Philip Kapleau (1912–2004)\nBULLET::::- Houn Jiyu-Kennett (1924–1996)\nBULLET::::- Bodhin Kjolhede (1948–)\nBULLET::::- Jakusho Kwong (1935–)\nBULLET::::- Taigen Dan Leighton (1950–)\nBULLET::::- John Daido Loori (1931–2009)\nBULLET::::- Dai Bai Zan Cho Bo Zen Ji (1954–)\nBULLET::::- Heng Sure (1949–)\nBULLET::::- Bonnie Myotai Treace (1956-)\nBULLET::::- Brad Warner (1964–)\n\nChinese\nBULLET::::- Fayun (1933–2003)\nBULLET::::- Hsu Yun (1840–1959)\nBULLET::::- Hsuan Hua (1918–1995)\nBULLET::::- Nan Huai-Chin (1918–2012)\n\nEuropean\nBULLET::::- John Crook (1930–2011)\nBULLET::::- U Dhammaloka (1856?–1914?)\nBULLET::::- John Garrie (1923–1998)\nBULLET::::- Muhō Noelke (1968–)\n\nJapanese\nBULLET::::- Kōbun Chino Otogawa (1938–2002)\nBULLET::::- Taisen Deshimaru (1914–1982)\nBULLET::::- Hakuin Ekaku (1686–1769)\nBULLET::::- Keido Fukushima\nBULLET::::- Jakushitsu Genkō (1290–1367)\nBULLET::::- Shodo Harada (1940–)\nBULLET::::- Harada Daiun Sogaku (1871–1961)\nBULLET::::- Dainin Katagiri (1928–1990)\nBULLET::::- Musō Soseki (1275–1351)\nBULLET::::- Imakita Kosen (1816–1892)\nBULLET::::- Yamada Koun (1907–1989)\nBULLET::::- Taizan Maezumi (1931–1995)\nBULLET::::- Sōyū Matsuoka (?–1998)\nBULLET::::- Sōkō Morinaga (1925–1995)\nBULLET::::- Soen Nakagawa (1907–1984)\nBULLET::::- Gudō Wafu Nishijima (1919–2014)\nBULLET::::- Shōhaku Okumura\nBULLET::::- Kōdō Sawaki (1880–1965)\nBULLET::::- Nyogen Senzaki (1876–1958)\nBULLET::::- Oda Sessō (1901–1966)\nBULLET::::- Soyen Shaku (1859–1919)\nBULLET::::- Zenkei Shibayama (1894–1974)\nBULLET::::- Eido Tai Shimano (1932–2018)\nBULLET::::- Omori Sogen (1904–1994)\nBULLET::::- D. T. Suzuki (1870–1966)\nBULLET::::- Shunryū Suzuki (1904–1971)\nBULLET::::- Dai Bai Zan Cho Bo Zen Ji (1933–)\nBULLET::::- Bassui Tokushō (1327–1387)\nBULLET::::- Sesshū Tōyō (1420–1506)\nBULLET::::- Sobin Yamada\nBULLET::::- Hakuun Yasutani (1885–1973)\nBULLET::::- Bankei Yōtaku (1622–1693)\nBULLET::::- Sesson Yūbai (1290–1348)\n\nKorean\nBULLET::::- Seongcheol (1912–1993)\nBULLET::::- Seungsahn (1927–2004)\nBULLET::::- Pomnyun (1953-)\n\nMalaysian\nBULLET::::- Sujiva (1951–)\nBULLET::::- Chi Chern (1955–)\n\nTaiwanese\nBULLET::::- Guang Qin (廣欽) (1892–1986), founder of Cheng Tian Temple (承天禪寺) in Taiwan\nBULLET::::- Yin Shun (印順) (1906–2005), founder of Humanistic Buddhism (人間佛教)\nBULLET::::- Sheng-yen (聖嚴) (1931–2009), founder of Dharma Drum Mountain (法鼓山) in Taiwan\nBULLET::::- Cheng Yen (證嚴) (1937–), founder of Tzu Chi Foundation (慈濟基金會) in Taiwan\nBULLET::::- Hsing Yun (星雲) (1927–), founder of Fo Guang Shan (佛光山) in Taiwan\nBULLET::::- Wei Chueh (惟覺) (1928–), founder of Chung Tai Shan (中台禪寺) in Taiwan\n\nVietnamese\nBULLET::::- Thích Nhất Hạnh (1926–)\nBULLET::::- Thích Chân Không (1938–)\nBULLET::::- Thích Thiên-Ân (1926–1980)\nBULLET::::- Thích Thanh Từ (1924–)\n\nBULLET::::- Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar (1891–1956), Indian Intellectual, jurist, scholar, political leader, Buddhist revivalist and architect of the Indian Constitution\nBULLET::::- Tara Brach (1953–)\nBULLET::::- John Crook (1930–2011), British ecologist, sociologist, and practitioner of both Ch'an and Tibetan Buddhism tradition\nBULLET::::- Josei Toda (1900–1958), peace activist and second president of the Soka Gakkai\nBULLET::::- Joseph Goldstein (1944–)\nBULLET::::- Han Yong-un (1879–1944)\nBULLET::::- Chittadhar Hridaya (1906–1982)\nBULLET::::- Hsuan Hua (1918–1995), Tripitaka Master; extensive English commentaries on the major Mahayana Sutras: Avatamsaka Sutra, Shurangama Sutra, Shurangama Mantra, Lotus Sutra, Diamond Sutra, and many others\nBULLET::::- Christmas Humphreys (1901–1983)\nBULLET::::- Daisaku Ikeda (1928–), prolific writer of Nichiren Buddhism, society, peace and nuclear abolition, and President of the Soka Gakkai International\nBULLET::::- Jack Kornfield (1945–), American book writer, student of renowned forest monk Ajahn Chah, and teacher of Theravada Buddhism\nBULLET::::- Sangharakshita (1925–2018)\nBULLET::::- Edward Salim Michael (1921—2006)\nBULLET::::- Nakamura Hajime (1911–1999)\nBULLET::::- Nishida Kitaro (1870–1945)\nBULLET::::- Gudo Wafu Nishijima (1919–)\nBULLET::::- Nishitani Keiji (1900–1990)\nBULLET::::- Henry Steel Olcott (1832–1907)\nBULLET::::- Sheng-yen (1930–2009), religious scholar, one of the most respected teachers of Chinese Ch'an (Zen) Buddhism, and founder of spiritual and educational organization Dharma Drum Mountain\nBULLET::::- Taixu (1890–1947)\nBULLET::::- Tanaka Chigaku (1861–1939)\nBULLET::::- Tsunesaburo Makiguchi (1871–1944), Japanese educator and founder of the Soka Gakkai\nBULLET::::- Robert Thurman (1941–), American author, editor and translator of books on Tibetan Buddhism, Je Tsongkhapa professor of Indo-Tibetan Buddhist Studies at Columbia University and co-founder and president of Tibet House U.S.\nBULLET::::- Brad Warner (1964–)\nBULLET::::- Alan Watts (1915–1973)\nBULLET::::- Robert Wright (1957–)\nBULLET::::- Yin Shun (1906–2005)\nBULLET::::- Noah Levine (1971–) is an American Buddhist teacher and the author\n\nBULLET::::- B. R. Ambedkar (1891–1956), Indian nationalist, jurist, scholar, political leader, philosopher, anthropologist, historian, economist, Buddhist revivalist and principal architect of the Constitution of India\nBULLET::::- Aung San Suu Kyi, Burmese opposition politician and chairperson of the National League for Democracy (NLD) in Burma; received the Rafto Prize and the Sakharov Prize in 1990 and the Nobel Peace Prize in 1991 (Theravada)\nBULLET::::- Colleen Hanabusa, U.S. Congresswoman (2011–), Democrat and lawyer from Hawaii\nBULLET::::- Mazie Hirono, U.S. Senator (2013–), U.S. Congresswoman (2007–2013) and Democrat from Hawaii; first elected female Senator from Hawaii, first Asian-American woman elected to the Senate, first U.S. Senator born in Japan and the nation's first Buddhist Senator\nBULLET::::- Hank Johnson, U.S. Congressman (2007-) and Democrat from Georgia; one of the first two Buddhists to serve in the United States Congress (Soka Gakkai International)\nBULLET::::- Eric Lubbock, 4th Baron Avebury (1928–2016), English politician and Liberal Democrat; served as the Liberal Member of Parliament for Orpington from 1962 to 1970 and served in the House of Lords, having inherited the title of Baron Avebury in 1971\nBULLET::::- Jiyul, a Buddhist nun from South Korea who fasted to stop destruction of Korean salamander lands (Korean Seon)\nBULLET::::- Pomnyun, South Korean Buddhist monk, Zen master, and peace activist who received the Ramon Magsaysay Award for Peace and International Understanding in 2002 for his peace activism on the issue of Korean peninsula. (Korean Seon)\nBULLET::::- U Thant (1909–1974), Burmese diplomat and third Secretary-General of the United Nations (1961-1971) (Theravada)\nBULLET::::- Thích Huyền Quang (1919–2008), Vietnamese Buddhist monk, dissident and activist; formerly the patriarch of the Unified Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam; in 2002, he was awarded the Homo Homini Award for his human rights activism by the Czech group People in Need\nBULLET::::- Thích Quảng Độ, Vietnamese Buddhist monk, current patriarch of the Unified Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam; awarded the Homo Homini Award for human rights activism by the Czech group People in Need in 2002; nine-time Nobel Peace Prize nominee\nBULLET::::- Thích Quảng Đức (1897–1963), Vietnamese Mahayana monk and self-martyr for freedom of religion; burned himself to death at a busy Saigon road intersection on 11 June 1963 (Mahayana)\nBULLET::::- Kiren Rijiju, Indian politician\n\nBULLET::::- Fabien Barthez, French goalkeeper (1994–2006) of 1998 FIFA World Cup and Euro 2000-winning French national football team (Zen)\nBULLET::::- Roberto Baggio, Italian (1988–2004) footballer; in 1993, he was named FIFA World Player of the Year and won the Ballon d'Or (Soka Gakkai International)\nBULLET::::- Tiger Woods, American golfer\n\nBULLET::::- Ellison Onizuka (1946–1986), U.S. Air Force Colonel and first Asian American astronaut of NASA (Pure Land Buddhism)\n\nBULLET::::- Orlando Bloom, English actor (Soka Gakkai International)\nBULLET::::- Kate Bosworth, American actress (Soka Gakkai International)\nBULLET::::- Belinda Carlisle, American singer (Soka Gakkai International)\nBULLET::::- Tisca Chopra, Indian actress (Soka Gakkai International)\nBULLET::::- Edson Celulari, Brazilian actor\nBULLET::::- Chow Yun-fat, Chinese actor\nBULLET::::- Leonard Cohen, Canadian singer/songwriter/poet (Zen)\nBULLET::::- Penélope Cruz, Spanish actress and model\nBULLET::::- George Dvorsky, Transhumanist, Futurist and one of directors of Humanity+ (Secular Buddhism)\nBULLET::::- Richard Gere, American actor (Tibetan Buddhism)\nBULLET::::- Allen Ginsberg, poet (Tibetan Buddhism)\nBULLET::::- Philip Glass, American composer (Tibetan Buddhist)\nBULLET::::- Herbie Hancock, American pianist and composer (Soka Gakkai International)\nBULLET::::- Steve Jobs, American businessman, entrepreneur, marketer, inventor and the CEO of Apple Inc (Zen)\nBULLET::::- Jack Kerouac, American novelist (Zen and Tibetan Buddhism; also the Catholic Church)\nBULLET::::- k.d. lang, Canadian singer (Tibetan Buddhism)\nBULLET::::- James Lecesne, American actor, author, screenwriter, LGBT rights activist, founder of The Trevor Project (Soka Gakkai International)\nBULLET::::- Jet Li, Chinese martial artist, Hollywood actor (Tibetan Buddhist)\nBULLET::::- Courtney Love, American singer-songwriter (Soka Gakkai International)\nBULLET::::- Naima Mora, fashion model, winner of America's Next Top Model (Soka Gakkai International)\n\nBULLET::::- Kenneth Pai, Chinese-American writer\nBULLET::::- Steven Seagal, American actor and aikido expert (Tibetan Buddhism)\nBULLET::::- Maya Soetoro-Ng, Indonesian American writer, university instructor and maternal half-sister of Barack Obama, the 44th President of the United States\nBULLET::::- Oliver Stone, American film director\nBULLET::::- Sharon Stone, American actress, producer, and former fashion model\nBULLET::::- George Takei, American actor and author\nBULLET::::- Tina Turner, American singer-songwriter (Soka Gakkai International)\nBULLET::::- Marcia Wallace, American actress, voice artist, comedian (Soka Gakkai International)\nBULLET::::- Naomi Watts, British-Australian actress and film producer\nBULLET::::- Faye Wong, Chinese singer and actress (Tibetan Buddhism)\nBULLET::::- Michelle Yeoh, Malaysian actress\n\nBULLET::::- Gautama Buddha, protagonist from \"Saint Young Men\"\nBULLET::::- The cast from \"Ah My Buddha\"\nBULLET::::- Ikkyū, protagonist from \"Ikkyū-san\"\nBULLET::::- The cast from \"Oseam\"\nBULLET::::- Seishin Muroi, character from Shiki\"\nBULLET::::- Yoh Asakura, protagonist of the anime/manga \"Shaman King\"\nBULLET::::- Hanamaru Kunikida, character from \"Love Live! Sunshine!!\"\nBULLET::::- Miroku, character from Japanese Anime \"Inuyasha\"\nBULLET::::- Krillin, character from the \"Dragonball\" series\nBULLET::::- Kaname Asahina,Chiaki and Yūsei, characters from \"Brothers Conflict\"\nBULLET::::- Chichiri, character from \"Fushigi Yūgi\"\nBULLET::::- Yakumo Kokonoe, character from \"The Irregular at Magic High School\"\nBULLET::::- Mayura Sōda, Miyuki Sagara, and Yukimasa Sagara, characters from \"\"\nBULLET::::- Keisei Tagami and Akasha Shishidō, characters from the \"Corpse Princess\" series\nBULLET::::- Anji Yūkyūzan , character from \"Rurouni Kenshin\"\nBULLET::::- Enkai, character from \"Requiem from the Darkness\"\n\nBULLET::::- Enigma, a Marvel Comics superheroine\nBULLET::::- Xorn, Marvel Comics character and member of the X-Men\nBULLET::::- Green Lama, an American pulp magazine hero\nBULLET::::- Green Arrow (Connor Hawke), DC Comics superhero\n\nBULLET::::- Sun Wukong, Monkey King in Chinese epic novel \"Journey to the West\", and a fictional pupil of historical Chinese monk Xuanzang\nBULLET::::- Mary Elizabeth, character from the novel \"The Perks of Being a Wallflower\"\n\nBULLET::::- Steve Jinks, character from \"Warehouse 13\"\nBULLET::::- Daryl Dixon, character from \"The Walking Dead\"\nBULLET::::- Kahn Souphanousinphone, character from the cartoon \"King of the Hill\"\nBULLET::::- Connie Souphanousinphone, character from the cartoon \"King of the Hill\"\nBULLET::::- Dale Cooper, protagonist of the television series \"Twin Peaks\"\nBULLET::::- Kyle Valenti, character from the television series \"Roswell\"\nBULLET::::- Lisa Simpson, feminist and daughter of Homer and Marge Simpson, character from the cartoon \"The Simpsons\"\nBULLET::::- Carl Carlson, character from the cartoon \"The Simpsons\"\nBULLET::::- Lenny Leonard, character from the cartoon \"The Simpsons\"\nBULLET::::- Trini Kwan, original Yellow Ranger of the \"Mighty Morphin Power Rangers\"\nBULLET::::- Wendy Wu, protagonist of the Disney Channel Original Movie \"\"\nBULLET::::- Master Splinter, a Zen sensei/teacher to the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles\nBULLET::::- Hiro Nakamura, protagonist character in TV series \"Heroes\"\nBULLET::::- Gi, the Planeteer able to wield the element water\nBULLET::::- Edina Monsoon (Eddy) from the \"Absolutely Fabulous\" TV sitcom\nBULLET::::- God, from the animated cartoon \"South Park\"\nBULLET::::- Charlie Crews, Zen Buddhist, protagonist of television series \"Life\"\nBULLET::::- Buddha, character from \"Air Buddies\"\n\nBULLET::::- Liu Kang, character from the video game and later movie, \"Mortal Kombat\"\nBULLET::::- Sage, a class of trainer from the \"Pokémon\" series\n\nBULLET::::- 2D, lead singer and keyboardist of the British virtual band Gorillaz\nBULLET::::- Jeremy, from the popular web series \"Pure Pwnage\"\n\nBULLET::::- List of converts to Buddhism\nBULLET::::- Buddhahood\nBULLET::::- Outline of Buddhism\n"}
{"id": "18166", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18166", "title": "List of agnostics", "text": "List of agnostics\n\nListed here are persons who have identified themselves as theologically agnostic. Also included are individuals who have expressed the view that the veracity of a god's existence is unknown or inherently unknowable.\n\nBULLET::::- Saul Alinsky (1909–1972): American community organizer and writer; \"Rules for Radicals\"\nBULLET::::- Poul Anderson (1926–2001): American science fiction author\nBULLET::::- Piers Anthony (born 1934): English-American writer of science fiction and fantasy\nBULLET::::- Susan B. Anthony (1820–1906): American civil rights leader who played a pivotal role in the 19th century women's rights movement to introduce women's suffrage into the United States; co-founder of the first Women's Temperance Movement with Elizabeth Cady Stanton as President\nBULLET::::- Hannah Arendt (1906–1975): German American writer and political theorist\nBULLET::::- Samuel Beckett (1906–1989): Irish avant-garde novelist, playwright, theatre director, and poet; awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1969\nBULLET::::- Ambrose Bierce (1842 – c. 1913): American editorialist, journalist, short story writer, fabulist and satirist; known for his short story \"An Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge\" and his satirical lexicon \"The Devil's Dictionary\"\nBULLET::::- Jorge Luis Borges (1899–1986): Argentine writer\nBULLET::::- Henry Cadbury (1883–1974): English biblical scholar and Quaker who contributed to the New Revised Standard Version of the Bible\nBULLET::::- Thomas Carlyle (1795–1881): Scottish satirical writer, essayist, historian and teacher during the Victorian era\nBULLET::::- Ariel Dorfman (born 1942): Argentine/Chilean novelist, playwright, essayist, academic, and human rights activist\nBULLET::::- Arthur Conan Doyle (1859–1930): Scottish physician and writer; known for his stories about the detective Sherlock Holmes; a prolific writer whose other works include science fiction stories, plays, romances, poetry, non-fiction and historical novels\nBULLET::::- W.E.B. Du Bois (1868–1963): American sociologist, historian, civil rights activist, Pan-Africanist, author and editor; co-founder of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) in 1909\nBULLET::::- Bart D. Ehrman: American New Testament scholar and \"a happy agnostic\"\nBULLET::::- Edward FitzGerald (1809–1883): English poet and writer, best known as the poet of the first and most famous English translation of \"The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam\"\nBULLET::::- Betty Friedan (1921–2006): American writer, activist and feminist; a leading figure in the women's movement in the United States; her 1963 book, \"The Feminine Mystique\", is often credited with sparking the \"second wave\" of American feminism in the 20th century\nBULLET::::- Frederick James Furnivall (1825–1910): English second editor of the \"Oxford English Dictionary\"\nBULLET::::- John Galsworthy (1867–1933): English novelist and playwright; \"The Forsyte Saga\" (1906–1921) and its sequels, \"A Modern Comedy\" and \"End of the Chapter\"; won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1932\nBULLET::::- Neil Gaiman (born 1960): English author of short fiction, novels, comic books, graphic novels, audio theatre and films including the comic book series \"The Sandman\" and novels \"Stardust\", \"American Gods\", \"Coraline\", and \"The Graveyard Book\"\nBULLET::::- Maxim Gorky (1868–1936): Russian and Soviet author who brought Socialist Realism to literature\nBULLET::::- Thomas Hardy (1840–1928): English novelist and poet; while his works typically belong to the Naturalism movement, several poems display elements of the previous Romantic and Enlightenment periods of literature, such as his fascination with the supernatural\nBULLET::::- Sadegh Hedayat (1903–1951): Iranian author and writer\nBULLET::::- Robert A. Heinlein (1907–1988): American science fiction writer\nBULLET::::- Joseph Heller (1923–1999): American satirical novelist, short story writer, and playwright; \"Catch-22\"\nBULLET::::- Alexander Herzen (1812–1870): Russian writer and thinker; the \"father of Russian socialism\"; one of the main fathers of agrarian populism\nBULLET::::- Aldous Huxley (1894–1963): English writer of novels, such as \"Brave New World\", and wide-ranging essays\nBULLET::::- A.J. Jacobs (born 1968): American author\nBULLET::::- James Joyce (1882–1941): Irish novelist and poet, considered to be one of the most influential writers in the modernist avant-garde movement of the early 20th century; best known for his novel \"Ulysses\"\nBULLET::::- Franz Kafka (1883–1924): Czech-born Jewish writer\nBULLET::::- John Keats (1795–1821): English Romantic poet\nBULLET::::- Janusz Korczak (1878 or 1879–1942): Polish Jewish educator, children's author and pediatrician. After spending many years working as director of an orphanage in Warsaw, Korczak refused freedom and remained with the orphans as they were sent to Treblinka extermination camp during the Grossaktion Warsaw of 1942.\nBULLET::::- Stanislaw Lem (1921–2006): Polish science fiction novelist and essayist\nBULLET::::- H. P. Lovecraft (1890–1937): American writer of strange fiction and horror\nBULLET::::- Lucretius (99 BC–55 BC): Roman poet and philosopher\nBULLET::::- Bernard Malamud (1914–1986): American author of novels and short stories; one of the great American Jewish authors of the 20th century\nBULLET::::- H. L. Mencken (1880–1956): German-American journalist, satirist, social critic, cynic and freethinker, known as the \"Sage of Baltimore\"\nBULLET::::- Thomas Mann (1875–1955): German novelist, short story writer, social critic, philanthropist, essayist, and 1929 Nobel Prize laureate, known for his series of highly symbolic and ironic epic novels and novellas, noted for their insight into the psychology of the artist and the intellectual\nBULLET::::- Vladimir Nabokov (1899–1977): Russian novelist, poet and short story writer; known for his novel \"Lolita\"\nBULLET::::- Eugene O'Neill (1888–1953), American playwright; won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1936\nBULLET::::- Larry Niven (born 1938): American science fiction author; \"Ringworld\" (1970)\nBULLET::::- Fernando Pessoa (1888–1935): Portuguese poet, writer, literary critic and translator, described as one of the most significant literary figures of the 20th century and one of the greatest poets in the Portuguese language\nBULLET::::- Marcel Proust (1871–1922): French novelist, critic and essayist, known for his work \"In Search of Lost Time\"\nBULLET::::- Philip Pullman (born 1946): English children's author of the trilogy \"His Dark Materials\"; has said that he is technically an agnostic, though he also calls himself an atheist\nBULLET::::- Alexander Pushkin (1799–1837): Russian author of the Romantic era, considered by many to be the greatest Russian poet and the founder of modern Russian literature\nBULLET::::- Edward Said (1935–2003): Palestinian-American literary theorist and advocate for Palestinian rights; University Professor of English and Comparative Literature at Columbia University; a founding figure in postcolonialism\nBULLET::::- Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. (1917–2007): American historian and Pulitzer Prize–winning writer\nBULLET::::- Mary Shelley (1797–1851): English novelist, short story writer, dramatist, essayist, biographer, and travel writer, best known for her Gothic novel \"Frankenstein\" (1818)\nBULLET::::- Edward Snowden (born 1983): American computer specialist, privacy activist and former CIA employee and NSA contractor; disclosed classified details of several top-secret United States and British government mass surveillance programs\nBULLET::::- Elizabeth Cady Stanton (1815–1902): American social activist, abolitionist, and leading figure of the early woman's movement. Her Declaration of Sentiments, presented at the Seneca Falls Convention held in 1848 in Seneca Falls, New York, is often credited with initiating the first organized woman's rights and woman's suffrage movements in the United States. Late in life she led the effort to write the \"Woman's Bible\" to correct the injustices she perceived against women in the Bible.\nBULLET::::- Olaf Stapledon (1886–1950): English philosopher and author of several influential works of science fiction\nBULLET::::- John Steinbeck (1902–1968): American writer known for novels such as \"The Grapes of Wrath\" and \"East of Eden\"; won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1962\nBULLET::::- Stendhal (1783–1842) (a.k.a. Marie-Henri Beyle): French writer\nBULLET::::- Boris Strugatsky (1925–2012): Soviet-Russian science fiction author who collaborated with his brother, Arkady Strugatsky, on various works; their novel \"Piknik na obochine\" was translated into English as \"Roadside Picnic\" in 1977 and was filmed by Andrei Tarkovsky under the title \"Stalker\"\nBULLET::::- Charles Templeton (1915–2001): Canadian evangelist; author of \"A Farewell to God\"\nBULLET::::- Thucydides (c. 460–c. 395): Greek historian and author from Alimos. His \"History of the Peloponnesian War\" recounts the 5th-century BC war between Sparta and Athens to the year 411 BC. Thucydides has been dubbed the father of \"scientific history\", because of his strict standards of evidence-gathering and analysis in terms of cause and effect without reference to intervention by the gods, as outlined in his introduction to his work.\nBULLET::::- Ivan Turgenev (1818–1883): Russian novelist, short story writer and playwright; \"A Sportsman's Sketches\", \"Fathers and Sons\"\nBULLET::::- Mark Twain: American humorist, satirist, lecturer and writer, most noted for his novels \"Adventures of Huckleberry Finn\" and \"The Adventures of Tom Sawyer\"; has also been identified a deist\nBULLET::::- Adam Bruno Ulam (1922–2000): Polish and American historian and political scientist at Harvard University; one of the world's foremost authorities on Russia and the Soviet Union, and the author of twenty books and many articles\nBULLET::::- Ibn Warraq: known for his books critical of Islam\nBULLET::::- Hale White (1831–1913): British writer and civil servant\nBULLET::::- Elie Wiesel (1928–2016): Romanian-born Jewish-American writer, professor, political activist and Holocaust survivor; author of 57 books, including \"Night\", a work based on his experiences as a prisoner in the Auschwitz, Buna and Buchenwald concentration camps; awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1986\nBULLET::::- Robert Anton Wilson (1932–2007): American author, futurologist, and cryptocracy historian\nBULLET::::- Mary Wollstonecraft (1759–1797): English writer, philosopher, and advocate of women's rights. During her brief career, she wrote novels, treatises, a travel narrative, a history of the French Revolution, a conduct book, and a children's book. Wollstonecraft is best known for \"A Vindication of the Rights of Woman\" (1792), in which she argues that women are not naturally inferior to men, but appear to be only because they lack education. She suggests that both men and women should be treated as rational beings and imagines a social order founded on reason.\nBULLET::::- David Yallop (born 27 January 1937): English true crime author\nBULLET::::- Émile Zola (1840–1902): French writer; prominent figure in the literary school of naturalism; important contributor to the development of theatrical naturalism\n\nBULLET::::- Leslie Alexander (born 1943): American sports owner, owner of the Houston Rockets\nBULLET::::- Warren Buffett (born 1930): American investor; identified himself as agnostic in response to Warren Allen Smith, who had asked him whether he believed in God\nBULLET::::- Henry Dunant (1828–1910): Swiss businessman and social activist; founder of International Committee of the Red Cross; in 1901 he received the first Nobel Peace Prize, together with Frédéric Passy\nBULLET::::- Elon Musk (born 1971): South African American inventor and entrepreneur best known for founding SpaceX and co-founding Tesla Motors and PayPal (originally X.com)\nBULLET::::- Ted Turner (born 1938): American founder of Turner Broadcasting System, now part of Time Warner\n\nBULLET::::- John Adams (born 1947): American composer\nBULLET::::- Hideaki Anno (born 1960): Japanese animation and film director; known for his work on the popular anime series \"Neon Genesis Evangelion\"\nBULLET::::- Simon Baker (born 1969): Australian television and movie actor\nBULLET::::- David Bazan (born 1976): American singer, songwriter, musician and former frontman of Pedro The Lion, an indie rock outfit associated with Christian rock that was controversial among Christians for their language and off-kilter views about religion; his solo career has been focused around his newfound agnosticism.\nBULLET::::- Monica Bellucci (born 1964): Italian actress and fashion model\nBULLET::::- Tom Bergeron (born 1955): American television personality and game show host; host of \"America's Funniest Home Videos\", \"Hollywood Squares\" and \"Dancing with the Stars\"\nBULLET::::- Ingmar Bergman (1918–2007): Swedish director, writer and producer for film, stage and television\nBULLET::::- Irving Berlin (1888–1989): American composer and lyricist of Jewish heritage, widely considered one of the greatest songwriters in American history\nBULLET::::- Hector Berlioz (1803–1869): French Romantic composer\nBULLET::::- Gael García Bernal (born 1978): Mexican actor and director; claims to be \"culturally Catholic\" and \"spiritually agnostic\"\nBULLET::::- Lewis Black (born 1948): American stand-up comedian, author, playwright, social critic and actor\nBULLET::::- Johannes Brahms (1833–1897): German composer and pianist\nBULLET::::- Georges Brassens (1921–1981): French singer-songwriter and poet\nBULLET::::- Benjamin Britten (1913–1976): English composer, conductor, and pianist; a central figure of 20th-century British classical music\nBULLET::::- Gavin Bryars (born 1943): English composer and double bassist\nBULLET::::- Rose Byrne (born 1979), Australian actress\nBULLET::::- Dick Cavett (born 1936): American television talk show host\nBULLET::::- Charlie Chaplin (1889–1977): English comic actor, film director and composer best known for his work in the United States during the silent film era\nBULLET::::- Aaron Copland (1900–1990): American composer\nBULLET::::- Salvador Dalí (1904–1989): Spanish surrealist painter born in Figueres, Spain. Dalí, a skilled draftsman, became best known for the striking and bizarre images in his surrealist work. His painterly skills are often attributed to the influence of Renaissance masters. His arguably best-known work, \"The Persistence of Memory\", was completed in 1931. Dalí's expansive artistic repertoire included film, sculpture, and photography, in collaboration with a range of artists in a variety of media. He allegedly claimed to be both an agnostic and a Roman Catholic.\nBULLET::::- Daniel Day-Lewis (born 1957): English-Irish actor, three-time Academy Award for Best Actor winner\nBULLET::::- Leonardo DiCaprio (born 1974): American actor\nBULLET::::- Ronnie James Dio (1942–2010): American heavy metal singer (Elf, Rainbow, Black Sabbath, Dio, Heaven & Hell)\nBULLET::::- Richard Dreyfuss (born 1947): American actor\nBULLET::::- Thomas Eakins (1844–1916): American realist painter, photographer, sculptor, and fine arts educator; widely acknowledged to be one of the most important artists in American art history\nBULLET::::- Christopher Eccleston (born 1964): English actor\nBULLET::::- Zac Efron (born 1987): American actor, star of movies such as \"High School Musical\" and \"17 Again\"; was raised agnostic (his paternal grandfather was Jewish)\nBULLET::::- Carrie Fisher (1956–2016): American actress, screenwriter and novelist\nBULLET::::- Gabriel Fauré (1845–1924): French composer, organist, pianist and teacher; one of the foremost French composers of his generation; his musical style influenced many 20th-century composers\nBULLET::::- Henry Fonda (1905–1982): American film and stage actor\nBULLET::::- Emilia Fox (born 1974): English actress\nBULLET::::- Gilberto Gil (born 1942): Brazilian singer, guitarist, and songwriter, known for both his musical innovation and political commitment\nBULLET::::- Jean-Luc Godard (born 1930): French-Swiss film director, screenwriter and film critic; often identified with the 1960s French film movement \"La Nouvelle Vague\", or \"New Wave\"\nBULLET::::- Matt Groening (born 1954): American creator of animated TV series \"The Simpsons\" and \"Futurama\", and the comic \"Life in Hell\"\nBULLET::::- Bob Guccione (1930–2010): American founder and publisher of \"Penthouse\" magazine\nBULLET::::- Neil Patrick Harris (born 1973): American actor, producer, singer, and director; best known for \"Doogie Howser, M.D.\" and \"How I Met Your Mother\"; as a child, belonged to an Episcopal Church with his family, where he sang in choir, but has designated himself as an agnostic on his Myspace\nBULLET::::- Hergé (1907–1983): Belgian cartoonist; creator of \"The Adventures of Tintin\"\nBULLET::::- Gustav Holst (1874–1934): English composer, arranger and teacher; best known for his orchestral suite \"The Planets\"; composed a large number of works across a range of genres, although none achieved comparable success\nBULLET::::- John Humphrys (born 1943): English radio and television presenter who hosted a series of programmes interviewing religious leaders, \"Humphrys in Search of God\"\nBULLET::::- Leoš Janáček (1854–1928): Czech composer\nBULLET::::- Gene Kelly (1912–1996): American dancer, actor, singer, film director and producer, and choreographer\nBULLET::::- Myles Kennedy (born 1969): American musician, singer, and songwriter; lead vocalist and guitarist of the rock band Alter Bridge\nBULLET::::- Larry King (born 1933): host of \"Larry King Live\"\nBULLET::::- Janez Lapajne (born 1967): Slovenian film director, producer, writer, editor and production designer\nBULLET::::- Cloris Leachman (born 1926): American actress\nBULLET::::- Stan Lee (1922–2018) American comic book writer, editor, actor, producer, publisher, television personality; former president and chairman of Marvel Comics\nBULLET::::- Lemmy (1945–2015): English rock singer and bass guitarist; founder of the rock band Motörhead\nBULLET::::- James Hetfield (born 1963): American heavy metal singer and rhythm guitarist; co-founder of the heavy metal band Metallica\nBULLET::::- Annie Lennox (born 1954): Scottish recording artist\nBULLET::::- Emcee Lynx (born 1980): American anarchist hip hop musician; identifies as potentially pantheist, agnostic or atheist\nBULLET::::- René Magritte (1898–1967): Belgian surrealist artist\nBULLET::::- Gustav Mahler (1860–1911): Austrian Late-Romantic composer and conductor\nBULLET::::- Dave Matthews (born 1967): American musician and actor\nBULLET::::- Brian May (born 1947): English musician and astrophysicist most widely known as the guitarist, songwriter and occasional singer of the rock band Queen\nBULLET::::- Paul McCartney (born 1942): English musician, singer and composer\nBULLET::::- David Mitchell (born 1974): British actor, comedian and writer\nBULLET::::- Edvard Munch (1863–1944): Norwegian Symbolist painter, printmaker and an important forerunner of expressionist art; known for \"The Scream\"\nBULLET::::- Ernest Newman (1868–1959): English music critic and musicologist\nBULLET::::- Conor Oberst (born 1980): American singer-songwriter; fronts the band Bright Eyes\nBULLET::::- Hubert Parry (1848–1918): English composer, teacher and historian of music\nBULLET::::- Neil Peart (born 1952): Canadian drummer and lyricist for hard rock band Rush; many Rush song lyrics criticize religion and theism\nBULLET::::- Sean Penn (born 1960): American actor, twice winner of the Academy Award for Best Actor\nBULLET::::- Brendan Perry (born 1959): English singer and multi-instrumentalist best known for his work as the male half of the duo Dead Can Dance with Lisa Gerrard\nBULLET::::- Chris Pine (born 1980): American actor\nBULLET::::- Brad Pitt (born 1963): American actor; stated that he did not believe in God, and that he was mostly agnostic\nBULLET::::- Sidney Poitier (born 1927): Bahamian American actor, film director, author, and diplomat; his views are closer to deism\nBULLET::::- Hugo Riemann (1949–1919): German music theorist and composer\nBULLET::::- Joe Rogan (born 1967): American comedian, podcaster, social critic and UFC color commentator\nBULLET::::- Andy Rooney (1919–2011): American broadcast personality; specified that he was an agnostic and \"not\" an atheist, but also called himself an atheist\nBULLET::::- Larry Sanger: American co-founder of Wikipedia\nBULLET::::- Franz Schubert (1797–1828): Austrian composer\nBULLET::::- Robert Schumann (1810–1856): German composer and influential music critic; widely regarded as one of the greatest composers of the Romantic era\nBULLET::::- Ridley Scott (born 1937): English film director and producer; \"Alien\" (1979), \"Blade Runner\"\nBULLET::::- Adrienne Shelly (1966–2006), American actor, screenwriter and director\nBULLET::::- Richard Strauss (1864–1949): German composer of the late Romantic and early modern eras\nBULLET::::- Howard Stern (born 1954): American radio personality, television host, author, actor, and photographer\nBULLET::::- Sting (born 1951): English musician and lead singer of The Police\nBULLET::::- Matt Stone (born 1971): American co-creator of the cartoon series \"South Park\"; considers himself an agnostic Jew (his mother is Jewish), though he has also denied the existence of God\nBULLET::::- Osamu Tezuka (1928–1989): Japanese cartoonist, manga artist, animator, producer, activist and medical doctor; creator of \"Astro Boy\", \"Kimba the White Lion\" and \"Black Jack\"; often credited as the \"godfather of anime\", and is often considered the Japanese equivalent to Walt Disney\nBULLET::::- Jhonen Vasquez (born 1974): American comic book writer, and cartoonist; known for the animated series \"Invader Zim\"\nBULLET::::- Giuseppe Verdi (1813–1901): Italian composer, one of the most influential of the 19th century\nBULLET::::- Ralph Vaughan Williams (1872–1958): British composer. Despite the variety of his works with religious connections, Vaughan Williams was decidedly not a believer. According to his classmate Bertrand Russell, Williams was an atheist while attending Cambridge. According to his widow, he later became an agnostic.\n\nBULLET::::- Confucius (551 BC–479 BC): Chinese teacher, editor, politician, and philosopher of the Spring and Autumn Period of Chinese history. The philosophy of Confucius emphasized personal and governmental morality, correctness of social relationships, justice and sincerity. His followers competed successfully with many other schools during the Hundred Schools of Thought era only to be suppressed in favor of the Legalists during the Qin Dynasty. Following the victory of Han over Chu after the collapse of Qin, Confucius's thoughts received official sanction and were further developed into a Chinese religious system known as Confucianism.\nBULLET::::- Immanuel Kant (1724–1804): German philosopher; known for \"Critique of Pure Reason\"\nBULLET::::- Laozi (born 604 BC): Chinese religious philosopher; author of the \"Tao Te Ching\"; this association has led him to be traditionally considered the founder of philosophical religion Taoism\n\nBULLET::::- Isaiah Berlin (1909–1997): British social and political theorist, philosopher and historian of ideas of Russian-Jewish origin, thought by many to be the dominant scholar of his generation\nBULLET::::- Noam Chomsky (born 1928): American linguist, philosopher, political activist, author; lecturer, Institute Professor and professor emeritus of linguistics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology; credited with the creation of the theory of generative grammar\nBULLET::::- Democritus (460 BC – 370 BC), Ancient Greek philosopher; influential pre-Socratic philosopher and pupil of Leucippus, who formulated an atomic theory for the cosmos\nBULLET::::- John Dewey (1859–1952): American philosopher, psychologist and educational reformer; his ideas have been influential in education and social reform\nBULLET::::- Epicurus (341 BCE–270 BCE), Ancient Greek philosopher and the founder of the school of philosophy called Epicureanism\nBULLET::::- Fred Edwords (born 1948): longtime Humanist activist; national director of the United Coalition of Reason\nBULLET::::- James Hall (born 1933): philosopher; describes himself as an agnostic Episcopalian\nBULLET::::- Sidney Hook (1902–1989): American philosopher of the Pragmatist school known for his contributions to the philosophy of history, the philosophy of education, political theory, and ethics\nBULLET::::- David Hume (1711–1776): Scottish philosopher, historian, economist, and essayist, known especially for his philosophical empiricism and scepticism. He was one of the most important figures in the history of Western philosophy and the Scottish Enlightenment. Hume is often grouped with John Locke, George Berkeley, and a handful of others as a British Empiricist.\nBULLET::::- Edmund Husserl (1859–1938): German philosopher and mathematician and the founder of the 20th-century philosophical school of phenomenology\nBULLET::::- Harold Innis (1894–1952): Canadian political philosopher and professor of political economy at the University of Toronto; author of seminal works on media, communication theory and Canadian economic history\nBULLET::::- Anthony Kenny (born 1931): president of Royal Institute of Philosophy, wrote in his essay \"Why I'm not an atheist\" after justifying his agnostic position that \"a claim to knowledge needs to be substantiated; ignorance need only be confessed.\"\nBULLET::::- Thomas Kuhn (1922–1996): American historian and philosopher of science whose controversial 1962 book \"The Structure of Scientific Revolutions\" was deeply influential in both academic and popular circles, introducing the term \"paradigm shift,\" which has since become an English-language staple\nBULLET::::- G. E. Moore (1873–1958): English philosopher; one of the founders of the analytic tradition in philosophy\nBULLET::::- Karl R. Popper: philosopher of science; promoted falsifiability as a necessary criterion of empirical statements in science\nBULLET::::- Protagoras (died 420 BCE): Greek Sophist; first major Humanist; wrote that the existence of the gods was unknowable\nBULLET::::- Pyrrho (360 BC – c. 270 BC): Greek philosopher of classical antiquity; credited as being the first Skeptic philosopher and the inspiration for the school known as Pyrrhonism, founded by Aenesidemus in the 1st century BC\nBULLET::::- Bertrand Russell (1872–1970): British philosopher and mathematician; considered himself a philosophical agnostic, but said that the label \"atheist\" conveyed a more accurate impression to \"the ordinary man in the street\"\nBULLET::::- Michael Schmidt-Salomon (born 1967): German philosopher, author and former editor of \"MIZ\" (\"Contemporary Materials and Information: Political magazine for atheists and the irreligious\") Schmidt-Salomon has specified that he is not a \"\"pure\" atheist, but actually an \"agnostic\".\"\nBULLET::::- Herbert Spencer (1820–1903): English philosopher, biologist, sociologist, and prominent classical liberal political theorist of the Victorian era\nBULLET::::- Theophrastus (c. 371 BC – 287 BC): Greek philosopher; a native of Eresos in Lesbos; the successor to Aristotle in the Peripatetic school.\nBULLET::::- Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar (1820–1891): Indian Bengali polymath; a key figure of the Bengal Renaissance\nBULLET::::- Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889–1951): Austrian-British philosopher who worked primarily in logic, the philosophy of mathematics, the philosophy of mind, and the philosophy of language. He is best known for his philosophical works like the \"Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus\" and \"Philosophical Investigations\".\n\nBULLET::::- Norman Angell (1872–1967): English lecturer, journalist, author, and politician; member of parliament for the Labour Party in England; awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1933\nBULLET::::- Jacinda Ardern (born 1980): New Zealand politician, Prime Minister of New Zealand, 2017–present\nBULLET::::- Clement Attlee (1883–1967): British politician, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, 1945–1951\nBULLET::::- Michelle Bachelet (born 1951): Chilean politician, President of Chile, 2006–2010\nBULLET::::- Vincent Bugliosi (born 1934): former Los Angeles County Deputy District Attorney\nBULLET::::- Fernando Henrique Cardoso (born 1931): Brazilian politician, President of Brazil, 1995–2003\nBULLET::::- Helen Clark (born 1950): New Zealand politician, Prime Minister of New Zealand, 1999–2008\nBULLET::::- Carlos Gaviria Díaz (born 1937): Colombian politician; said \"I am an agnostic, like him Bertrand Russell\"\nBULLET::::- John Curtin (1885–1945): 14th Prime Minister of Australia\nBULLET::::- Clarence Darrow (1857–1938): American lawyer; defended John T. Scopes' right to teach Darwin's theory of evolution in the famous Tennessee \"Monkey Trial\"\nBULLET::::- Alan Dershowitz (born 1938): American lawyer, jurist and political commentator; author of \"Taking the Stand: My Life in the Law\" (2013)\nBULLET::::- Willem Drees (1886–1988): Dutch politician, Prime Minister of the Netherlands, 1948–1958\nBULLET::::- Heinz Fischer (born 1938): Austrian politician, President of Austria, 2004–2016\nBULLET::::- Eamon Gilmore (born 1955): Irish politician, Tánaiste (Deputy Prime Minister) of the Republic of Ireland\nBULLET::::- Boris van der Ham (born 1973): Dutch politician\nBULLET::::- Mariëtte Hamer (born 1958): Dutch politician\nBULLET::::- Bob Hawke (born 1929): 23rd Prime Minister of Australia, 1983–1991\nBULLET::::- François Hollande (born 1954): 24th President of France, 2012–2017\nBULLET::::- Billy Hughes (1862–1952): 7th Prime Minister of Australia\nBULLET::::- Robert G. Ingersoll (1833–1899): American political leader and orator known as \"The Great Agnostic\"\nBULLET::::- Ivo Josipović (born 1957): Croatian politician and composer; third President of Croatia, 2010–\nBULLET::::- Bob Kerrey (born 1943): American politician, Governor of Nebraska (1983–1987) and United States Senator from Nebraska (1989–2001)\nBULLET::::- Wim Kok (born 1938): Dutch politician, Prime Minister of the Netherlands, 1994–2002\nBULLET::::- Bruno Kreisky (1911–1990): Austrian Federal Chancellor, 1970–1983\nBULLET::::- Aleksander Kwaśniewski (born 1954): President of Poland, 1995–2005\nBULLET::::- Ricardo Lagos (born 1938): first declared agnostic to be elected president of Chile\nBULLET::::- John Key (born 1961): New Zealand politician, Prime Minister of New Zealand, 2008–2016\nBULLET::::- Esther Ouwehand (born 1976): Dutch politician\nBULLET::::- Jan Marijnissen (born 1952): Dutch politician\nBULLET::::- François Mitterrand (1916–1996): President of France, 1981–1995\nBULLET::::- Jayaprakash Narayan (Lok Satta) (born 1956): politician, thinker, and social reformer\nBULLET::::- Jawaharlal Nehru (1889–1964): Indian freedom-fighter and the country's first Prime Minister, 1947–1964\nBULLET::::- Robert Owen (1771–1858): Welsh social reformer; a founder of utopian socialism and the cooperative movement\nBULLET::::- Susan Rice (born 1964): former United States Ambassador to the United Nations\nBULLET::::- George Lincoln Rockwell (1918–1967): founder of the American Nazi Party\nBULLET::::- Siddaramaiah (born 1948): former Karnataka Deputy CM\nBULLET::::- Jens Stoltenberg (born 1959): former Prime Minister of Norway; current Secretary General of NATO\nBULLET::::- Cenk Uygur (born 1970): Turkish American columnist, political commentator, activist, former MSNBC host, co-founder of the American liberal/progressive political and social internet commentary program \"The Young Turks\", founder of Wolf PAC\nBULLET::::- Joop den Uyl (1919–1987): Dutch politician, Prime Minister of the Netherlands, 1973–1977\nBULLET::::- Gerdi Verbeet (born 1951): Dutch politician, President of the House of Representatives since 2006.\nBULLET::::- Geert Wilders (born 1963): Dutch politician, leader of the Party for Freedom\nBULLET::::- Gough Whitlam (1916–2014): Prime Minister of Australia, 1972–1975\nBULLET::::- Lee Kuan Yew (1923–2015): employment lawyer, Prime Minister and Founding Father of Singapore\nBULLET::::- Gerrit Zalm (born 1952): Dutch politician, Deputy Prime Minister of the Netherlands, 2003–2007\nBULLET::::- José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero (born 1960): former Prime Minister of Spain\n\nBULLET::::- Haroon Ahmed (born 1936): British Pakistani scientist in the fields of microelectronics and electrical engineering\nBULLET::::- Hannes Alfvén (1908–1995): Swedish electrical engineer and plasma physicist; recipient of 1970 Nobel Prize in Physics for his work on magnetohydrodynamics (MHD); known for describing the class of MHD waves now known as Alfvén waves\nBULLET::::- Ralph Alpher (1921–2007): American cosmologist; known for the seminal paper on Big Bang nucleosynthesis, the Alpher–Bethe–Gamow paper\nBULLET::::- Sir David Attenborough (born 1926): English natural history presenter and anthropologist\nBULLET::::- Hertha Marks Ayrton (1854–1923): English engineer, mathematician and inventor\nBULLET::::- John Logie Baird (1888–1946): Scottish engineer and inventor of the world's first practical, publicly demonstrated television system, and of the world's first fully electronic colour television tube\nBULLET::::- Robert Bárány (1876–1936): Austro-Hungarian otologist; for his work on the physiology and pathology of the vestibular apparatus of the ear, he received the 1914 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine\nBULLET::::- John Bardeen (1908–1991): American physicist and electrical engineer; the only person to have won the Nobel Prize in Physics twice: first in 1956 with William Shockley and Walter Brattain for the invention of the transistor; and again in 1972 with Leon N Cooper and John Robert Schrieffer for a fundamental theory of conventional superconductivity known as the BCS theory\nBULLET::::- Alexander Graham Bell (1847–1922): eminent scientist, inventor, engineer and innovator; credited with inventing the first practical telephone\nBULLET::::- Richard E. Bellman (1920–1984): American applied mathematician, celebrated for his invention of dynamic programming in 1953, and important contributions in other fields of mathematics\nBULLET::::- Emile Berliner (1851–1929): German-born American inventor; known for developing the disc record gramophone (phonograph in American English)\nBULLET::::- Claude Bernard (1813–1878): French physiologist; first to define the term \"milieu intérieur\" (now known as homeostasis, a term coined by Walter Bradford Cannon)\nBULLET::::- Nicolaas Bloembergen (born 1920): Dutch-American physicist; shared the 1981 Nobel Prize in Physics with Arthur Schawlow and Kai Siegbahn for their work in laser spectroscopy\nBULLET::::- David Bohm (1917–1992): American-born British quantum physicist who contributed to theoretical physics, philosophy of mind, neuropsychology\nBULLET::::- George Boole (1815–1864): English mathematician and logician; known for developing Boolean algebra; has also been labeled a deist\nBULLET::::- Robert Bosch (1861–1942): German industrialist, engineer and inventor, founder of Robert Bosch GmbH\nBULLET::::- Jagadish Chandra Bose (1858–1937): Indian polymath: physicist, biologist, botanist, archaeologist, early writer of science fiction; pioneered the investigation of radio and microwave optics, made very significant contributions to plant science, and laid the foundations of experimental science in the Indian subcontinent; invented the crescograph\nBULLET::::- Jacob Bronowski (1908–1974): Polish-Jewish British mathematician, biologist, historian of science, theatre author, poet and inventor; presenter and writer of the 1973 BBC television documentary series \"The Ascent of Man\", and the accompanying boo\nBULLET::::- Frank Macfarlane Burnet (1899–1985): Australian virologist; known for his contributions to immunology; received the 1960 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for demonstrating acquired immune tolerance and developing the theory of clonal selection\nBULLET::::- Santiago Ramón y Cajal (1852–1934): Spanish pathologist, histologist, neuroscientist; considered by many to be the father of modern neuroscience; won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1996\nBULLET::::- Wallace Carothers (1896–1937): American chemist and inventor; credited with the invention of nylon\nBULLET::::- Henry Cavendish (1731–1810): British scientist; noted for his discovery of hydrogen or what he called \"inflammable air\"; known for the Cavendish experiment, his measurement of the Earth's density, and early research into electricity\nBULLET::::- Francis Crick (1916–2004): Nobel-laureate co-discoverer of the structure of DNA; described himself as a skeptic and an agnostic with \"a strong inclination towards atheism\"\nBULLET::::- Marie Curie (1867–1934): Polish physicist and chemist; pioneer in the field of radioactivity; the first to win two Nobel Prizes in two different sciences: the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1903 and the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1911\nBULLET::::- Heber Doust Curtis (1872–1942): American astronomer; known for his participation in the Great Debate with Harlow Shapley on the nature of nebulae and galaxies, and the size of the universe\nBULLET::::- Charles Darwin (1809–1882): founder of the theory of evolution by natural selection; once described himself as being generally agnostic, though he was a member of the Anglican Church and attended Unitarian services\nBULLET::::- David Deutsch (born 1953): British physicist at the University of Oxford; pioneered the field of quantum computation by formulating a description for a quantum Turing machine, as well as specifying an algorithm designed to run on a quantum computer\nBULLET::::- Paul Dirac (1902–1984): British theoretical physicist; a founder of quantum mechanics; predicted the existence of antimatter; won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1933\nBULLET::::- Eugène Dubois (1858–1940): Dutch paleoanthropologist and geologist; earned worldwide fame for his discovery of Pithecanthropus erectus (later redesignated Homo erectus), or 'Java Man'\nBULLET::::- Émile Durkheim (1858–1917): French sociologist; had a Jewish bar mitzvah at thirteen, was briefly interested in Catholicism after a mystical experience, but later became an agnostic\nBULLET::::- Freeman Dyson (born 1923): British-born American theoretical physicist and mathematician, famous for his work in quantum electrodynamics, solid-state physics, astronomy and nuclear engineering\nBULLET::::- Albert Einstein (1879–1955): German theoretical physicist, best known for his theory of relativity and the mass-energy equivalence, formula_1\nBULLET::::- John Ericsson (1803–1889): Swedish-American inventor and mechanical engineer\nBULLET::::- Enrico Fermi (1901–1954): Italian-American physicist; known for his work on the development of the first nuclear reactor, Chicago Pile-1, and for his contributions to the development of quantum theory, nuclear and particle physics, and statistical mechanics; awarded the 1938 Nobel Prize in Physics for his work on induced radioactivity\nBULLET::::- Edmond H. Fischer (born 1920): Swiss American biochemist; he and his collaborator Edwin G. Krebs were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1992 for describing how reversible phosphorylation works as a switch to activate proteins and regulate various cellular processes\nBULLET::::- Howard Florey (1898–1968): Australian pharmacologist and pathologist; shared the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1945 with Sir Ernst Boris Chain and Sir Alexander Fleming for his role in the making of penicillin\nBULLET::::- Lee De Forest (1863–1961): American inventor with over 180 patents to his credit; invented the Audion; considered to be one of the fathers of the \"electronic age\", as the Audion helped to usher in the widespread use of electronics; credited with one of the principal inventions that brought sound to motion pictures\nBULLET::::- Edward Frankland (1825–1899): British chemist; expert in water quality and analysis; originated the concept of combining power, or valence, in chemistry\nBULLET::::- Rosalind Franklin (1920–1958): British biophysicist and X-ray crystallographer; made critical contributions to the understanding of the fine molecular structures of DNA, RNA, viruses, coal and graphite\nBULLET::::- Jerome I. Friedman (born 1930): American physicist; Institute Professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology; in 1968–1969 he conducted experiments with Henry W. Kendall and Richard E. Taylor at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center which gave the first experimental evidence that protons had an internal structure, later known to be quarks; for this, they shared the 1990 Nobel Prize in Physics\nBULLET::::- Milton Friedman (1912–2006): American economist, writer and public intellectual, winner of Nobel Prize in Economics\nBULLET::::- William Froude (1810–1879): English engineer, hydrodynamicist and naval architect; first to formulate reliable laws for the resistance that water offers to ships (such as the hull speed equation) and for predicting their stability\nBULLET::::- Dennis Gabor (1900–1979): Hungarian-British electrical engineer and inventor; known for his invention of holography and received the 1971 Nobel Prize in Physics\nBULLET::::- Francis Galton (1822–1911): English Victorian polymath: anthropologist, eugenicist, tropical explorer, geographer, inventor, meteorologist, proto-geneticist, psychometrician, and statistician; a cousin of Charles Darwin\nBULLET::::- Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin (1900–1979): English-American astronomer who in 1925 was first to show that the Sun is mainly composed of hydrogen, contradicting accepted wisdom at the time\nBULLET::::- Roy J. Glauber (1925–2018): American theoretical physicist; awarded one half of the 2005 Nobel Prize in Physics \"for his contribution to the quantum theory of optical coherence\", with the other half shared by John L. Hall and Theodor W. Hänsch\nBULLET::::- Camillo Golgi (1843–1926): Italian physician, pathologist, scientist; along with Santiago Ramón y Cajal, he won the 1906 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for their studies of the structure of the nervous system\nBULLET::::- David Gross (born 1941): American particle physicist and string theorist; with Frank Wilczek and David Politzer, he was awarded the 2004 Nobel Prize in Physics for their discovery of asymptotic freedom\nBULLET::::- John Gurdon (born 1933): British developmental biologist; known for his pioneering research in nuclear transplantation and cloning\nBULLET::::- Murray Gell-Mann (1929–2019): American physicist and linguist who received the 1969 Nobel Prize in Physics for his work on the theory of elementary particles\nBULLET::::- Stephen Jay Gould (1941–2002): American paleontologist, evolutionary biologist, science historian and popularizer; called himself a \"Jewish agnostic\"\nBULLET::::- Hans Hahn (1879–1934): Austrian mathematician who made contributions to functional analysis, topology, set theory, the calculus of variations, real analysis, and order theory. His most famous student was Kurt Gödel, whose Ph.D. thesis was completed in 1929.\nBULLET::::- Alan Hale (born 1958): American astronomer, known for his co-discovery of the Comet Hale-Bopp.\nBULLET::::- William Stewart Halsted (1852–1922): American surgeon who emphasized strict aseptic technique during surgical procedures, was an early champion of newly discovered anesthetics, and introduced several new operations, including the radical mastectomy for breast cancer.\nBULLET::::- Theodor W. Hänsch (born 1941): German physicist. He received one fourth of the 2005 Nobel Prize in Physics for \"contributions to the development of laser-based precision spectroscopy, including the optical frequency comb technique\", sharing the prize with John L. Hall and Roy J. Glauber.\nBULLET::::- Friedrich Hayek (1899–1992): Austrian economist and philosopher. Best known for his defense of classical liberalism and free-market capitalism. Along with Gunnar Myrdal, Hayek shared the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 1974.\"\nBULLET::::- Hermann von Helmholtz (1821–1894): German physician and physicist who made significant contributions to several widely varied areas of modern science. In physiology and psychology, he is known for his mathematics of the eye, theories of vision, ideas on the visual perception of space, color vision research, and on the sensation of tone, perception of sound, and empiricism. In physics, he is known for his theories on the conservation of energy, work in electrodynamics, chemical thermodynamics, and on a mechanical foundation of thermodynamics. As a philosopher, he is known for his philosophy of science, ideas on the relation between the laws of perception and the laws of nature, the science of aesthetics, and ideas on the civilizing power of science.\nBULLET::::- Gerhard Herzberg (1904–1999): German pioneering physicist and physical chemist, who won the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1971.\nBULLET::::- David Hilbert (1862–1943): German mathematician, recognized as one of the most influential and universal mathematicians of the 19th and early 20th centuries.\nBULLET::::- Frederick Gowland Hopkins (1861–1947): English biochemist who was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1929, with Christiaan Eijkman, for the discovery of vitamins. He also discovered the amino acid tryptophan, in 1901. He was appointed President of the Royal Society from 1930 to 1935.\nBULLET::::- Gerard 't Hooft (born 1946): Dutch theoretical physicist. He shared the 1999 Nobel Prize in Physics with his thesis advisor Martinus J. G. Veltman \"for elucidating the quantum structure of electroweak interactions\".\nBULLET::::- Fred Hoyle (1915–2001): English astronomer and mathematician.\nBULLET::::- Edwin Hubble (1889–1953): American astronomer who played a crucial role in establishing the field of extragalactic astronomy and is generally regarded as the leading observational cosmologist of the 20th century. Hubble generally is known for Hubble's law. He is credited with the discovery of the existence of galaxies other than the Milky Way and his galactic red shift discovery that the loss in frequency—the redshift — observed in the spectra of light from other galaxies increased in proportion to a particular galaxy's distance from Earth. This relationship became known as Hubble's law. His findings fundamentally changed the scientific view of the universe.\nBULLET::::- Alexander von Humboldt (1769–1859): German naturalist and explorer. His quantitative work on botanical geography laid the foundation for the field of biogeography.\nBULLET::::- Andrew Huxley (1917–2012): English physiologist and biophysicist. He (along with Alan Hodgkin) won the 1963 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his experimental and mathematical work on the basis of nerve action potentials, the electrical impulses that enable the activity of an organism to be coordinated by a central nervous system.\nBULLET::::- Thomas Henry Huxley (1825–1895): English biologist and coiner of the term \"agnosticism\".\nBULLET::::- Robert Jastrow (1925–2008): American astronomer, physicist and cosmologist.\nBULLET::::- Edwin Thompson Jaynes (1922–1998): American physicist and statistician. He wrote extensively on statistical mechanics and on foundations of probability and statistical inference. He also pioneered the field of Digital physics.\nBULLET::::- James Hopwood Jeans (1877–1946): English physicist, astronomer and mathematician.\nBULLET::::- Jerome Karle (1918–2013): American physical chemist. Jointly with Herbert A. Hauptman, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1985, for the direct analysis of crystal structures using X-ray scattering techniques.\nBULLET::::- August Kekulé (1829–1896): German organic chemist. He was one of the most prominent chemists in Europe, especially in theoretical chemistry. He was the principal founder of the theory of chemical structure.\nBULLET::::- John Kendrew (1917–1997): English biochemist and crystallographer who shared the 1962 Nobel Prize in Chemistry with Max Perutz; their group in the Cavendish Laboratory investigated the structure of heme-containing proteins.\nBULLET::::- John Maynard Keynes (1883–1946): British economist. His ideas are the basis for the school of thought known as Keynesian economics, as well as its various offshoots.\nBULLET::::- Michio Kaku (born 1947): American theoretical physicist.\nBULLET::::- Alfred Kastler (1902–1984): French physicist. He won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1966.\nBULLET::::- Joseph Louis Lagrange (1736–1813): Italian-French mathematician and astronomer. He made significant contributions to all fields of analysis, number theory, and classical and celestial mechanics.\nBULLET::::- Irving Langmuir (1881–1957): American chemist and physicist. He was awarded the 1932 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his work in surface chemistry.\nBULLET::::- Anthony James Leggett (born 1938): English-American physicist. Professor Leggett is widely recognized as a world leader in the theory of low-temperature physics, and his pioneering work on superfluidity was recognized by the 2003 Nobel Prize in Physics.\nBULLET::::- Joseph Leidy (1823–1891): American paleontologist.\nBULLET::::- Mario Livio (born 1945): Israeli-American astrophysicist.\nBULLET::::- Seth Lloyd (born 1960): American mechanical engineer. He is a professor of mechanical engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.\nBULLET::::- James Lovelock (born 1919): British scientist, environmentalist and futurologist. He is best known for proposing the Gaia hypothesis.\nBULLET::::- Percival Lowell (1855–1916): American businessman, author, mathematician, and astronomer who fueled speculation that there were canals on Mars, founded the Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff, Arizona, and formed the beginning of the effort that led to the discovery of Pluto 14 years after his death.\nBULLET::::- Frank Malina (1912–1981): American aeronautical engineer and painter, especially known for becoming both a pioneer in the art world and the realm of scientific engineering.\nBULLET::::- Rudolph A. Marcus (born 1923): Canadian-born chemist who received the 1992 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his theory of electron transfer.\nBULLET::::- Lynn Margulis (1938–2011): American biologist. She is best known for her theory on the origin of eukaryotic organelles, and her contributions to the endosymbiotic theory, which is now generally accepted for how certain organelles were formed. She is also associated with the Gaia hypothesis, based on an idea developed by the English environmental scientist James Lovelock.\nBULLET::::- Dan McKenzie (geophysicist) (born 1942): British geophysicist.\nBULLET::::- Simon van der Meer (1925–2011): Dutch particle accelerator physicist who shared the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1984 with Carlo Rubbia for contributions to the CERN project which led to the discovery of the W and Z particles, two of the most fundamental constituents of matter.\nBULLET::::- Albert Abraham Michelson (1852–1931): American physicist known for his work on the measurement of the speed of light and especially for the Michelson-Morley experiment. In 1907 he received the Nobel Prize in Physics.\nBULLET::::- Ludwig von Mises (1881–1973): Austrian Economist and Philosopher. He was a prominent figure in the Austrian School of economic thought.\nBULLET::::- Ludwig Mond (1839–1909): German-born British chemist and industrialist.\nBULLET::::- Robert S. Mulliken (1896–1986): American physicist and chemist, primarily responsible for the early development of molecular orbital theory, i. e. the elaboration of the molecular orbital method of computing the structure of molecules. Dr. Mulliken received the Nobel Prize for chemistry in 1966.\nBULLET::::- Nathan Myhrvold (born 1959): American computer scientist, technologist, mathematician, physicist, entrepreneur, nature and wildlife photographer, master chef.\nBULLET::::- David Nalin (born 1941): American physiologist. Nalin had the key insight that Oral rehydration therapy (ORT) would work if the volume of solution patients drank matched the volume of their fluid losses, and that this would drastically reduce or completely replace the only current treatment for cholera, intravenous therapy. Nalin's discoveries have been estimated to have saved over 50 million lives worldwide.\nBULLET::::- Fridtjof Nansen (1861–1930): Norwegian explorer, scientist, diplomat, humanitarian and Nobel Peace Prize laureate. In 1922, he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his work on behalf of the displaced victims of the First World War and related conflicts.\nBULLET::::- Erwin Neher (born 1944): German biophysicist. Along with Bert Sakmann, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1991.\nBULLET::::- Ronald George Wreyford Norrish (1897–1978): British chemist. As a result of the development of flash photolysis, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1967 along with Manfred Eigen and George Porter for their study of extremely fast chemical reactions.\nBULLET::::- Robert Noyce (1927–1990): American physicist, businessman, and inventor. He co-founded Fairchild Semiconductor in 1957 and Intel Corporation in 1968. He is also credited (along with Jack Kilby) with the invention of the integrated circuit or microchip which fueled the personal computer revolution.\nBULLET::::- Sherwin B. Nuland (born 1930): American surgeon and author of How We Die.\nBULLET::::- Paul Nurse (born 1949): 2001 Nobel Laureate in Physiology or Medicine, called himself an atheist, but specified that \"sceptical agnostic\" was a more \"philosophically correct\" term.\nBULLET::::- Bill Nye (born 1955): American science educator, comedian, television host, actor, mechanical engineer and scientist. Popularly known as \"Bill Nye the Science Guy\".\nBULLET::::- George Olah (born 1927): 1994 Nobel Laureate in Chemistry, discoverer of superacids,\nBULLET::::- Mark Oliphant (1901–2000): Australian physicist and humanitarian. He played a fundamental role in the first experimental demonstration of nuclear fusion and also the development of the atomic bomb.\nBULLET::::- Karl Pearson (1857–1936): English mathematician who has been credited for establishing the discipline of mathematical statistics.\nBULLET::::- Saul Perlmutter (born 1959): American astrophysicist. He shared both the 2006 Shaw Prize in Astronomy and the 2011 Nobel Prize in Physics with Brian P. Schmidt and Adam Riess for providing evidence that the expansion of the universe is accelerating.\nBULLET::::- Henri Poincaré (1854–1912): French mathematician, theoretical physicist, engineer, and a philosopher of science. He is often described as a polymath, and in mathematics as \"The Last Universalist\", since he excelled in all fields of the discipline as it existed during his lifetime.\nBULLET::::- Siméon Denis Poisson (1781–1840): French mathematician, geometer, and physicist.\nBULLET::::- George Pólya (1888–1985): Hungarian Jewish mathematician. He was a professor of mathematics from 1914 to 1940 at ETH Zürich and from 1940 to 1953 at Stanford University. He made fundamental contributions to combinatorics, number theory, numerical analysis and probability theory. He is also noted for his work in heuristics and mathematics education.\nBULLET::::- Carolyn Porco (born 1953): American planetary scientist. She is best known for her work in the exploration of the outer solar system, beginning with her imaging work on the Voyager missions to Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune in the 1980s.\nBULLET::::- Vladimir Prelog (1906–1998): Croatian organic chemist. He won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1975.\nBULLET::::- Vilayanur S. Ramachandran (born 1951): Indian-American neuroscientist. Best known for his work in the fields of behavioral neurology and visual psychophysics.\nBULLET::::- C. V. Raman (1888–1970): Indian physicist whose work was influential in the growth of science in India. He was the recipient of the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1930 for the discovery that when light traverses a transparent material, some of the light that is deflected changes in wavelength. This phenomenon is now called Raman scattering and is the result of the Raman effect.\nBULLET::::- Lisa Randall (born 1962): American theoretical physicist and a student of particle physics and cosmology. She works on several of the competing models of string theory in the quest to explain the fabric of the universe. Her best known contribution to the field is the Randall–Sundrum model, first published in 1999 with Raman Sundrum.\nBULLET::::- John Strutt, 3rd Baron Rayleigh (1842–1919): English physicist who, with William Ramsay, discovered the element argon, an achievement for which he earned the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1904. He also discovered the phenomenon now called Rayleigh scattering, explaining why the sky is blue, and predicted the existence of the surface waves now known as Rayleigh waves. Rayleigh's textbook,\" The Theory of Sound\", is still referred to by acoustic engineers today.\nBULLET::::- Grote Reber (1911–2002): American amateur astronomer and pioneer of radio astronomy. He was instrumental in investigating and extending Karl Jansky's pioneering work, and conducted the first sky survey in the radio frequencies. His 1937 radio antenna was the second ever to be used for astronomical purposes and the first parabolic reflecting antenna to be used as a \"radio telescope\".\nBULLET::::- Robert Coleman Richardson (born 1937): American experimental physicist. He, along with David Lee, as senior researchers, and then graduate student Douglas Osheroff, shared the 1996 Nobel Prize in Physics for their 1972 discovery of the property of superfluidity in helium-3 atoms in the Cornell University Laboratory of Atomic and Solid State Physics.\nBULLET::::- Charles Richet (1850–1935): French physiologist, won the 1913 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his work on anaphylaxis.\nBULLET::::- Isaac Roberts (1829–1904): Welsh engineer and business man best known for his work as an amateur astronomer, pioneering the field of astrophotography of nebulae.\nBULLET::::- Richard J. Roberts (born 1943): British biochemist and molecular biologist. He was awarded the 1993 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine with Phillip Allen Sharp for the discovery of introns in eukaryotic DNA and the mechanism of gene-splicing.\nBULLET::::- Józef Rotblat (1908–2005): Polish-British physicist. Along with the Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs, he received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1995.\nBULLET::::- Carl Sagan (1934–1996): astronomer and skeptic.\nBULLET::::- Frederick Sanger (1918–2013): English biochemist and a two-time Nobel Laureate in Chemistry.\nBULLET::::- Nicholas Saunderson (1682–1739): English scientist and mathematician.\nBULLET::::- Peter Schuster (born 1941): Professor of Theoretical Chemistry at the University of Vienna.\nBULLET::::- Harlow Shapley (1885–1972): American astronomer. Best known for determining the correct position of the Sun within the Milky Way galaxy.\nBULLET::::- Charles Scott Sherrington (1857–1952): English neurophysiologist, histologist, bacteriologist, and pathologist. He, along with Edgar Adrian, won the 1932 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.\nBULLET::::- George Gaylord Simpson (1902–1984): American paleontologist. He is considered to be one of the most influential paleontologist of the 20th century, and a major participant in the modern evolutionary synthesis.\nBULLET::::- Jens C. Skou (born 1918): Danish chemist. In 1997 he received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry (together with Paul D. Boyer and John E. Walker) for his discovery of Na, K-ATPase.\nBULLET::::- Homer Smith (1895–1962): American physiologist. His research work focused on the kidney and he discovered inulin at the same time as A.N. Richards.\nBULLET::::- William Smith (geologist) (1769–1839): English geologist, credited with creating the first nationwide geological map. He is known as the \"Father of English Geology\" for collating the geological history of England and Wales into a single record, although recognition was very slow in coming.\nBULLET::::- George Smoot (born 1945): American astrophysicist, cosmologist, Nobel laureate, and $1 million TV quiz show prize winner (\"Are You Smarter Than a 5th Grader?\"). He won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 2006 for his work on the Cosmic Background Explorer with John C. Mather that led to the measurement \"of the black body form and anisotropy of the cosmic microwave background radiation.\"\nBULLET::::- Charles Proteus Steinmetz (1865–1923): German-American mathematician and electrical engineer.\nBULLET::::- Piero Sraffa (1898–1983): influential Italian economist whose book \"Production of Commodities by Means of Commodities\" is taken as founding the Neo-Ricardian school of Economics.\nBULLET::::- Albert Szent-Györgyi (1893–1986): Hungarian physiologist who won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1937. He is credited with discovering vitamin C and the components and reactions of the citric acid cycle.\nBULLET::::- Leo Szilard (1898–1964): Austro-Hungarian physicist and inventor.\nBULLET::::- Igor Tamm (1895–1971): Soviet physicist who received the 1958 Nobel Prize in Physics, jointly with Pavel Alekseyevich Cherenkov and Ilya Frank, for their 1934 discovery of Cherenkov radiation.\nBULLET::::- Edward Teller (1908–2003): Hungarian-American theoretical physicist, known colloquially as \"the father of the hydrogen bomb\". Teller made numerous contributions to nuclear and molecular physics, spectroscopy (the Jahn–Teller and Renner–Teller effects), and surface physics.\nBULLET::::- Thorvald N. Thiele (1838–1910): Danish astronomer, actuary and mathematician, most notable for his work in statistics, interpolation and the three-body problem. He was the first to propose a mathematical theory of Brownian motion. Thiele introduced the cumulants and (in Danish) the likelihood function; these contributions were not credited to Thiele by Ronald A. Fisher, who nevertheless named Thiele to his (short) list of the greatest statisticians of all time on the strength of Thiele's other contributions.\nBULLET::::- E. Donnall Thomas (1920–2012): American physician, professor emeritus at the University of Washington, and director emeritus of the clinical research division at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center. In 1990 he shared the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine with Joseph E. Murray for the development of cell and organ transplantation. Thomas developed bone marrow transplantation as a treatment for leukemia.\nBULLET::::- John Tyndall (1820–1893): Prominent 19th century experimental physicist. Known for producing a number of discoveries about processes in the atmosphere.\nBULLET::::- Neil deGrasse Tyson (born 1958): American astrophysicist, science communicator, the Frederick P. Rose Director of the Hayden Planetarium at the Rose Center for Earth and Space, and a Research Associate in the Department of Astrophysics at the American Museum of Natural History.\nBULLET::::- Stanislaw Ulam (1909–1984): Polish-Jewish mathematician. He participated in America's Manhattan Project, originated the Teller–Ulam design of thermonuclear weapons, invented the Monte Carlo method of computation, and suggested nuclear pulse propulsion.\nBULLET::::- Martinus J. G. Veltman (born 1931): Dutch theoretical physicist. He shared the 1999 Nobel Prize in Physics with his former student Gerardus 't Hooft for their work on particle theory.\nBULLET::::- Rudolf Virchow (1821–1902): German doctor, anthropologist, pathologist, prehistorian, biologist and politician. Referred to as \"the father of modern pathology,\" he is considered one of the founders of social medicine.\nBULLET::::- John von Neumann (1903–1957): Hungarian-American mathematician and polymath who made major contributions to a vast number of fields, including set theory, functional analysis, quantum mechanics, ergodic theory, geometry, fluid dynamics, economics, linear programming, game theory, computer science, numerical analysis, hydrodynamics, and statistics, as well as many other mathematical fields. It is indicated that he was an \"agnostic Catholic\" due to his agreement with Pascal's Wager.\nBULLET::::- Alfred Russel Wallace (1823–1913): British naturalist, explorer, geographer, anthropologist and biologist. He is best known for independently proposing a theory of evolution due to natural selection that prompted Charles Darwin to publish his own theory.\nBULLET::::- André Weil (1906–1998): French mathematician. He is especially known for his foundational work in number theory and algebraic geometry.\nBULLET::::- Walter Frank Raphael Weldon (1860–1906): English evolutionary biologist and a founder of biometry. He was the joint founding editor of Biometrika, with Francis Galton and Karl Pearson.\nBULLET::::- Norbert Wiener (1894–1964): American mathematician and child prodigy. He is regarded as the originator of cybernetics.\nBULLET::::- Eugene Wigner (1902–1995): Hungarian American theoretical physicist and mathematician. He received a share of the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1963 \"for his contributions to the theory of the atomic nucleus and the elementary particles, particularly through the discovery and application of fundamental symmetry principles\"; the other half of the award was shared between Maria Goeppert-Mayer and J. Hans D. Jensen. Wigner is important for having laid the foundation for the theory of symmetries in quantum mechanics as well as for his research into the structure of the atomic nucleus. It was Eugene Wigner who first identified Xe-135 \"poisoning\" in nuclear reactors, and for this reason it is sometimes referred to as \"Wigner poisoning\". Wigner is also important for his work in pure mathematics, having authored a number of theorems.\nBULLET::::- Frank Wilczek (born 1951): American theoretical physicist. Along with David J. Gross and Hugh David Politzer, won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 2004.\nBULLET::::- Steve Wozniak (born 1950): co-founder of Apple Computer and inventor of the Apple I and Apple II.\nBULLET::::- Chen Ning Yang (born 1922): Chinese-born American physicist who works on statistical mechanics and particle physics. He and Tsung-dao Lee received the 1957 Nobel Prize in Physics for their work on parity nonconservation of weak interaction.\nBULLET::::- Hubert Yockey (1916–2016): American physicist and information theorist.\nBULLET::::- Hans Zinsser (1878–1940): American bacteriologist and a prolific author. He is known for his work in isolating the typhus bacterium and developing a protective vaccine.\n\nBULLET::::- Steve Austin (born 1964): American professional wrestler.\nBULLET::::- Kristy Hawkins (born 1980): American IFBB professional bodybuilder and scientist.\nBULLET::::- Edmund Hillary (1919–2008): New Zealand mountaineer, explorer and philanthropist. He along with Tenzing Norgay became the first climbers confirmed as having reached the summit of Mount Everest.\nBULLET::::- Pat Tillman (1976–2004): American professional football player and U.S. Army veteran.\nBULLET::::- Rafael Nadal (born 1986): Spanish professional tennis player.\nBULLET::::- Rob Van Dam (born 1970): American professional wrestler, winner of three separate major promotion world championships.\nBULLET::::- Leonardo DiCaprio American actor\n\nBULLET::::- Lists of atheists\nBULLET::::- List of secular humanists\nBULLET::::- Lists of lists of people by belief\n\nBULLET::::- Agnostics in The Celebrity Atheist List\nBULLET::::- Famous Black Freethinkers\nBULLET::::- Famous Dead Nontheists\n"}
{"id": "18167", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18167", "title": "Linked list", "text": "Linked list\n\nIn computer science, a linked list is a linear collection of data elements, whose order is not given by their physical placement in memory. Instead, each element points to the next. It is a data structure consisting of a collection of nodes which together represent a sequence. In its most basic form, each node contains: data, and a reference (in other words, a \"link\") to the next node in the sequence. This structure allows for efficient insertion or removal of elements from any position in the sequence during iteration. More complex variants add additional links, allowing more efficient insertion or removal of nodes at arbitrary positions. A drawback of linked lists is that access time is linear (and difficult to pipeline). Faster access, such as random access, is not feasible. Arrays have better cache locality compared to linked lists.\n\nLinked lists are among the simplest and most common data structures. They can be used to implement several other common abstract data types, including lists, stacks, queues, associative arrays, and S-expressions, though it is not uncommon to implement those data structures directly without using a linked list as the basis.\n\nThe principal benefit of a linked list over a conventional array is that the list elements can be easily inserted or removed without reallocation or reorganization of the entire structure because the data items need not be stored contiguously in memory or on disk, while restructuring an array at run-time is a much more expensive operation. Linked lists allow insertion and removal of nodes at any point in the list, and allow doing so with a constant number of operations by keeping the link previous to the link being added or removed in memory during list traversal.\n\nOn the other hand, since simple linked lists by themselves do not allow random access to the data or any form of efficient indexing, many basic operations—such as obtaining the last node of the list, finding a node that contains a given datum, or locating the place where a new node should be inserted—may require iterating through most or all of the list elements. The advantages and disadvantages of using linked lists are given below. Linked list are dynamic, so the length of list can increase or decrease as necessary. Each node does not necessarily follow the previous one physically in the memory.\n\nBULLET::::- They use more memory than arrays because of the storage used by their pointers.\nBULLET::::- Nodes in a linked list must be read in order from the beginning as linked lists are inherently sequential access.\nBULLET::::- Nodes are stored incontiguously, greatly increasing the time periods required to access individual elements within the list, especially with a CPU cache.\nBULLET::::- Difficulties arise in linked lists when it comes to reverse traversing. For instance, singly linked lists are cumbersome to navigate backwards and while doubly linked lists are somewhat easier to read, memory is consumed in allocating space for a back-pointer.\n\nLinked lists were developed in 1955–1956 by Allen Newell, Cliff Shaw and Herbert A. Simon at RAND Corporation as the primary data structure for their Information Processing Language. IPL was used by the authors to develop several early artificial intelligence programs, including the Logic Theory Machine, the General Problem Solver, and a computer chess program. Reports on their work appeared in IRE Transactions on Information Theory in 1956, and several conference proceedings from 1957 to 1959, including Proceedings of the Western Joint Computer Conference in 1957 and 1958, and Information Processing (Proceedings of the first UNESCO International Conference on Information Processing) in 1959. The now-classic diagram consisting of blocks representing list nodes with arrows pointing to successive list nodes appears in \"Programming the Logic Theory Machine\" by Newell and Shaw in Proc. WJCC, February 1957. Newell and Simon were recognized with the ACM Turing Award in 1975 for having \"made basic contributions to artificial intelligence, the psychology of human cognition, and list processing\".\nThe problem of machine translation for natural language processing led Victor Yngve at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) to use linked lists as data structures in his COMIT programming language for computer research in the field of linguistics. A report on this language entitled \"A programming language for mechanical translation\" appeared in Mechanical Translation in 1958.\n\nLISP, standing for list processor, was created by John McCarthy in 1958 while he was at MIT and in 1960 he published its design in a paper in the Communications of the ACM, entitled \"Recursive Functions of Symbolic Expressions and Their Computation by Machine, Part I\". One of LISP's major data structures is the linked list.\n\nBy the early 1960s, the utility of both linked lists and languages which use these structures as their primary data representation was well established. Bert Green of the MIT Lincoln Laboratory published a review article entitled \"Computer languages for symbol manipulation\" in IRE Transactions on Human Factors in Electronics in March 1961 which summarized the advantages of the linked list approach. A later review article, \"A Comparison of list-processing computer languages\" by Bobrow and Raphael, appeared in Communications of the ACM in April 1964.\n\nSeveral operating systems developed by Technical Systems Consultants (originally of West Lafayette Indiana, and later of Chapel Hill, North Carolina) used singly linked lists as file structures. A directory entry pointed to the first sector of a file, and succeeding portions of the file were located by traversing pointers. Systems using this technique included Flex (for the Motorola 6800 CPU), mini-Flex (same CPU), and Flex9 (for the Motorola 6809 CPU). A variant developed by TSC for and marketed by Smoke Signal Broadcasting in California, used doubly linked lists in the same manner.\n\nThe TSS/360 operating system, developed by IBM for the System 360/370 machines, used a double linked list for their file system catalog. The directory structure was similar to Unix, where a directory could contain files and other directories and extend to any depth.\n\nEach record of a linked list is often called an 'element' or 'node'.\n\nThe field of each node that contains the address of the next node is usually called the 'next link' or 'next pointer'. The remaining fields are known as the 'data', 'information', 'value', 'cargo', or 'payload' fields.\n\nThe 'head' of a list is its first node. The 'tail' of a list may refer either to the rest of the list after the head, or to the last node in the list. In Lisp and some derived languages, the next node may be called the 'cdr' (pronounced \"could-er\") of the list, while the payload of the head node may be called the 'car'.\n\nSingly linked lists contain nodes which have a data field as well as 'next' field, which points to the next node in line of nodes. Operations that can be performed on singly linked lists include insertion, deletion and traversal.\n\nThe following code demonstrates how to add a new node with data \"value\" to the end of a singly linked list:\nnode addNode(node head, int value) {\n\nIn a 'doubly linked list', each node contains, besides the next-node link, a second link field pointing to the 'previous' node in the sequence. The two links may be called 'forward('s') and 'backwards', or 'next' and 'prev'('previous').\n\nA technique known as XOR-linking allows a doubly linked list to be implemented using a single link field in each node. However, this technique requires the ability to do bit operations on addresses, and therefore may not be available in some high-level languages.\nMany modern operating systems use doubly linked lists to maintain references to active processes, threads, and other dynamic objects. A common strategy for rootkits to evade detection is to unlink themselves from these lists.\n\nIn a 'multiply linked list', each node contains two or more link fields, each field being used to connect the same set of data records in a different order of same set(e.g., by name, by department, by date of birth, etc.). While doubly linked lists can be seen as special cases of multiply linked list, the fact that the two and more orders are opposite to each other leads to simpler and more efficient algorithms, so they are usually treated as a separate case.\n\nIn the last node of a list, the link field often contains a null reference, a special value is used to indicate the lack of further nodes. A less common convention is to make it point to the first node of the list; in that case, the list is said to be 'circular' or 'circularly linked'; otherwise, it is said to be 'open' or 'linear'. It is a list where the last pointer points to the first node.\n\nIn the case of a circular doubly linked list, the first node also points to the last node of the list.\n\nIn some implementations an extra 'sentinel' or 'dummy' node may be added before the first data record or after the last one. This convention simplifies and accelerates some list-handling algorithms, by ensuring that all links can be safely dereferenced and that every list (even one that contains no data elements) always has a \"first\" and \"last\" node.\n\nAn empty list is a list that contains no data records. This is usually the same as saying that it has zero nodes. If sentinel nodes are being used, the list is usually said to be empty when it has only sentinel nodes.\n\nThe link fields need not be physically part of the nodes. If the data records are stored in an array and referenced by their indices, the link field may be stored in a separate array with the same indices as the data records.\n\nSince a reference to the first node gives access to the whole list, that reference is often called the 'address', 'pointer', or 'handle' of the list. Algorithms that manipulate linked lists usually get such handles to the input lists and return the handles to the resulting lists. In fact, in the context of such algorithms, the word \"list\" often means \"list handle\". In some situations, however, it may be convenient to refer to a list by a handle that consists of two links, pointing to its first and last nodes.\n\nThe alternatives listed above may be arbitrarily combined in almost every way, so one may have circular doubly linked lists without sentinels, circular singly linked lists with sentinels, etc.\n\nAs with most choices in computer programming and design, no method is well suited to all circumstances. A linked list data structure might work well in one case, but cause problems in another. This is a list of some of the common tradeoffs involving linked list structures.\n\nA \"dynamic array\" is a data structure that allocates all elements contiguously in memory, and keeps a count of the current number of elements. If the space reserved for the dynamic array is exceeded, it is reallocated and (possibly) copied, which is an expensive operation.\n\nLinked lists have several advantages over dynamic arrays. Insertion or deletion of an element at a specific point of a list, assuming that we have indexed a pointer to the node (before the one to be removed, or before the insertion point) already, is a constant-time operation (otherwise without this reference it is O(n)), whereas insertion in a dynamic array at random locations will require moving half of the elements on average, and all the elements in the worst case. While one can \"delete\" an element from an array in constant time by somehow marking its slot as \"vacant\", this causes fragmentation that impedes the performance of iteration.\n\nMoreover, arbitrarily many elements may be inserted into a linked list, limited only by the total memory available; while a dynamic array will eventually fill up its underlying array data structure and will have to reallocate—an expensive operation, one that may not even be possible if memory is fragmented, although the cost of reallocation can be averaged over insertions, and the cost of an insertion due to reallocation would still be amortized O(1). This helps with appending elements at the array's end, but inserting into (or removing from) middle positions still carries prohibitive costs due to data moving to maintain contiguity. An array from which many elements are removed may also have to be resized in order to avoid wasting too much space.\n\nOn the other hand, dynamic arrays (as well as fixed-size array data structures) allow constant-time random access, while linked lists allow only sequential access to elements. Singly linked lists, in fact, can be easily traversed in only one direction. This makes linked lists unsuitable for applications where it's useful to look up an element by its index quickly, such as heapsort. Sequential access on arrays and dynamic arrays is also faster than on linked lists on many machines, because they have optimal locality of reference and thus make good use of data caching.\n\nAnother disadvantage of linked lists is the extra storage needed for references, which often makes them impractical for lists of small data items such as characters or boolean values, because the storage overhead for the links may exceed by a factor of two or more the size of the data. In contrast, a dynamic array requires only the space for the data itself (and a very small amount of control data). It can also be slow, and with a naïve allocator, wasteful, to allocate memory separately for each new element, a problem generally solved using memory pools.\n\nSome hybrid solutions try to combine the advantages of the two representations. Unrolled linked lists store several elements in each list node, increasing cache performance while decreasing memory overhead for references. CDR coding does both these as well, by replacing references with the actual data referenced, which extends off the end of the referencing record.\n\nA good example that highlights the pros and cons of using dynamic arrays vs. linked lists is by implementing a program that resolves the Josephus problem. The Josephus problem is an election method that works by having a group of people stand in a circle. Starting at a predetermined person, you count around the circle \"n\" times. Once you reach the \"n\"th person, take them out of the circle and have the members close the circle. Then count around the circle the same \"n\" times and repeat the process, until only one person is left. That person wins the election. This shows the strengths and weaknesses of a linked list vs. a dynamic array, because if you view the people as connected nodes in a circular linked list then it shows how easily the linked list is able to delete nodes (as it only has to rearrange the links to the different nodes). However, the linked list will be poor at finding the next person to remove and will need to search through the list until it finds that person. A dynamic array, on the other hand, will be poor at deleting nodes (or elements) as it cannot remove one node without individually shifting all the elements up the list by one. However, it is exceptionally easy to find the \"n\"th person in the circle by directly referencing them by their position in the array.\n\nThe list ranking problem concerns the efficient conversion of a linked list representation into an array. Although trivial for a conventional computer, solving this problem by a parallel algorithm is complicated and has been the subject of much research.\n\nA balanced tree has similar memory access patterns and space overhead to a linked list while permitting much more efficient indexing, taking O(log n) time instead of O(n) for a random access. However, insertion and deletion operations are more expensive due to the overhead of tree manipulations to maintain balance. Schemes exist for trees to automatically maintain themselves in a balanced state: AVL trees or red-black trees.\n\nWhile doubly linked and circular lists have advantages over singly linked linear lists, linear lists offer some advantages that make them preferable in some situations.\n\nA singly linked linear list is a recursive data structure, because it contains a pointer to a \"smaller\" object of the same type. For that reason, many operations on singly linked linear lists (such as merging two lists, or enumerating the elements in reverse order) often have very simple recursive algorithms, much simpler than any solution using iterative commands. While those recursive solutions can be adapted for doubly linked and circularly linked lists, the procedures generally need extra arguments and more complicated base cases.\n\nLinear singly linked lists also allow tail-sharing, the use of a common final portion of sub-list as the terminal portion of two different lists. In particular, if a new node is added at the beginning of a list, the former list remains available as the tail of the new one—a simple example of a persistent data structure. Again, this is not true with the other variants: a node may never belong to two different circular or doubly linked lists.\n\nIn particular, end-sentinel nodes can be shared among singly linked non-circular lists. The same end-sentinel node may be used for \"every\" such list. In Lisp, for example, every proper list ends with a link to a special node, denoted by codice_1 or codice_2, whose codice_3 and codice_4 links point to itself. Thus a Lisp procedure can safely take the codice_3 or codice_4 of \"any\" list.\n\nThe advantages of the fancy variants are often limited to the complexity of the algorithms, not in their efficiency. A circular list, in particular, can usually be emulated by a linear list together with two variables that point to the first and last nodes, at no extra cost.\n\nDouble-linked lists require more space per node (unless one uses XOR-linking), and their elementary operations are more expensive; but they are often easier to manipulate because they allow fast and easy sequential access to the list in both directions. In a doubly linked list, one can insert or delete a node in a constant number of operations given only that node's address. To do the same in a singly linked list, one must have the \"address of the pointer\" to that node, which is either the handle for the whole list (in case of the first node) or the link field in the \"previous\" node. Some algorithms require access in both directions. On the other hand, doubly linked lists do not allow tail-sharing and cannot be used as persistent data structures\n\nA circularly linked list may be a natural option to represent arrays that are naturally circular, e.g. the corners of a polygon, a pool of buffers that are used and released in FIFO (\"first in, first out\") order, or a set of processes that should be time-shared in round-robin order. In these applications, a pointer to any node serves as a handle to the whole list.\n\nWith a circular list, a pointer to the last node gives easy access also to the first node, by following one link. Thus, in applications that require access to both ends of the list (e.g., in the implementation of a queue), a circular structure allows one to handle the structure by a single pointer, instead of two.\n\nA circular list can be split into two circular lists, in constant time, by giving the addresses of the last node of each piece. The operation consists in swapping the contents of the link fields of those two nodes. Applying the same operation to any two nodes in two distinct lists joins the two list into one. This property greatly simplifies some algorithms and data structures, such as the quad-edge and face-edge.\n\nThe simplest representation for an empty \"circular\" list (when such a thing makes sense) is a null pointer, indicating that the list has no nodes. Without this choice, many algorithms have to test for this special case, and handle it separately. By contrast, the use of null to denote an empty \"linear\" list is more natural and often creates fewer special cases.\n\nSentinel node may simplify certain list operations, by ensuring that the next or previous nodes exist for every element, and that even empty lists have at least one node. One may also use a sentinel node at the end of the list, with an appropriate data field, to eliminate some end-of-list tests. For example, when scanning the list looking for a node with a given value \"x\", setting the sentinel's data field to \"x\" makes it unnecessary to test for end-of-list inside the loop. Another example is the merging two sorted lists: if their sentinels have data fields set to +∞, the choice of the next output node does not need special handling for empty lists.\n\nHowever, sentinel nodes use up extra space (especially in applications that use many short lists), and they may complicate other operations (such as the creation of a new empty list).\n\nHowever, if the circular list is used merely to simulate a linear list, one may avoid some of this complexity by adding a single sentinel node to every list, between the last and the first data nodes. With this convention, an empty list consists of the sentinel node alone, pointing to itself via the next-node link. The list handle should then be a pointer to the last data node, before the sentinel, if the list is not empty; or to the sentinel itself, if the list is empty.\n\nThe same trick can be used to simplify the handling of a doubly linked linear list, by turning it into a circular doubly linked list with a single sentinel node. However, in this case, the handle should be a single pointer to the dummy node itself.\n\nWhen manipulating linked lists in-place, care must be taken to not use values that you have invalidated in previous assignments. This makes algorithms for inserting or deleting linked list nodes somewhat subtle. This section gives pseudocode for adding or removing nodes from singly, doubly, and circularly linked lists in-place. Throughout we will use \"null\" to refer to an end-of-list marker or sentinel, which may be implemented in a number of ways.\n\nOur node data structure will have two fields. We also keep a variable \"firstNode\" which always points to the first node in the list, or is \"null\" for an empty list.\n\nTraversal of a singly linked list is simple, beginning at the first node and following each \"next\" link until we come to the end:\n\nThe following code inserts a node after an existing node in a singly linked list. The diagram shows how it works. Inserting a node before an existing one cannot be done directly; instead, one must keep track of the previous node and insert a node after it.\n\nInserting at the beginning of the list requires a separate function. This requires updating \"firstNode\".\n\nSimilarly, we have functions for removing the node \"after\" a given node, and for removing a node from the beginning of the list. The diagram demonstrates the former. To find and remove a particular node, one must again keep track of the previous element.\n\nNotice that codice_7 sets codice_8 to codice_9 when removing the last node in the list.\n\nSince we can't iterate backwards, efficient codice_10 or codice_11 operations are not possible. Inserting to a list before a specific node requires traversing the list, which would have a worst case running time of O(n). \n\nAppending one linked list to another can be inefficient unless a reference to the tail is kept as part of the List structure, because we must traverse the entire first list in order to find the tail, and then append the second list to this. Thus, if two linearly linked lists are each of length formula_1, list appending has asymptotic time complexity of formula_2. In the Lisp family of languages, list appending is provided by the codice_12 procedure.\n\nMany of the special cases of linked list operations can be eliminated by including a dummy element at the front of the list. This ensures that there are no special cases for the beginning of the list and renders both codice_13 and codice_7 unnecessary. In this case, the first useful data in the list will be found at codice_15.\n\nIn a circularly linked list, all nodes are linked in a continuous circle, without using \"null.\" For lists with a front and a back (such as a queue), one stores a reference to the last node in the list. The \"next\" node after the last node is the first node. Elements can be added to the back of the list and removed from the front in constant time.\n\nCircularly linked lists can be either singly or doubly linked.\n\nBoth types of circularly linked lists benefit from the ability to traverse the full list beginning at any given node. This often allows us to avoid storing \"firstNode\" and \"lastNode\", although if the list may be empty we need a special representation for the empty list, such as a \"lastNode\" variable which points to some node in the list or is \"null\" if it's empty; we use such a \"lastNode\" here. This representation significantly simplifies adding and removing nodes with a non-empty list, but empty lists are then a special case.\n\nAssuming that \"someNode\" is some node in a non-empty circular singly linked list, this code iterates through that list starting with \"someNode\":\n\nNotice that the test \"while node ≠ someNode\" must be at the end of the loop. If the test was moved to the beginning of the loop, the procedure would fail whenever the list had only one node.\n\nThis function inserts a node \"newNode\" into a circular linked list after a given node \"node\". If \"node\" is null, it assumes that the list is empty.\n\nSuppose that \"L\" is a variable pointing to the last node of a circular linked list (or null if the list is empty). To append \"newNode\" to the \"end\" of the list, one may do\n\nTo insert \"newNode\" at the \"beginning\" of the list, one may do\n\nLanguages that do not support any type of reference can still create links by replacing pointers with array indices. The approach is to keep an array of records, where each record has integer fields indicating the index of the next (and possibly previous) node in the array. Not all nodes in the array need be used. If records are also not supported, parallel arrays can often be used instead.\n\nAs an example, consider the following linked list record that uses arrays instead of pointers:\n\nA linked list can be built by creating an array of these structures, and an integer variable to store the index of the first element.\n\nLinks between elements are formed by placing the array index of the next (or previous) cell into the Next or Prev field within a given element. For example:\n\n! Index\n! Next\n! Prev\n! Name\n! Balance\n\nIn the above example, codice_16 would be set to 2, the location of the first entry in the list. Notice that entry 3 and 5 through 7 are not part of the list. These cells are available for any additions to the list. By creating a codice_17 integer variable, a free list could be created to keep track of what cells are available. If all entries are in use, the size of the array would have to be increased or some elements would have to be deleted before new entries could be stored in the list.\n\nThe following code would traverse the list and display names and account balance:\n\nWhen faced with a choice, the advantages of this approach include:\nBULLET::::- The linked list is relocatable, meaning it can be moved about in memory at will, and it can also be quickly and directly serialized for storage on disk or transfer over a network.\nBULLET::::- Especially for a small list, array indexes can occupy significantly less space than a full pointer on many architectures.\nBULLET::::- Locality of reference can be improved by keeping the nodes together in memory and by periodically rearranging them, although this can also be done in a general store.\nBULLET::::- Naïve dynamic memory allocators can produce an excessive amount of overhead storage for each node allocated; almost no allocation overhead is incurred per node in this approach.\nBULLET::::- Seizing an entry from a pre-allocated array is faster than using dynamic memory allocation for each node, since dynamic memory allocation typically requires a search for a free memory block of the desired size.\n\nThis approach has one main disadvantage, however: it creates and manages a private memory space for its nodes. This leads to the following issues:\nBULLET::::- It increases complexity of the implementation.\nBULLET::::- Growing a large array when it is full may be difficult or impossible, whereas finding space for a new linked list node in a large, general memory pool may be easier.\nBULLET::::- Adding elements to a dynamic array will occasionally (when it is full) unexpectedly take linear (O(n)) instead of constant time (although it's still an amortized constant).\nBULLET::::- Using a general memory pool leaves more memory for other data if the list is smaller than expected or if many nodes are freed.\nFor these reasons, this approach is mainly used for languages that do not support dynamic memory allocation. These disadvantages are also mitigated if the maximum size of the list is known at the time the array is created.\n\nMany programming languages such as Lisp and Scheme have singly linked lists built in. In many functional languages, these lists are constructed from nodes, each called a \"cons\" or \"cons cell\". The cons has two fields: the \"car\", a reference to the data for that node, and the \"cdr\", a reference to the next node. Although cons cells can be used to build other data structures, this is their primary purpose.\n\nIn languages that support abstract data types or templates, linked list ADTs or templates are available for building linked lists. In other languages, linked lists are typically built using references together with records.\n\nWhen constructing a linked list, one is faced with the choice of whether to store the data of the list directly in the linked list nodes, called \"internal storage\", or merely to store a reference to the data, called \"external storage\". Internal storage has the advantage of making access to the data more efficient, requiring less storage overall, having better locality of reference, and simplifying memory management for the list (its data is allocated and deallocated at the same time as the list nodes).\n\nExternal storage, on the other hand, has the advantage of being more generic, in that the same data structure and machine code can be used for a linked list no matter what the size of the data is. It also makes it easy to place the same data in multiple linked lists. Although with internal storage the same data can be placed in multiple lists by including multiple \"next\" references in the node data structure, it would then be necessary to create separate routines to add or delete cells based on each field. It is possible to create additional linked lists of elements that use internal storage by using external storage, and having the cells of the additional linked lists store references to the nodes of the linked list containing the data.\n\nIn general, if a set of data structures needs to be included in linked lists, external storage is the best approach. If a set of data structures need to be included in only one linked list, then internal storage is slightly better, unless a generic linked list package using external storage is available. Likewise, if different sets of data that can be stored in the same data structure are to be included in a single linked list, then internal storage would be fine.\n\nAnother approach that can be used with some languages involves having different data structures, but all have the initial fields, including the \"next\" (and \"prev\" if double linked list) references in the same location. After defining separate structures for each type of data, a generic structure can be defined that contains the minimum amount of data shared by all the other structures and contained at the top (beginning) of the structures. Then generic routines can be created that use the minimal structure to perform linked list type operations, but separate routines can then handle the specific data. This approach is often used in message parsing routines, where several types of messages are received, but all start with the same set of fields, usually including a field for message type. The generic routines are used to add new messages to a queue when they are received, and remove them from the queue in order to process the message. The message type field is then used to call the correct routine to process the specific type of message.\n\nSuppose you wanted to create a linked list of families and their members. Using internal storage, the structure might look like the following:\n\nTo print a complete list of families and their members using internal storage, we could write:\n\nUsing external storage, we would create the following structures:\n\nTo print a complete list of families and their members using external storage, we could write:\n\nNotice that when using external storage, an extra step is needed to extract the record from the node and cast it into the proper data type. This is because both the list of families and the list of members within the family are stored in two linked lists using the same data structure (\"node\"), and this language does not have parametric types.\n\nAs long as the number of families that a member can belong to is known at compile time, internal storage works fine. If, however, a member needed to be included in an arbitrary number of families, with the specific number known only at run time, external storage would be necessary.\n\nFinding a specific element in a linked list, even if it is sorted, normally requires O(\"n\") time (linear search). This is one of the primary disadvantages of linked lists over other data structures. In addition to the variants discussed above, below are two simple ways to improve search time.\n\nIn an unordered list, one simple heuristic for decreasing average search time is the \"move-to-front heuristic\", which simply moves an element to the beginning of the list once it is found. This scheme, handy for creating simple caches, ensures that the most recently used items are also the quickest to find again.\n\nAnother common approach is to \"index\" a linked list using a more efficient external data structure. For example, one can build a red-black tree or hash table whose elements are references to the linked list nodes. Multiple such indexes can be built on a single list. The disadvantage is that these indexes may need to be updated each time a node is added or removed (or at least, before that index is used again).\n\nA random access list is a list with support for fast random access to read or modify any element in the list. One possible implementation is a skew binary random access list using the skew binary number system, which involves a list of trees with special properties; this allows worst-case constant time head/cons operations, and worst-case logarithmic time random access to an element by index. Random access lists can be implemented as persistent data structures.\n\nRandom access lists can be viewed as immutable linked lists in that they likewise support the same O(1) head and tail operations.\n\nA simple extension to random access lists is the min-list, which provides an additional operation that yields the minimum element in the entire list in constant time (without mutation complexities).\n\nBoth stacks and queues are often implemented using linked lists, and simply restrict the type of operations which are supported.\n\nThe skip list is a linked list augmented with layers of pointers for quickly jumping over large numbers of elements, and then descending to the next layer. This process continues down to the bottom layer, which is the actual list.\n\nA binary tree can be seen as a type of linked list where the elements are themselves linked lists of the same nature. The result is that each node may include a reference to the first node of one or two other linked lists, which, together with their contents, form the subtrees below that node.\n\nAn unrolled linked list is a linked list in which each node contains an array of data values. This leads to improved cache performance, since more list elements are contiguous in memory, and reduced memory overhead, because less metadata needs to be stored for each element of the list.\n\nA hash table may use linked lists to store the chains of items that hash to the same position in the hash table.\n\nA heap shares some of the ordering properties of a linked list, but is almost always implemented using an array. Instead of references from node to node, the next and previous data indexes are calculated using the current data's index.\n\nA self-organizing list rearranges its nodes based on some heuristic which reduces search times for data retrieval by keeping commonly accessed nodes at the head of the list.\n\n\nBULLET::::- Description from the Dictionary of Algorithms and Data Structures\nBULLET::::- Introduction to Linked Lists, Stanford University Computer Science Library\nBULLET::::- Linked List Problems, Stanford University Computer Science Library\nBULLET::::- Open Data Structures - Chapter 3 - Linked Lists, Pat Morin\nBULLET::::- Patent for the idea of having nodes which are in several linked lists simultaneously (note that this technique was widely used for many decades before the patent was granted)\n"}
{"id": "18168", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18168", "title": "Logic gate", "text": "Logic gate\n\nIn electronics, a logic gate is an idealized or physical device implementing a Boolean function; that is, it performs a logical operation on one or more binary inputs and produces a single binary output. Depending on the context, the term may refer to an ideal logic gate, one that has for instance zero rise time and unlimited fan-out, or it may refer to a non-ideal physical device (see Ideal and real op-amps for comparison).\n\nLogic gates are primarily implemented using diodes or transistors acting as electronic switches, but can also be constructed using vacuum tubes, electromagnetic relays (relay logic), fluidic logic, pneumatic logic, optics, molecules, or even mechanical elements. With amplification, logic gates can be cascaded in the same way that Boolean functions can be composed, allowing the construction of a physical model of all of Boolean logic, and therefore, all of the algorithms and mathematics that can be described with Boolean logic.\n\nLogic circuits include such devices as multiplexers, registers, arithmetic logic units (ALUs), and computer memory, all the way up through complete microprocessors, which may contain more than 100 million gates. In modern practice, most gates are made from MOSFETs (metal–oxide–semiconductor field-effect transistors).\n\nCompound logic gates AND-OR-Invert (AOI) and OR-AND-Invert (OAI) are often employed in circuit design because their construction using MOSFETs is simpler and more efficient than the sum of the individual gates.\n\nIn reversible logic, Toffoli gates are used.\n\nTo build a functionally complete logic system, relays, valves (vacuum tubes), or transistors can be used. The simplest family of logic gates using bipolar transistors is called resistor–transistor logic (RTL). Unlike simple diode logic gates (which do not have a gain element), RTL gates can be cascaded indefinitely to produce more complex logic functions. RTL gates were used in early integrated circuits. For higher speed and better density, the resistors used in RTL were replaced by diodes resulting in diode–transistor logic (DTL). Transistor–transistor logic (TTL) then supplanted DTL. As integrated circuits became more complex, bipolar transistors were replaced with smaller field-effect transistors (MOSFETs); see PMOS and NMOS. To reduce power consumption still further, most contemporary chip implementations of digital systems now use CMOS logic. CMOS uses complementary (both n-channel and p-channel) MOSFET devices to achieve a high speed with low power dissipation.\n\nFor small-scale logic, designers now use prefabricated logic gates from families of devices such as the TTL 7400 series by Texas Instruments, the CMOS 4000 series by RCA, and their more recent descendants. Increasingly, these fixed-function logic gates are being replaced by programmable logic devices, which allow designers to pack many mixed logic gates into a single integrated circuit. The field-programmable nature of programmable logic devices such as FPGAs has reduced the 'hard' property of hardware; it is now possible to change the logic design of a hardware system by reprogramming some of its components, thus allowing the features or function of a hardware implementation of a logic system to be changed. Other types of logic gates include, but are not limited to:\n! Logic family !! Abbreviation !! Description\nDiode logic DL  \nQuantum-dot cellular automata\nQCA\nUses tunnelable q-bits for synthesizing the binary logic bits. The electrostatic repulsive force in between two electrons in the quantum dots assigns the electron configurations (that defines high-level logic state 1 or low-level logic state 0) under the suitably driven polarizations. This is a transistorless, currentless, junctionless binary logic synthesis technique allowing it to have very fast operation speeds.\n\nElectronic logic gates differ significantly from their relay-and-switch equivalents. They are much faster, consume much less power, and are much smaller (all by a factor of a million or more in most cases). Also, there is a fundamental structural difference. The switch circuit creates a continuous metallic path for current to flow (in either direction) between its input and its output. The semiconductor logic gate, on the other hand, acts as a high-gain voltage amplifier, which sinks a tiny current at its input and produces a low-impedance voltage at its output. It is not possible for current to flow between the output and the input of a semiconductor logic gate.\n\nAnother important advantage of standardized integrated circuit logic families, such as the 7400 and 4000 families, is that they can be cascaded. This means that the output of one gate can be wired to the inputs of one or several other gates, and so on. Systems with varying degrees of complexity can be built without great concern of the designer for the internal workings of the gates, provided the limitations of each integrated circuit are considered.\n\nThe output of one gate can only drive a finite number of inputs to other gates, a number called the 'fan-out limit'. Also, there is always a delay, called the 'propagation delay', from a change in input of a gate to the corresponding change in its output. When gates are cascaded, the total propagation delay is approximately the sum of the individual delays, an effect which can become a problem in high-speed circuits. Additional delay can be caused when many inputs are connected to an output, due to the distributed capacitance of all the inputs and wiring and the finite amount of current that each output can provide.\n\nThe binary number system was refined by Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (published in 1705), influenced by the ancient \"I Ching\"s binary system. Leibniz established that, by using the binary system, the principles of arithmetic and logic could be combined.\n\nIn an 1886 letter, Charles Sanders Peirce described how logical operations could be carried out by electrical switching circuits. Eventually, vacuum tubes replaced relays for logic operations. Lee De Forest's modification, in 1907, of the Fleming valve can be used as a logic gate. Ludwig Wittgenstein introduced a version of the 16-row truth table as proposition 5.101 of \"Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus\" (1921). Walther Bothe, inventor of the coincidence circuit, got part of the 1954 Nobel Prize in physics, for the first modern electronic AND gate in 1924. Konrad Zuse designed and built electromechanical logic gates for his computer Z1 (from 1935–38). \n\nFrom 1934 to 1936, NEC engineer Akira Nakashima introduced switching circuit theory in a series of papers showing that two-valued Boolean algebra, which he discovered independently, can describe the operation of switching circuits. His work was later cited by Claude E. Shannon, who elaborated on the use of Boolean algebra in the analysis and design of switching circuits in 1937. Using this property of electrical switches to implement logic is the fundamental concept that underlies all electronic digital computers. Switching circuit theory became the foundation of digital circuit design, as it became widely known in the electrical engineering community during and after World War II, with theoretical rigor superseding the \"ad hoc\" methods that had prevailed previously.\n\nMetal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) logic originates from the MOSFET (metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor), invented by Mohamed M. Atalla and Dawon Kahng at Bell Labs in 1959. They first demonstrated both PMOS logic and NMOS logic in 1960. Both types were later combined and adapted into complementary MOS (CMOS) logic by Chih-Tang Sah and Frank Wanlass at Fairchild Semiconductor in 1963.\n\nActive research is taking place in molecular logic gates.\n\nThere are two sets of symbols for elementary logic gates in common use, both defined in ANSI/IEEE Std 91-1984 and its supplement ANSI/IEEE Std 91a-1991. The \"distinctive shape\" set, based on traditional schematics, is used for simple drawings and derives from United States Military Standard MIL-STD-806 of the 1950s and 1960s. It is sometimes unofficially described as \"military\", reflecting its origin. The \"rectangular shape\" set, based on ANSI Y32.14 and other early industry standards as later refined by IEEE and IEC, has rectangular outlines for all types of gate and allows representation of a much wider range of devices than is possible with the traditional symbols. The IEC standard, IEC 60617-12, has been adopted by other standards, such as EN 60617-12:1999 in Europe, BS EN 60617-12:1999 in the United Kingdom, and DIN EN 60617-12:1998 in Germany.\n\nThe mutual goal of IEEE Std 91-1984 and IEC 60617-12 was to provide a uniform method of describing the complex logic functions of digital circuits with schematic symbols. These functions were more complex than simple AND and OR gates. They could be medium scale circuits such as a 4-bit counter to a large scale circuit such as a microprocessor.\n\nIEC 617-12 and its successor IEC 60617-12 do not explicitly show the \"distinctive shape\" symbols, but do not prohibit them. These are, however, shown in ANSI/IEEE 91 (and 91a) with this note: \"The distinctive-shape symbol is, according to IEC Publication 617, Part 12, not preferred, but is not considered to be in contradiction to that standard.\" IEC 60617-12 correspondingly contains the note (Section 2.1) \"Although non-preferred, the use of other symbols recognized by official national standards, that is distinctive shapes in place of symbols [list of basic gates], shall not be considered to be in contradiction with this standard. Usage of these other symbols in combination to form complex symbols (for example, use as embedded symbols) is discouraged.\" This compromise was reached between the respective IEEE and IEC working groups to permit the IEEE and IEC standards to be in mutual compliance with one another.\n\nA third style of symbols, DIN 40700 (1976), was in use in Europe and is still widely used in European academia, see the logic table in .\n\nIn the 1980s, schematics were the predominant method to design both circuit boards and custom ICs known as gate arrays. Today custom ICs and the field-programmable gate array are typically designed with Hardware Description Languages (HDL) such as Verilog or VHDL.\n\n! Type !! Distinctive shape(IEEE Std 91/91a-1991) !! Rectangular shape(IEEE Std 91/91a-1991)(IEC 60617-12:1997) !! Boolean algebra between A & B !! Truth table\n! colspan=\"5\"  1-Input gates\n\nINPUT  OUTPUT\n0  0\n1  1\n\nINPUT  OUTPUT\n0  1\n1  0\n\n! colspan=\"5\" Conjunction and Disjunction\n\ncolspan=2INPUT  OUTPUT\n0  0  0\n0  1  0\n1  0  0\n1  1  1\n\ncolspan=2INPUT  OUTPUT\n0  0  0\n0  1  1\n1  0  1\n1  1  1\n\n! colspan=\"5\" Alternative denial and Joint denial\n\ncolspan=2INPUT  OUTPUT\n0  0  1\n0  1  1\n1  0  1\n1  1  0\n\ncolspan=2INPUT  OUTPUT\n0  0  1\n0  1  0\n1  0  0\n1  1  0\n\n! colspan=\"5\" Exclusive or and Biconditional\ncolspan=2INPUT  OUTPUT\n0  0  0\n0  1  1\n1  0  1\n1  1  0\n\ncolspan=2INPUT  OUTPUT\n0  0  1\n0  1  0\n1  0  0\n1  1  1\n\nOutput comparison of 1-input logic gates.\n0  0  1\n1  1  0\n\nOutput comparison of 2-input logic gates.\n0  0  0  1  0  1  0  1\n0  1  0  1  1  0  1  0 \n1  0  0  1  1  0  1  0 \n1  1  1  0  1  0  0  1 \n\nCharles Sanders Peirce (during 1880–81) showed that NOR gates alone (or alternatively NAND gates alone) can be used to reproduce the functions of all the other logic gates, but his work on it was unpublished until 1933. The first published proof was by Henry M. Sheffer in 1913, so the NAND logical operation is sometimes called Sheffer stroke; the logical NOR is sometimes called \"Peirce's arrow\". Consequently, these gates are sometimes called \"universal logic gates\".\n\nBy use of De Morgan's laws, an \"AND\" function is identical to an \"OR\" function with negated inputs and outputs. Likewise, an \"OR\" function is identical to an \"AND\" function with negated inputs and outputs. A NAND gate is equivalent to an OR gate with negated inputs, and a NOR gate is equivalent to an AND gate with negated inputs.\n\nThis leads to an alternative set of symbols for basic gates that use the opposite core symbol (\"AND\" or \"OR\") but with the inputs and outputs negated. Use of these alternative symbols can make logic circuit diagrams much clearer and help to show accidental connection of an active high output to an active low input or vice versa. Any connection that has logic negations at both ends can be replaced by a negationless connection and a suitable change of gate or vice versa. Any connection that has a negation at one end and no negation at the other can be made easier to interpret by instead using the De Morgan equivalent symbol at either of the two ends. When negation or polarity indicators on both ends of a connection match, there is no logic negation in that path (effectively, bubbles \"cancel\"), making it easier to follow logic states from one symbol to the next. This is commonly seen in real logic diagrams – thus the reader must not get into the habit of associating the shapes exclusively as OR or AND shapes, but also take into account the bubbles at both inputs and outputs in order to determine the \"true\" logic function indicated.\n\nA De Morgan symbol can show more clearly a gate's primary logical purpose and the polarity of its nodes that are considered in the \"signaled\" (active, on) state. Consider the simplified case where a two-input NAND gate is used to drive a motor when either of its inputs are brought low by a switch. The \"signaled\" state (motor on) occurs when either one OR the other switch is on. Unlike a regular NAND symbol, which suggests AND logic, the De Morgan version, a two negative-input OR gate, correctly shows that OR is of interest. The regular NAND symbol has a bubble at the output and none at the inputs (the opposite of the states that will turn the motor on), but the De Morgan symbol shows both inputs and output in the polarity that will drive the motor.\n\nDe Morgan's theorem is most commonly used to implement logic gates as combinations of only NAND gates, or as combinations of only NOR gates, for economic reasons.\n\nLogic gates can also be used to store data. A storage element can be constructed by connecting several gates in a \"latch\" circuit. More complicated designs that use clock signals and that change only on a rising or falling edge of the clock are called edge-triggered \"flip-flops\". Formally, a flip-flop is called a bistable circuit, because it has two stable states which it can maintain indefinitely. The combination of multiple flip-flops in parallel, to store a multiple-bit value, is known as a register. When using any of these gate setups the overall system has memory; it is then called a sequential logic system since its output can be influenced by its previous state(s), i.e. by the \"sequence\" of input states. In contrast, the output from combinational logic is purely a combination of its present inputs, unaffected by the previous input and output states.\n\nThese logic circuits are known as computer memory. They vary in performance, based on factors of speed, complexity, and reliability of storage, and many different types of designs are used based on the application.\n\nA three-state logic gate is a type of logic gate that can have three different outputs: high (H), low (L) and high-impedance (Z). The high-impedance state plays no role in the logic, which is strictly binary. These devices are used on buses of the CPU to allow multiple chips to send data. A group of three-states driving a line with a suitable control circuit is basically equivalent to a multiplexer, which may be physically distributed over separate devices or plug-in cards.\n\nIn electronics, a high output would mean the output is sourcing current from the positive power terminal (positive voltage). A low output would mean the output is sinking current to the negative power terminal (zero voltage). High impedance would mean that the output is effectively disconnected from the circuit.\n\nSince the 1990s, most logic gates are made in CMOS (complementary metal oxide semiconductor) technology that uses both NMOS and PMOS transistors. Often millions of logic gates are packaged in a single integrated circuit.\n\nThere are several logic families with different characteristics (power consumption, speed, cost, size) such as: RDL (resistor–diode logic), RTL (resistor-transistor logic), DTL (diode–transistor logic), TTL (transistor–transistor logic) and CMOS. There are also sub-variants, e.g. standard CMOS logic vs. advanced types using still CMOS technology, but with some optimizations for avoiding loss of speed due to slower PMOS transistors.\n\nNon-electronic implementations are varied, though few of them are used in practical applications. Many early electromechanical digital computers, such as the Harvard Mark I, were built from relay logic gates, using electro-mechanical relays. Logic gates can be made using pneumatic devices, such as the Sorteberg relay or mechanical logic gates, including on a molecular scale. Logic gates have been made out of DNA (see DNA nanotechnology) and used to create a computer called MAYA (see MAYA-II). Logic gates can be made from quantum mechanical effects (though quantum computing usually diverges from boolean design; see quantum logic gate). Photonic logic gates use nonlinear optical effects.\n\nIn principle any method that leads to a gate that is functionally complete (for example, either a NOR or a NAND gate) can be used to make any kind of digital logic circuit. Note that the use of 3-state logic for bus systems is not needed, and can be replaced by digital multiplexers, which can be built using only simple logic gates (such as NAND gates, NOR gates, or AND and OR gates).\n\nBULLET::::- And-inverter graph\nBULLET::::- Boolean algebra topics\nBULLET::::- Boolean function\nBULLET::::- Digital circuit\nBULLET::::- Espresso heuristic logic minimizer\nBULLET::::- Fan-out\nBULLET::::- Field-programmable gate array (FPGA)\nBULLET::::- Flip-flop (electronics)\nBULLET::::- Functional completeness\nBULLET::::- Karnaugh map\nBULLET::::- Combinational logic\nBULLET::::- List of 4000 series integrated circuits\nBULLET::::- List of 7400 series integrated circuits\nBULLET::::- Logic family\nBULLET::::- Logical graph\nBULLET::::- NMOS logic\nBULLET::::- Programmable Logic Controller (PLC)\nBULLET::::- Programmable Logic Device (PLD)\nBULLET::::- Propositional calculus\nBULLET::::- Quantum logic gate\nBULLET::::- Race hazard\nBULLET::::- Reversible computing\nBULLET::::- Truth table\n"}
{"id": "18171", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18171", "title": "Linear search", "text": "Linear search\n\nIn computer science, a linear search or sequential search is a method for finding an element within a list. It sequentially checks each element of the list until a match is found or the whole list has been searched.\n\nA linear search runs in at worst linear time and makes at most comparisons, where is the length of the list. If each element is equally likely to be searched, then linear search has an average case of comparisons, but the average case can be affected if the search probabilities for each element vary. Linear search is rarely practical because other search algorithms and schemes, such as the binary search algorithm and hash tables, allow significantly faster searching for all but short lists.\n\nA linear search sequentially checks each element of the list until it finds an element that matches the target value. If the algorithm reaches the end of the list, the search terminates unsuccessfully.\n\nGiven a list of elements with values or records , and target value , the following subroutine uses linear search to find the index of the target in .\n\nBULLET::::1. Set to 0.\nBULLET::::2. If , the search terminates successfully; return .\nBULLET::::3. Increase by 1.\nBULLET::::4. If , go to step 2. Otherwise, the search terminates unsuccessfully.\n\nThe basic algorithm above makes two comparisons per iteration: one to check if equals , and the other to check if still points to a valid index of the list. By adding an extra record to the list (a sentinel value) that equals the target, the second comparison can be eliminated until the end of the search, making the algorithm faster. The search will reach the sentinel if the target is not contained within the list.\n\nBULLET::::1. Set to 0.\nBULLET::::2. If , go to step 4.\nBULLET::::3. Increase by 1 and go to step 2.\nBULLET::::4. If , the search terminates successfully; return . Else, the search terminates unsuccessfully.\n\nIf the list is ordered such that , the search can establish the absence of the target more quickly by concluding the search once exceeds the target. This variation requires a sentinel that is greater than the target.\n\nBULLET::::1. Set to 0.\nBULLET::::2. If , go to step 4.\nBULLET::::3. Increase by 1 and go to step 2.\nBULLET::::4. If , the search terminates successfully; return . Else, the search terminates unsuccessfully.\nFor a list with \"n\" items, the best case is when the value is equal to the first element of the list, in which case only one comparison is needed. The worst case is when the value is not in the list (or occurs only once at the end of the list), in which case \"n\" comparisons are needed.\n\nIf the value being sought occurs \"k\" times in the list, and all orderings of the list are equally likely, the expected number of comparisons is\n\nFor example, if the value being sought occurs once in the list, and all orderings of the list are equally likely, the expected number of comparisons is formula_2. However, if it is \"known\" that it occurs once, then at most \"n\" - 1 comparisons are needed, and the expected number of comparisons is \n\n(for example, for \"n\" = 2 this is 1, corresponding to a single if-then-else construct).\n\nEither way, asymptotically the worst-case cost and the expected cost of linear search are both O(\"n\").\n\nThe performance of linear search improves if the desired value is more likely to be near the beginning of the list than to its end. Therefore, if some values are much more likely to be searched than others, it is desirable to place them at the beginning of the list.\n\nIn particular, when the list items are arranged in order of decreasing probability, and these probabilities are geometrically distributed, the cost of linear search is only O(1). \n\nLinear search is usually very simple to implement, and is practical when the list has only a few elements, or when performing a single search in an un-ordered list.\n\nWhen many values have to be searched in the same list, it often pays to pre-process the list in order to use a faster method. For example, one may sort the list and use binary search, or build an efficient search data structure from it. Should the content of the list change frequently, repeated re-organization may be more trouble than it is worth.\n\nAs a result, even though in theory other search algorithms may be faster than linear search (for instance binary search), in practice even on medium-sized arrays (around 100 items or less) it might be infeasible to use anything else. On larger arrays, it only makes sense to use other, faster search methods if the data is large enough, because the initial time to prepare (sort) the data is comparable to many linear searches \n\nBULLET::::- Ternary search\nBULLET::::- Hash table\nBULLET::::- Linear search problem\n"}
{"id": "18172", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18172", "title": "Land mine", "text": "Land mine\n\nA land mine is an explosive device concealed under or on the ground and designed to destroy or disable enemy targets, ranging from combatants to vehicles and tanks, as they pass over or near it. Such a device is typically detonated automatically by way of pressure when a target steps on it or drives over it, although other detonation mechanisms are also sometimes used. A land mine may cause damage by direct blast effect, by fragments that are thrown by the blast, or by both.\n\nThe use of land mines is controversial because of their potential as indiscriminate weapons. They can remain dangerous many years after a conflict has ended, harming civilians and the economy. 78 countries are contaminated with land mines and 15,000–20,000 people are killed every year while countless more are maimed. Approximately 80% of land mine casualties are civilian, with children as the most affected age group. Most killings occur in times of peace. With pressure from a number of campaign groups organised through the International Campaign to Ban Landmines, a global movement to prohibit their use led to the 1997 Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on their Destruction, also known as the \"Ottawa Treaty\". To date, 164 nations have signed the treaty, but these do not include China, the Russian Federation, and the United States.\n\nIn the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Convention (also known as the Ottawa Treaty) and the Protocol on Mines, Booby-Traps and Other Devices, a \"mine\" is defined as a \"munition designed to be placed under, on or near the ground or other surface area and to be exploded by the presence, proximity or contact of a person or vehicle.\" Similar in function is the \"booby-trap\", which the Protocol defines as \"any device or material which is designed, constructed or adapted to kill or injure and which functions unexpectedly when a person disturbs or approaches an apparently harmless object or performs an apparently safe act.\" Such actions might include opening a door or picking up an object. Normally, mines are mass-produced and placed in groups, while booby traps are improvised and deployed one at a time. Also, booby traps can be non-explosive devices such as the punji stick. Overlapping both categories is the \"improvised explosive device\" (IED), which is \"a device placed or fabricated in an improvised manner incorporating explosive material, destructive, lethal, noxious, incendiary, pyrotechnic materials or chemicals designed to destroy, disfigure, distract or harass. They may incorporate military stores, but are normally devised from non-military components.\" Some meet the definition of mines or booby traps and are also referred to as improvised, artisanal or locally manufactured mines. Other types of IED are remotely activated, so are not considered mines.\n\n\"Remotely delivered mines\" are dropped from an aircraft or carried by devices such as artillery shells or rockets. Another type of remotely delivered explosive is the \"cluster munition\", a device that releases several submunitions (\"bomblets\") over a large area. If they do not explode, they are referred to as \"unexploded ordnance\" (UXO), along with unexploded artillery shells and other explosive devices that were not manually placed (that is, mines and booby traps are not UXOs). \"Explosive remnants of war\" (ERW) include UXO and \"abandoned explosive ordnance\" (AXO), devices that were never used and were left behind after a conflict.\n\nLand mines are divided into two types: anti-tank mines, which are designed to disable tanks or other vehicles; and anti-personnel mines, which are designed to injure or kill people.\n\nThe history of land mines can be divided up into three main phases: In the ancient world, buried spikes provided many of the same functions as modern mines. Mines using gunpowder as the explosive were used from the Ming Dynasty to the American Civil War. Subsequently, high explosives were developed and used in land mines.\n\nSome fortifications in the Roman Empire were surrounded by a series of hazards buried in the ground. These included \"goads\", foot-long pieces of wood with iron hooks on their ends; \"lilia\" (lilies, so named after their appearance), which were pits in which sharpened logs were arranged in a five-point pattern; and \"abatis\", fallen trees with sharpened branches facing outwards. As with modern land mines, they were \"victim-operated\", often concealed, and formed zones that were wide enough so that the enemy could not do much harm from outside, but were under fire (from spear throws, in this case) if they attempted to remove the obstacles. A notable use of these defenses was by Julius Caesar in the Battle of Alesia. His forces were besieging Vercingetorix, the leader of the Gauls, but Vercingetorix managed to send for reinforcements. To maintain the siege and defend against the reinforcements, Caesar formed a line of fortifications on both sides, and they played an important role in his victory. Lilies were also used by Scots against the English at the Battle of Bannockburn in 1314, and by Germans at the Battle of Passchendaele in the First World War.\n\nA more easily deployed defense used by the Romans was the caltrop, a weapon about 12–15 cm across with four sharp spikes that are oriented so that when it is thrown on the ground, one spike always points up. As with modern antipersonnel mines, caltrops are designed to disable soldiers rather than kill them, and they also more particularly are effective in stopping mounted forces, who lack the advantage of being able to carefully scrutinize each step they take (though forcing foot-mounted forces to take the time to do so has benefits in and of itself.) They were used by the Jin Dynasty in China at the Battle of Zhongdu to slow down the advance of Genghis Khan's army; Joan of Arc was wounded by one in the Siege of Orléans; in Japan they are known as tetsu-bishu and were used by ninjas from the fourteenth century onwards. Caltrops are still strung together and used as roadblocks in some modern conflicts.\n\nStarting in the ninth century, the Chinese began centuries of experiments that resulted in gunpowder, an explosive mixture of sulfur, charcoal and potassium nitrate. Gunpowder was first used in battle in the thirteenth century. An \"enormous bomb\", credited to Lou Qianxia, was used in 1277 by the Chinese at the Battle of Zhongdu, although it probably had little effect. Gunpowder was difficult to use in mines because it is hygroscopic, easily absorbing water from the atmosphere, and when wet is no longer explosive.\n\nA 14th-century military treatise, the \"Huolongjing\" (Fire Dragon Manual), describes hollow cast iron cannonball shells filled with gunpowder. The wad of the mine was made of hard wood, carrying three different fuses in case of defective connection to the touch hole. These fuses were long and lit by hand, so they required carefully timed calculation of enemy movements.\n\nThe \"Huolongjing\" also describes land mines that were set off by enemy movement. A nine-foot length of bamboo was waterproofed by wrapping it in cowhide and covering it with oil. It was filled with compressed gunpowder and lead or iron pellets, sealed with wax and concealed in a trench. The triggering mechanism was not fully described until the early 17th century. When the enemy stepped onto hidden boards, they dislodge a pin, causing a weight to fall. A cord attached to the weight was wrapped around a drum attached to two steel wheels; when the weight fell, the wheels struck sparks against flint, igniting a set of fuses to multiple mines. A similar mechanism was used in the first wheellock musket in Europe as sketched by Leonardo da Vinci around 1500 AD.\n\nAnother victim-operated device was the \"underground sky-soaring thunder\", which lured bounty hunters with halberds, pikes, and lances planted in the ground. If they pulled on one of these weapons, the butt end disturbed a bowl underneath and a slow-burning incandescent material in the bowl ignited the fuses.\n\nThe fuse mechanisms for the above devices were cumbersome and unreliable. By the time Europeans arrived in China, landmines were largely forgotten.\n\nAt Augsburg in 1573, three centuries after the Chinese invented the first pressure-operated mine, a German military engineer by the name of Samuel Zimmermann invented the \"Fladdermine\" (flying mine). It consisted of a few pounds of black powder buried near the surface and was activated by stepping on it or tripping a wire that made a flintlock fire. Such mines were deployed on the slope in front of a fort. They were used during the Franco-Prussian War but were probably not very effective because a flintlock does not work for long when left untended.\n\nAnother device, the fougasse, was not victim-operated or mass-produced, but it was a precursor of modern fragmentation mines and the claymore mine. If consisted of a cone-shape hole with gunpowder at the bottom, covered either by rocks and scrap iron (\"stone fougasse\") or mortar shells, similar to large black powder hand grenades (\"shell fougasse\"). It was triggered by a flintlock connected to a tripwire on the surface. It could sometimes cause heavy casualties but required high maintenance due to the susceptibility of black powder to dampness. Consequently, it was mainly employed in the defenses of major fortifications, in which role it used in several European wars of the eighteenth century and the American Revolution.\n\nOne of the greatest limitations of early land mines was the unreliable fuses and their susceptibility to dampness. This changed with the invention of the safety fuse. Later, \"Command initiation\", the ability to detonate a charge immediately instead of waiting several minutes for a fuse to burn, became possible after electricity was developed. An electrical current sent down a wire could ignite the charge with a spark. The Russians claim first use of this technology in the Russo-Turkish War of 1828–1829, and with it the fougasse remained useful until it was superseded by the claymore in the 1960s.\n\nVictim-activated mines were also unreliable because they relied on a flintlock to ignite the explosive. The percussion cap, developed in the early 19th century, made them much more reliable, and pressure-operated mines were deployed on land and sea in the Crimean War (1853–1856).\n\nDuring the American Civil War, the Confederate brigadier general Gabriel J. Rains deployed thousands of \"torpedoes\" consisting of artillery shells with pressure caps, beginning with the Battle of Yorktown in 1862. As a Captain, Rains had earlier employed explosive booby traps during the Seminole Wars in Florida in 1840. Over the course of the war, mines only caused a few hundred casualties, but they had a large effect on morale and slowed down the advance of Union troops. Many on both sides considered the use of mines barbaric, and in response, generals in the Union Army forced Confederate prisoners to remove the mines.\n\nStarting in the 19th century, more powerful explosives than gunpowder were developed, often for non-military reasons such as blasting train tunnels in the Alps and Rockies. Guncotton, up to four times more powerful than gunpowder, was invented by Christian Schonbein in 1846. It was dangerous to make until Frederick Augustus Abel developed a safe method in 1865. From the 1870s to the First World War, it was the standard explosive used by the British military.\n\nIn 1847, Ascanio Sobrero invented nitroglycerine to treat angina pectoris and it turned out to be a much more powerful explosive than guncotton. It was very dangerous to use until Alfred Nobel found a way to incorporate it in a solid mixture called dynamite and developed a safe detonator. Even then, dynamite needed to be stored carefully or it could form crystals that detonated easily. Thus, the military still preferred guncotton.\n\nIn 1863, the German chemical industry developed trinitrotoluene (TNT). This had the advantage that it was difficult to detonate, so it could withstand the shock of firing by artillery pieces. It was also advantageous for land mines for several reasons: it was not detonated by the shock of shells landing nearby; it was lightweight, unaffected by damp, and stable under a wide range of conditions; it could be melted to fill a container of any shape, and it was cheap to make. Thus, it became the standard explosive in mines after the First World War.\n\nIn their colonial conflicts, the British had fewer scruples about using mines than the Americans had in the Civil War. The British used mines in the Siege of Khartoum to hold off a much larger Sudanese Mahdist force for ten months. In the end, however, the town was taken and the British massacred. In the Boer War (1899–1903), they succeeded in holding Mafeking against Boer forces with the help of a mixture of real and fake minefields; and they laid mines alongside railroad tracks to discourage sabotage.\n\nIn the Russo-Japanese War of 1904–1905, both sides used land and sea mines, although the effect on land was mainly moral. The naval mines were far more effective, destroying several battleships.\n\nOne sign of the increasing power of explosives used in land mines was that, by the First World War, they burst into about 1,000 high-velocity fragments; in the Franco-Prussian War (1870), it had only been 20 to 30 fragments. Nevertheless, antipersonnel mines were not a big factor in the war because machine guns, barbed wire and rapid-fire artillery were far more effective defenses. An exception was in Africa (now Tanzania and Namibia) where the warfare was much more mobile.\n\nTowards the end of the war, the British started to use tanks to break through trench defenses. The Germans responded with anti-tank guns and mines. Improvised mines gave way to mass-produced mines consisting of wooden boxes filled with guncotton, and minefields were standardized to stop masses of tanks from advancing.\n\nBetween World Wars, the future Allies did little work on land mines, but the Germans developed a series of anti-tank mines, the \"Tellermines\" (plate mines). They also developed the \"Schrapnell mine\" (also known as the S-mine), the first bouncing mine. When triggered, this jumped up to about waist height and exploded, sending thousands of steel balls in all directions. Triggered by pressure, trip wires or electronics, it could harm soldiers within an area of about 2800 square feet.\n\nTens of millions of mines were laid in the Second World War, particularly in the deserts of North Africa and the steppes of Eastern Europe, where the open ground favored tanks. However, the first country to use them was Finland. They were defending against a much larger Soviet force with over 6,000 tanks, twenty times the number the Finns had; but they had terrain that was broken up by lakes and forests, so tank movement was restricted to roads and tracks. Their defensive line, the Mannerheim Line, integrated these natural defenses with mines, including simple fragmentation mines mounted on stakes.\n\nWhile the Germans were advancing rapidly using \"blitzkrieg\" tactics, they did not make much use of mines. After 1942, however, they were on the defensive and became the most inventive and systematic users of mines. Their production shot up and they began inventing new types of mines as the Allies found ways to counter the existing ones. To make it more difficult to remove antitank mines, they surrounded them with S-mines and added anti-handling devices that would explode when soldiers tried to lift them. They also took a formal approach to laying mines and they kept detailed records of the locations of mines.\n\nIn the Second Battle of El Alamein in 1942, the Germans prepared for an Allied attack by laying about half a million mines in two fields running across the entire battlefield and five miles deep. Nicknamed the Devil's gardens, they were covered by 88 mm anti-tank guns and small-arms fire. The Allies prevailed, but at the cost of over half their tanks; 20 percent of the losses were caused by mines.\n\nThe Soviets learned the value of mines from their war with Finland, and when Germany invaded, they made heavy use of them, manufacturing over 67 million. At the Battle of Kursk, which put an end to the German advance, they laid over a million mines in eight belts with an overall depth of 35 kilometres.\n\nMines forced tanks to slow down and wait for soldiers to go ahead and remove the mines. The main method of breaching minefields involved prodding the dirt with a bayonet or stick at an angle of 30 degrees (to avoid putting pressure on the top of the mine and detonating it). Since all mines at the beginning of the war had metal casings, metal detectors could be used to speed up the locating of mines. A Polish officer, Józef Kosacki, developed a portable mine detector known as the Polish mine detector. To counter the detector, Germans developed mines with wooden casings, the Schu-mine 42 (antipersonnel) and Holzmine 42 (anti-tank). Effective, cheap and easy to make, the \"schu\" mine became the most common mine in the war. Mine casings were also made of glass, concrete and clay. The Russians developed a mine with a pressed-cardboard casing, the PMK40, and the Italians made an anti-tank mine out of bakelite. In 1944, the Germans created the Topfmine, an entirely non-metallic mine. They ensured that they could detect their own mines by covering them with radioactive sand, but the Allies did not find this out until after the war.\n\nSeveral mechanical methods for clearing mines were tried. Heavy rollers attached to tanks or cargo trucks, but they did not last long and their weight made the tanks considerably slower. Tanks and bulldozers pushed ploughs that in turn pushed aside any mines to a depth of 30 cm. The Bangalore torpedo, a long thin tube filled with explosives, was invented in 1912 and used to clear barbed wire. Larger versions such as the Snake and the Conger were developed but were not very effective. One of the best options was the flail, which chains with weights on the end attached to rotating drums. The first version, the Scorpion, was attached to the Matilda tank and used in the Second Battle of El Alamein. The Crab, attached to the Sherman tank, was faster (2 kilometers per hour); it was used during D-Day and the aftermath.\n\nDuring the Cold War, the members of NATO were concerned about massive armored attacks by the Soviet Union. They planned for a minefield stretching across the entire West German border, and developed new types of mine. The British designed an anti-tank mine, the Mark 7, to defeat rollers by detonating the second time it was pressed. It also had a 0.7-second delay so the tank would be directly over the mine. They also developed the first scatterable mine, the No. 7 (\"Dingbat\"). The Americans used the M6 antitank mine and tripwire-operated bouncing antipersonnel mines such as the M2 and M16.\n\nIn the Korean War, land mine use was dictated by the steep terrain, narrow valleys, forest cover and lack of developed roads. This made tanks less effective and more easily stopped by mines. However, mines laid near roads were often easy to spot. In response to this problem, the US developed the M24, a mine that was placed off to the side of the road. When triggered by a tripwire, it fired a rocket. However, the mine was not available until after the war.\n\nThe Chinese had a lot of success with massed infantry attacks. The extensive forest cover limited the range of machine guns, but anti-personnel mines were effective. However, mines were poorly recorded and marked, often becoming as much a hazard to allies as enemies. Tripwire-operated mines were not defended by pressure mines; the Chinese were often able to disable them and reuse them against UN forces.\n\nLooking for more destructive mines, the Americans developed the Claymore, a directional fragmentation mine that hurls steel balls in a 60 degree arc at a lethal speed of 1,200 metres per second. They also developed a pressure-operated mine, the M14 (\"toe-popper\"). These, too, were ready too late for the Korean war.\nIn 1948, the British developed the No. 6 antipersonnel mine a minimum-metal mine with a narrow diameter, making it difficult to detect with metal detectors or prodding. Its three-pronged pressure piece inspired the nickname \"Carrot Mine\". However, it was unreliable in wet conditions. In the 1960s the Canadians developed a similar, but more reliable mine, the C3A1 (\"Elsie\") and the British army adopted it. The British also developed the L9 Bar Mine, a wide anti-tank mine with a rectangular shape, which covered more area, allowing a minefield to be laid four times as fast as previous mines. They also upgraded the Dingbat to the Ranger, a plastic mine that was fired from a truck-mounted discharger that could fire 72 mines at a time.\n\nIn the 1950s, the US Operation Doan Brook studied the feasibility of delivering mines by air. This led to three types of air-delivered mine. Wide Area Anti-Personnel Mines (WAAPMs) were small steel spheres that discharged tripwires when they hit the ground; each dispenser held 540 mines. The BLU-43 Dragontooth was small and had a flattened W shape to slow its descent, while the Gravel mine was larger. Both were packed by the thousand into bombs. All three were designed to inactivate after a period of time, but any that failed to activate presented a safety challenge. Over 37 million Gravel mines were produced between 1967 and 1968, and when they were dropped in places like Vietnam their locations were unmarked and unrecorded. A similar problem was presented by unexploded cluster munitions.\n\nThe next generation of scatterable mines arose in response to the increasing mobility of war. The Germans developed the Skorpion system, which scattered AT2 mines from a tracked vehicle. The Italians developed a helicopter delivery system that could rapidly switch between SB-33 anti-personnel mines and SB-81 anti-tank mines. The US developed a range of systems called the Family of Scatterable Mines (FASCAM) that could deliver mines by fast jet, artillery, helicopter and ground launcher.\n\nIn the First World War, the Germans developed a device, nicknamed the “Yperite Mine” by the British, that they left behind in abandoned trenches and bunkers. It was detonated by a delayed charge, spreading mustard gas (“Yperite”). In the Second World War they developed a modern chemical mine, the Spruh-Buchse 37 (Bounding Gas Mine 37), but never used it. The United States developed the M1 chemical mine , which used mustard gas, in 1939; and the M23 chemical mine, which used the VX nerve agent, in 1960. The Soviets developed the KhF, a \"bounding chemical mine\". The French had chemical mines and the Iraqis were believed to have them before the invasion of Kuwait. In 1997, the Chemical Weapons Convention came into force, prohibiting the use of chemical weapons and mandating their destruction. As of 30 April 2019, 97% of the declared stockpiles of chemical weapons were destroyed.\n\nFor a few decades during the Cold War, the U.S. developed atomic demolition munitions, often referred to as nuclear land mines. These were portable nuclear bombs that could be placed by hand, and could be detonated remotely or with a timer. Some of these were deployed in Europe. Governments in West Germany, Turkey and Greece wanted to have nuclear minefields as a defense against attack from the Warsaw Pact. However, such weapons were politically and tactically infeasible, and by 1989 the last of these munitions was retired. The British also had a project, codenamed Blue Peacock, to develop nuclear mines to be buried in Germany; the project was cancelled in 1958.\n\nA conventional land mine consists of a casing that is mostly filled with the main charge. It has a firing mechanism such as a pressure plate; this triggers a detonator or igniter, which in turn sets off a booster charge. There may be additional firing mechanisms in anti-handling devices.\n\nA land mine can be triggered by a number of things including pressure, movement, sound, magnetism and vibration. Anti-personnel mines commonly use the pressure of a person's foot as a trigger, but tripwires are also frequently employed. Most modern anti-vehicle mines use a magnetic trigger to enable it to detonate even if the tires or tracks did not touch it. Advanced mines are able to sense the difference between friendly and enemy types of vehicles by way of a built-in signature catalog. This will theoretically enable friendly forces to use the mined area while denying the enemy access.\n\nMany mines combine the main trigger with a touch or tilt trigger to prevent enemy engineers from defusing it. Land mine designs tend to use as little metal as possible to make searching with a metal detector more difficult; land mines made mostly of plastic have the added advantage of being very inexpensive.\n\nSome types of modern mines are designed to self-destruct, or chemically render themselves inert after a period of weeks or months to reduce the likelihood of civilian casualties at the conflict's end. These self-destruct mechanisms are not absolutely reliable, and most land mines laid historically are not equipped in this manner.\n\nThere is a common misperception that a landmine is armed by stepping on it and only triggered by stepping off, providing tension in movies. In fact the initial pressure trigger will detonate the mine, as they are designed to kill or maim, not to make someone stand very still until it can be disarmed.\n\nAnti-handling devices detonate the mine if someone attempts to lift, shift or disarm it. The intention is to hinder deminers by discouraging any attempts to clear minefields. There is a degree of overlap between the function of a boobytrap and an anti-handling device insofar as some mines have optional fuze pockets into which standard pull or pressure-release boobytrap firing devices can be screwed. Alternatively, some mines may mimic a standard design, but actually be specifically intended to kill deminers, such as the MC-3 and PMN-3 variants of the PMN mine. Anti-handling devices can be found on both anti-personnel mines and anti-tank mines, either as an integral part of their design or as improvised add-ons. For this reason, the standard render safe procedure for mines is often to destroy them on site without attempting to lift them.\n\nAnti-tank mines were created not long after the invention of the tank in the First World War. At first improvised, purpose-built designs were developed. Set off when a tank passes, they attack the tank at one of its weaker areas — the tracks. They are designed to immobilize or destroy vehicles and their occupants. In U.S. military terminology destroying the vehicles is referred to as a catastrophic kill while only disabling its movement is referred to as a mobility kill.\n\nAnti-tank mines are typically larger than anti-personnel mines and require more pressure to detonate. The high trigger pressure, normally requiring prevents them from being set off by infantry or smaller vehicles of lesser importance. More modern anti-tank mines use shaped charges to focus and increase the armor penetration of the explosives.\n\nAnti-personnel mines are designed primarily to kill or injure people, as opposed to vehicles. They are often designed to injure rather than kill in order to increase the logistical support (evacuation, medical) burden on the opposing force. Some types of anti-personnel mines can also damage the tracks or wheels of armored vehicles.\n\nIn the asymmetric warfare conflicts and civil wars of the 21st century, improvised explosives, known as IEDs, have partially supplanted conventional landmines as the source of injury to dismounted (pedestrian) soldiers and civilians. IEDs are used mainly by insurgents and terrorists against regular armed forces and civilians. The injuries from the anti-personnel IED were recently reported in BMJ Open to be far worse than with landmines resulting in multiple limb amputations and lower body mutilation.\n\nLand mines were designed for two main uses: \nBULLET::::- To create defensive tactical barriers, channelling attacking forces into predetermined fire zones or slowing an invading force's progress to allow reinforcements to arrive.\nBULLET::::- To act as passive area-denial weapons (to deny the enemy use of valuable terrain, resources or facilities when active defense of the area is not desirable or possible).\n\nLand mines are currently used in large quantities mostly for this first purpose, thus their widespread use in the demilitarized zones (DMZs) of likely flashpoints such as Cyprus, Afghanistan and Korea. As of 2013, the only governments that still laid land mines were Myanmar in its internal conflict, and Syria in its civil war.\n\nIn military science, minefields are considered a defensive or harassing weapon, used to slow the enemy down, to help deny certain terrain to the enemy, to focus enemy movement into kill zones, or to reduce morale by randomly attacking material and personnel. In some engagements during World War II, anti-tank mines accounted for half of all vehicles disabled.\n\nSince combat engineers with mine-clearing equipment can clear a path through a minefield relatively quickly, mines are usually considered effective only if covered by fire.\n\nThe extents of minefields are often marked with warning signs and cloth tape, to prevent friendly troops and non-combatants from entering them. Of course, sometimes terrain can be denied using dummy minefields. Most forces carefully record the location and disposition of their own minefields, because warning signs can be destroyed or removed, and minefields should eventually be cleared. Minefields may also have marked or unmarked safe routes to allow friendly movement through them.\n\nPlacing minefields without marking and recording them for later removal is considered a war crime under Protocol II of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons, which is itself an annex to the Geneva Conventions.\n\nArtillery and aircraft scatterable mines allow minefields to be placed in front of moving formations of enemy units, including the reinforcement of minefields or other obstacles that have been breached by enemy engineers. They can also be used to cover the retreat of forces disengaging from the enemy, or for interdiction of supporting units to isolate front line units from resupply. In most cases these minefields consist of a combination of anti-tank and anti-personnel mines, with the anti-personnel mines making removal of the anti-tank mines more difficult. Mines of this type used by the United States are designed to self-destruct after a preset period of time, reducing the requirement for mine clearing to only those mines whose self-destruct system did not function. Some designs of these scatterable mines require an electrical charge (capacitor or battery) to detonate. After a certain period of time, either the charge dissipates, leaving them effectively inert or the circuitry is designed such that upon reaching a low level, the device is triggered, thus destroying the mine.\n\nNone of the conventional tactics and norms of mine warfare applies when they are employed in a guerrilla role:\nBULLET::::- The mines are not used in a defensive role (for specific position or area).\nBULLET::::- Mined areas are not marked.\nBULLET::::- Mines are usually placed singly and not in groups covering an area.\nBULLET::::- Mines are often left unattended (not covered by fire).\n\nLand mines were commonly deployed by insurgents during the South African Border War, leading directly to the development of the first dedicated mine-protected armoured vehicles in South Africa. Namibian insurgents used anti-tank mines to throw South African military convoys into disarray before attacking them. To discourage detection and removal efforts, they also laid anti-personnel mines directly parallel to the anti-tank mines. This initially resulted in heavy South African military and police casualties, as the vast distances of road network vulnerable to insurgent sappers every day made comprehensive detection and clearance efforts impractical. The only other viable option was the adoption of mine-protected vehicles which could remain mobile on the roads with little risk to their passengers even if a mine was detonated. South Africa is widely credited with inventing the v-hull, a vee-shaped hull for armoured vehicles which deflects mine blasts away from the passenger compartment.\n\nDuring the ongoing Syrian Civil War, Iraqi Civil War (2014–2017) and Yemeni Civil War (2015–present) landmines have been used for both defensive and guerrilla purposes.\n\nMinefields may be laid by several means. The preferred, but most labour-intensive, way is to have engineers bury the mines, since this will make the mines practically invisible and reduce the number of mines needed to deny the enemy an area. Mines can be laid by specialized mine-laying vehicles. Mine-scattering shells may be fired by artillery from a distance of several tens of kilometers.\n\nMines may be dropped from helicopters or airplanes, or ejected from cluster bombs or cruise missiles.\n\nAnti-tank minefields can be scattered with anti-personnel mines to make clearing them manually more time-consuming; and anti-personnel minefields are scattered with anti-tank mines to prevent the use of armored vehicles to clear them quickly. Some anti-tank mine types are also able to be triggered by infantry, giving them a dual purpose even though their main and official intention is to work as anti-tank weapons.\n\nSome minefields are specifically booby-trapped to make clearing them more dangerous. Mixed anti-personnel and anti-tank minefields, anti-personnel mines \"under\" anti-tank mines, and fuses separated from mines have all been used for this purpose. Often, single mines are backed by a secondary device, designed to kill or maim personnel tasked with clearing the mine.\n\nMultiple anti-tank mines have been buried in stacks of two or three with the bottom mine fuzed, in order to multiply the penetrating power. Since the mines are buried, the ground directs the energy of the blast in a single direction—through the bottom of the target vehicle or on the track.\n\nAnother specific use is to mine an aircraft runway immediately after it has been bombed in order to delay or discourage repair. Some cluster bombs combine these functions. One example was the British JP233 cluster bomb which includes munitions to damage (crater) the runway as well as anti-personnel mines in the same cluster bomb. As a result of the anti-personnel mine ban it was withdrawn from British Royal Air Force service, and the last stockpiles of the mine were destroyed on 19 October 1999.\n\nMetal detectors were first used for demining, after their invention by the Polish officer Józef Kosacki. His invention, known as the Polish mine detector, was used by the Allies alongside mechanical methods, to clear the German mine fields during the Second Battle of El Alamein when 500 units were shipped to Field Marshal Montgomery's Eighth Army.\n\nThe Nazis used captured civilians who were chased across minefields to detonate the explosives. According to Laurence Rees \"Curt von Gottberg, the SS-Obergruppenführer who, during 1943, conducted another huge anti-partisan action called Operation Kottbus on the eastern border of Belarus, reported that 'approximately two to three thousand local people were blown up in the clearing of the minefields'.\"\n\nWhereas the placing and arming of mines is relatively inexpensive and simple, the process of detecting and removing them is typically expensive, slow, and dangerous. This is especially true of irregular warfare where mines were used on an ad hoc basis in unmarked areas. Anti-personnel mines are most difficult to find, due to their small size and the fact that many are made almost entirely of non-metallic materials specifically to escape detection.\n\nManual clearing remains the most effective technique for clearing mine fields, although hybrid techniques involving the use of animals and robots are being developed. Animals are desirable due to their strong sense of smell, which is more than capable of detecting a land mine. Animals like rats and dogs can also differentiate between other metal objects and land mines because they can be trained to detect the explosive agent itself.\n\nOther techniques involve the use of geo-location technologies. A joint team of researchers at the University of New South Wales and Ohio State University is working to develop a system based on multi-sensor integration.\n\nThe laying of land mines has inadvertently led to a positive development in the Falkland Islands. Mine fields laid near the sea during the Falklands War have become favorite places for penguins, which do not weigh enough to detonate the mines. Therefore, they can breed safely, free of human intrusion. These odd sanctuaries have proven so popular and lucrative for ecotourism that efforts exist to prevent removal of the mines.\n\nThe use of land mines is controversial because they are indiscriminate weapons, harming soldier and civilian alike. They remain dangerous after the conflict in which they were deployed has ended, killing and injuring civilians and rendering land impassable and unusable for decades. To make matters worse, many factions have not kept accurate records (or any at all) of the exact locations of their minefields, making removal efforts painstakingly slow. These facts pose serious difficulties in many developing nations where the presence of mines hampers resettlement, agriculture, and tourism. The International Campaign to Ban Landmines campaigned successfully to prohibit their use, culminating in the 1997 Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on their Destruction, known informally as the Ottawa Treaty.\n\nThe Treaty came into force on 1 March 1999. The treaty was the result of the leadership of the Governments of Canada, Norway, South Africa and Mozambique working with the \"International Campaign to Ban Landmines\", launched in 1992. The campaign and its leader, Jody Williams, won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1997 for its efforts.\n\nThe treaty does not include anti-tank mines, cluster bombs or claymore-type mines operated in command mode and focuses specifically on anti-personnel mines, because these pose the greatest long term (post-conflict) risk to humans and animals since they are typically designed to be triggered by any movement or pressure of only a few kilograms, whereas anti-tank mines require much more weight (or a combination of factors that would exclude humans). Existing stocks must be destroyed within four years of signing the treaty.\n\nSignatories of the Ottawa Treaty agree that they will not use, produce, stockpile or trade in anti-personnel land mines. In 1997, there were 122 signatories; the Treaty has now been signed by 162 countries. As of early 2016, 162 countries have joined the Treaty. Thirty-six countries, including the People's Republic of China, the Russian Federation and the United States, which together may hold tens of millions of stockpiled antipersonnel mines, are not party to the Convention. Another 34 have yet to sign on. The United States did not sign because the treaty lacks an exception for the Korean Demilitarized Zone.\n\nThere is a clause in the treaty, Article 3, which permits countries to retain land mines for use in training or development of countermeasures. Sixty-four countries have taken this option.\n\nAs an alternative to an outright ban, 10 countries follow regulations that are contained in a 1996 amendment of Protocol II of the Convention on Conventional Weapons (CCW). The countries are China, Finland, India, Israel, Morocco, Pakistan, South Korea and the United States. Sri Lanka, which had adhered to this regulation announced in 2016, that it would join the Ottawa Treaty.\n\nBefore the Ottawa Treaty was adopted, the Arms Project of Human Rights Watch identified \"almost 100 companies and government agencies in 48 countries\" that had manufactured \"more than 340 types of antipersonnel landmines in recent decades.\" Five to ten million mines were produced per year with a value of $50 to $200 million. The largest producers were probably China, Italy and the Soviet Union. The companies involved included giants such as Daimler-Benz, the Fiat Group, the Daewoo Group, RCA and General Electric.\n\nAs of 2017, the \"Landmine & Cluster Munition Monitor\" identified four countries that \"likely to be actively producing\" land mines: India, Myanmar, Pakistan and South Korea. Another seven states reserved the right to make them but were probably not doing so: China, Cuba, Iran, North Korea, Russia, Singapore, and Vietnam.\n\nThroughout the world there are millions of hectares that are contaminated with land mines.\n\nFrom 1999 to 2017, the \"Landmine Monitor\" has recorded over 120,000 casualties from mines, IEDs and explosive remnants of war; it estimates that another 1,000 per year go unrecorded. The estimate for all time is over half a million. In 2017, at least 2,793 were killed and 4,431 injured. 87% of the casualties were civilians and 47% were children (less than 18 years old). The largest numbers of casualties were in Afghanistan (2,300), Syria (1,906), and Ukraine (429).\n\nNatural disasters can have a significant impact on efforts to demine areas of land. For example, the floods that occurred in Mozambique in 1999 and 2000 may have displaced hundreds of thousands of land mines left from the war. Uncertainty about their locations delayed recovery efforts.\n\nFrom a recent study by Asmeret Asefaw Berhe, land degradation caused by land mines \"can be classified into five groups: access denial, loss of biodiversity, micro-relief disruption, chemical composition, and loss of productivity\". The effects of an explosion depend on: \"(i) the objectives and methodological approaches of the investigation; (ii) concentration of mines in a unit area; (iii) chemical composition and toxicity of the mines; (iv) previous uses of the land and (v) alternatives that are available for the affected populations.\"\n\nThe most prominent ecological issue associated with landmines (or fear of them) is denial of access to vital resources (where \"access\" refers to the ability to use resources, in contrast to \"property\", the right to use them). The presence and fear of presence of even a single landmine can discourage access for agriculture, water supplies and possibly conservation measures. Reconstruction and development of important structures such as schools and hospitals are likely to be delayed, and populations may shift to urban areas, increasing overcrowding and the risk of spreading diseases.\n\nAccess denial can have positive effects on the environment. When a mined area becomes a \"no-man's land\", plants and vegetation have a chance to grow and recover. For example, formerly arable lands in Nicaragua returned to forests and remained undisturbed after the establishment of landmines. (Similarly, the Penguins of the Falkland Islands have benefited.) However, these benefits can only last as long as animals, tree limbs, etc. do not detonate the mines. In addition, long idle periods could \"potentially end up creating or exacerbating loss of productivity\", particularly within land of low quality.\n\nLandmines can threaten biodiversity by wiping out vegetation and wildlife during explosions or demining. This extra burden can push threatened and endangered species to extinction. They have also been used by poachers to target endangered species. Displace people refugees hunt animals for food and destroy habitat by making shelters.\n\nShrapnel, or abrasions of bark or roots caused by detonated mines, can cause the slow death of trees and provide entry sites for wood-rotting fungi. When landmines make land unavailable for farming, residents resort to the forests to meet all of their survival needs. This exploitation furthers the loss of biodiversity.\n\nNear mines that have exploded or decayed, soils tend to be contaminated, particularly with heavy metals. Products produced from the explosives, both organic and inorganic substances, are most likely to be \"long lasting, water-soluble and toxic even in small amounts\". They can be implemented either \"directly or indirectly into soil, water bodies, microorganisms and plants with drinking water, food products or during respiration\".\n\nToxic compounds can also find their way into bodies of water accumulate in land animals, fish and plants. They can act \"as a nerve poison to hamper growth\", with deadly effect.\n\nBULLET::::- Countermine System\nBULLET::::- Demolition belt\nBULLET::::- Mine Protected Vehicle\nBULLET::::- Unexploded ordnance (UXO)\n\nBULLET::::- Mines\nBULLET::::- Anti-handling device\nBULLET::::- ARGES mine\nBULLET::::- Blast resistant mine\nBULLET::::- Fougasse\nBULLET::::- Improvised explosive device\nBULLET::::- Intelligent Munitions System\nBULLET::::- List of land mines\nBULLET::::- Minimum metal mine\nBULLET::::- Naval mine\nBULLET::::- PFM-1\nBULLET::::- Smart mine\nBULLET::::- Wooden box mine\nBULLET::::- Bulgarian anti-helicopter mines\n\nBULLET::::- Places\nBULLET::::- Land mines in Central America\nBULLET::::- Land mines in Cambodia\nBULLET::::- Landmines in Israel\nBULLET::::- Land mines in North Africa\nBULLET::::- Uzbek-Tajikistan border minefields\n\nBULLET::::- Organisations\nBULLET::::- International Campaign to Ban Landmines (ICBL)\nBULLET::::- Mine action\nBULLET::::- Mines Advisory Group (MAG)\nBULLET::::- Mine clearance agencies\n\nBULLET::::- ICBL: International Campaign to Ban Landmines\nBULLET::::- Landmines and international humanitarian law, ICRC\nBULLET::::- Detector Spots Buried Mines 1943, Popular Science article on the \"Polish\" mine detector.\nBULLET::::- \"How Axis Land Mines Work\", April 1944 detailed article on types of land mines\nBULLET::::- E-Mine Electronic Mine Information Network by United Nations Mine Action Services\nBULLET::::- Detecting Land Mines: New Technology, by Paul Grad. Published by \"Asian Surveying and Mapping\"\nBULLET::::- Ken Rutherford, \"Landmines: A Survivor’s Tale\" – Journal of Mine Action\n"}
{"id": "18173", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18173", "title": "List of libertarian political parties", "text": "List of libertarian political parties\n\nMany countries and subnational political entities have libertarian parties. Although these parties may describe themselves as libertarian, their ideologies differ considerably and not all of them support all elements of libertarianism.\n\n!Name\n!Country\n!Ideology\n!Membership\nLiberal Libertarian Party   Classical liberalism, libertarianism, individual right, free market, non-aggression principle  Interlibertarians\nLiberal Democratic Party<ref name=\"Global Directory of Free Liberal/Libertarian Parties\"></ref>   Classic liberalism, libertarianism  International Alliance of Libertarian Parties<br>Interlibertarians\nLibertair, Direct, Democratisch  <br>  Conservative liberalism, libertarianism, right-wing populism, Euroscepticism  Alliance of European Conservatives and Reformists<br>European Conservatives and Reformists\nLibertarians   Liberalism, libertarianism, minarchism, anarcho-capitalism  Interlibertarians\nNew Party   Libertarianism, classical liberalism \nBritish Columbia Libertarian Party  <br>  Libertarianism \nLibertarian Party of Canada   Libertarianism, classical liberalism, voluntaryism, non-interventionism, fiscal conservatism, laissez-faire, civil libertarianism  International Alliance of Libertarian Parties<br>Interlibertarians\nOntario Libertarian Party  <br>  Libertarianism  Interlibertarians\nAtlantica Party  <br>  Populism, libertarianism, fiscal conservatism  Freedom Party International\nLibertario   Minarchism  International Alliance of Libertarian Parties\nLiberal Democrats   Classical liberalism  Interlibertarians\nParty of Free Citizens   Classical liberalism, libertarian conservatism, Euroscepticism  International Alliance of Libertarian Parties<br>Interlibertarians\nLibertarian Party   Libertarianism  Interlibertarians\nLiberal Alliance   Classical liberalism, liberalism, libertarianism \nEuropean Party for Individual Liberty   Classical liberalism, libertarianism  Interlibertarians\nLiberal Alternative  Classical liberalism \nParti Libertarien   Classical liberalism, minarchism  International Alliance of Libertarian Parties (founding member) \nLiberal Democratic Party  Classical liberalism  European Party for Individual Liberty\nMouvement des Libertariens   Minarchism \nGirchi   Libertarianism, Anarcho-capitalism \nParty of Reason   Libertarianism  International Alliance of Libertarian Parties (founding member)<br>Interlibertarians<br>European Party for Individual Liberty\nLiberal Alliance   Classical liberalism \nLibertarian Society of Iceland   Libertarianism \nSwarna Bharat Party   Classical liberalism \nZehut   Classical liberalism, libertarianism, anti-clericalism, minarchism \nItalian Radicals   Liberalism, libertarianism, anti-clericalism  Liberal International<br>Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe\nLibertarian Movement   Agorism, anarcho-capitalism, anti-federalism, anti-statism, classical liberalism, Euroscepticism, free market, individualism, laissez-faire, liberism, libertarianism, minarchism, non-interventionism, non-violence, non-voting, Objectivism, voluntaryism  International Alliance of Libertarian Parties<br>Interlibertarians\nGo Tax Evaders!   Libertarianism  Interlibertarians\nLibertarische Partij   Classical liberalism, libertarianism  International Alliance of Libertarian Parties<br>Interlibertarians<br>European Party for Individual Liberty\nCapitalist Party   Classical liberalism, laissez-faire  International Alliance of Libertarian Parties\nCongress of the New Right  Libertarian conservatism, Euroscepticism \nLiberty   Libertarianism, conservative liberalism, Euroscepticism \nLibertarian Party  Minarchism, anarcho-capitalism \nLibertarian Party of Russia   Libertarianism, minarchism, anarcho-capitalism  International Alliance of Libertarian Parties (founding member)<br>Interlibertarians\nScottish Libertarian Party   Libertarianism, Scottish independence, Euroscepticism  International Alliance of Libertarian Parties\nLibertarian Party of South Africa   Libertarianism  International Alliance of Libertarian Parties (founding member)<br>Interlibertarians\nCapitalist Party of South Africa   Libertarianism, capitalism \nLibertarian Party   Libertarianism, cosmopolitanism, individualism, anarcho-capitalism, Rothbardian, Misesian, Austrian School, classical liberalism, laissez-faire \nPartido Libertario   Libertarianism, laissez-faire, anarcho-capitalism  International Alliance of Libertarian Parties<br>Interlibertarians<br>European Party for Individual Liberty\nLiberala partiet   Classical liberalism, libertarianism  International Alliance of Libertarian Parties\nLibertarian Party of Geneva  <br>  Libertarianism \nThe Swiss Independence Party up!   Libertarianism  International Alliance of Libertarian Parties\nI Liberisti Ticinesi  <br>  Libertarianism  Interlibertarians\n5.10   Libertarianism  Interlibertarians\nLibertarian Party   Libertarian conservatism, minarchism, classical liberalism, Euroscepticism  International Alliance of Libertarian Parties (founding member)<br>Interlibertarians\nLibertarian Party   Libertarianism, classical liberalism, laissez-faire, civil liberties, non-interventionism  International Alliance of Libertarian Parties (founding member)<br>Interlibertarians\nLibertarian Liberal Party   Libertarianism  Interlibertarians\nLibertarian Movement of Venezuela   Market anarchism, minarchism  Interlibertarians\n\n!Name\n!Country\n!Ideology\n!Membership\nFreedom Party of Manitoba (1980s–2000s)  <br>  Objectivism  Freedom Party International\nSwatantra Party   Classical liberalism \nLiberal Reformers (2005–2009)   Classical liberalism \nPannella List (1989–1996)   Radicalism, liberalism, economic liberalism \nLibertarianz (1995–2014)   Objectivism \nReal Politics Union (1990–2011)   Classic liberalism, conservatism, monarchism, Euroscepticism \nRussian Libertarian Movement (2003–2006)   Libertarianism \nLiberal Republican Party (1870–1872)   Anti-corruption, classical liberalism, manifest destiny \nPersonal Choice Party (2004–2006)   Libertarianism \nBoston Tea Party (2006–2012)   Non-interventionism  Interlibertarians\n\nOutright LibertariansLibertarian PartyLGBTQ libertarianism\nLPRadicalsLibertarian PartyLibertarianism\nRepublican Liberty CaucusRepublican PartyClassical liberalism\n\nBULLET::::- Liberalism by country\nBULLET::::- List of political parties\nBULLET::::- Outline of libertarianism\nBULLET::::- List of libertarian organizations\n"}
{"id": "18175", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18175", "title": "Loa", "text": "Loa\n\nLoa (, also written lwa as in Haitian Creole) are the spirits of Haitian Vodou and Louisiana Voodoo. They are also referred to as \"mystères\" and \"the invisibles\" and are intermediaries between Bondye (from French \"Bon Dieu\", meaning \"good God\")—the Supreme Creator, who is distant from the world—and humanity. Unlike saints or angels, however, they are not simply prayed to, they are served. They are each distinct beings with their own personal likes and dislikes, distinct sacred rhythms, songs, dances, ritual symbols, and special modes of service. Contrary to popular belief, the loa are not deities in and of themselves; they are intermediaries for, and dependent on, a distant Bondye.\n\nThe words \"loa\" and \"lwa\" come from the French \"les lois\"; \"the laws\" in English.\n\nThe enslaved Fon and Ewe in Haiti and Louisiana syncretized the loa with the Catholic saints—vodoun altars will frequently display images of Catholic saints. For example, Papa Legba is syncretized with Saint Peter or Lazarus of Bethany.\n\nSyncretism also works the other way in Haitian Vodou and many Catholic saints have become loa in their own right, most notably Philomena, the archangel Michael, Jude the Apostle, and John the Baptist.\n\nIn a ritual the loa are called down by the \"houngan\" (priest), \"mambo\" (priestess), or the \"bokor\" and the \"caplata\" (sorcerers and witches) to take part in the service, receive offerings, and grant requests. The loa arrive in the peristyle (ritual space) by mounting (possessing) a horse (ritualist) in Creole referred as \"Chwal\"—who is said to be \"ridden\". This can be quite a violent occurrence as the participant can flail about or convulse before falling to the ground, but some loa, such as Ayizan, will mount their \"horses\" very quietly.\n\nCertain loa display very distinctive behavior by which they can be recognized, specific phrases, and specific actions. As soon as a loa is recognized, the symbols appropriate to them will be given to them. For example, Erzulie Freda will be given a glass of pink champagne, she is sprinkled with her perfumes, fine gifts of food will be presented to her or she even puts on her jewelry; Legba will be given his cane, straw hat, and pipe; Baron Samedi will often fall flat on the floor and the vodousants around him will dress him and prepare him as they do in a morgue with cotton in his nose.\nOnce the loa have arrived, fed, been served, and possibly given help or advice, they leave the peristyle. Certain loa can become obstinate, for example the Guédé are notorious for wanting just one more smoke, or one more drink, but it is the job of the houngan or mambo to keep the spirits in line while ensuring they are adequately provided for.\n\nThere are many families or \"\"nanchons\"\" (from \"nations\") of loa: Rada (also Radha), Petro (also Pethro, Petwo), Nago, Kongo, and Ghede (also Guede, or Gede), among others.\n\nThe Rada loa are generally older, as many of these spirits come from Africa and the kingdom of Dahomey. The Rada Loa are mainly water spirits and many of the Rada loa are served with a water. The Rada are \"Cool\" in the sense they are less aggressive than the Petro. They include Legba, Loko, Ayizan, Damballa Wedo and Ayida-Weddo, Maîtresse Mambo Erzulie Fréda Dahomey, La Sirène, and Agwé. Many of these spirits are served with white (as opposed to the specific colours of individual loa).\n\nThe Petro loa are generally the more fiery, occasionally aggressive and warlike loa, and are associated with Haiti and the New World. They include Ezili Dantor, Marinette, and Met Kalfu (Maitre Carrefour, \"Master Crossroads\"). Their traditional colour is red.\n\nOriginating from the Congo region, these loa include the many Simbi loa. It also includes Marinette, a fierce and much feared female loa.\n\nOriginating from Yorubaland, this nation includes many of the Ogoun loa.\n\nThe Guédé are the spirits of the dead. They are traditionally led by the Barons (La Croix, Samedi, Cimitière, Kriminel), and Maman Brigitte. The Ghede as a family are loud, rude (although rarely to the point of real insult), sexual, and usually a lot of fun. As those who have lived already, they have nothing to fear, and frequently will display how far past consequence and feeling they are when they come through in a service—eating glass, raw chillis, and anointing their sensitive areas with chilli rum, for example. Their traditional colours are black and purple.\n\nBULLET::::- Adjassou-Linguetor\nBULLET::::- Adjinakou\nBULLET::::- Adya Houn'tò\nBULLET::::- Agaou\nBULLET::::- Agassou\nBULLET::::- Agwé\nBULLET::::- Anaisa Pye\nBULLET::::- Anmino\nBULLET::::- Ayida-Weddo\nBULLET::::- Ayizan\nBULLET::::- Azaka-Tonnerre\nBULLET::::- Bacalou\nBULLET::::- Badessy\nBULLET::::- Baron Samedi\nBULLET::::- Baron Kriminel\nBULLET::::- Belie Belcan\nBULLET::::- Boli Shah\nBULLET::::- Bossou Ashadeh\nBULLET::::- Boum'ba Maza\nBULLET::::- Brize\nBULLET::::- Bugid Y Aiba\nBULLET::::- Captain Debas\nBULLET::::- Clermeil\nBULLET::::- Congo\nBULLET::::- Damballa\nBULLET::::- Dan Petro\nBULLET::::- Dan Wédo\nBULLET::::- Demeplait\nBULLET::::- Dereyale\nBULLET::::- Diable Tonnere\nBULLET::::- Diejuste\nBULLET::::- Dinclinsin\nBULLET::::- Erzulie\nBULLET::::- Filomez\nBULLET::::- Ghede\nBULLET::::- Ghede Linto\nBULLET::::- Ghede Loraj\nBULLET::::- Ghede Nibo\nBULLET::::- Ghede Doubye\nBULLET::::- Gran Maître\nBULLET::::- Grand Bois\nBULLET::::- Guinee\nBULLET::::- Jean Zombi\nBULLET::::- Joseph Danger\nBULLET::::- Joumalonge\nBULLET::::- Met Kalfou\nBULLET::::- Kalfou Twa\nBULLET::::- Kapitan Zombi\nBULLET::::- Klemezin Klemay\nBULLET::::- Lemba\nBULLET::::- L'inglesou\nBULLET::::- La Sirène\nBULLET::::- Limba\nBULLET::::- Loco\nBULLET::::- Lovana\nBULLET::::- Mademoiselle Charlotte\nBULLET::::- Mait' Carrefour\nBULLET::::- Maîtresse Délai\nBULLET::::- Maîtresse Hounon'gon\nBULLET::::- Maman Brigitte\nBULLET::::- Marassa\nBULLET::::- Marassa Jumeaux\nBULLET::::- Marinette (Vodou)\nBULLET::::- Maroule\nBULLET::::- Mombu\nBULLET::::- Manze Marie\nBULLET::::- Mounanchou\nBULLET::::- Nago Shango\nBULLET::::- Ogoun\nBULLET::::- Papa Legba\nBULLET::::- Pie\nBULLET::::- Silibo\nBULLET::::- Simbi\nBULLET::::- Sobo\nBULLET::::- Sousson-Pannan\nBULLET::::- Senegal\nBULLET::::- Ti Kita\nBULLET::::- Ti Jean Quinto\nBULLET::::- Ti Malice\nBULLET::::- Ti Jean Petro\nBULLET::::- Wawe\n\nBULLET::::- Alusi\nBULLET::::- Dahomean religion\nBULLET::::- Haitian mythology\nBULLET::::- Nkisi\nBULLET::::- Orisha\nBULLET::::- Paquet congo\nBULLET::::- Winti\n\nBULLET::::- Webster list of loa\n"}
{"id": "18178", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18178", "title": "Labour economics", "text": "Labour economics\n\nLabour economics seeks to understand the functioning and dynamics of the markets for wage labour. Labour is a commodity that supplied by labourers in exchange for a wage paid by demanding firms. \n\nLabour markets or job markets function through the interaction of workers and employers. Labour economics looks at the suppliers of labour services (workers) and the demanders of labour services (employers), and attempts to understand the resulting pattern of wages, employment, and income.\n\nLabour is a measure of the work done by human beings. It is conventionally contrasted with such other factors of production as land and capital. Some theories focus on human capital (referring to the skills that workers possess, not necessarily their actual work). Labour is unique to study because it is a special type of good that cannot be separated from the owner (i.e. the work cannot be separated from the person who does it). A labour market is also different from other markets in that workers are the suppliers and firms are the demanders. \n\nThere are two sides to labour economics. Labour economics can generally be seen as the application of microeconomic or macroeconomic techniques to the labour market. Microeconomic techniques study the role of individuals and individual firms in the labour market. Macroeconomic techniques look at the interrelations between the labour market, the goods market, the money market, and the foreign trade market. It looks at how these interactions influence macro variables such as employment levels, participation rates, aggregate income and gross domestic product.\n\nThe Labour force (LF) is defined as the number of people of working age, who are either employed or actively looking for work (unemployed). The labour force participation rate (LFPR) is the number of people in the labour force divided by the size of the adult civilian non-institutional population (or by the population of working age that is not institutionalized), LFPR = LF/Population.\n\nThe non-labour force includes those who are not looking for work, those who are institutionalized (such as in prisons or psychiatric wards), stay-at home spouses, children not of working age, and those serving in the military. The unemployment level is defined as the labour force minus the number of people currently employed. The unemployment rate is defined as the level of unemployment divided by the labour force. The employment rate is defined as the number of people currently employed divided by the adult population (or by the population of working age). In these statistics, self-employed people are counted as employed.\n\nThe skills required in a labor force can vary from individual to individual, as well as from firm to firm. Some firms have specific skills they are interested in, limiting the labour force to certain criteria. A firm requiring specific skills will help determine the size of the market.\n\nVariables like employment level, unemployment level, labour force, and unfilled vacancies are called stock variables because they measure a quantity at a point in time. They can be contrasted with flow variables which measure a quantity over a duration of time. Changes in the labour force are due to flow variables such as natural population growth, net immigration, new entrants, and retirements. Changes in unemployment depend on inflows (non-employed people starting to look for jobs and employed people who lose their jobs that are looking for new ones) and outflows (people who find new employment and people who stop looking for employment). When looking at the overall macro economy, several types of unemployment have been identified, which can be separated into two categories of natural and unnatural unemployment.\n\n\"Natural Unemployment\"\n\nBULLET::::- Frictional unemployment – This reflects the fact that it takes time for people to find and settle into new jobs that they feel are appropriate for them and their skill set. Technological advancement often reduces frictional unemployment; for example, internet search engines have reduced the cost and time associated with locating employment or personnel selection.\nBULLET::::- Structural unemployment – the number of jobs available in an industry are not sufficient enough to provide jobs to all persons who are interested in working or qualified to work in that industry. This can be due to the changes in industries prevalent in a country or because wages for industry are too high, causing people to want to supply their labour to that industry.\nBULLET::::- Natural rate of unemployment (also known as full employment) – This is the summation of frictional and structural unemployment, that excludes cyclical contributions of unemployment (e.g. recessions) and seasonal unemployment. It is the lowest rate of unemployment that a stable economy can expect to achieve, given that some frictional and structural unemployment is inevitable. Economists do not agree on the level of the natural rate, with estimates ranging from 1% to 5%, or on its meaning – some associate it with \"non-accelerating inflation\". The estimated rate varies between countries and across time.\n\n\"Unnatural Unemployment\"\n\nBULLET::::- Demand deficient unemployment (also known as cyclical unemployment) – In Keynesian economics, any level of unemployment beyond the natural rate is probably due to insufficient goods demand in the overall economy. During a recession, aggregate expenditure is deficient causing the underutilisation of inputs (including labour). Aggregate expenditure (AE) can be increased, according to Keynes, by increasing consumption spending (C), increasing investment spending (I), increasing government spending (G), or increasing the net of exports minus imports (X−M), since AE = C + I + G + (X−M).\nBULLET::::- Seasonal unemployment -- unemployment due to seasonal fluctuations of demand for workers across industries, such as in the retail industry after holidays that involve a lot of shopping are over.\n\nNeoclassical economists view the labour market as similar to other markets in that the forces of supply and demand jointly determine price (in this case the wage rate) and quantity (in this case the number of people employed).\n\nHowever, the labour market differs from other markets (like the markets for goods or the financial market) in several ways. In particular, the labour market may act as a non-clearing market. While according to neoclassical theory most markets quickly attain a point of equilibrium without excess supply or demand, this may not be true of the labour market: it may have a persistent level of unemployment. Contrasting the labour market to other markets also reveals persistent compensating differentials among similar workers.\n\nModels that assume perfect competition in the labour market, as discussed below, conclude that workers earn their marginal product of labour.\n\nHouseholds are suppliers of labour. In microeconomic theory, people are assumed to be rational and seeking to maximize their utility function. In the labour market model, their utility function expresses trade-offs in preference between leisure time and income from time used for labour. However, they are constrained by the hours available to them.\n\nLet \"w\" denote the hourly wage, \"k\" denote total hours available for labour and leisure, \"L\" denote the chosen number of working hours, π denote income from non-labour sources, and \"A\" denote leisure hours chosen. The individual's problem is to maximise utility \"U\", which depends on total income available for spending on consumption and also depends on time spent in leisure, subject to a time constraint, with respect to the choices of labour time and leisure time:\n\nThis is shown in the graph below, which illustrates the trade-off between allocating time to leisure activities and allocating it to income-generating activities. The linear constraint indicates that every additional hour of leisure undertaken requires the loss of an hour of labour and thus of the fixed amount of goods that that labour's income could purchase. Individuals must choose how much time to allocate to leisure activities and how much to working. This allocation decision is informed by the indifference curve labelled IC. The curve indicates the combinations of leisure and work that will give the individual a specific level of utility. The point where the highest indifference curve is just tangent to the constraint line (point A), illustrates the optimum for this supplier of labour services.\n\nIf consumption is measured by the value of income obtained, this diagram can be used to show a variety of interesting effects. This is because the absolute value of the slope of the budget constraint is the wage rate. The point of optimisation (point A) reflects the equivalency between the wage rate and the marginal rate of substitution of leisure for income (the absolute value of the slope of the indifference curve). Because the marginal rate of substitution of leisure for income is also the ratio of the marginal utility of leisure (MU) to the marginal utility of income (MU), one can conclude:\n\nwhere \"Y\" is total income and the right side is the wage rate.\nIf the wage rate increases, this individual's constraint line pivots up from X,Y to X,Y. He/she can now purchase more goods and services. His/her utility will increase from point A on IC to point B on IC.\nTo understand what effect this might have on the decision of how many hours to work, one must look at the income effect and substitution effect.\n\nThe wage increase shown in the previous diagram can be decomposed into two separate effects. The pure income effect is shown as the movement from point A to point C in the next diagram. Consumption increases from Y to Y and – since the diagram assumes that leisure is a normal good – leisure time increases from X to X. (Employment time decreases by the same amount as leisure increases.)\n\nBut that is only part of the picture. As the wage rate rises, the worker will substitute away from leisure and into the provision of labour—that is, will work more hours to take advantage of the higher wage rate, or in other words substitute away from leisure because of its higher opportunity cost. This substitution effect is represented by the shift from point C to point B. The net impact of these two effects is shown by the shift from point A to point B. The relative magnitude of the two effects depends on the circumstances. In some cases, such as the one shown, the substitution effect is greater than the income effect (in which case more time will be allocated to working), but in other cases the income effect will be greater than the substitution effect (in which case less time is allocated to working). The intuition behind this latter case is that the individual decides that the higher earnings on the previous amount of labour can be \"spent\" by purchasing more leisure.\n\nIf the substitution effect is greater than the income effect, an individual's supply of labour services will increase as the wage rate rises, which is represented by a positive slope in the labour supply curve (as at point E in the adjacent diagram, which exhibits a positive wage elasticity). This positive relationship is increasing until point F, beyond which the income effect dominates the substitution effect and the individual starts to reduce the amount of labour hours he supplies (point G) as wage increases; in other words, the wage elasticity is now negative.\n\nThe direction of slope may change more than once for some individuals, and the labour supply curve is different for different individuals.\n\nOther variables that affect the labour supply decision, and can be readily incorporated into the model, include taxation, welfare, work environment, and income as a signal of ability or social contribution.\n\nA firm's labour demand is based on its marginal physical product of labour (MPP). This is defined as the additional output (or physical product) that results from an increase of one unit of labour (or from an infinitesimal increase in labour). (See also Production theory basics.)\n\nLabour demand is a derived demand; that is, hiring labour is not desired for its own sake but rather because it aids in producing output, which contributes to an employer's revenue and hence profits. The demand for an additional amount of labour depends on the Marginal Revenue Product (MRP) and the marginal cost (MC) of the worker. With a perfectly competitive goods market, the MRP is calculated by multiplying the price of the end product or service by the Marginal Physical Product of the worker. If the MRP is greater than a firm's Marginal Cost, then the firm will employ the worker since doing so will increase profit. The firm only employs however up to the point where MRP=MC, and not beyond, in neoclassical economic theory.\n\nThe MRP of the worker is affected by other inputs to production with which the worker can work (e.g. machinery), often aggregated under the term \"capital\". It is typical in economic models for greater availability of capital for a firm to increase the MRP of the worker, all else equal. Education and training are counted as \"human capital\". Since the amount of physical capital affects MRP, and since financial capital flows can affect the amount of physical capital available, MRP and thus wages can be affected by financial capital flows within and between countries, and the degree of capital mobility within and between countries.\n\nAccording to neoclassical theory, over the relevant range of outputs, the marginal physical product of labour is declining (law of diminishing returns). That is, as more and more units of labour are employed, their additional output begins to decline.\n\nAdditionally, although the MRP is a good way of expressing an employer's demand, other factors such as social group formation can the demand, as well as the labor supply. This constantly restructures exactly what a labor market is, and leads way to causing problems for theories of inflation.\n\nThe marginal revenue product of labour can be used as the demand for labour curve for this firm in the short run. In competitive markets, a firm faces a perfectly elastic supply of labour which corresponds with the wage rate and the marginal resource cost of labour (W = S = MFC). In imperfect markets, the diagram would have to be adjusted because MFC would then be equal to the wage rate divided by marginal costs. Because optimum resource allocation requires that marginal factor costs equal marginal revenue product, this firm would demand L units of labour as shown in the diagram.\n\nThe demand for labour of this firm can be summed with the demand for labour of all other firms in the economy to obtain the aggregate demand for labour. Likewise, the supply curves of all the individual workers (mentioned above) can be summed to obtain the aggregate supply of labour. These supply and demand curves can be analysed in the same way as any other industry demand and supply curves to determine equilibrium wage and employment levels.\n\nWage differences exist, particularly in mixed and fully/partly flexible labour markets. For example, the wages of a doctor and a port cleaner, both employed by the NHS, differ greatly. There are various factors concerning this phenomenon. This includes the MRP of the worker. A doctor's MRP is far greater than that of the port cleaner. In addition, the barriers to becoming a doctor are far greater than that of becoming a port cleaner. To become a doctor takes a lot of education and training which is costly, and only those who excel in academia can succeed in becoming doctors. The port cleaner however requires relatively less training. The supply of doctors is therefore significantly less elastic than that of port cleaners. Demand is also inelastic as there is a high demand for doctors and medical care is a necessity, so the NHS will pay higher wage rates to attract the profession.\n\nSome labour markets have a single employer and thus do not satisfy the perfect competition assumption of the neoclassical model above. The model of a monopsonistic labour market gives a lower quantity of employment and a lower equilibrium wage rate than does the competitive model.\n\nIn many real-life situations the assumption of perfect information is unrealistic. An employer does not necessarily know how hard workers are working or how productive they are. This provides an incentive for workers to shirk from providing their full effort, called moral hazard. Since it is difficult for the employer to identify the hard-working and the shirking employees, there is no incentive to work hard and productivity falls overall, leading to the hiring of more workers and a lower unemployment rate.\n\nOne solution that is used to avoid moral hazard is stock options that grant employees the chance to benefit directly from a firm's success. However, this solution has attracted criticism as executives with large stock-option packages have been suspected of acting to over-inflate share values to the detriment of the long-run welfare of the firm. Another solution, foreshadowed by the rise of temporary workers in Japan and the firing of many of these workers in response to the financial crisis of 2008, is more flexible job- contracts and -terms that encourage employees to work less than full-time by partially compensating for the loss of hours, relying on workers to adapt their working time in response to job requirements and economic conditions instead of the employer trying to determine how much work is needed to complete a given task and overestimating.\n\nAnother aspect of uncertainty results from the firm's imperfect knowledge about worker ability. If a firm is unsure about a worker's ability, it pays a wage assuming that the worker's ability is the average of similar workers. This wage under compensates high-ability workers which may drive them away from the labour market as well as at the same time attracting low-ability workers. Such a phenomenon, called adverse selection, can sometimes lead to market collapse.\n\nOne way to combat adverse selection, firms will try to use signalling, pioneered by Michael Spence, whereby employers could use various characteristics of applicants differentiate between high-ability or low-ability workers. One common signal used is education, whereby employers assume that high-ability workers will have higher levels of education. Employers can then compensate high-ability workers with higher wages. However, signalling does not always work, and it may appear to an external observer that education has raised the marginal product of labour, without this necessarily being true.\n\nOne of the major research achievements of the 1990-2010 period was the development of a framework with dynamic search, matching, and bargaining.\n\nAt the micro level, one sub-discipline eliciting increased attention in recent decades is analysis of internal labour markets, that is, \"within\" firms (or other organisations), studied in personnel economics from the perspective of personnel management. By contrast, external labour markets \"imply that workers move somewhat fluidly between firms and wages are determined by some aggregate process where firms do not have significant discretion over wage setting.\" The focus is on \"how firms establish, maintain, and end employment relationships and on how firms provide incentives to employees,\" including models and empirical work on incentive systems and as constrained by economic efficiency and risk/incentive tradeoffs relating to personnel compensation.\n\nInequality and discrimination in the workplace can have many affects on workers.\n\nIn the context of labour economics, inequality is usually referring the to unequal distribution of earning between households. Inequality is commonly measured by economists using the Gini coefficient. This coefficient does not have a concrete meaning, but is more used as a way to compare inequality across regions. The higher the Gini coefficient is calculated to be the larger inequality exists in a region. Over time, inequality has, on average, been increasing. This is due to numerous factors including labour supply and demand shifts as well as institutional changes in the labour market. On the shifts in labour supply and demand, factors include demand for skilled workers going up more than the supply of skilled workers and relative to unskilled workers as well as technological changes that increase productivity; all of these things cause wages to go up for skilled labor while unskilled worker wages stay the same or decline. As for the institutional changes, a decrease in union power and a declining real minimum wage, which both reduce unskilled workers wages, and tax cuts for the wealthy all increase the inequality gap between groups of earners.\n\nAs for discrimination, it is the difference in pay that can be attributed to the demographic differences between people, such as gender, race, ethnicity, religion, sexual orientation, etc, even though these factors do not affect the productivity of the worker. Many regions and countries have enacted government policies to combat discrimination, including discrimination in the workplace. Discrimination can be modeled and measured in numerous ways. The oaxaca decomposition is a common method used to calculate the amount of discrimination that exists when wages differ between groups of people. This decomposition aims to calculate the difference in wages that occurs because of differences in skills versus the returns to those skills. A way of modeling discrimination in the workplace when dealing with wages are Gary Becker's taste models. Using taste models, employer discrimination can be thought of as the employer not hiring the minority worker because their perceived cost of hiring that worker is higher than that of the cost of hiring a non-minority worker, which causes less hiring of the minority. Another taste model is for employee discrimination, which does not cause a decline in the hiring of minorities, but instead causes a more segregated workforce because the prejudiced worker feels that they should be paid more to work next to the worker they are prejudiced against or that they are not paid an equal amount as the worker they are prejudiced against. One more taste model involves customer discrimination, whereby the employers themselves are not prejudiced but believe that their customers might be, so therefore the employer is less likely to hire the minority worker if they are going to interact with customers that are prejudiced. There are many other taste models other than these that Gary Becker has made to explain discrimination that causes differences in hiring in wages in the labour market.\n\nMany sociologists, political economists, and heterodox economists claim that labour economics tends to lose sight of the complexity of individual employment decisions. These decisions, particularly on the supply side, are often loaded with considerable emotional baggage and a purely numerical analysis can miss important dimensions of the process, such as social benefits of a high income or wage rate regardless of the marginal utility from increased consumption or specific economic goals.\n\nFrom the perspective of mainstream economics, neoclassical models are not meant to serve as a full description of the psychological and subjective factors that go into a given individual's employment relations, but as a useful approximation of human behaviour in the aggregate, which can be fleshed out further by the use of concepts such as information asymmetry, transaction costs, contract theory etc.\n\nAlso missing from most labour market analyses is the role of unpaid labour such as unpaid internships where workers with little or no experience are allowed to work a job without pay so that they can gain experience in a particular profession. Even though this type of labour is unpaid it can nevertheless play an important part in society if not abused by employers. The most dramatic example is child raising. However, over the past 25 years an increasing literature, usually designated as the economics of the family, has sought to study within household decision making, including joint labour supply, fertility, child raising, as well as other areas of what is generally referred to as home production.\n\nThe labour market, as institutionalised under today's market economic systems, has been criticised, especially by both mainstream socialists and anarcho-syndicalists, who utilise the term wage slavery as a pejorative for wage labour. Socialists draw parallels between the trade of labour as a commodity and slavery. Cicero is also known to have suggested such parallels.\n\nAccording to Noam Chomsky, analysis of the psychological implications of wage slavery goes back to the Enlightenment era. In his 1791 book \"On the Limits of State Action\", classical liberal thinker Wilhelm von Humboldt explained how \"whatever does not spring from a man's free choice, or is only the result of instruction and guidance, does not enter into his very nature; he does not perform it with truly human energies, but merely with mechanical exactness\" and so when the labourer works under external control, \"we may admire what he does, but we despise what he is.\" Both the Milgram and Stanford experiments have been found useful in the psychological study of wage-based workplace relations.\n\nThe American philosopher John Dewey posited that until \"industrial feudalism\" is replaced by \"industrial democracy,\" politics will be \"the shadow cast on society by big business\". Thomas Ferguson has postulated in his investment theory of party competition that the undemocratic nature of economic institutions under capitalism causes elections to become occasions when blocs of investors coalesce and compete to control the state.\n\nAs per anthropologist David Graeber, the earliest wage labour contracts we know about were in fact contracts for the rental of chattel slaves (usually the owner would receive a share of the money, and the slave, another, with which to maintain his or her living expenses.) Such arrangements, according to Graeber, were quite common in New World slavery as well, whether in the United States or Brazil. C. L. R. James argued that most of the techniques of human organisation employed on factory workers during the industrial revolution were first developed on slave plantations.\n\nAdditionally, Marxists posit that labour-as-commodity, which is how they regard wage labour, provides an absolutely fundamental point of attack against capitalism. \"It can be persuasively argued,\" noted one concerned philosopher, \"that the conception of the worker's labour as a commodity confirms Marx's stigmatisation of the wage system of private capitalism as 'wage-slavery;' that is, as an instrument of the capitalist's for reducing the worker's condition to that of a slave, if not below it.\"\n\nBULLET::::- Profession\nBULLET::::- Skilled worker\nBULLET::::- Retirement\nBULLET::::- Employment\nBULLET::::- Unemployment\nBULLET::::- Employment Protection Legislation\nBULLET::::- Compensation of employees\nBULLET::::- Wages\nBULLET::::- Wage labour\nBULLET::::- Wage slavery\nBULLET::::- Manual labour\nBULLET::::- Affective labour\nBULLET::::- Volunteer\nBULLET::::- Unfree labour\nBULLET::::- Slavery\nBULLET::::- Offshore outsourcing\nBULLET::::- Housework\nBULLET::::- Human capital\nBULLET::::- Human resources\nBULLET::::- Human Resource Management Systems\nBULLET::::- Cost the limit of price\nBULLET::::- Demographic economics\nBULLET::::- Microeconomics\nBULLET::::- Beveridge curve\nBULLET::::- Consumer theory\nBULLET::::- Production theory basics\nBULLET::::- Conditional factor demands\nBULLET::::- Labour market flexibility\nBULLET::::- Frisch elasticity of labour supply\nBULLET::::- Labour power\nBULLET::::- Monopsony\nBULLET::::- Marginal factor cost\nBULLET::::- Economic rent\nBULLET::::- Industrial relations\nBULLET::::- Protestant work ethic\nBULLET::::- Richard Blundell and Thomas MaCurdy, 2008. \"labour supply,\" \"The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics\", 2nd Edition Abstract.\nBULLET::::- Freeman, R.B., 1987. \"Labour economics,\" \"\", v. 3, pp. 72–76.\nBULLET::::- John R. Hicks, 1932, 2nd ed., 1963. \"The Theory of Wages\". London, Macmillan.\nBULLET::::- \"Handbook of Labor Economics\". Elsevier. Amsterdam: North-Holland. Links to one-page chapter previews for each volume:\nBULLET::::- Mark R. Killingsworth, 1983. \"Labour Supply\". Cambridge: Cambridge Surveys of Economic Literature.\nBULLET::::- Jacob Mincer, 1974. \"Schooling, Experience, and Earnings\". New York: Columbia University Press.\nBULLET::::- Anindya Bakrie & Morendy Octora, 2002. \"Schooling, Experience, and Earnings\". New York, Singapore National University : Columbia University Press.\nBULLET::::- Simon Head, \"The New Ruthless Economy. Work and Power in the Digital Age\", Oxford UP 2005,\n\nBULLET::::- Ageing workers EU-OSHA\nBULLET::::- The Labour Economics Gateway – Collection of Internet sites that are of interest to labour economists\nBULLET::::- Labour & Worklife Program at Harvard Law School, Changing Labour Markets Project\nBULLET::::- W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research\nBULLET::::- ILO: \"Key Indicators of the Labour Market (KILM).\" 5. ed. Sept. 2007\nBULLET::::- LabourFair Resources – Link to Fair Labour Practices\nBULLET::::- Labour Research Network – Labour research programme treating various fields\nBULLET::::- Labour Research Department – Independent labour economics research organisation\n"}
{"id": "18179", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18179", "title": "Lammas", "text": "Lammas\n\nLammas Day (Anglo-Saxon \"hlaf-mas\", \"loaf-mass\"), is a holiday celebrated in some English-speaking countries in the Northern Hemisphere on 1 August. It is a festival to mark the annual wheat harvest, and is the first harvest festival of the year. On this day it was customary to bring to church a loaf made from the new crop, which began to be harvested at Lammastide, which falls at the halfway point between the summer Solstice and Autumn September Equinox.\n\nThe loaf was blessed, and in Anglo-Saxon England it might be employed afterwards in protective rituals: a book of Anglo-Saxon charms directed that the lammas bread be broken into four bits, which were to be placed at the four corners of the barn, to protect the garnered grain.\n\nIn many parts of England, tenants were bound to present freshly harvested wheat to their landlords on or before the first day of August. In the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", where it is referred to regularly, it is called \"the feast of first fruits\". The blessing of first fruits was performed annually in both the Eastern and Western Churches on the first or the sixth of August (the latter being the feast of the Transfiguration of Christ).\n\nLammas has coincided with the feast of St. Peter in Chains, commemorating St. Peter's miraculous deliverance from prison, but in the liturgical reform of 1969, the feast of St. Alphonsus Liguori was transferred to this day, the day of St. Alphonsus' death.\n\nIn medieval times the feast was sometimes known in England and Scotland as the \"Gule of August\", but the meaning of \"gule\" is unclear. Ronald Hutton suggests following the 18th-century Welsh clergyman antiquary John Pettingall that it is merely an Anglicisation of ', the Welsh name of the \"feast of August\". The \"OED\" and most etymological dictionaries give it a more circuitous origin similar to \"gullet\"; from Old French ', a diminutive of ', \"throat, neck,\" from Latin ' \"throat\".\n\nSeveral antiquaries beginning with John Brady offered a back-construction to its being originally known as \"Lamb-mass\", under the undocumented supposition that tenants of the Cathedral of York, dedicated to St. Peter ad Vincula, of which this is the feast, would have been required to bring a live lamb to the church, or, with John Skinner, \"because Lambs then grew out of season.\" This is a folk etymology, of which \"OED\" notes that it was \"subsequently felt as if from \".\n\nFor many villeins, the wheat must have run low in the days before Lammas, and the new harvest began a season of plenty, of hard work and company in the fields, reaping in teams. Thus there was a spirit of celebratory play.\n\nIn the medieval agricultural year, Lammas also marked the end of the hay harvest that had begun after Midsummer. At the end of hay-making a sheep would be loosed in the meadow among the mowers, for him to keep who could catch it.\n\nIn Shakespeare's \"Romeo and Juliet\" (1.3.19) it is observed of Juliet, \"Come Lammas Eve at night shall she [Juliet] be fourteen.\" Since Juliet was born Lammas eve, she came before the harvest festival, which is significant since her life ended before she could reap what she had sown and enjoy the bounty of the harvest, in this case full consummation and enjoyment of her love with Romeo.\n\nAnother well-known cultural reference is the opening of \"The Battle of Otterburn\": \"It fell about the Lammas tide when the muir-men win their hay\".\n\nWilliam Hone speaks in \"The Every-Day Book\" (1838) of a later festive Lammas day sport common among Scottish farmers near Edinburgh. He says that they \"build towers...leaving a hole for a flag-pole in the centre so that they may raise their colours.\" When the flags over the many peat-constructed towers were raised, farmers would go to others' towers and attempt to \"level them to the ground.\" A successful attempt would bring great praise. However, people were allowed to defend their towers, and so everyone was provided with a \"tooting-horn\" to alert nearby country folk of the impending attack and the battle would turn into a \"brawl.\" According to Hone, more than four people had died at this festival and many more were injured. At the day's end, races were held, with prizes given to the townspeople.\n\nLughnasadh or Lammas is also the name used for one of the eight sabbats in the Neopagan Wheel of the Year. It is the first of the three autumn harvest festivals, the other two being the autumn equinox (also called Mabon) and Samhain. In the Northern Hemisphere it takes place around 1 August, while in the Southern Hemisphere it is celebrated around 1 February.\n\nLammas is one of the Scottish quarter days.\n\n\"Lammas leaves\" or \"Lammas growth\" refers to a second crop of leaves produced in high summer by some species of trees in temperate countries to replace those lost to insect damage. They often differ slightly in shape, texture and/or hairiness from the earlier leaves.\n\nA low impact development project at Tir y Gafel, Glandwr, Pembrokeshire, Lammas Ecovillage is a collective initiative for nine self-built homes. It was the first such project to obtain planning permission based on a predecessor of what is now the sixth national planning guidance for sustainable rural communities originally proposed by the One Planet Council.\n\nThe \"Doctor Who\" serial \"The Image of the Fendahl\", takes place on Lammas Eve.\n\nIn the \"Inspector Morse\" episode \"Day of the Devil\", Lammas Day is presented as a Satanic (un)holy day, \"the Devil's day\".\n\nKatherine Kurtz's alternate World War II fantasy \"history\" takes its title, \"Lammas Night\", from pagan tradition surrounding the first of August and the Divine Right of Kings.\n\nBULLET::::- Harvest Home\nBULLET::::- Leyton Marshes\nBULLET::::- Ould Lammas Fair\n\nBULLET::::- Pretanic World—Pre-Christian Holidays & Pre-Christian Traditions of Christian Holidays from Britain and Ireland\nBULLET::::- Observations on Popular Antiquities\n"}
{"id": "18182", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18182", "title": "Longmeadow, Massachusetts", "text": "Longmeadow, Massachusetts\n\nLongmeadow is a town in Hampden County, Massachusetts, in the United States. The population was 15,784 at the 2010 census.\n\nLongmeadow was first settled in 1644, and officially incorporated October 17, 1783. The town was originally farmland within the limits of Springfield. It remained relatively pastoral until the street railway was built , when the population tripled over a fifteen-year period. After Interstate 91 was built in the wetlands on the west side of town, population tripled again between 1960 and 1975.\n\nDuring the 19th and early 20th centuries, Longmeadow was best known as the site from which Longmeadow brownstone was mined. Several famous American buildings, including Princeton University's Neo-Gothic library, are made of Longmeadow brownstone. In 1894, the more populous and industrialized \"East Village\" portion of the town containing the brownstone quarries split off to become East Longmeadow.\n\nDesigned by famed golf course architect Donald Ross in 1922, the Longmeadow Country Club was the proving ground for golf equipment designed and manufactured by the Spalding Co. of Chicopee. Bobby Jones, a consultant for Spalding, was a member in standing at LCC and made a number of his instructional films at LCC in the 1930s.\n\nLongmeadow is located in the western part of the state, just south of the city of Springfield, and is bordered on the west by the Connecticut River and Agawam, to the east by East Longmeadow, and to the south by Enfield, Connecticut. It extends approximately north to south and east to west. It is approximately north of Hartford.\n\nMore than 30% of the town is permanent open space. Conservation areas on the west side of town include more than bordering the Connecticut River. The area supports a wide range of wildlife including deer, beaver, wild turkeys, foxes, and eagles. Springfield's Forest Park, which at is the largest city park in New England, forms the northern border of the town. The private Twin Hills and public Franconia golf courses, plus town athletic fields and conservation land, cover nearly 2/3 of the eastern border of the town. Two large public parks, the Longmeadow Country Club, and three conservation areas account for the bulk of the remaining formal open space. Almost 20% of the houses in town are in proximity to a \"dingle\", a tree-lined steep-sided sandy ravine with a wetland at the bottom that provides a privacy barrier between yards.\n\nLongmeadow has a town common, commonly referred to as \"The Green\", located along U.S. Route 5 on the west side of town. It is about long. Roughly 100 houses date back before 1900, most of which are in the historic district, are located near the town green. Longmeadow’s Town Green is a historic district on the National Register of Historic Places, and it is surrounded by a number of buildings dating back to the 18th and 19th centuries. Longmeadow is unique as the town green has maintained its residential purpose and has resisted commercial pressure. The current function as listed by the National Register of Historic Places is domestic and landscape. The current sub-function as listed by the National Register of Historic Places is park and single dwelling. Houses along the photogenic main street (Longmeadow Street) are set back farther than in most towns of similar residential density. The town has three recently remodeled elementary schools, two secondary schools, and one high school. The commercial center of town is an area called \"The Longmeadow Shops\", including restaurants and clothing stores.\n\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which are land and , or 5.34%, are water.\n\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 15,633 people, 5,734 households, and 4,432 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 5,879 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 95.42% White, 0.69% African American, 0.05% Native American, 2.90% Asian, 0.06% Pacific Islander, 0.26% from other races, and 0.62% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.09% of the population.\n\nThere were 5,734 households out of which 37.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 69.1% were married couples living together, 6.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 22.7% were non-families. 20.4% of all households were made up of individuals and 14.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.66 and the average family size was 3.09.\n\nIn the town, the population was spread out with 26.8% under the age of 18, 4.6% from 18 to 24, 22.0% from 25 to 44, 28.7% from 45 to 64, and 17.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 43 years. For every 100 females, there were 87.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 82.0 males.\n\nThe median income for a household in the town was $109,586, and the median income for a family was $115,578. Males had a median income of $68,238 versus $40,890 for females. The per capita income for the town was $48,949. About 1.0% of families and 2.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 0.3% of those under age 18 and 8.3% of those age 65 or over.\n\nThe town is chartered as an Open Town Meeting form of government. The town government also consists of a Select Board with five members, elected by the town. The public school system is governed by the School Committee. The School Committee is made up of seven voting members elected by the town, the superintendent of schools, two assistant-superintendents, a secretary, and a student representative.\n\nThe Longmeadow public school system operates six schools. Blueberry Hill School, Center School, and Wolf Swamp Road School are K−5 elementary schools. Williams Middle School and Glenbrook Middle School serve grades 6–8. Longmeadow High School serves all students in the town between grades 9 and 12. The town's elementary schools have been recently rebuilt, statements of interest for improvements to the two middle schools and Longmeadow High School were filed with the Massachusetts School Building Authority in 2007. In 2010, the voters of Longmeadow approved a 2.5% budget override to support the construction of a new $78 million high school. The town received an estimated $34 million in state funds to be used towards the new construction The new High School was completed and opened to students on February 26, 2013. After students and faculty had moved into the new school, the demolition of the old school was begun. The demolition was completed by June 2013. The school had its grand opening in September 2013 with both the brand new school and renovated business & administration wing open.\n\nLongmeadow also hosts two private parochial schools, the Lubavitcher Yeshiva Academy (LYA) and St. Mary's Academy. LYA was established in 1946 in response to the Greater Springfield Jewish community's need for a quality Jewish day school. In 1999, LYA became the first Jewish day school to be accredited by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges (NEASC). The more than 90 students that the school serves each year from across the spectrum of Jewish life includes orthodox, conservative, reform and unaffiliated families. St. Mary's School, located behind St. Mary's Church, serves Catholic students grades Pre-K through Grade 8.\n\nApproximately 50% of the students at Longmeadow High School participate in the music program. The choruses have won gold medals at the MICCA competition. The jazz ensemble has won numerous gold medals as well, but no longer competes. The wind ensemble and symphony orchestra have had the honor of performing in Indianapolis, Boston (Boston Symphony Hall), and New York (Carnegie Hall). In 2010, Longmeadow was awarded The American Prize in Orchestral Performance. The music program's crowning achievement has been receiving three national Grammy Awards based on the high level of excellence maintained throughout all groups in the music program.\n\nLongmeadow also contains the 46-acre primary campus for Bay Path University, a private undergraduate and graduate institution.\n\nBULLET::::- B.S., Duchess of Longmeadow\nBULLET::::- Ian Soares, Film Actor (Hulu, Gatehouse Theater)\nBULLET::::- Terri Alden, nurse\nBULLET::::- Barry Almeida, professional hockey player.\nBULLET::::- Mary Ann Booth, microscopist\nBULLET::::- Craig E. Campbell, Alaska's lieutenant governor and retired Alaska National Guard lieutenant general\nBULLET::::- John Chapman (Johnny Appleseed), pioneer nurseryman who introduced apple trees to large parts of Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois\nBULLET::::- J. H. Colton, leading 19th Century cartographer\nBULLET::::- John Deluca, actor (Butchy in \"Teen Beach Movie\")\nBULLET::::- Damien Fahey, MTV VJ and host of \"Total Request Live\"\nBULLET::::- Meghann Fahy, Sutton on Freeform's \"The Bold Type\", \"One Life to Live\" character Hannah, Natalie on Broadway's \"Next to Normal\"\nBULLET::::- Jonathan Green, British author and journalist\nBULLET::::- Jay Heaps, former player and manager for New England Revolution of Major League Soccer\nBULLET::::- Nathan Cooley Keep, pioneer in field of dentistry, founding dean of Harvard School of Dental Medicine\nBULLET::::- Andrew Lam, author and retinal surgeon\nBULLET::::- Eric Lesser, Massachusetts State Senator\nBULLET::::- Aaron Lewis, guitarist and vocalist for band Staind\nBULLET::::- Erika Leigh (Belezarian), American cable news broadcaster, KSFY News, Spectrum News\nBULLET::::- Chirlane McCray, African-American writer and activist, wife of NYC mayor Bill de Blasio\nBULLET::::- Bridget Moynahan, model and actress, star of films and TV series \"Blue Bloods\"\nBULLET::::- Joe Philbin, NFL coach, former head coach of Miami Dolphins\nBULLET::::- Joey Santiago, lead guitarist for influential alternative rock band Pixies\nBULLET::::- Anita Shreve, award-winning writer\nBULLET::::- Brynn Cartelli, winner of the 14th season of The Voice\nBULLET::::- Erinn Bartlett, actress (\"Deep Blue Sea\", \"The In Crowd\")\nThomas Herrala - Head Coach of nationally ranked New Trier Township High School Lacrosse in Winnekta, IL.(7 state titles as head coach; 12 state titles overall; 200 wins as head coach)\n\nBULLET::::- Town of Longmeadow official website\n"}
{"id": "18183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18183", "title": "Relative direction", "text": "Relative direction\n\nThe most common relative directions are left, right, forward(s), backward(s), up, and down. No absolute direction corresponds to any of the relative directions. This is a consequence of the translational invariance of the laws of physics: nature, loosely speaking, behaves the same no matter what direction one moves. As demonstrated by the Michelson-Morley null result, there is no absolute inertial frame of reference. There are definite relationships between the relative directions, however. left and right, forward and backward, and up and down are three pairs of complementary directions, each pair orthogonal to both of the others. Relative directions are also known as egocentric coordinates.\n\nSince definitions of left and right based on the geometry of the natural environment are unwieldy, in practice, the meaning of relative direction words is conveyed through tradition, acculturation, education, and direct reference. One common definition of up and down uses gravity and the planet Earth as a frame of reference. Since there is a very noticeable force of gravity acting between the Earth and any other nearby object, down is defined as that direction which an object moves in reference to the Earth when the object is allowed to fall freely. Up is then defined as the opposite direction of down. Another common definition uses a human body, standing upright, as a frame of reference. In that case, up is defined as the direction from feet to head, perpendicular to the surface of the Earth. In most cases, up is a directionally oriented position generally opposite to that of the pull of gravity.\nIn situations where a common frame of reference is needed, it is most common to use an egocentric view. A simple example is road signage. Another example is stage blocking, where \"stage left\" \"stage right\" \"stage up\" and \"stage down\" are, by convention, defined from the actor's point of view, but up and down stage do not follow gravitational conventions of up and down. An example of a non-egocentric view is page layout, where the relative terms \"upper half\" \"left margin,\" etc. are defined in terms of the observer but employed in reverse for a type compositor, returning to an egocentric view. In medicine and science, where precise definitions are crucial, relative directions (left and right) are the sides of the organism, not those of the observer. The same is true in heraldry, where left and right in a coat of arms is treated as if the shield were being held by the armiger. To avoid confusion, Latin terminology is employed: \"dexter\" and \"sinister\" for right and left. Proper right and proper left are terms mainly used to describe images, and overcome the potential confusion that a figure's right or \"proper right\" hand is on the left hand as the viewer of a frontal image sees it.\n\nForward and backward may be defined by referring to an object's or person's motion. Forward is defined as the direction in which the object is moving. Backward is then defined as the opposite direction to forward. Alternatively, 'forward' may be the direction pointed by the observer's nose, defining 'backward' as the direction from the nose to the sagittal border in the observer's skull. With respect to a ship 'forward' would indicate the relative position of any object lying in the direction the ship is pointing. For symmetrical objects, it is also necessary to define forward and backward in terms of expected direction. Many mass transit trains are built symmetrically with paired control booths, and definitions of forward, backward, left, and right are temporary.\n\nGiven significant distance from the magnetic poles, one can figure which hand is which using a magnetic compass and the sun. Facing the sun, before noon, the north pointer of the compass points to the \"left\" hand. After noon, it points to the \"right\".\n\nThe right-hand rule is one common way to relate the three principal directions. For many years a fundamental question in physics was whether a left-hand rule would be equivalent. Many natural structures, including human bodies, follow a certain \"handedness\", but it was widely assumed that nature did not distinguish the two possibilities. This changed with the discovery of parity violations in particle physics. If a sample of cobalt-60 atoms is magnetized so that they spin counterclockwise around some axis, the beta radiation resulting from their nuclear decay will be preferentially directed opposite that axis. Since counter-clockwise may be defined in terms of up, forward, and right, this experiment unambiguously differentiates left from right using only natural elements: if they were reversed, or the atoms spun clockwise, the radiation would follow the spin axis instead of being opposite to it.\n\nBow, stern, port, and starboard, fore and aft are nautical terms that convey an impersonal relative direction in the context of the moving frame of persons aboard a ship. The need for impersonal terms is most clearly seen in a rowing shell where the majority of the crew face aft (\"backwards\"), hence the oars to their right are actually on the port side of the boat. Rowers eschew the terms left, right, port and starboard in favor of stroke-side and bow-side. The usage derives from the tradition of having the stroke (the rower closest to the stern of the boat) oar on the port side of the boat.\n\nMost human cultures use relative directions for reference, but there are exceptions. Australian Aboriginal peoples like the Guugu Yimithirr, Kaiadilt and Thaayorre have no words denoting the egocentric directions in their language; instead, they exclusively refer to cardinal directions, even when describing small-scale spaces. For instance, if they wanted someone to move over on the car seat to make room, they might say \"move a bit to the east\". To tell someone where exactly they left something in their house, they might say, \"I left it on the southern edge of the western table.\" Or they might warn a person to \"look out for that big ant just north of your foot\". Other peoples \"from Polynesia to Mexico and from Namibia to Bali\" similarly have predominantly \"geographic languages\". American Sign Language makes heavy use of geographical direction through absolute orientation.\n\nLeft-right discrimination (LRD) refers to a person's ability to differentiate between left and right. The inability to accurately differentiate between left and right is known as left-right confusion (LRC). According to research performed by John R. Clarke of Drexel University, LRC affects approximately 15% of the population. People who suffer from LRC can typically perform daily navigational tasks, such as driving according to road signs or following a map, but may have difficulty performing actions that require a precise understanding of directional commands, such as ballroom dancing.\n\nData regarding LRC prevalence is primarily based on behavioral studies, self-assessments, and surveys. Gormley and Brydges found that in a group of 800 adults, 17% of women and 9% of men reported difficulty differentiating between left and right. Such studies suggest that women are more prone to LRC than men, with women reporting higher rates of LRC in both accuracy and speed of response.\n\nThe Bergen Left-Right Discrimination (BLRD) test is designed to measure individual performance in LRD accuracy. However, this test has been criticized for incorporating tasks that require the use of additional strategies, such as mental rotation (MR). Because men have been shown to consistently outperform women in MR tasks, tests involving the use of this particular strategy may present alternative cognitive demands and lead to inaccurate assessment of LRD performance. An extended version of the BLRD test was designed to allow for differential evaluation of LRD and MR abilities, in which subtests were created with either high or low demands on mental rotation. Results from these studies did not find sex differences in LRD performance when mental rotation demands were low. Another study found that sex differences in left-right discrimination existed in terms of self-reported difficulty, but not in actual tested ability.\n\nAlternatively, studies focused on LRD as a phenomenon distinct from MR concluded that there are sex differences present in LRD. Scientists controlled for MR demands, potential menstrual cycle effects, and other hormone fluctuations, and determined that the neurocognitive mechanisms that support LRD are different for men and women. This research revealed that inferior parietal and right angular gyrus activation were correlated with LRD performance in both men and women. Women also demonstrated increased prefrontal activation, but did not exhibit greater bilateral activation. Additionally, no correlation was found between LRD accuracy and brain activation, or between brain activation and reaction time, for either sex. These results indicate that there are sex differences in the neurocognitive mechanisms underlying LRD performance; however, findings did not suggest that women are more prone to LRC than men.\n\nHumans are constantly making decisions about spatial relations; however, some spatial relations, such as left-right, are commonly confused, while other spatial relations, such as up-down, above-below, and front-back, are seldom, if ever, mistaken. The ability to categorize and compartmentalize space is an essential tool for navigating this 3D world; an ability shown to develop in early infancy. Infant ability to visually match above-below and left-right relations appears to diminish in early toddlerhood, as language acquisition may complicate verbal labeling. Children learn to verbally discriminate between above-below relations around the age of three, and learn left-right linguistic labels between the ages of six and seven; however, these classifications may only exist in the linguistic context. In other words, children may learn the terms for left and right without having developed a cognitive representation to allow for the accurate application of such spatial distinctions.\n\nResearch seeks to explain the neural activity associated with left-right discrimination, attempting to identify differences in the encoding, consolidation, and retrieval of left-right versus above-below relations. One study found that neural activity patterns for left-right and above-below distinctions are represented differently in the brain, leading to the theory that these spatial judgements are supported by separate cognitive mechanisms. Experiments used magnetoencephalography (MEG) to record neural activity during a computerized nonverbal task, examining left-right and above-below differences in encoding and working memory. Results showed differences in neural activity patterns in the right cerebellum, right superior temporal gyrus, and left temporoparietal junction during the encoding phase, and indicated differential neural activity in the inferior parietal, right superior temporal, and right cerebellum regions in the working memory tests.\n\nAlthough some individuals may struggle with LRD more than others, discriminating between left and right in the face of distraction has been shown to impair even the most proficient individual’s ability to accurately differentiate between the two. This issue is of particular importance to medical students, clinicians and health care professionals, where distraction in the workplace and LRD inaccuracy can lead to severe consequences, including laterality errors and wrong-side surgeries. Laterality errors in the field of aviation may also lead to equally devastating results, for example, causing a major airline crash.\n\nDistraction has a significant impact on LRD accuracy, and the type of distraction can alter the magnitude of these effects. For example, cognitive distraction, which occurs when an individual is not directly focused on the task at hand, has a more profound effect on LRD performance than auditory distraction, such as the presence of continuous ambient noise. Additionally, in the field of health care, it has been noted that mental rotation is often involved in making left-right distinctions, such as when a medical practitioner is facing their patient and must adjust for the opposite left-right relations.\n\nBULLET::::- Anatomical terms of location\nBULLET::::- Cardinal direction\nBULLET::::- Cerebral hemisphere\nBULLET::::- Clock position\nBULLET::::- Dexter and sinister\nBULLET::::- Horizontal direction\nBULLET::::- Dextral and sinistral\nBULLET::::- Handedness\nBULLET::::- List of international common standards\nBULLET::::- Port and starboard\nBULLET::::- Rotation\nBULLET::::- Slant direction\nBULLET::::- Windward and leeward\n"}
{"id": "18184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18184", "title": "Lizard", "text": "Lizard\n\nLizards are a widespread group of squamate reptiles, with over 6,000 species, ranging across all continents except Antarctica, as well as most oceanic island chains. The group is paraphyletic as it excludes the snakes and Amphisbaenia; some lizards are more closely related to these two excluded groups than they are to other lizards. Lizards range in size from chameleons and geckos a few centimeters long to the 3 meter long Komodo dragon.\n\nMost lizards are quadrupedal, running with a strong side-to-side motion. Others are legless, and have long snake-like bodies. Some such as the forest-dwelling \"Draco\" lizards are able to glide. They are often territorial, the males fighting off other males and signalling, often with brightly colours, to attract mates and to intimidate rivals. Lizards are mainly carnivorous, often being sit-and-wait predators; many smaller species eat insects, while the Komodo eats mammals as big as water buffalo.\n\nLizards make use of a variety of antipredator adaptations, including venom, camouflage, reflex bleeding, and the ability to sacrifice and regrow their tails.\n\nThe adult length of species within the suborder ranges from a few centimeters for chameleons such as \"Brookesia micra\" and geckos such as \"Sphaerodactylus ariasae\" to nearly in the case of the largest living varanid lizard, the Komodo dragon. Most lizards are fairly small animals.\n\nLizards typically have rounded torsos, elevated heads on short necks, four limbs and long tails. Some are legless, including snakes. Lizards and snakes share a movable quadrate bone, distinguishing them from the rhynchocephalians, which have more rigid diapsid skulls . Some lizards such as chameleons have prehensile tails, assisting them in climbing among vegetation.\n\nAs in other reptiles, the skin of lizards is covered in overlapping scales made of keratin. This provides protection from the environment and reduces water loss through evaporation. This adaptation enables lizards to thrive in some of the driest deserts on earth. The skin is tough and leathery, and is shed (sloughed) as the animal grows. Unlike snakes which shed the skin in a single piece, lizards slough their skin in several pieces. The scales may be modified into spines for display or protection, and some species have bone osteoderms underneath the scales.\n\nThe dentitions of lizards reflect their wide range of diets, including carnivorous, insectivorous, omnivorous, herbivorous, nectivorous, and molluscivorous. Species typically have uniform teeth suited to their diet, but several species have variable teeth, such as cutting teeth in the front of the jaws and crushing teeth in the rear. Most species are pleurodont, though agamids and chameleons are acrodont.\n\nThe tongue can be extended outside the mouth, and is often long. In the beaded lizards, whiptails and monitor lizards, the tongue is forked and used mainly or exclusively to sense the environment, continually flicking out to sample the environment, and back to transfer molecules to the vomeronasal organ responsible for chemosensation, analogous to but different from smell or taste. In geckos, the tongue is used to lick the eyes clean: they have no eyelids. Chameleons have very long sticky tongues which can be extended rapidly to catch their insect prey.\n\nThree lineages, the geckos, anoles, and chameleons, have modified the scales under their toes to form adhesive pads, highly prominent in the first two groups. The pads are composed of millions of tiny setae (hair-like structures) which fit closely to the substrate to adhere using van der Waals forces; no liquid adhesive is needed. In addition, the toes of chameleons are divided into two opposed groups on each foot (zygodactyly), enabling them to perch on branches as birds do.\n\nAside from legless lizards, most lizards are quadrupedal and move using gaits with alternating movement of the right and left limbs with substantial body bending. This body bending prevents significant respiration during movement, limiting their endurance, in a mechanism called Carrier's constraint. Several species can run bipedally, and a few can prop themselves up on their hindlimbs and tail while stationary. Several small species such as those in the genus \"Draco\" can glide: some can attain a distance of , losing in height. Some species, like geckos and chameleons, adhere to vertical surfaces including glass and ceilings. Some species, like the common basilisk, can run across water.\n\nLizards make use of their senses of sight, touch, olfaction and hearing like other vertebrates. The balance of these varies with the habitat of different species; for instance, skinks that live largely covered by loose soil rely heavily on olfaction and touch, while geckos depend largely on acute vision for their ability to hunt and to evaluate the distance to their prey before striking. Monitor lizards have acute vision, hearing, and olfactory senses. Some lizards make unusual use of their sense organs: chameleons can steer their eyes in different directions, sometimes providing non-overlapping fields of view, such as forwards and backwards at once. Lizards lack external ears, having instead a circular opening in which the tympanic membrane (eardrum) can be seen. Many species rely on hearing for early warning of predators, and flee at the slightest sound.\n\nAs in snakes and many mammals, all lizards have a specialised olfactory system, the vomeronasal organ, used to detect pheromones. Monitor lizards transfer scent from the tip of their tongue to the organ; the tongue is used only for this information-gathering purpose, and is not involved in manipulating food.\n\nSome lizards, particularly iguanas, have retained a photosensory organ on the top of their heads called the parietal eye, a basal (\"primitive\") feature also present in the tuatara. This \"eye\" has only a rudimentary retina and lens and cannot form images, but is sensitive to changes in light and dark and can detect movement. This helps them detect predators stalking it from above.\n\nUntil 2006 it was thought that among lizards, only the Gila monster and the Mexican beaded lizard were venomous. However, several species of monitor lizards, including the Komodo dragon, produce powerful venom in their oral glands. Lace monitor venom, for instance, causes swift loss of consciousness and extensive bleeding through its pharmacological effects, both lowering blood pressure and preventing blood clotting. Nine classes of toxin known from snakes are produced by lizards. The range of actions provides the potential for new medicinal drugs based on lizard venom proteins.\n\nGenes associated with venom toxins have been found in the salivary glands on a wide range of lizards, including species traditionally thought of as non-venomous, such as iguanas and bearded dragons. This suggests that these genes evolved in the common ancestor of lizards and snakes, some 200 million years ago (forming a single clade, the Toxicofera). However, most of these putative venom genes were \"housekeeping genes\" found in all cells and tissues, including skin and cloacal scent glands. The genes in question may thus be evolutionary precursors of venom genes.\n\nRecent studies (2013 and 2014) on the lung anatomy of the savannah monitor and green iguana found them to have a unidirectional airflow system, which involves the air moving in a loop through the lungs when breathing. This was previously thought to only exist in the archosaurs (crocodilians and birds). This may be evidence that unidirectional airflow is an ancestral trait in diapsids.\n\nAs with all amniotes, lizards rely on internal fertilisation and copulation involves the male inserting one of his hemipenes into the female's cloaca. The majority of species are oviparous (egg laying). The female deposits the eggs in a protective structure like a nest or crevice or simply on the ground. Depending on the species, clutch size can vary from 4–5 percent of the females body weight to 40–50 percent and clutches range from one or a few large eggs to dozens of small ones. \n\nIn most lizards, the eggs have leathery shells to allow for the exchange of water, although more arid-living species have calcified shells to retain water. Inside the eggs, the embryos use nutrients from the yolk. Parental care is uncommon and the female usually abandons the eggs after laying them. Brooding and protection of eggs does occur in some species. The female prairie skink uses respiratory water loss to maintain the humidity of the eggs which facilitates embryonic development. In lace monitors, the young hatch close to 300 days, and the female returns to help them escape the termite mound were the eggs were laid.\n\nAround 20 percent of lizard species reproduce via viviparity (live birth). This is particularly common in Anguimorphs. Viviparous species give birth to relatively developed young which look like miniature adults. Embryos are nourished via a placenta-like structure. A minority of lizards have parthenogenesis (reproduction from unfertilised eggs). These species consist of all females who reproduce asexually with no need for males. This is known in occur in various species of whiptail lizards. Parthenogenesis was also recorded in species that normally reproduce sexually. A captive female Komodo dragon produced a clutch of eggs, despite being separated from males for over two years.\n\nSex determination in lizards can be temperature-dependent. The temperature of the eggs' micro-environment can determine the sex of the hatched young: low temperature incubation produces more females while higher temperatures produce more males. However, some lizards have sex chromosomes and both male heterogamety (XY and XXY) and female heterogamety (ZW) occur.\n\nThe majority of lizard species are active during the day, though some are active at night, notably geckos. As ectotherms, lizards have a limited ability to regulate their body temperature, and must seek out and bask in sunlight to gain enough heat to become fully active.\n\nMost social interactions among lizards are between breeding individuals. Territoriality is common and is correlated with species that use sit-and-wait hunting strategies. Males establish and maintain territories that contain resources which attract females and which they defend from other males. Important resources include basking, feeding, and nesting sites as well as refuges from predators. The habitat of a species affects the structure of territories, for example, rock lizards have territories atop rocky outcrops. Some species may aggregate in groups, enhancing vigilance and lessening the risk of predation for individuals, particularly for juveniles. Agonistic behaviour typically occurs between sexually mature males over territory or mates and may involve displays, posturing, chasing, grappling and biting.\n\nLizards signal both to attract mates and to intimidate rivals. Visual displays include body postures and inflation, push-ups, bright colours, mouth gapings and tail waggings. Male anoles and iguanas have dewlaps or skin flaps which come in various sizes, colours and patterns and the expansion of the dewlap as well as head-bobs and body movements add to the visual signals. Some species have deep blue dewlaps and communicate with ultraviolet signals. Blue-tongued skinks will flash their tongues as a threat display. Chameleons are known to change their complex colour patterns when communicating, particularly during agonistic encounters. They tend to show brighter colours when displaying aggression and darker colours when they submit or \"give up\".\n\nSeveral gecko species are brightly coloured; some species tilt their bodies to display their coloration. In certain species, brightly coloured males turn dull when not in the presence of rivals or females. While it is usually males that display, in some species females also use such communication. In the bronze anole, head-bobs are a common form of communication among females, the speed and frequency varying with age and territorial status. Chemical cues or pheromones are also important in communication. Males typically direct signals at rivals, while females direct them at potential mates. Lizards may be able to recognise individuals of the same species by their scent.\n\nAcoustic communication is less common in lizards. Hissing, a typical reptilian sound, is mostly produced by larger species as part of a threat display, accompanying gaping jaws. Some groups, particularly geckos, snake-lizards, and some iguanids, can produce more complex sounds and vocal apparatuses have independently evolved in different groups. These sounds are used for courtship, territorial defense and in distress, and include clicks, squeaks, barks and growls. The mating call of the male tokay gecko is heard as \"tokay-tokay!\". Tactile communication involves individuals rubbing against each other, either in courtship or in aggression. Some chameleon species communicate with one another by vibrating the substrate that they are standing on, such as a tree branch or leaf.\n\nLizards are found worldwide, excluding the far north and Antarctica, and some islands. They can be found in elevations from sea level to . They prefer warmer, tropical climates but are adaptable and can live in all but the most extreme environments. Lizards also exploit a number of habitats; most primarily live on the ground, but others may live in rocks, on trees, underground and even in water. The marine iguana is adapted for life in the sea.\n\nThe majority of lizard species are predatory and the most common prey items are small, terrestrial invertebrates, particularly insects. Many species are sit-and-wait predators though others may be more active foragers. Chameleons prey on numerous insect species, such as beetles, grasshoppers and winged termites as well as spiders. They rely on persistence and ambush to capture these prey. An individual perches on a branch and stays perfectly still, with only its eyes moving. When an insect lands, the chameleon focuses its eyes on the target and slowly moves towards it before projecting its long sticky tongue which, when hauled back, brings the attach prey with it. Geckos feed on crickets, beetles, termites and moths.\n\nTermites are an important part of the diets of some species of Autarchoglossa, since, as social insects, they can be found in large numbers in one spot. Ants may form a prominent part of the diet of some lizards, particularly among the lacertas. Horned lizards are also well known for specializing on ants. Due to their small size and indigestible chitin, ants must be consumed in large amounts, and ant-eating lizards have larger stomachs than even herbivorous ones. Species of skink and alligator lizards eat snails and their power jaws and molar-like teeth are adapted for breaking the shells.\n\nLarger species, such as monitor lizards, can feed on larger prey including fish, frogs, birds, mammals and other reptiles. Prey may be swallowed whole and torn into smaller pieces. Both bird and reptile eggs may also be consumed as well. Gila monsters and beaded lizards climb trees to reach both the eggs and young of birds. Despite being venomous, these species rely on their strong jaws to kill prey. Mammalian prey typically consists of rodents and leporids; the Komodo dragon can kill prey as large as water buffalo. Dragons are prolific scavengers, and a single decaying carcass can attract several from away. A dragon is capable of consuming a carcass in 17 minutes.\n\nAround 2 percent of lizard species, including many iguanids, are herbivores. Adults of these species eat plant parts like flowers, leaves, stems and fruit, while juveniles eat more insects. Plant parts can be hard to digest, and, as they get closer to adulthood, juvenile iguanas eat faeces from adults to acquire the microflora necessary for their transition to a plant-based diet. Perhaps the most herbivorous species is the marine iguana which dives to forage for algae, kelp and other marine plants. Some non-herbivorous species supplement their insect diet with fruit, which is easily digested.\n\nLizards have a variety of antipredator adaptations, including running and climbing, venom, camouflage, tail autotomy, and reflex bleeding.\n\nLizards exploit a variety of different camouflage methods. Many lizards are disruptively patterned. In some species, such as Aegean wall lizards, individuals vary in colour, and select rocks which best match their own colour to minimise the risk of being detected by predators. The Moorish gecko is able to change colour for camouflage: when a light-coloured gecko is placed on a dark surface, it darkens within an hour to match the environment. The chameleons in general use their ability to change their coloration for signalling rather than camouflage, but some species such as Smith's dwarf chameleon do use active colour change for camouflage purposes.\nThe flat-tail horned lizard's body is coloured like its desert background, and is flattened and fringed with white scales to minimise its shadow.\n\nMany lizards, including geckos and skinks, are capable of shedding their tails (autotomy). The detached tail, sometimes brilliantly coloured, continues to writhe after detaching, distracting the predator's attention from the fleeing prey. Lizards partially regenerate their tails over a period of weeks. Some 326 genes are involved in regenerating lizard tails. The fish-scale gecko \"Geckolepis megalepis \" sheds patches of skin and scales if grabbed.\n\nMany lizards attempt to escape from danger by running to a place of safety; for example, wall lizards can run up walls and hide in holes or cracks. Horned lizards adopt differing defences for specific predators. They may play dead to deceive a predator that has caught them; attempt to outrun the rattlesnake, which does not pursue prey; but stay still, relying on their cryptic coloration, for \"Masticophis\" whip snakes which can catch even swift prey. If caught, some species such as the greater short-horned lizard puff themselves up, making their bodies hard for a narrow-mouthed predator like a whip snake to swallow. Finally, horned lizards can squirt blood at cat and dog predators from a pouch beneath its eyes, to a distance of about ; the blood tastes foul to these attackers.\n\nThe earliest known fossil remains of a lizard belong to the iguanian species \"Tikiguania estesi\", found in the Tiki Formation of India, which dates to the Carnian stage of the Triassic period, about 220 million years ago. However, doubt has been raised over the age of \"Tikiguania\" because it is almost indistinguishable from modern agamid lizards. The \"Tikiguania\" remains may instead be late Tertiary or Quaternary in age, having been washed into much older Triassic sediments. Lizards are most closely related to the Rhynchocephalia, which appeared in the Late Triassic, so the earliest lizards probably appeared at that time. Mitochondrial phylogenetics suggest that the first lizards evolved in the late Permian. It had been thought on the basis of morphological data that iguanid lizards diverged from other squamates very early on, but molecular evidence contradicts this.\n\nMosasaurs probably evolved from an extinct group of aquatic lizards known as aigialosaurs in the Early Cretaceous. Dolichosauridae is a family of Late Cretaceous aquatic varanoid lizards closely related to the mosasaurs.\n\nThe position of the lizards and other Squamata among the reptiles was studied using fossil evidence by Rainer Schoch and Hans-Dieter Sues in 2015. Lizards form about 60% of the extant non-avian reptiles.\nBoth the snakes and the Amphisbaenia (worm lizards) are clades deep within the Squamata (the smallest clade that contains all the lizards), so \"lizard\" is paraphyletic.\nThe cladogram is based on genomic analysis by Wiens and colleagues in 2012 and 2016. Excluded taxa are shown in upper case on the cladogram.\n\nIn the 13th century, lizards were recognized in Europe as part of a broad category of \"reptiles\" that consisted of a miscellany of egg-laying creatures, including \"snakes, various fantastic monsters, […], assorted amphibians, and worms\", as recorded by Vincent of Beauvais in his \"Mirror of Nature\". The seventeenth century saw changes in this loose description. The name Sauria was coined by James Macartney (1802); it was the Latinisation of the French name \"Sauriens\", coined by Alexandre Brongniart (1800) for an order of reptiles in the classification proposed by the author, containing lizards and crocodilians, later discovered not to be each other's closest relatives. Later authors used the term \"Sauria\" in a more restricted sense, i.e. as a synonym of Lacertilia, a suborder of Squamata that includes all lizards but excludes snakes. This classification is rarely used today because Sauria so-defined is a paraphyletic group. It was defined as a clade by Jacques Gauthier, Arnold G. Kluge and Timothy Rowe (1988) as the group containing the most recent common ancestor of archosaurs and lepidosaurs (the groups containing crocodiles and lizards, as per Mcartney's original definition) and all its descendants. A different definition was formulated by Michael deBraga and Olivier Rieppel (1997), who defined Sauria as the clade containing the most recent common ancestor of Choristodera, Archosauromorpha, Lepidosauromorpha and all their descendants. However, these uses have not gained wide acceptance among specialists.\nSuborder Lacertilia (Sauria) – (lizards) \nBULLET::::- Family †Bavarisauridae\nBULLET::::- Family †Eichstaettisauridae\nBULLET::::- Infraorder Iguania\nBULLET::::- Family †Arretosauridae\nBULLET::::- Family †Euposauridae\nBULLET::::- Family Corytophanidae (casquehead lizards)\nBULLET::::- Family Iguanidae (iguanas and spinytail iguanas)\nBULLET::::- Family Phrynosomatidae (earless, spiny, tree, side-blotched and horned lizards)\nBULLET::::- Family Polychrotidae (anoles)\nBULLET::::- Family Leiosauridae (see Polychrotinae)\nBULLET::::- Family Tropiduridae (neotropical ground lizards)\nBULLET::::- Family Liolaemidae (see Tropidurinae)\nBULLET::::- Family Leiocephalidae (see Tropidurinae)\nBULLET::::- Family Crotaphytidae (collared and leopard lizards)\nBULLET::::- Family Opluridae (Madagascar iguanids)\nBULLET::::- Family Hoplocercidae (wood lizards, clubtails)\nBULLET::::- Family †Priscagamidae\nBULLET::::- Family †Isodontosauridae\nBULLET::::- Family Agamidae (agamas, frilled lizards)\nBULLET::::- Family Chamaeleonidae (chameleons)\nBULLET::::- Infraorder Gekkota\nBULLET::::- Family Gekkonidae (geckos)\nBULLET::::- Family Pygopodidae (legless geckos)\nBULLET::::- Family Dibamidae (blind lizards)\nBULLET::::- Infraorder Scincomorpha\nBULLET::::- Family †Paramacellodidae\nBULLET::::- Family †Slavoiidae\nBULLET::::- Family Scincidae (skinks)\nBULLET::::- Family Cordylidae (spinytail lizards)\nBULLET::::- Family Gerrhosauridae (plated lizards)\nBULLET::::- Family Xantusiidae (night lizards)\nBULLET::::- Family Lacertidae (wall lizards or true lizards)\nBULLET::::- Family †Mongolochamopidae\nBULLET::::- Family †Adamisauridae\nBULLET::::- Family Teiidae (tegus and whiptails)\nBULLET::::- Family Gymnophthalmidae (spectacled lizards)\nBULLET::::- Infraorder Diploglossa\nBULLET::::- Family Anguidae (slowworms, glass lizards)\nBULLET::::- Family Anniellidae (American legless lizards)\nBULLET::::- Family Xenosauridae (knob-scaled lizards)\nBULLET::::- Infraorder Platynota (Varanoidea)\nBULLET::::- Family Varanidae (monitor lizards)\nBULLET::::- Family Lanthanotidae (earless monitor lizards)\nBULLET::::- Family Helodermatidae (Gila monsters and beaded lizards)\nBULLET::::- Family †Mosasauridae (marine lizards)\n\nLizards have frequently evolved convergently, with multiple groups independently developing similar morphology and ecological niches. \"Anolis\" ecomorphs have become a model system in evolutionary biology for studying convergence. Limbs have been lost or reduced independently over two dozen times across lizard evolution, including in the Anniellidae, Anguidae, Cordylidae, Dibamidae, Gymnophthalmidae, Pygopodidae, and Scincidae; snakes are just the most famous and species-rich group of Squamata to have followed this path.\n\nMost lizard species are harmless to humans. Only the largest lizard species, the Komodo dragon, which reaches in length and weighs up to , has been known to stalk, attack, and, on occasion, kill humans. An eight-year-old Indonesian boy died from blood loss after an attack in 2007.\n\nNumerous species of lizard are kept as pets, including bearded dragons, iguanas, anoles, and geckos (such as the popular leopard gecko).\n\nLizards appear in myths and folktales around the world. In Australian Aboriginal mythology, Tarrotarro, the lizard god, split the human race into male and female, and gave people the ability to express themselves in art. A lizard king named Mo'o features in Hawaii and other cultures in Polynesia. In the Amazon, the lizard is the king of beasts, while among the Bantu of Africa, the god Unkulunkulu sent a chameleon to tell humans they would live forever, but the chameleon was held up, and another lizard brought a different message, that the time of humanity was limited. A popular legend in Maharashtra tells the tale of how a common Indian monitor, with ropes attached, was used to scale the walls of the fort in the Battle of Sinhagad.\n\nGreen iguanas are eaten in Central America, where they are sometimes referred to as \"chicken of the tree\" after their habit of resting in trees and their supposedly chicken-like taste, while spiny-tailed lizards are eaten in Africa. In North Africa, \"Uromastyx\" species are considered \"dhaab\" or 'fish of the desert' and eaten by nomadic tribes.\n\nLizards such as the Gila monster produce toxins with medical applications. Gila toxin reduces plasma glucose; the substance is now synthesised for use in the anti-diabetes drug exenatide (Byetta). Another toxin from Gila monster saliva has been studied for use as an anti-Alzheimer's drug.\n\nLizards in many cultures share the symbolism of snakes, especially as an emblem of resurrection. This may have derived from their regular moulting. The motif of lizards on Christian candle holders probably alludes to the same symbolism.\nAccording to Jack Tresidder, in Egypt and the Classical world they were beneficial emblems, linked with wisdom. In African, Aboriginal and Melanesian folklore they are linked to cultural heroes or ancestral figures.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18185", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18185", "title": "List of deists", "text": "List of deists\n\nThis is a partial list of people who have been categorized as Deists, the belief in a deity based on natural religion only, or belief in religious truths discovered by people through a process of reasoning, independent of any revelation through scriptures or prophets. They have been selected for their influence on Deism, or for their fame in other areas.\nBULLET::::- Ethan Allen (1738–89), early American revolutionary and guerrilla leader\nBULLET::::- Al-Maʿarri (973–1058), was a blind Arab philosopher, poet and writer, and a controversial rationalist.\nBULLET::::- Luis Walter Alvarez (1911–1988), American experimental physicist and inventor, who spent nearly all of his long professional career on the faculty of the University of California, Berkeley. He was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1968, and took out over 40 patents, some of which led to commercial products.\nBULLET::::- Anaxagoras (c. 500–428 BC), Pre-Socratic Greek philosopher.\nBULLET::::- Neil Armstrong (1930–2012), American NASA astronaut, test pilot, aerospace engineer, university professor, United States Naval Aviator, and the first person to set foot upon the Moon.\nBULLET::::- Ludwig Boltzmann (1844–1906), Austrian physicist famous for his founding contributions in the fields of statistical mechanics and statistical thermodynamics.\nBULLET::::- Napoleon Bonaparte (1769–1821), French military and political leader\nBULLET::::- Max Born (1882–1970), German-British physicist and mathematician who was instrumental in the development of quantum mechanics. He also made contributions to solid-state physics and optics and supervised the work of a number of notable physicists in the 1920s and 30s. Born won the 1954 Nobel Prize in Physics (shared with Walther Bothe).\nBULLET::::- Nick Cave (1957–), Australian musician, songwriter, poet, author and actor.\nBULLET::::- Émilie du Châtelet (1706–1749), French mathematician, physicist, and author during the Age of Enlightenment. Her crowning achievement is considered to be her translation and commentary on Isaac Newton's work Principia Mathematica.\nBULLET::::- Jean le Rond d'Alembert (1717–1783), French mathematician, mechanician, physicist, philosopher, and music theorist. He was also co-editor with Denis Diderot of the Encyclopédie.\nBULLET::::- Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519), Italian Renaissance polymath: painter, sculptor, architect, musician, scientist, mathematician, engineer, inventor, anatomist, geologist, cartographer, botanist, and writer.\nBULLET::::- Paul Davies (1946–), British physicist and science writer and broadcaster\nBULLET::::- Humphry Davy (1778–1829), British chemist and inventor.\nBULLET::::- Rodrigo Duterte (1945-), 16th President of the Philippines.\nBULLET::::- Thomas Alva Edison (1847–1931), American inventor and businessman.\nBULLET::::- Antony Flew (1923–2010), British analytic philosopher and prominent former atheist; during his last years he openly made an allegiance to Deism and stated to have acknowledged the existence of an Intelligent Creator of the universe, the Aristotelian God.\nBULLET::::- Benjamin Franklin (1706–90), American polymath; one of the Founding Fathers of the United States\nBULLET::::- Martin Gardner (1914–2010), American popular mathematics and science writer specializing in recreational mathematics, but with interests encompassing micromagic, stage magic, literature (especially the writings of Lewis Carroll and G. K. Chesterton), philosophy, scientific skepticism, and religion.\nBULLET::::- William Lloyd Garrison (1805–1879), American abolitionist, journalist, and social reformer. He is best known as the editor of the abolitionist newspaper The Liberator, and was one of the founders of the American Anti-Slavery Society, he promoted \"immediate emancipation\" of slaves in the United States.\nBULLET::::- Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855), German mathematician and physical scientist who contributed significantly to many fields, including number theory, statistics, analysis, differential geometry, geodesy, geophysics, electrostatics, astronomy and optics.\nBULLET::::- Brett Gurewitz (1962–), guitarist and songwriter for the American punk rock band Bad Religion\nBULLET::::- Edward Herbert, 1st Baron Herbert of Cherbury (1583–1648), British soldier, diplomat, historian, poet and religious philosopher\nBULLET::::- Harish-Chandra (1923–1983), Indian mathematician, who did fundamental work in representation theory, especially Harmonic analysis on semisimple Lie groups.\nBULLET::::- James Heckman (1944–), American economist who shared the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 2000 for his pioneering work in econometrics and microeconomics.\nBULLET::::- Victor Hugo (1802–85), French writer, artist, activist and statesman\nBULLET::::- William Hogarth (1697–1764), English painter, visual artist and pioneering cartoonist\nBULLET::::- James Hutton (1726–1797), Scottish physician, geologist, naturalist, chemical manufacturer and experimental agriculturalist. His work helped to establish the basis of modern geology. His theories of geology and geologic time, also called deep time, came to be included in theories which were called plutonism and uniformitarianism.\nBULLET::::- Thomas Jefferson (1743–1826), author of the Jefferson Bible, an American Founding Father, the principal author of the U.S. Declaration of Independence, and the third President of the United States.\nBULLET::::- Walter Kohn (1923–2016), Austrian-born American theoretical physicist. He was awarded, with John Pople, the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1998.\nBULLET::::- Harmony Korine (1973–), American film director, producer, screenwriter, and author.\nBULLET::::- Jean-Baptiste Lamarck (1744–1829), French naturalist. He was a soldier, biologist, academic, and an early proponent of the idea that evolution occurred and proceeded in accordance with natural laws.\nBULLET::::- Abraham Lincoln (1809–1865), sixteenth president of the United States of America. He never joined any church and has been described as a \"Christian deist\". As a young man, he was religiously skeptical and sometimes ridiculed revivalists. During his early years, Lincoln enjoyed reading the works of deists such as Thomas Paine and Voltaire. He drafted a pamphlet incorporating such ideas but did not publish it. After charges of hostility to Christianity almost cost him a congressional bid, he kept his unorthodox beliefs private. James Adams labelled Lincoln as a deist. In 1834, he reportedly wrote a manuscript essay challenging Christianity modelled on Paine's book \"The Age of Reason\", which a friend supposedly burned to protect him from ridicule. He seemed to believe in an all-powerful God, who shaped events and, by 1865, was expressing those beliefs in major speeches.\nBULLET::::- Gottfried Leibniz (1646–1716), German mathematician and philosopher. He is best known for developing infinitesimal calculus independently of Isaac Newton, and his mathematical notation has been widely used ever since it was published. He has also been labeled a Christian as well.\nBULLET::::- Gotthold Ephraim Lessing (1729–1781), German writer, philosopher, dramatist, publicist, and art critic\nBULLET::::- John Locke (1632–1704), influential English philosopher in the field of empiricism\nBULLET::::- Mikhail Lomonosov (1711–1765), Russian polymath, scientist and writer, who made important contributions to literature, education, and science. Among his discoveries was the atmosphere of Venus. His spheres of science were natural science, chemistry, physics, mineralogy, history, art, philology, optical devices and others. Lomonosov was also a poet and influenced the formation of the modern Russian literary language.\nBULLET::::- Charles Lyell (1797–1875), British lawyer and the foremost geologist of his day. He is best known as the author of \"Principles of Geology\", which popularised James Hutton's concepts of uniformitarianism.\nBULLET::::- Colin Maclaurin (1698–1746), Scottish mathematician who made important contributions to geometry and algebra. The Maclaurin series, a special case of the Taylor series, are named after him.\nBULLET::::- James Madison (1751–1836), \"Father of the United States Constitution\", one of the Founding Fathers of the United States, and the 4th President of the United States\nBULLET::::- Alfred M. Mayer (1836–1897), American physicist.\nBULLET::::- Dmitri Mendeleev (1834–1907), Russian chemist and inventor. He is credited as being the creator of the first version of the periodic table of elements.\nBULLET::::- Moses Mendelssohn (1729–1796), German philosopher influential in the Jewish Haskalah\nBULLET::::- John Muir (1838–1914), Scottish-born American naturalist, author, and early advocate of preservation of wilderness in the United States.\nBULLET::::- Simon Newcomb (1835–1909), Canadian-American astronomer and mathematician.\nBULLET::::- Thomas Paine (1737–1809), English pamphleteer, revolutionary, radical, inventor, and intellectual, and one of the Founding Fathers of the United States\nBULLET::::- Elihu Palmer (1764–1806), American author and advocate of deism\nBULLET::::- Wolfgang Pauli (1900–1958), Austrian theoretical physicist. In 1945, he received the Nobel Prize in Physics. He is best known for his work on Pauli principle and spin theory.\nBULLET::::- Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914), American philosopher, logician, mathematician, and scientist, sometimes known as \"the father of pragmatism\". He was educated as a chemist and employed as a scientist for 30 years. Today he is appreciated largely for his contributions to logic, mathematics, philosophy, scientific methodology, and semiotics, and for his founding of pragmatism.\nBULLET::::- Max Planck (1858–1947), German physicist, regarded as the founder of quantum theory.\nBULLET::::- José Rizal (1861–1896), a Filipino patriot, philosopher, medical doctor, poet, journalist, novelist, political scientist, painter and polyglot. Considered to be one of the Philippines' most important heroes and martyrs whose writings and execution contributed to the igniting of the Philippine Revolution. He is also considered as Asia's first modern non-violent proponent of freedom.\nBULLET::::- Ernest Rutherford (1871–1937), New Zealand chemist and \"father\" of nuclear physics, who was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1908 \"for his investigations into the disintegration of the elements, and the chemistry of radioactive substances\".\nBULLET::::- Maximilien Robespierre (1758–94), French revolutionary and lawyer\nBULLET::::- Andrei Sakharov (1921–1989), Soviet nuclear physicist, dissident, and human rights activist.\nBULLET::::- Friedrich Schiller (1759–1805), German poet, philosopher, historian, and playwright.\nBULLET::::- Adam Smith (1723–1790), Scottish Philosopher and economist; considered the father of modern economics\nBULLET::::- Lysander Spooner (1808–1887), American anarchist, philosopher and abolitionist\nBULLET::::- Matthew Tindal (1657–1733), controversial English author whose works were influential on Enlightenment thinking\nBULLET::::- Mark Twain (1835–1910), American author and humorist\nBULLET::::- Jules Verne (1828–1905), French author who pioneered the science fiction genre in Europe. He is best known for his novels \"Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea\", \"Journey to the Center of the Earth\", and \"Around the World in Eighty Days\".\nBULLET::::- Voltaire (1694–1778), French Enlightenment writer and philosopher\nBULLET::::- George Washington (1732–1799), one of the Founding Fathers of the United States and the 1st President of the United States\nBULLET::::- James Watt (1736–1819), Scottish inventor and mechanical engineer whose improvements to the Newcomen steam engine were fundamental to the changes brought by the Industrial Revolution in both his native Great Britain and the rest of the world.\nBULLET::::- Johann Adam Weishaupt (1748-1830), Bavarian Philospoher, Cannon Law Professor and Founder of the Illuminati\nBULLET::::- Henrik Wergeland (1808–1845), Norwegian poet and theologist (by self-definition).\nBULLET::::- Hermann Weyl (1885–1955), German mathematician and theoretical physicist.\n\nBULLET::::- List of people by belief\n"}
{"id": "18187", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18187", "title": "Book of Leviticus", "text": "Book of Leviticus\n\nThe Book of Leviticus () is the third book of the Torah and of the Old Testament; scholars generally agree that it developed over a long period of time, reaching its present form during the Persian Period between 538-332 BCE. \n\nMost of its chapters (1–7, 11–27) consist of God's speeches to Moses, which God commands Moses to repeat to the Israelites. This takes place within the story of the Israelites' Exodus after they escaped Egypt and reached Mt. Sinai (Exodus 19:1). The Book of Exodus narrates how Moses led the Israelites in building the Tabernacle (Exodus 35–40) with God's instructions (Exodus 25–31). Then in Leviticus, God tells the Israelites and their priests how to make offerings in the Tabernacle and how to conduct themselves while camped around the holy tent sanctuary. Leviticus takes place during the month or month-and-a-half between the completion of the Tabernacle (Exodus 40:17) and the Israelites' departure from Sinai (Numbers 1:1, 10:11).\n\nThe instructions of Leviticus emphasize ritual, legal and moral practices rather than beliefs. Nevertheless, they reflect the world view of the creation story in Genesis 1 that God wishes to live with humans. The book teaches that faithful performance of the sanctuary rituals can make that possible, so long as the people avoid sin and impurity whenever possible. The rituals, especially the sin and guilt offerings, provide the means to gain forgiveness for sins (Leviticus 4–5) and purification from impurities (Leviticus 11–16) so that God can continue to live in the Tabernacle in the midst of the people.\n\nThe English name Leviticus comes from the Latin \"Leviticus,\" which is in turn from the Greek Greek Λευιτικόν, \"Leuitikon\", referring to the priestly tribe of the Israelites, “Levi.” The Greek expression is in turn a variant of the rabbinic Hebrew \"torat kohanim\", \"law of priests\", as many of its laws relate to priests.\n\nIn Hebrew the book is called \"Vayikra\" (), from the opening of the book, \"va-yikra\" \"And He <nowiki>[</nowiki>God<nowiki>]</nowiki> called.\"\n\n\"(The outlines from commentaries are similar, though not identical; compare those of Wenham, Hartley, Milgrom, and Watts)\n\nI. Laws on sacrifice (1:1–7:38)\nII. Institution of the priesthood (8:1–10:20)\nIII. Uncleanliness and its treatment (11:1–15:33)\nIV. Day of Atonement: purification of the tabernacle from the effects of uncleanliness and sin (ch. 16)\n\nV. Prescriptions for practical holiness (the Holiness Code, chs. 17–26)\nVI. Redemption of votive gifts (ch. 27)\n\nChapters 1–5 describe the various sacrifices from the sacrificers' point of view, although the priests are essential for handling the blood. Chapters 6–7 go over much the same ground, but from the point of view of the priest, who, as the one actually carrying out the sacrifice and dividing the \"portions\", needs to know how to do this. Sacrifices are between God, the priest, and the offerers, although in some cases the entire sacrifice is a single portion to God—i.e., burnt to ashes.\n\nChapters 8–10 describe how Moses consecrates Aaron and his sons as the first priests, the first sacrifices, and God's destruction of two of Aaron's sons for ritual offenses. The purpose is to underline the character of altar priesthood (i.e., those priests with power to offer sacrifices to God) as an Aaronite privilege, and the responsibilities and dangers of their position.\n\nWith sacrifice and priesthood established, chapters 11–15 instruct the lay people on purity (or cleanliness). Eating certain animals produces uncleanliness, as does giving birth; certain skin diseases (but not all) are unclean, as are certain conditions affecting walls and clothing (mildew and similar conditions); and genital discharges, including female menses and male gonorrhea, are unclean. The reasoning behind the food rules are obscure; for the rest the guiding principle seems to be that all these conditions involve a loss of \"life force\", usually but not always blood.\n\nLeviticus 16 concerns the Day of Atonement. This is the only day on which the High Priest is to enter the holiest part of the sanctuary, the holy of holies. He is to sacrifice a bull for the sins of the priests, and a goat for the sins of the laypeople. The priest is to send a second goat into the desert to \"Azazel\", bearing the sins of the whole people. Azazel may be a wilderness-demon, but its identity is mysterious.\n\nChapters 17–26 are the Holiness code. It begins with a prohibition on all slaughter of animals outside the Temple, even for food, and then prohibits a long list of sexual contacts and also child sacrifice. The \"holiness\" injunctions which give the code its name begin with the next section: there are penalties for the worship of Molech, consulting mediums and wizards, cursing one's parents and engaging in unlawful sex. Priests receive instruction on mourning rituals and acceptable bodily defects. The punishment for blasphemy is death, and there is the setting of rules for eating sacrifices; there is an explanation of the calendar, and there are rules for sabbatical and Jubilee years; there are rules for oil lamps and bread in the sanctuary; and there are rules for slavery. The code ends by telling the Israelites they must choose between the law and prosperity on the one hand, or, on the other, horrible punishments, the worst of which will be expulsion from the land.\n\nChapter 27 is a disparate and probably late addition telling about persons and things serving as dedication to the Lord and how one can redeem, instead of fulfill, vows.\n\nThe majority of scholars have concluded that the Pentateuch received its final form during the Persian period (538–332 BC). Nevertheless, Leviticus had a long period of growth before reaching that form.\n\nThe entire composition of the book of Leviticus is Priestly literature. Most scholars see chapters 1–16 (the Priestly code) and chapters 17–26 (the Holiness code) as the work of two related schools, but while the Holiness material employs the same technical terms as the Priestly code, it broadens their meaning from pure ritual to the theological and moral, turning the ritual of the Priestly code into a model for the relationship of Israel to God: as the tabernacle, which is apart from uncleanliness, becomes holy by the presence of the Lord, so He will dwell among Israel when Israel receives purification (becomes holy) and separates from other peoples. The ritual instructions in the Priestly code apparently grew from priests giving instruction and answering questions about ritual matters; the Holiness code (or H) used to be a separate document, later becoming part of Leviticus, but it seems better to think of the Holiness authors as editors who worked with the Priestly code and actually produced Leviticus as we now have it.\n\nMany scholars argue that the rituals of Leviticus have a theological meaning concerning Israel's relationship with its God. Jacob Milgrom was especially influential in spreading this view. He maintained that the priestly regulations in Leviticus expressed a rational system of theological thought. The writers expected them to be put into practice in Israel's temple, so the rituals would express this theology as well, as well as ethical concern for the poor. Milgrom also argued that the book's purity regulations (chaps. 11–15) have a basis in ethical thinking. Many other interpreters have followed Milgrom in exploring the theological and ethical implications of Leviticus's regulations (e.g. Marx, Balentine), though some have questioned how systematic they really are. Ritual, therefore, is not taking a series of actions for their own sake, but a means of maintaining the relationship between God, the world, and humankind.\n\nThe main function of the priests is service at the altar, and only the sons of Aaron are priests in the full sense. (Ezekiel also distinguishes between altar-priests and lower Levites, but in Ezekiel the altar-priests are sons of Zadok instead of sons of Aaron; many scholars see this as a remnant of struggles between different priestly factions in First Temple times, finding resolution by the Second Temple into a hierarchy of Aaronite altar-priests and lower-level Levites, including singers, gatekeepers and the like).\n\nIn chapter 10, God kills Nadab and Abihu, the oldest sons of Aaron, for offering \"strange incense\". Aaron has two sons left. Commentators have read various messages in the incident: a reflection of struggles between priestly factions in the post–Exilic period (Gerstenberger); or a warning against offering incense outside the Temple, where there might be the risk of invoking strange gods (Milgrom). In any case, there has been a pollution of the sanctuary by the bodies of the two dead priests, leading into the next theme, holiness.\n\nRitual purity is essential for an Israelite to be able to approach Yahweh and remain part of the community. Uncleanliness threatens holiness; Chapters 11–15 review the various causes of uncleanliness and describe the rituals which will restore cleanliness; one is to maintain cleanliness through observation of the rules on sexual behaviour, family relations, land ownership, worship, sacrifice, and observance of holy days.\n\nYahweh dwells with Israel in the holy of holies. All of the priestly ritual focuses on Yahweh and the construction and maintenance of a holy space, but sin generates impurity, as do everyday events such as childbirth and menstruation; impurity pollutes the holy dwelling place. Failure to ritually purify the sacred space could result in God leaving, which would be disastrous.\n\nThrough sacrifice, the priest \"makes atonement\" for sin and the offerer receives forgiveness (but only if God accepts the sacrifice—forgiveness comes only from God). Atonement rituals involve the pouring or sprinkling of blood as the symbol of the life of the victim: the blood has the power to wipe out or absorb the sin. The two-part division of the book structurally reflects the role of atonement: chapters 1–16 call for the establishment of the institution for atonement, and chapters 17–27 call for the life of the atoned community in holiness.\n\nThe consistent theme of chapters 17–26 is in the repetition of the phrase, \"Be holy, for I the Lord your God am holy.\" Holiness in ancient Israel had a different meaning than in contemporary usage: it might have been regarded as the \"god-ness\" of God, an invisible but physical and potentially dangerous force. Specific objects, or even days, can be holy, but they derive holiness from being connected with God—the seventh day, the tabernacle, and the priests all derive their holiness from God. As a result, Israel had to maintain its own holiness in order to live safely alongside God.\n\nThe need for holiness is for the possession of the Promised Land (Canaan), where the Jews will become a holy people: \"You shall not do as they do in the land of Egypt where you dwelt, and you shall not do as they do in the land of Canaan to which I am bringing you...You shall do my ordinances and keep my statutes...I am the Lord, your God\" (ch. 18:3).\n\nLeviticus, as part of the Torah, became the law book of Jerusalem's Second Temple as well as of the Samaritan temple. Evidence of its influence is evident among the Dead Sea Scrolls, which included fragments of seventeen manuscripts of Leviticus dating from the third to the first centuries BC. Many other Qumran scrolls cite the book, especially the Temple Scroll and 4QMMT.\n\nJews and Christians have not observed Leviticus's instructions for animal offerings since the first century AD. Because of the destruction of the temple in Jerusalem in 70 AD, Jewish worship has focused on prayer and the study of Torah. Nevertheless, Leviticus constitutes a major source of Jewish law and is traditionally the first book children learn in the Rabbinic system of education. There are two main Midrashim on Leviticus—the halakhic one (Sifra) and a more aggadic one (Vayikra Rabbah).\n\nThe New Testament, particularly the Epistle to the Hebrews, uses ideas and images from Leviticus to describe Christ as the high priest who offers his own blood as a sin offering. Therefore, Christians do not make animal offerings either, as Gordon Wenham summarized: \"With the death of Christ the only sufficient \"burnt offering\" was offered once and for all, and therefore the animal sacrifices which foreshadowed Christ's sacrifice were made obsolete.\"\n\nChristians generally have the view that the New Covenant supersedes (i.e., replaces) the Old Testament's ritual laws, which includes many of the rules in Leviticus. Christians therefore have usually not observed Leviticus' rules regarding diet, purity, and agriculture. Christian teachings have differed, however, as to where to draw the line between ritual and moral regulations.\n\nBULLET::::- 613 commandments\nBULLET::::- En-Gedi Scroll\nBULLET::::- Paleo-Hebrew Leviticus scroll\n\nBULLET::::- Leviticus at Bible gateway\n\nBULLET::::- Bamberger, Bernard Jacob The Torah: A Modern Commentary (1981),\n\n\nOnline versions of Leviticus:\n\nBULLET::::- Hebrew:\nBULLET::::- Leviticus at Mechon-Mamre (Jewish Publication Society translation)\nBULLET::::- Leviticus (The Living Torah) Rabbi Aryeh Kaplan's translation and commentary at Ort.org\nBULLET::::- Vayikra—Levitichius (Judaica Press) translation [with Rashi's commentary] at Chabad.org\nBULLET::::- ויקרא \"Vayikra\"—Leviticus (Hebrew—English at Mechon-Mamre.org)\nBULLET::::- Christian translations:\nBULLET::::- The Book of Leviticus, Douay Rheims Version, with Bishop Challoner Commentaries\nBULLET::::- \"Online Bible\" at GospelHall.org (King James Version)\nBULLET::::- \"Online Audio and Classic Bible\" at Bible-Book.org (King James Version)\nBULLET::::- \"oremus Bible Browser\" (New Revised Standard Version)\nBULLET::::- \"oremus Bible Browser\" (\"Anglicized\" New Revised Standard Version)\nBULLET::::- Various versions\n\nRelated article:\nBULLET::::- Book of Leviticus article (Jewish Encyclopedia)\nBULLET::::- The Literary Structure of Leviticus (chaver.com)\n\nBrief introduction\nBULLET::::- Leviticus\n"}
{"id": "18188", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18188", "title": "L. Frank Baum", "text": "L. Frank Baum\n\nBaum was born in Chittenango, New York in 1856 into a devout Methodist family. He had German, Scots-Irish and English ancestry. He was the seventh of nine children of Cynthia Ann (née Stanton) and Benjamin Ward Baum, only five of whom survived into adulthood. \"Lyman\" was the name of his father's brother, but he always disliked it and preferred his middle name \"Frank\".\n\nHis father succeeded in many businesses, including barrel-making, oil drilling in Pennsylvania, and real estate. Baum grew up on his parents' expansive estate called Rose Lawn, which he fondly recalled as a sort of paradise. Rose Lawn was located in Mattydale, New York. Frank was a sickly, dreamy child, tutored at home with his siblings. From the age of 12, he spent two miserable years at Peekskill Military Academy but, after being severely disciplined for daydreaming, he had a possibly psychogenic heart attack and was allowed to return home.\n\nBaum started writing early in life, possibly prompted by his father buying him a cheap printing press. He had always been close to his younger brother Henry (Harry) Clay Baum, who helped in the production of \"The Rose Lawn Home Journal\". The brothers published several issues of the journal, including advertisements from local businesses, which they would give to family and friends for free. By the age of 17, Baum established a second amateur journal called \"The Stamp Collector\", printed an 11-page pamphlet called \"Baum's Complete Stamp Dealers' Directory\", and started a stamp dealership with friends.\n\nAt 20, Baum took on the national craze of breeding fancy poultry. He specialized in raising the Hamburg. In March 1880, he established a monthly trade journal, \"The Poultry Record\", and in 1886, when Baum was 30 years old, his first book was published: \"The Book of the Hamburgs: A Brief Treatise upon the Mating, Rearing, and Management of the Different Varieties of Hamburgs\".\n\nBaum had a flair for being the spotlight of fun in the household, including during times of financial difficulties. His selling of fireworks made the Fourth of July memorable. His skyrockets, Roman candles, and fireworks filled the sky, while many people around the neighborhood would gather in front of the house to watch the displays. Christmas was even more festive. Baum dressed as Santa Claus for the family. His father would place the Christmas tree behind a curtain in the front parlor so that Baum could talk to everyone while he decorated the tree without people managing to see him. He maintained this tradition all his life.\n\nBaum embarked on his lifetime infatuation—and wavering financial success—with the theater. A local theatrical company duped him into replenishing their stock of costumes on the promise of leading roles coming his way. Disillusioned, Baum left the theater — temporarily — and went to work as a clerk in his brother-in-law's dry goods company in Syracuse. This experience may have influenced his story \"The Suicide of Kiaros\", first published in the literary journal \"The White Elephant\". A fellow clerk one day was found locked in a store room dead, probably from suicide.\n\nBaum could never stay away long from the stage. He performed in plays under the stage names of Louis F. Baum and George Brooks. In 1880, his father built him a theater in Richburg, New York, and Baum set about writing plays and gathering a company to act in them. \"The Maid of Arran\" proved a modest success, a melodrama with songs based on William Black's novel \"A Princess of Thule\". Baum wrote the play and composed songs for it (making it a prototypical musical, as its songs relate to the narrative), and acted in the leading role. His aunt Katharine Gray played his character's aunt. She was the founder of Syracuse Oratory School, and Baum advertised his services in her catalog to teach theater, including stage business, play writing, directing, translating (French, German, and Italian), revision, and operettas.\n\nOn November 9, 1882, Baum married Maud Gage, a daughter of Matilda Joslyn Gage, a famous women's suffrage and feminist activist. While Baum was touring with \"The Maid of Arran\", the theater in Richburg caught fire during a production of Baum's ironically titled parlor drama \"Matches\", destroying the theater as well as the only known copies of many of Baum's scripts, including \"Matches\", as well as costumes.\n\nIn July 1888, Baum and his wife moved to Aberdeen, Dakota Territory where he opened a store called \"Baum's Bazaar\". His habit of giving out wares on credit led to the eventual bankrupting of the store, so Baum turned to editing the local newspaper \"The Aberdeen Saturday Pioneer\" where he wrote the column \"Our Landlady\". Following the death of Sitting Bull at the hands of Indian agency police, Baum urged the wholesale extermination of all America's native peoples in a column that he wrote on December 20, 1890 (full text below). On January 3, 1891 he returned to the subject in an editorial response to the Wounded Knee Massacre:\n\nThe Pioneer has before declared that our only safety depends upon the total extirmination of the Indians. Having wronged them for centuries, we had better, in order to protect our civilization, follow it up by one more wrong and wipe these untamed and untamable creatures from the face of the earth.\n\nA recent analysis of these editorials has challenged their literal interpretation, suggesting that the actual intent of Baum was to generate sympathy for the Indians via obnoxious argument, ostensibly promoting the contrary position.\n\nBaum's description of Kansas in \"The Wonderful Wizard of Oz\" is based on his experiences in drought-ridden South Dakota. During much of this time, Matilda Joslyn Gage was living in the Baum household. While Baum was in South Dakota, he sang in a quartet which included James Kyle, who became one of the first Populist (People's Party) Senators in the U.S.\n\nBaum's newspaper failed in 1891, and he, Maud, and their four sons moved to the Humboldt Park section of Chicago, where Baum took a job reporting for the \"Evening Post\". Beginning in 1897, he founded and edited a magazine called \"The Show Window\", later known as the \"Merchants Record and Show Window\", which focused on store window displays, retail strategies and visual merchandising. The major department stores of the time created elaborate Christmastime fantasies, using clockwork mechanisms that made people and animals appear to move. The former \"Show Window\" magazine is still currently in operation, now known as \"VMSD\" magazine (visual merchandising + store design), based in Cincinnati. In 1900, Baum published a book about window displays in which he stressed the importance of mannequins in drawing customers. He also had to work as a traveling salesman.\n\nIn 1897, he wrote and published \"Mother Goose in Prose\", a collection of Mother Goose rhymes written as prose stories and illustrated by Maxfield Parrish. \"Mother Goose\" was a moderate success and allowed Baum to quit his sales job (which had had a negative impact on his health). In 1899, Baum partnered with illustrator W. W. Denslow to publish \"Father Goose, His Book\", a collection of nonsense poetry. The book was a success, becoming the best-selling children's book of the year.\n\nIn 1900, Baum and Denslow (with whom he shared the copyright) published \"The Wonderful Wizard of Oz\" to much critical acclaim and financial success. The book was the best-selling children's book for two years after its initial publication. Baum went on to write thirteen more novels based on the places and people of the Land of Oz.\n\nTwo years after \"Wizard\" publication, Baum and Denslow teamed up with composer Paul Tietjens and director Julian Mitchell to produce a musical stage version of the book under Fred R. Hamlin. Baum and Tietjens had worked on a musical of \"The Wonderful Wizard of Oz\" in 1901 and based closely upon the book, but it was rejected. This stage version opened in Chicago in 1902 (the first to use the shortened title \"The Wizard of Oz\"), then ran on Broadway for 293 stage nights from January to October 1903. It returned to Broadway in 1904, where it played from March to May and again from November to December. It successfully toured the United States with much of the same cast, as was done in those days, until 1911, and then became available for amateur use. The stage version starred Anna Laughlin as Dorothy Gale, alongside David C. Montgomery and Fred Stone as the Tin Woodman and Scarecrow respectively, which shot the pair to instant fame.\n\nThe stage version differed quite a bit from the book, and was aimed primarily at adults. Toto was replaced with Imogene the Cow, and Tryxie Tryfle (a waitress) and Pastoria (a streetcar operator) were added as fellow cyclone victims. The Wicked Witch of the West was eliminated entirely in the script, and the plot became about how the four friends were allied with the usurping Wizard and were hunted as traitors to Pastoria II, the rightful King of Oz. It is unclear how much control or influence Baum had on the script; it appears that many of the changes were written by Baum against his wishes due to contractual requirements with Hamlin. Jokes in the script, mostly written by Glen MacDonough, called for explicit references to President Theodore Roosevelt, Senator Mark Hanna, Rev. Andrew Danquer, and oil magnate John D. Rockefeller. Although use of the script was rather free-form, the line about Hanna was ordered dropped as soon as Hamlin got word of his death in 1904.\n\nBeginning with the success of the stage version, most subsequent versions of the story, including newer editions of the novel, have been titled \"The Wizard of Oz\", rather than using the full, original title. In more recent years, restoring the full title has become increasingly common, particularly to distinguish the novel from the Hollywood film.\n\nBaum wrote a new Oz book, \"The Marvelous Land of Oz\", with a view to making it into a stage production, which was titled \"The Woggle-Bug\", but Montgomery and Stone balked at appearing when the original was still running. The Scarecrow and Tin Woodman were then omitted from this adaptation, which was seen as a self-rip-off by critics and proved to be a major flop before it could reach Broadway. He also worked for years on a musical version of \"Ozma of Oz\", which eventually became \"The Tik-Tok Man Of Oz\". This did fairly well in Los Angeles, but not well enough to convince producer Oliver Morosco to mount a production in New York. He also began a stage version of \"The Patchwork Girl of Oz\", but this was ultimately realized as a film\".\n\nWith the success of \"Wizard\" on page and stage, Baum and Denslow hoped for further success and published \"Dot and Tot of Merryland\" in 1901. The book was one of Baum's weakest, and its failure further strained his faltering relationship with Denslow. It was their last collaboration. Baum worked primarily with John R. Neill on his fantasy work beginning in 1904, but Baum met Neill few times (all before he moved to California) and often found Neill's art not humorous enough for his liking. He was particularly offended when Neill published \"The Oz Toy Book: Cut-outs for the Kiddies\" without authorization.\n\nBaum reportedly designed the chandeliers in the Crown Room of the Hotel del Coronado; however, that attribution has yet to be corroborated. Several times during the development of the Oz series, Baum declared that he had written his last Oz book and devoted himself to other works of fantasy fiction based in other magical lands, including \"The Life and Adventures of Santa Claus\" and \"Queen Zixi of Ix\". However, he returned to the series each time, persuaded by popular demand, letters from children, and the failure of his new books. Even so, his other works remained very popular after his death, with \"The Master Key\" appearing on \"St. Nicholas Magazine\"'s survey of readers' favorite books well into the 1920s.\n\nIn 1905, Baum declared plans for an Oz amusement park. In an interview, he mentioned buying Pedloe Island off the coast of California to turn it into an Oz park. However, there is no evidence that he purchased such an island, and no one has ever been able to find any island whose name even resembles Pedloe in that area. Nevertheless, Baum stated to the press that he had discovered a Pedloe Island off the coast of California and that he had purchased it to be \"the Marvelous Land of Oz,\" intending it to be \"a fairy paradise for children.\" Eleven year old Dorothy Talbot of San Francisco was reported to be ascendant to the throne on March 1, 1906, when the Palace of Oz was expected to be completed. Baum planned to live on the island, with administrative duties handled by the princess and her all-child advisers. Plans included statues of the Scarecrow, Tin Woodman, Jack Pumpkinhead, and H.M. Woggle-Bug, T.E. Baum abandoned his Oz park project after the failure of \"The Woggle-Bug\", which was playing at the Garrick Theatre in 1905.\nBecause of his lifelong love of theatre, he financed elaborate musicals, often to his financial detriment. One of Baum's worst financial endeavors was his \"The Fairylogue and Radio-Plays\" (1908), which combined a slideshow, film, and live actors with a lecture by Baum as if he were giving a travelogue to Oz. However, Baum ran into trouble and could not pay his debts to the company who produced the films. He did not get back to a stable financial situation for several years, after he sold the royalty rights to many of his earlier works, including \"The Wonderful Wizard of Oz\". This resulted in the M.A. Donahue Company publishing cheap editions of his early works with advertising which purported that Baum's newer output was inferior to the less expensive books that they were releasing. Baum had shrewdly transferred most of his property into Maud's name, except for his clothing, his typewriter, and his library (mostly of children's books, such as the fairy tales of Andrew Lang, whose portrait he kept in his study)—all of which, he successfully argued, were essential to his occupation. Maud handled the finances anyway, and thus Baum lost much less than he could have.\n\nBaum made use of several pseudonyms for some of his other non-Oz books. They include:\nBULLET::::- Edith Van Dyne (the \"Aunt Jane's Nieces\" series)\nBULLET::::- Laura Bancroft (\"The Twinkle Tales\", \"Policeman Bluejay\")\nBULLET::::- Floyd Akers (\"The Boy Fortune Hunters\" series, continuing the \"Sam Steele\" series)\nBULLET::::- Suzanne Metcalf (\"Annabel\")\nBULLET::::- Schuyler Staunton (\"The Fate of a Crown\", \"Daughters of Destiny\")\nBULLET::::- John Estes Cooke (\"Tamawaca Folks\")\nBULLET::::- Capt. Hugh Fitzgerald (the \"Sam Steele\" series)\n\nBaum also anonymously wrote \"The Last Egyptian: A Romance of the Nile\". He continued theatrical work with Harry Marston Haldeman's men's social group The Uplifters, for which he wrote several plays for various celebrations. He also wrote the group's parodic by-laws. The group also included Will Rogers, but was proud to have had Baum as a member and posthumously revived many of his works despite their ephemeral intent. Many of these play's titles are known, but only \"The Uplift of Lucifer\" is known to survive (it was published in a limited edition in the 1960s). Prior to that, his last produced play was \"The Tik-Tok Man of Oz\" (based on \"Ozma of Oz\" and the basis for \"Tik-Tok of Oz\"), a modest success in Hollywood that producer Oliver Morosco decided did not do well enough to take to Broadway. Morosco, incidentally, quickly turned to film production, as did Baum.\n\nIn 1914, Baum started his own film production company The Oz Film Manufacturing Company, which came as an outgrowth of the Uplifters. He served as its president and principal producer and screenwriter. The rest of the board consisted of Louis F. Gottschalk, Harry Marston Haldeman, and Clarence R. Rundel. The films were directed by J. Farrell MacDonald, with casts that included Violet MacMillan, Vivian Reed, Mildred Harris, Juanita Hansen, Pierre Couderc, Mai Welles, Louise Emmons, J. Charles Haydon, and early appearances by Harold Lloyd and Hal Roach. Silent film actor Richard Rosson appeared in one of the films (Rosson's younger brother Harold Rosson was the cinematographer on \"The Wizard of Oz\", released in 1939). After little success probing the unrealized children's film market, Baum acknowledged his authorship of \"The Last Egyptian\" and made a film of it (portions of which are included in \"Decasia\"), but the Oz name had become box office poison for the time being, and even a name change to Dramatic Feature Films and transfer of ownership to Frank Joslyn Baum did not help. Baum invested none of his own money in the venture, unlike \"The Fairylogue and Radio-Plays\", but the stress probably took its toll on his health.\n\nOn May 5, 1919, Baum suffered a stroke. The following day he slipped into a coma but briefly awoke and spoke his last words to his wife, \"Now we can cross the Shifting Sands.\" Frank died on May 6, 1919. He was buried in Glendale's Forest Lawn Memorial Park Cemetery.\n\nHis final Oz book, \"Glinda of Oz\", was published on July 10, 1920, a year after his death. The Oz series was continued long after his death by other authors, notably Ruth Plumly Thompson, who wrote an additional twenty-one Oz books.\n\nBaum's avowed intentions with the Oz books and his other fairy tales was to retell tales such as those which are found in the works of the Brothers Grimm and Hans Christian Andersen, make them in an American vein, update them, avoid stereotypical characters such as dwarfs or genies, and remove the association of violence and moral teachings. His first Oz books contained a fair amount of violence, but it decreased as the series progressed; in \"The Emerald City of Oz\", Ozma objects to the use of violence, even to the use of violence against the Nomes who threaten Oz with invasion. His introduction is often cited as the beginning of the sanitization of children's stories, although he did not do a great deal more than eliminate harsh moral lessons.\n\nAnother traditional element that Baum intentionally omitted was the emphasis on romance. He considered romantic love to be uninteresting to young children, as well as largely incomprehensible. In \"The Wonderful Wizard of Oz\", the only element of romance lay in the background of the Tin Woodman and his love for Nimmie Amee, which explains his condition and it does not otherwise affect the tale, and that of Gayelette and the enchantment of the Winged monkeys. The only other stories with such elements were \"The Scarecrow of Oz\" and \"Tik-Tok of Oz\", both based on dramatizations, which Baum regarded warily until his readers accepted them.\n\nSally Roesch Wagner of The Matilda Joslyn Gage Foundation has published a pamphlet titled \"The Wonderful Mother of Oz\" describing how Matilda Gage's feminist politics were sympathetically channeled by Baum into his Oz books. Much of the politics in the Republican \"Aberdeen Saturday Pioneer\" dealt with trying to convince the populace to vote for women's suffrage. Baum was the secretary of Aberdeen's Woman's Suffrage Club. Susan B. Anthony visited Aberdeen and stayed with the Baums. Nancy Tystad Koupal notes an apparent loss of interest in editorializing after Aberdeen failed to pass the bill for women's enfranchisement.\n\nSome of Baum's contacts with suffragists of his day seem to have inspired much of his second Oz story \"The Marvelous Land of Oz\". In this story, General Jinjur leads the girls and women of Oz in a revolt, armed with knitting needles; they succeed and make the men do the household chores. Jinjur proves to be an incompetent ruler, but a female advocating gender equality is ultimately placed on the throne. His Edith Van Dyne stories depict girls and young women engaging in traditionally masculine activities, including the \"Aunt Jane's Nieces\", \"The Flying Girl\" and its sequel, and his girl sleuth Josie O'Gorman from The Bluebird Books.\n\nDuring the period surrounding the 1890 Ghost Dance movement and Wounded Knee Massacre, Baum wrote two editorials about Native Americans for the \"Aberdeen Saturday Pioneer\" which have provoked controversy in recent times because of his assertion that the safety of white settlers depended on the wholesale genocide of American Indians. Sociologist Robert Venables has argued that Baum was not using sarcasm in the editorials.\n\nThe first piece was published on December 20, 1890, five days after the killing of the Lakota Sioux holy man, Sitting Bull (who was being held in custody at the time). Following is the complete text of the editorial:\n\nBaum wrote a second editorial following the December 29, 1890 massacre and published on January 3, 1891:\n\nThese two short editorials continue to haunt his legacy. In 2006, two descendants of Baum apologized to the Sioux nation for any hurt that their ancestor had caused.\n\nThe short story \"The Enchanted Buffalo\" claims to be a legend of a tribe of bison, and states that a key element made it into legends of Native American tribes. Baum mentions his characters' distaste for a Hopi snake dance in \"Aunt Jane's Nieces and Uncle John\", but also deplores the horrible situation of Indian Reservations. \"Aunt Jane's Nieces on the Ranch\" has a hard-working Mexican present himself as an exception to counter Anglo stereotypes of Mexican laziness. Baum's mother-in-law and Woman's Suffrage leader Matilda Joslyn Gage had great influence over Baum's views. Gage was initiated into the Wolf Clan and admitted into the Iroquois Council of Matrons for her outspoken respect and sympathy for Native American people; it would seem unlikely that Baum could have harbored animosity for them in his mature years.\n\nNumerous political references to the \"Wizard\" appeared early in the 20th century. Henry Littlefield, an upstate New York high school history teacher, wrote a scholarly article which was the first full-fledged interpretation of the novel as an extended political allegory of the politics and characters of the 1890s. Special attention was paid to the Populist metaphors and debates over silver and gold. Baum was a Republican and avid supporter of Women's Suffrage, and it is thought that he did not support the political ideals of either the Populist movement of 1890–1892 or the Bryanite-silver crusade of 1896–1900. He published a poem in support of William McKinley.\n\nSince 1964, many scholars, economists, and historians have expanded on Littlefield's interpretation, pointing to multiple similarities between the characters (especially as depicted in Denslow's illustrations) and stock figures from editorial cartoons of the period. Littlefield himself wrote to \"The New York Times\" letters to the editor section spelling out that his theory had no basis in fact, but that his original point was \"not to label Baum, or to lessen any of his magic, but rather, as a history teacher at Mount Vernon High School, to invest turn-of-the-century America with the imagery and wonder I have always found in his stories.\"\n\nBaum's newspaper had addressed politics in the 1890s, and Denslow was an editorial cartoonist as well as an illustrator of children's books. A series of political references is included in the 1902 stage version, such as references by name to the President, to a powerful senator, and to John D. Rockefeller for providing the oil needed by the Tin Woodman. Scholars have found few political references in Baum's Oz books after 1902.\n\nBaum himself was asked whether his stories had hidden meanings, but he always replied that they were written to \"please children\".\n\nBaum was originally a Methodist, but he joined the Episcopal Church in Aberdeen to participate in community theatricals. Later, he and his wife were encouraged by Matilda Joslyn Gage to become members of the Theosophical Society in 1892. Baum's beliefs are often reflected in his writing. The only mention of a church in his Oz books is the porcelain one which the Cowardly Lion breaks in the Dainty China Country in \"The Wonderful Wizard of Oz\". The Baums sent their older sons to \"Ethical Culture Sunday School\" in Chicago, which taught morality, not religion.\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Boy Fortune Hunters in Egypt\" (1908)\nBULLET::::- \"The Boy Fortune Hunters in Panama\" (1908)\nBULLET::::- \"Fortune Hunters in China\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Boy Fortune Hunters in the South Seas\" (1911)\nBULLET::::- \"Queen Zixi of Ix\" (1905)\nBULLET::::- \"The Fate of a Crown\" (1905)\nBULLET::::- \"Sam Steele's Adventures on Land and Sea\" (1906)\nBULLET::::- \"Daughters of Destiny (novel)\" (1906)\nBULLET::::- \"The Last Egyptian\" (1907)\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Wonderful Wizard of Oz\" (1900)\nBULLET::::- \"The Marvelous Land of Oz\" (1904)\nBULLET::::- \"Queer Visitors from the Marvelous Land of Oz\" (1905, comic strip depicting 27 stories)\nBULLET::::- \"The Woggle-Bug Book\" (1905)\nBULLET::::- \"Ozma of Oz\" (1907)\nBULLET::::- \"Dorothy and the Wizard in Oz\" (1908)\nBULLET::::- \"The Road to Oz\" (1909)\nBULLET::::- \"The Emerald City of Oz\" (1910)\nBULLET::::- \"The Patchwork Girl of Oz\" (1913)\nBULLET::::- \"Little Wizard Stories of Oz\" (1913, collection of 6 short stories)\nBULLET::::- \"Tik-Tok of Oz\" (1914)\nBULLET::::- \"The Scarecrow of Oz\" (1915)\nBULLET::::- \"Rinkitink in Oz\" (1916)\nBULLET::::- \"The Lost Princess of Oz\" (1917)\nBULLET::::- \"The Tin Woodman of Oz\" (1918)\nBULLET::::- \"The Magic of Oz\" (1919, posthumously published)\nBULLET::::- \"Glinda of Oz\" (1920, posthumously published)\n\n1921's \"The Royal Book of Oz\" was posthumous attributed to Baum but was entirely the work of Ruth Plumly Thompson.\n\nBULLET::::- A 1970 episode of the long-running American Western anthology series \"Death Valley Days\" presents a highly romanticized portrayal of Baum's time in South Dakota. The comedic teleplay, titled \"The Wizard of Aberdeen\", stars Conlan Carter as Baum and Beverlee McKinsey as Maud. Although the 30-minute presentation touches on Baum's family life and his struggles in Aberdeen as a newspaper editor, it focuses principally on his storytelling to local children about characters in a distant land he initially refers to as \"Ooz\".\nBULLET::::- John Ritter portrayed Baum in the television film \"\" (1990).\nBULLET::::- The theme park Storybook Land, located in Aberdeen, South Dakota, features the Land of Oz, with characters and attractions from the books.\nBULLET::::- In the shortly lived 2008 TV series \"\", the show's protagonist John Connor enrolls in High School under the name of \"John Baum\" (after L. Frank Baum) to keep his true identity a secret. Later in the show, His mother Sarah would mention to Cameron that \"The Wonderful Wizard Of Oz\" was John's favorite book when he was younger.\nBULLET::::- In 2013, Baum was inducted into the Chicago Literary Hall of Fame.\nBULLET::::- Chittenango, New York holds a three-day annual festival called Oz-Stravaganza! to celebrate the literary works of author L. Frank Baum, who was born in Chittenango on May 15, 1856. The children's novel \"The Wonderful Wizard of Oz\" was published on May 17, 1900.[24] The weekend-long festival, usually held during the first Saturday of June and the weekend thereof, includes a parade, which features many community groups. The parade has also featured actors and actresses who played Munchkins in the 1939 film \"The Wizard of Oz\", including Jerry Maren, Karl Slover, Meinhardt Raabe, and Margaret Williams Pellegrini.[25]\n\nBULLET::::- Algeo, John. \"A Notable Theosophist: L. Frank Baum.\" \"American Theosophist\", Vol. 74 (August–September 1986), pp. 270–3.\nBULLET::::- Attebery, Brian. \"The Fantasy Tradition in American Literature\". Bloomington, IN, Indiana University Press, 1980.\nBULLET::::- Baum, Frank Joslyn, and Russell P. Macfall. \"To Please a Child\". Chicago, Reilly & Lee, 1961.\nBULLET::::- Baum, L. Frank. \"The Annotated Wizard of Oz\". Edited with an Introduction and Notes by Michael Patrick Hearn. New York, Clarkson N. Potter, 1973. Revised 2000. New York, W.W. Norton, 2000.\nBULLET::::- Ford, Alla T. \"The High-Jinks of L. Frank Baum\". Hong Kong, Ford Press, 1969.\nBULLET::::- Ford, Alla T. \"The Musical Fantasies of L. Frank Baum\". Lake Worth, FL, Ford Press, 1969.\nBULLET::::- Gardner, Martin, and Russel B. Nye. \"The Wizard of Oz and Who He Was\". East Lansing, MI, Michigan State University Press, 1957. Revised 1994.\nBULLET::::- Hearn, Michael Patrick. \"The Critical Heritage Edition of the Wizard of Oz\". New York, Schocken, 1986.\nBULLET::::- Koupal, Nancy Tystad. \"Baum's Road to Oz: The Dakota Years\". Pierre, SD, South Dakota State Historical Society, 2000.\nBULLET::::- Koupal, Nancy Tystad. \"Our Landlady\". Lawrence, KS, University of Nebraska Press, 1986.\nBULLET::::- Parker, David B. \"The Rise and Fall of The Wonderful Wizard of Oz as a \"Parable on Populism\" \"Journal of the Georgia Association of Historians, vol. 15 (1994), pp. 49–63.\nBULLET::::- Reneau, Reneau H. \"Misanthropology: A Florilegium of Bahumbuggery\" Inglewood, CA, donlazaro translations, 2004, pp. 155–164\nBULLET::::- Reneau, Reneau H. \"A Newer Testament: Misanthropology Unleashed\" Inglewood, CA, donlazaro translations, 2008, pp. 129–147\nBULLET::::- Riley, Michael O. \"Oz and Beyond: The Fantasy World of L. Frank Baum\". Lawrence, KS, University of Kansas Press, 1997.\nBULLET::::- Rogers, Katharine M. \"L. Frank Baum, Creator of Oz: A Biography\". New York, St. Martin's Press, 2002.\nBULLET::::- Sale, Roger. \"Fairy Tales and After: From Snow White to E. B. White\". Cambridge, MA, Harvard University press, 1978.\nBULLET::::- Schwartz, Evan I. \"Finding Oz: How L. Frank Baum Discovered the Great American Story\". New York, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2009\nBULLET::::- Wagner, Sally Roesch. \"The Wonderful Mother of Oz\". Fayetteville, NY: The Matilda Joslyn Gage Foundation, 2003.\nBULLET::::- Wilgus, Neal. \"Classic American Fairy Tales: The Fantasies of L. Frank Baum\" in Darrell Schweitzer (ed) \"Discovering Classic Fantasy Fiction\", Gillette NJ: Wildside Press, 1996, pp. 113–121.\n\nBULLET::::- L. Frank Baum Papers at Syracuse University\nBULLET::::- Bibliography (Baum and Oz)\nBULLET::::- The International Wizard of Oz Club, Inc.\nBULLET::::- Wonderful Wizard of Oz Website\nBULLET::::- The Complete Oz Works\nBULLET::::- Copyright Registration Application from Claimant L. Frank Baum for The wonderful Wizard of Oz From the Collections at the Library of Congress\n"}
{"id": "18189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18189", "title": "Lake Ladoga", "text": "Lake Ladoga\n\nLake Ladoga ( or ; [earlier in Finnish \"Nevajärvi\"]; ; ) is a freshwater lake located in the Republic of Karelia and Leningrad Oblast in northwestern Russia, in the vicinity of Saint Petersburg. \n\nIt is the largest lake entirely in Europe, the second largest lake after Baikal in Russia, and the 14th largest freshwater lake by area in the world. \"Ladoga Lacus\", a methane lake on Saturn's moon Titan, is named after the lake.\n\nIn one of Nestor's chronicles from the 12th century he mentions a lake called \"the Great Nevo\", a clear link to the Neva River and, possibly furthermore, to Finnish \"nevo\" \"sea\" or \"neva\" \"bog, quagmire\". \n\nAncient Norse sagas and Hanseatic treaties both mention a city made of lakes named Old Norse Aldeigja or Aldoga. Since the beginning of the 14th century this hydronym was commonly known as \"Ladoga\". According to T. N. Jackson, it can be taken \"almost for granted, that the name of Ladoga first referred to the river, then the city, and only then the lake.\" Therefore, he considers the primary hydronym Ladoga to originate in the eponymous inflow to the lower reaches of the Volkhov River whose Finnic name was Alodejoki (corresponding to modern ) \"river of the lowlands\".\n\nThe Germanic toponym (Aldeigja → Aldoga) was soon borrowed by the Slavic population and transformed by means of the Old Russian metathesis \"ald- → lad-\" to . The Old Norse intermediary word between Finnish and Old Russian word is fully supported by archeology, since the Scandinavians first appeared in Ladoga in the early 750s, that is, a couple of decades before the Slavs.\n\nOther theories about the origin of the name derive it from \"wave\" and \"wavy\"; or from the Russian dialectal word алодь, meaning \"open lake, extensive water field\". Eugene Helimski by contrast, offers an etymology rooted in German. In his opinion, the primary name of the lake was \"old source\", associated to the open sea, in contrast to the name of the Neva River (flowing from Lake Ladoga) which would derive from the German expression for \"the new\". Through the intermediate form \"*Aldaugja\", cam about, referring to \"Ladoga (city)\".\n\nThe lake has an average surface area of 17,891 km (excluding the islands). Its north-to-south length is 219 km and its average width is 83 km; the average depth is 51 m, although it reaches a maximum of 230 m in the north-western part. Basin area: 276,000 km, volume: 837 km (earlier estimated as 908 km). There are around 660 islands, with a total area of about 435 km. Ladoga is, on average, 5 m above sea level. Most of the islands, including the famous Valaam archipelago, Kilpola and Konevets, are situated in the northwest of the lake.\n\nSeparated from the Baltic Sea by the Karelian Isthmus, it drains into the Gulf of Finland via the Neva River.\n\nLake Ladoga is navigable, being a part of the Volga-Baltic Waterway connecting the Baltic Sea with the Volga River. The Ladoga Canal bypasses the lake in the southern part, connecting the Neva to the Svir.\n\nThe basin of Lake Ladoga includes about 50,000 lakes and 3,500 rivers longer than 10 km. About 85% of the water inflow is due to tributaries, 13% is due to precipitation, and 2% is due to underground waters.\n\nGeologically, the Lake Ladoga depression is a graben and syncline structure of Proterozoic age (Precambrian). This \"Ladoga–Pasha structure\", as it known, hosts Jotnian sediments. During the Pleistocene glaciations the depression was partially stripped of its sedimentary rock fill by glacial overdeepening. During the Last Glacial Maximum, about 17,000 years BP, the lake served likely as a channel that concentrated ice of the Fennoscandian Ice Sheet into an ice stream that fed glacier lobes further east. \n\nDeglaciation following the Weichselian glaciation took place in the Lake Ladoga basin between 12,500 and 11,500 radiocarbon years BP. Lake Ladoga was initially part of the Baltic Ice Lake (70–80 m. above present sea level), a historical freshwater stage of Baltic Sea. It is possible, though not certain, that Ladoga was isolated from it during regression of the subsequent Yoldia Sea brackish stage (10,200–9,500 BP). The isolation threshold should be at Heinjoki to the east of Vyborg, where the Baltic Sea and Ladoga were connected by a strait or a river outlet at least until the formation of the River Neva, and possibly even much later, until the 12th century AD or so.\n\nAt 9,500 BP, Lake Onega, previously draining into the White Sea, started emptying into Ladoga via the River Svir. Between 9,500 and 9,100 BP, during the transgression of Ancylus Lake, the next freshwater stage of the Baltic, Ladoga certainly became part of it, even if they hadn't been connected immediately before. During the Ancylus Lake subsequent regression, around 8,800 BP Ladoga became isolated.\n\nLadoga slowly transgressed in its southern part due to uplift of the Baltic Shield in the north. It has been hypothesized, but not proven, that waters of the Litorina Sea, the next brackish-water stage of the Baltic, occasionally invaded Ladoga between 7,000 and 5,000 BP. Around 5,000 BP the waters of the Saimaa Lake penetrated Salpausselkä and formed a new outlet, River Vuoksi, entering Lake Ladoga in the northwestern corner and raising its level by 1–2 m.\n\nThe River Neva originated when the Ladoga waters at last broke through the threshold at Porogi into the lower portions of Izhora River, then a tributary of the Gulf of Finland, between 4,000 and 2,000 BP. Dating of some sediments in the northwestern part of Lake Ladoga suggests it happened at 3,100 radiocarbon years BP (3,410–3,250 calendar years BP).\nThe Ladoga is rich with fish. 48 forms (species and infra specific taxa) of fish have been encountered in the lake, including roach, carp bream, zander, European perch, ruffe, endemic variety of smelt, two varieties of \"Coregonus albula\" (vendace), eight varieties of \"Coregonus lavaretus\", a number of other \"Salmonidae\" as well as, albeit rarely, endangered European sea sturgeon. Commercial fishing was once a major industry but has been hurt by overfishing. After the war, between 1945–1954, the total annual catch increased and reached a maximum of 4,900 tonnes. However, unbalanced fishery led to the drastic decrease of catch in 1955–1963, sometimes to 1,600 tonnes per year. Trawling has been forbidden in Lake Ladoga since 1956 and some other restrictions were imposed. The situation gradually recovered, and in 1971–1990 the catch ranged between 4,900 and 6,900 tonnes per year, about the same level as the total catch in 1938. Fish farms and recreational fishing are developing. \n\nIt has its own endemic ringed seal subspecies known as the Ladoga seal.\n\nSince the beginning of the 1960s Ladoga has become considerably eutrophicated.\n\nNizhnesvirsky Natural Reserve is situated along the shore of Lake Ladoga immediately to the north of the mouth of the River Svir.\n\nThe Ladoga has a population of Arctic char that is genetically close to the chars of Lake Sommen and Lake Vättern in southern Sweden.\n\nIn the Middle Ages, the lake formed a vital part of the trade route from the Varangians to the Eastern Roman Empire, with the Norse emporium at Staraya Ladoga defending the mouth of the Volkhov since the 8th century. In the course of the Swedish–Novgorodian Wars, the area was disputed between the Novgorod Republic and Sweden. In the early 14th century, the fortresses of Korela (Kexholm) and Oreshek (Nöteborg) were established along the banks of the lake.\n\nThe ancient Valaam Monastery was founded on the island of Valaam, the largest in Lake Ladoga, abandoned between 1611–1715, magnificently restored in the 18th century, and evacuated to Finland during the Winter War in 1940. In 1989 the monastic activities in the Valaam were resumed. Other historic cloisters in the vicinity are the Konevets Monastery, which sits on the Konevets island, and the Alexander-Svirsky Monastery, which preserves fine samples of medieval Muscovite architecture.\n\nDuring the Ingrian War, a fraction of the Ladoga coast was occupied by Sweden. In 1617, by the Treaty of Stolbovo, the northern and western coast was ceded by Russia to Sweden. In 1721, after the Great Northern War, it was restitution to Russia by the Treaty of Nystad. In the 18th century, the Ladoga Canal were built to bypass the lake which was prone to winds and storms that destroyed hundreds of cargo ships.\n\nLater, in 1812–1940 the lake was shared between Finland and Russia. According to the conditions of the 1920 Tartu Peace Treaty militarization of the lake was severely restricted. However, both Soviet Russia and Finland had flotillas in Ladoga (see also Finnish Ladoga Naval Detachment). After the Winter War (1939–40) according to the Moscow Peace Treaty, Ladoga, previously shared with Finland, became an internal basin of the Soviet Union.\n\nDuring the Continuation War (1941–44) not only Finnish and Soviet, but also German and Italian vessels operated there (see also Naval Detachment K and Regia Marina). Under these circumstances, during much of the Siege of Leningrad (1941–44), Lake Ladoga provided the only access to the besieged city because a section of the eastern shore remained in Soviet hands. Supplies were transported into Leningrad with trucks on winter roads over the ice, the \"Road of Life\", and by boat in the summer. After World War II, Finland lost the Karelia region again to the USSR, and all Finnish citizens were evacuated from the ceded territory. Ladoga became an internal Soviet basin once again. The northern shore, Ladoga Karelia with the town of Sortavala, is now part of the Republic of Karelia. The western shore, Karelian Isthmus, became part of Leningrad Oblast.\n\nBULLET::::- Svir River from Lake Onega (south-east, discharge: 790 m/s);\nBULLET::::- Volkhov River from Lake Ilmen (south, discharge: 580 m/s);\nBULLET::::- Vuoksi River (and Burnaya River) from Lake Saimaa in Finland (west, discharge: 540 m/s).\nBULLET::::- Syas River (south, discharge: 53 m/s).\nBULLET::::- Olonka River from Lake Utozero\n\nBULLET::::- Shlisselburg (at )\nBULLET::::- Novaya Ladoga (at )\nBULLET::::- Syasstroy (at )\nBULLET::::- Pitkyaranta (at )\nBULLET::::- Sortavala (at )\nBULLET::::- Lakhdenpokhya (at )\nBULLET::::- Priozersk (at )\n\nBULLET::::- Simola, Heikki et al. (eds), Proceeding of The First International Lake Ladoga Symposium. Special issue of \"Hydrobiologia\". Vol. 322, Issues 1–3. / April 1996.\nBULLET::::- Ladoga Lake (photos)\nBULLET::::- War on Lake Ladoga, 1941–1944\nBULLET::::- Maps\n"}
{"id": "18190", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18190", "title": "Language family", "text": "Language family\n\nA language family is a group of languages related through descent from a common \"ancestral language\" or \"parental language\", called the proto-language of that family. The term \"family\" reflects the tree model of language origination in historical linguistics, which makes use of a metaphor comparing languages to people in a biological family tree, or in a subsequent modification, to species in a phylogenetic tree of evolutionary taxonomy. Linguists therefore describe the \"daughter languages\" within a language family as being \"genetically related\".\n\nAccording to \"Ethnologue\" the 7,111 living human languages are distributed in 141 different language families. A \"living language\" is simply one that is currently used as the primary form of communication of a group of people. There are also many dead languages, or languages which have no native speakers living, and extinct languages, which have no native speakers and no descendant languages. Finally, there are some languages that are insufficiently studied to be classified, and probably some which are not even known to exist outside their respective speech communities.\n\nMembership of languages in a language family is established by research in comparative linguistics. Sister languages are said to have a \"genetic\" or \"genealogical\" relationship. The latter term is older. Speakers of a language family belong to a common speech community. The divergence of a proto-language into daughter languages typically occurs through geographical separation, with the original speech community gradually evolving into distinct linguistic units. Individuals belonging to other speech communities may also adopt languages from a different language family through the language shift process.\n\nGenealogically related languages present shared retentions; that is, features of the proto-language (or reflexes of such features) that cannot be explained by chance or borrowing (convergence). Membership in a branch or group within a language family is established by shared innovations; that is, common features of those languages that are not found in the common ancestor of the entire family. For example, Germanic languages are \"Germanic\" in that they share vocabulary and grammatical features that are not believed to have been present in the Proto-Indo-European language. These features are believed to be innovations that took place in Proto-Germanic, a descendant of Proto-Indo-European that was the source of all Germanic languages.\n\nLanguage families can be divided into smaller phylogenetic units, conventionally referred to as \"branches\" of the family because the history of a language family is often represented as a tree diagram. A family is a monophyletic unit; all its members derive from a common ancestor, and all attested descendants of that ancestor are included in the family. (Thus, the term \"family\" is analogous to the biological term \"clade\".) \n\nSome taxonomists restrict the term \"family\" to a certain level, but there is little consensus in how to do so. Those who affix such labels also subdivide branches into \"groups\", and groups into \"complexes\". A top-level (i.e., the largest) family is often called a \"phylum\" or \"stock\". The closer the branches are to each other, the closer the languages will be related. This means if a branch off of a proto-language is 4 branches down and there is also a sister language to that fourth branch, then the two sister languages are more closely related to each other than to that common ancestral proto-language.\n\nThe term \"macrofamily\" or \"superfamily\" is sometimes applied to proposed groupings of language families whose status as phylogenetic units is generally considered to be unsubstantiated by accepted historical linguistic methods. For example, the Celtic, Germanic, Slavic, Italic, and Indo-Iranian language families are branches of a larger Indo-European language family. There is a remarkably similar pattern shown by the linguistic tree and the genetic tree of human ancestry \nthat was verified statistically. Languages interpreted in terms of the putative phylogenetic tree of human languages are transmitted to a great extent vertically (by ancestry) as opposed to horizontally (by spatial diffusion).\n\nSome closely-knit language families, and many branches within larger families, take the form of dialect continua in which there are no clear-cut borders that make it possible to unequivocally identify, define, or count individual languages within the family. However, when the differences between the speech of different regions at the extremes of the continuum are so great that there is no mutual intelligibility between them, as occurs in Arabic, the continuum cannot meaningfully be seen as a single language. \n\nA speech variety may also be considered either a language or a dialect depending on social or political considerations. Thus, different sources, especially over time, can give wildly different numbers of languages within a certain family. Classifications of the Japonic family, for example, range from one language (a language isolate with dialects) to nearly twenty—until the classification of Ryukyuan as separate languages within a Japonic language family rather than dialects of Japanese, the Japanese language itself was considered a language isolate and therefore the only language in its family.\n\nMost of the world's languages are known to be related to others. Those that have no known relatives (or for which family relationships are only tentatively proposed) are called language isolates, essentially language families consisting of a single language. An example is Basque. In general, it is assumed that language isolates have relatives or had relatives at some point in their history but at a time depth too great for linguistic comparison to recover them.\n\nA language isolated in its own branch within a family, such as Albanian and Armenian within Indo-European, is often also called an isolate, but the meaning of the word \"isolate\" in such cases is usually clarified with a modifier. For instance, Albanian and Armenian may be referred to as an \"Indo-European isolate\". By contrast, so far as is known, the Basque language is an absolute isolate: it has not been shown to be related to any other language despite numerous attempts. Another well-known isolate is Mapudungun, the Mapuche language from the Araucanían language family in Chile. A language may be said to be an isolate currently but not historically if related but now extinct relatives are attested. The Aquitanian language, spoken in Roman times, may have been an ancestor of Basque, but it could also have been a sister language to the ancestor of Basque. In the latter case, Basque and Aquitanian would form a small family together. (Ancestors are not considered to be distinct members of a family.)\n\nA proto-language can be thought of as a mother language (not to be confused with a mother tongue, which is one that a specific person has been exposed to from birth), being the root which all languages in the family stem from. The common ancestor of a language family is seldom known directly since most languages have a relatively short recorded history. However, it is possible to recover many features of a proto-language by applying the comparative method, a reconstructive procedure worked out by 19th century linguist August Schleicher. This can demonstrate the validity of many of the proposed families in the list of language families. For example, the reconstructible common ancestor of the Indo-European language family is called \"Proto-Indo-European\". Proto-Indo-European is not attested by written records and so is conjectured to have been spoken before the invention of writing.\n\nShared innovations, acquired by borrowing or other means, are not considered genetic and have no bearing with the language family concept. It has been asserted, for example, that many of the more striking features shared by Italic languages (Latin, Oscan, Umbrian, etc.) might well be \"areal features\". However, very similar-looking alterations in the systems of long vowels in the West Germanic languages greatly postdate any possible notion of a proto-language innovation (and cannot readily be regarded as \"areal\", either, since English and continental West Germanic were not a linguistic area). In a similar vein, there are many similar unique innovations in Germanic, Baltic and Slavic that are far more likely to be areal features than traceable to a common proto-language. But legitimate uncertainty about whether shared innovations are areal features, coincidence, or inheritance from a common ancestor, leads to disagreement over the proper subdivisions of any large language family.\n\nA sprachbund is a geographic area having several languages that feature common linguistic structures. The similarities between those languages are caused by language contact, not by chance or common origin, and are not recognized as criteria that define a language family. An example of a sprachbund would be the Indian subcontinent.\n\nThe concept of language families is based on the historical observation that languages develop dialects, which over time may diverge into distinct languages. However, linguistic ancestry is less clear-cut than familiar biological ancestry, in which species do not crossbreed. It is more like the evolution of microbes, with extensive lateral gene transfer: Quite distantly related languages may affect each other through language contact, which in extreme cases may lead to languages with no single ancestor, whether they be creoles or mixed languages. In addition, a number of sign languages have developed in isolation and appear to have no relatives at all. Nonetheless, such cases are relatively rare and most well-attested languages can be unambiguously classified as belonging to one language family or another, even if this family's relation to other families is not known.\n\nBULLET::::- Constructed language\nBULLET::::- Endangered language\nBULLET::::- Extinct language\nBULLET::::- List of revived languages\nBULLET::::- Global language system\nBULLET::::- ISO 639-5\nBULLET::::- Linguist List\nBULLET::::- List of language families\nBULLET::::- List of languages by number of native speakers\nBULLET::::- Origin of language\nBULLET::::- Proto-language\nBULLET::::- Proto-Human language\nBULLET::::- Tree model\nBULLET::::- Unclassified language\nBULLET::::- Father Tongue hypothesis\nBULLET::::- Boas, Franz. (1922). \"Handbook of American Indian languages\" (Vol. 2). Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 40. Washington, D.C.: Government Print Office (Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology).\nBULLET::::- Boas, Franz. (1933). \"Handbook of American Indian languages\" (Vol. 3). Native American legal materials collection, title 1227. Glückstadt: J.J. Augustin.\nBULLET::::- Campbell, Lyle. (1997). \"American Indian languages: The historical linguistics of Native America\". New York: Oxford University Press. .\nBULLET::::- Campbell, Lyle; & Mithun, Marianne (Eds.). (1979). \"The languages of native America: Historical and comparative assessment\". Austin: University of Texas Press.\nBULLET::::- Goddard, Ives (Ed.). (1996). \"Languages\". Handbook of North American Indians (W. C. Sturtevant, General Ed.) (Vol. 17). Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution. .\nBULLET::::- Goddard, Ives. (1999). \"Native languages and language families of North America\" (rev. and enlarged ed. with additions and corrections). [Map]. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press (Smithsonian Institution). (Updated version of the map in Goddard 1996). .\nBULLET::::- Gordon, Raymond G., Jr. (Ed.). (2005). \"Ethnologue: Languages of the world\" (15th ed.). Dallas, TX: SIL International. . (Online version: http://www.ethnologue.com).\nBULLET::::- Greenberg, Joseph H. (1966). \"The Languages of Africa\" (2nd ed.). Bloomington: Indiana University.\nBULLET::::- Harrison, K. David. (2007) \"When Languages Die: The Extinction of the World's Languages and the Erosion of Human Knowledge\". New York and London: Oxford University Press.\nBULLET::::- Mithun, Marianne. (1999). \"The languages of Native North America\". Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (hbk); .\nBULLET::::- Ross, Malcolm. (2005). \"Pronouns as a preliminary diagnostic for grouping Papuan languages\". In: Andrew Pawley, Robert Attenborough, Robin Hide and Jack Golson, eds, \"Papuan pasts: cultural, linguistic and biological histories of Papuan-speaking peoples\" (PDF)\nBULLET::::- Ruhlen, Merritt. (1987). \"A guide to the world's languages\". Stanford: Stanford University Press.\nBULLET::::- Sturtevant, William C. (Ed.). (1978–present). \"Handbook of North American Indians\" (Vol. 1–20). Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution. (Vols. 1–3, 16, 18–20 not yet published).\nBULLET::::- Voegelin, C. F. & Voegelin, F. M. (1977). \"Classification and index of the world's languages\". New York: Elsevier.\nBULLET::::- Linguistic maps (from Muturzikin)\nBULLET::::- Ethnologue\nBULLET::::- The Multitree Project\nBULLET::::- Lenguas del mundo (World Languages)\nBULLET::::- Comparative Swadesh list tables of various language families (from Wiktionary)\nBULLET::::- Most similar languages\n"}
{"id": "18194", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18194", "title": "Looe Island", "text": "Looe Island\n\nLooe Island (, meaning \"island of the monk's enclosure\"), also known as St George's Island, and historically St Michael's Island is a small island a mile from the mainland town of Looe off Cornwall, England.\n\nAccording to local legend, Joseph of Arimathea landed here with the child Christ. Some scholars, including Glyn Lewis, suggest the island could be Ictis, the location described by Diodorus Siculus as a centre for the tin trade in pre-Roman Britain.\n\nThe island is now owned and managed by the Cornwall Wildlife Trust charity where access is carefully managed for the benefit of wildlife and landing is only possible via the Cornwall Wildlife Trust authorized boatman. The waters around the island are a marine nature reserve and form part of the Looe Voluntary Marine Conservation Area (VMCA). First established in 1995, the Looe VCMA covers nearly 5 km of coastline and aims to protect the coastal and marine wildlife around Looe.\n\nPeople have been living on Looe Island since the Iron Age. Evidence of early habitation includes pieces of Roman amphorae as well as stone boat anchors and Roman coins. In the Dark Ages, the island was used a seat of early Christian settlement. The child Jesus was believed to have visited the Island with his uncle, Joseph of Arimathea, who traded with the Cornish tin traders. Therefore, Looe Island became a place of pilgrimage for early Christians and a small thatched roofed chapel was built there during this time.\n\nIn the later medieval period, the island came under the overall control of Glastonbury Abbey, with the Prior of Lammana being directly responsible for its governance; the island's chapel was under the care of two Benedictine monks until 1289 when the property was sold to a local landowner. The priory was replaced by a domestic chapel served by a secular priest until the Dissolution of the Monasteries in 1536 when it became property of the Crown. From the 13th to the 16th centuries it was known as St Michael's Island but after the dissolution of the monasteries, it was rededicated in 1594 as St George's Island.\n\nThrough the 17th and 18th centuries the island was used by smugglers to avoid the British Government's revenue cutters out of Plymouth and Falmouth. The Old Guildhall Museum in Looe hold information and research about the smuggling families of Looe Island and information is also available in the more recent publications about the island.\n\nIn the 20th century, Looe island was owned (and inhabited) by two sisters, Babs and Evelyn Atkins, who wrote two books: \"We Bought An Island\" and its sequel \"Tales From Our Cornish Island\" . They chronicle the purchase of the island and what it was like to live there. Evelyn died in 1997 at the age of 87; Babs continued to live on the island until her death in 2004, at the age of 86. On her death, the island was bequeathed to the Cornwall Wildlife Trust; it will be preserved as a nature reserve in perpetuity. The adjoining islet, formerly known as Little Island, now renamed Trelawny Island and connected by a small bridge, was bequeathed by Miss Atkins back to the Trelawny family, who previously owned Looe Island from 1743 to 1921.\n\nSituated in the English Channel, about one mile from East Looe in the direction of Polperro, it is about in area and a mile (1.6 km) in circumference. Its highest point is above sea level. Looe Island, like much of south west England, has a mild climate with frost and snow being rare.\n\nThe island is owned and managed by the Cornwall Wildlife Trust. This is a non-profit-making venture, the landing fees and other income being devoted to conserving the island's natural environment and providing facilities. The island is open during the summer to day visitors arriving by the Trust's boat. After a short welcome talk visitors are directed to the small visitor centre from where they can pick up a copy of the self-guided trail. Visitors have some two hours on the island and all trips are subject to tides and weather/sea state. While it is normally accessible only by the Cornwall Wildlife Trust's boat, at extremely low spring tides it is possible for the journey to be made by foot across the slippery, seaweed-covered rocky sea floor. However you have to remain on the beach and promptly head back to the mainland.\n\nIn 2008, Channel 4's archaeology series \"Time Team\" visited the island to carry out an investigation into its early Christian history. They excavated the sites of Christian chapels built on both the island and on the mainland opposite. During their dig they found the remains of a Benedictine chapel that was built in c.1139 by monks from Glastonbury Abbey, a reliquary, graves and the remains of much earlier Anglo-Romano places of worship built of wood with dating evidence suggesting use by Christians before the reign of Constantine the Great.\n\nIn 1994/95 Andrew Hugill composed Island Symphony, an electro-acoustic piece utilising sampled sounds sourced over the net plus recorded natural sounds from the island itself.\n\nBULLET::::- St Michael's Mount\nBULLET::::- Mont Saint-Michel\nBULLET::::- List of monastic houses in Cornwall\n\nBULLET::::- \"Looe Island Then and Now: Carolyn Clarke 2014 United P. C Publisher\nBULLET::::- \"The Looe Island Story: an Illustrated History of St George's Island\", Mike Dunn, 2006, Polperro Heritage Press,\nBULLET::::- \" Island Life: A History of Looe Island, David Clensy, 2006\nBULLET::::- \" We Bought an Island: Evelyn E Atkins 1976\nBULLET::::- \" Tales from our Cornish Island: Evelyn E Atkins 0-340-22688-9\n\nBULLET::::- Cornwall Wildlife Trust\nBULLET::::- Smuggling history\nBULLET::::- Looe Marine Conservation Group\n"}
{"id": "18195", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18195", "title": "LaTeX", "text": "LaTeX\n\nLaTeX ( or ) is a document preparation system. When writing, the writer uses plain text as opposed to the formatted text found in WYSIWYG (\"what you see is what you get\") word processors like Microsoft Word, LibreOffice Writer and Apple Pages. The writer uses markup tagging conventions to define the general structure of a document (such as article, book, and letter), to stylise text throughout a document (such as bold and italics), and to add citations and cross-references. A TeX distribution such as TeX Live or MikTeX is used to produce an output file (such as PDF or DVI) suitable for printing or digital distribution. Within the typesetting system, its name is stylised as LaTeX.\n\nLaTeX is widely used in academia for the communication and publication of scientific documents in many fields, including mathematics, statistics, computer science, engineering, chemistry, physics, economics, linguistics, quantitative psychology, philosophy, and political science. It also has a prominent role in the preparation and publication of books and articles that contain complex multilingual materials, such as Sanskrit and Greek. LaTeX uses the TeX typesetting program for formatting its output, and is itself written in the TeX macro language.\n\nLaTeX can be used as a standalone document preparation system, or as an intermediate format. In the latter role, for example, it is sometimes used as part of a pipeline for translating DocBook and other XML-based formats to PDF. The typesetting system offers programmable desktop publishing features and extensive facilities for automating most aspects of typesetting and desktop publishing, including numbering and cross-referencing of tables and figures, chapter and section headings, the inclusion of graphics, page layout, indexing and bibliographies.\n\nLike TeX, LaTeX started as a writing tool for mathematicians and computer scientists, but even from early in its development, it has also been taken up by scholars who needed to write documents that include complex math expressions or non-Latin scripts, such as Arabic, Sanskrit and Chinese.\n\nLaTeX is intended to provide a high-level, descriptive markup language that accesses the power of TeX in an easier way for writers. In essence, TeX handles the layout side, while LaTeX handles the content side for document processing. LaTeX comprises a collection of TeX macros and a program to process LaTeX documents, and because the plain TeX formatting commands are elementary, it provides authors with ready-made commands for formatting and layout requirements such as chapter headings, footnotes, cross-references and bibliographies.\n\nLaTeX was originally written in the early 1980s by Leslie Lamport at SRI International. The current version is LaTeX2e (stylised as LaTeX2ε). LaTeX is free software and is distributed under the LaTeX Project Public License (LPPL).\n\nLaTeX attempts to follow the design philosophy of separating presentation from content, so that authors can focus on the content of what they are writing without attending simultaneously to its visual appearance. In preparing a LaTeX document, the author specifies the logical structure using simple, familiar concepts such as \"chapter\", \"section\", \"table\", \"figure\", etc., and lets the LaTeX system handle the formatting and layout of these structures. As a result, it encourages the separation of the layout from the content — while still allowing manual typesetting adjustments whenever needed. This concept is similar to the mechanism by which many word processors allow styles to be defined globally for an entire document, or the use of Cascading Style Sheets in styling HTML documents.\n\nThe LaTeX system is a markup language that handles typesetting and rendering, and can be arbitrarily extended by using the underlying macro language to develop custom macros such as new environments and commands. Such macros are often collected into \"packages,\" which could then be made available to address some specific typesetting needs such as the formatting of complex mathematical expressions or graphics (e.g., the use of the codice_1 environment provided by the codice_2 package to produce aligned equations).\n\nIn order to create a document in LaTeX, you first write a file, say codice_3, using your preferred text editor. Then you give your codice_3 file as input to the TeX program (with the LaTeX macros loaded), which prompts TeX to write out a file suitable for onscreen viewing or printing. This write-format-preview cycle is one of the chief ways in which working with LaTeX differs from the What-You-See-Is-What-You-Get (WYSIWYG) style of document editing. It is similar to the code-compile-execute cycle known to the computer programmers. Today, many LaTeX-aware editing programs make this cycle a simple matter through the pressing a single key, while showing the output preview on the screen beside the input window. Some online LaTeX editors even automatically refresh the preview, while other online tools provide incremental editing in-place, mixed in with the preview in a streamlined single window.\n\nThe example below shows the LaTeX input and corresponding output:\n\nNote how the equation for formula_1 (highlighted in the example code) was typeset by the markup:\n\nwhere the square root is denoted by \"codice_5\", and the fractions by \"codice_6\".\n\nThe characters T, E, X in the name come from the Greek capital letters tau, epsilon, and chi, as the name of TeX derives from the (skill, art, technique); for this reason, TeX's creator Donald Knuth promotes a pronunciation of () (that is, with a voiceless velar fricative as in Modern Greek, similar to the ch in loch). Lamport remarks that \"TeX is usually pronounced \"tech\", making \"lah\"-teck, lah-\"teck\", and \"lay\"-teck the logical choices; but language is not always logical, so \"lay-tecks\" is also possible.\"\n\nThe name is traditionally printed in running text with a special typographical logo: LaTeX.\nIn media where the logo cannot be precisely reproduced in running text, the word is typically given the unique capitalization \"LaTeX\". Alternatively, the TeX, LaTeX and XeTeX logos can also be rendered via pure CSS and XHTML for use in graphical web browsers — by following the specifications of the internal codice_7 macro.\n\nLaTeX is typically distributed along with plain TeX under a free software license: the LaTeX Project Public License (LPPL). The LPPL is not compatible with the GNU General Public License, as it requires that modified files must be clearly differentiable from their originals (usually by changing the filename); this was done to ensure that files that depend on other files will produce the expected behavior and avoid dependency hell. The LPPL is DFSG compliant as of version 1.3. As free software, LaTeX is available on most operating systems, which include UNIX (Solaris, HP-UX, AIX), BSD (FreeBSD, macOS, NetBSD, OpenBSD), Linux (Red Hat, Debian, Arch, Gentoo), Windows, DOS, RISC OS, AmigaOS and Plan9.\n\nAs a macro package, LaTeX provides a set of macros for TeX to interpret. There are many other macro packages for TeX, including Plain TeX, GNU Texinfo, AMSTeX, and ConTeXt.\n\nWhen TeX \"compiles\" a document, it follows (from the user's point of view) the following processing sequence: Macros → TeX → Driver → Output. Different implementations of each of these steps are typically available in TeX distributions. Traditional TeX will output a DVI file, which is usually converted to a PostScript file. More recently, Hàn Thế Thành and others have written a new implementation of TeX called pdfTeX, which also outputs to PDF and takes advantage of features available in that format. The XeTeX engine developed by Jonathan Kew, on the other hand, merges modern font technologies and Unicode with TeX.\n\nThe default font for LaTeX is Knuth's Computer Modern, which gives default documents created with LaTeX the same distinctive look as those created with plain TeX. XeTeX allows the use of OpenType and TrueType (that is, outlined) fonts for output files.\n\nThere are also many editors for LaTeX, some of which are offline, source-code-based while others are online, partial-WYSIWYG-based. For more, see Comparison of TeX editors.\n\nLaTeX2e is the current version of LaTeX, since it replaced LaTeX 2.09 in 1994. , LaTeX3, which started in the early 1990s, is under a long-term development project. Planned features include improved syntax, hyperlink support, a new user interface, access to arbitrary fonts and a new documentation.\n\nThere are numerous commercial implementations of the entire TeX system. System vendors may add extra features like additional typefaces and telephone support. LyX is a free, WYSIWYM visual document processor that uses LaTeX for a back-end. TeXmacs is a free, WYSIWYG editor with similar functionalities as LaTeX, but with a different typesetting engine. Other WYSIWYG editors that produce LaTeX include Scientific Word on MS Windows., and BaKoMa TeX on Windows, Mac and Linux.\n\nA number of community-supported TeX distributions are available, including TeX Live (multi-platform), teTeX (deprecated in favor of TeX Live, UNIX), fpTeX (deprecated), MiKTeX (Windows), proTeXt (Windows), MacTeX (TeX Live with the addition of Mac specific programs), gwTeX (Mac OS X) (deprecated), OzTeX (Mac OS Classic), AmigaTeX (no longer available), PasTeX (AmigaOS, available on the Aminet repository), and Auto-Latex Equations (Google Docs add-on that supports MathJax LaTeX commands).\n\nLaTeX documents (codice_8) can be opened with any text editor. They consist of plain text and do not contain hidden formatting codes or binary instructions. Additionally, TeX documents can be shared by rendering the LaTeX file to Rich Text Format (codice_9) or XML. This can be done using the free software programs LaTeX2RTF or TeX4ht. LaTeX can also be rendered to PDF files using the LaTeX extension pdfLaTeX. LaTeX files containing Unicode text can be processed into PDFs with the codice_10 package, or by the TeX extensions XeLaTeX and LuaLaTeX.\nBULLET::::- HeVeA is a converter written in Ocaml that converts LaTeX documents to HTML5. It is licensed under the Q Public License.\nBULLET::::- LaTeX2HTML is a converter written in Perl that converts LaTeX documents to HTML. This way, e.g., scientific papers—primarily typeset for printing—can be placed on the Web for online viewing. It is licensed under GNU GPL v2. The latest updates are available from CTAN.\nBULLET::::- LaTeXML is a free, public domain software, written in Perl, which converts LaTeX documents to a variety of structured formats, including HTML5, epub, jats, tei.\nBULLET::::- Pandoc is a 'universal document converter' able to transform LaTeX into many different file formats, including HTML5, epub, rtf and docx. It is licensed under GNU GPL v2.\n\nLaTeX was created in the early 1980s by Leslie Lamport, when he was working at SRI. He needed to write TeX macros for his own use, and thought that with a little extra effort he could make a general package usable by others. Peter Gordon, an editor at Addison-Wesley, convinced him to write a LaTeX user's manual for publication (Lamport was initially skeptical that anyone would pay money for it); it came out in 1986 and sold hundreds of thousands of copies. Meanwhile, Lamport released versions of his LaTeX macros in 1984 and 1985. On 21 August 1989, at a TeX Users Group (TUG) meeting at Stanford, Lamport agreed to turn over maintenance and development of LaTeX to Frank Mittelbach. Mittelbach, along with Chris Rowley and Rainer Schöpf, formed the LaTeX3 team; in 1994, they released LaTeX 2e, the current standard version, and continue working on LaTeX3.\n\nBULLET::::- BibTeX – reference management software typically used with LaTeX\nBULLET::::- Formula editor\nBULLET::::- List of document markup languages\nBULLET::::- List of TeX extensions\nBULLET::::- xdvi – software for viewing DVI files while using Unix\n\n\nBULLET::::- LaTeX Vs. Word Comparison\nBULLET::::- How to Write an Article in Word and Convert It to LaTeX Format\nBULLET::::- MOEDITOR A LaTeX editor available in Windows, Mac and Ubuntu.\nBULLET::::- Google Colaboratory A Jupyter notebook environment that can handle LaTeX and Python.\nBULLET::::- A Comprehensive Tutorial Series to Learn LaTeX Step by Step by Resurchify\n"}
{"id": "18196", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18196", "title": "List of saints", "text": "List of saints\n\nThis is an incomplete list of Christian saints in alphabetical order by Christian name, but, where known and given, a surname, location, or personal attribute (included as part of the name) may affect the ordering.\n\nOne list says there are 810 canonized Roman Catholic saints (who have been through the formal institutional process of canonization), although some give numbers in the thousands. (Pope John Paul II alone canonized 110 individuals, plus many group canonizations such as 110 martyr saints of China, 103 Korean martyrs, 117 Vietnamese martyrs, Mexican Martyrs, Spanish martyrs and French revolutionary martyrs.) Among the Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox Communions, the numbers may be even higher, since there is no fixed process of \"canonization\" and each individual jurisdiction within the two Orthodox communions independently maintains parallel lists of saints that have only partial overlap. Note that 78 popes are considered saints.\n\nThe Anglican Communion recognizes pre-Reformation saints, as does the United Methodist Church. Persons who have led lives of celebrated sanctity or missionary zeal are included in the Calendar of the Prayer Book \"without thereby enrolling or commending such persons as saints of the Church\". Similarly, any individuals commemorated in the Lutheran calendar of saints will be listed as well.\n\nWikipedia contains calendars of saints for particular denominations, listed by the day of the year on which they are traditionally venerated, as well as a chronological list of saints and blesseds, listed by their date of death.\n\n! rowspan=\"2\"  Saint\n! rowspan=\"2\"  Date of birth\n! rowspan=\"2\"  Date of death\n! rowspan=\"2\"  Date ofcanonization\n! colspan=\"5\"  Tradition\n! Anglican\n! Oriental Orthodox\n! Eastern Orthodox\n! Roman Catholic\n! Total\nAbel of Reims\nAbraham of Scetes\n\nAvoye\n\nYes\n1\n\nYes\n1\n\nYes\nYes\n2\n\nJoseph Vaz\n\nYes\nYes\n2\nLudmila of Bohemia\n\nYes\nYes\n2\n\nMartyrs of Libya\n15 Dec 2015\n21 Dec 2015\nYes (Copts)\n\n1\n\nMelania the Younger\n\n1\n\nEuphrasia Eluvathingal\n17 Oct 1877\n29 Aug 1952\n23 Nov 2014\n\nYes\n1\n\n \"Common Worship\" has \"Commemoration\".\n\nBULLET::::- Calendar of saints\nBULLET::::- Chronological list of saints and blesseds\nBULLET::::- Doctor of the church\nBULLET::::- List of blesseds\nBULLET::::- List of canonizations, for a list of Catholic canonizations by date\nBULLET::::- List of Catholic saints\nBULLET::::- List of early Christian saints\nBULLET::::- List of patron saints by occupation and activity\nBULLET::::- List of saints of India\nBULLET::::- List of Russian saints\nBULLET::::- List of saints by pope\nBULLET::::- List of saints of Ireland\nBULLET::::- List of servants of God (Roman Catholic Church)\nBULLET::::- List of venerable people (Roman Catholic)\nBULLET::::- List of venerable people (Eastern Orthodox)\nBULLET::::- Martyrology\nBULLET::::- On the Resting-Places of the Saints (list from 11th century England)\nBULLET::::- Patron saint\nBULLET::::- Roman Martyrology\nBULLET::::- Saint symbology\nBULLET::::- Saints in Anglicanism\nBULLET::::- Saints in Methodism\n\nBULLET::::- Extensive categorized lists of Catholic Saints\nBULLET::::- Catholic Saints by patronage topics\nBULLET::::- Catholic Online list of saints\nBULLET::::- Church of England \"Common Worship\" calendar\nBULLET::::- Coptic Saints Galleries at http://St-Takla.org\nBULLET::::- The Prologue from Ohrid, a collection of brief lives of Orthodox saints along with brief homilies and meditations.\nBULLET::::- Hagiographies, hymnography, and icons for many Orthodox saints from the website of the Orthodox Church in America.\n"}
{"id": "18198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18198", "title": "Lebesgue measure", "text": "Lebesgue measure\n\nIn measure theory, a branch of mathematics, the Lebesgue measure, named after French mathematician Henri Lebesgue, is the standard way of assigning a measure to subsets of \"n\"-dimensional Euclidean space. For \"n\" = 1, 2, or 3, it coincides with the standard measure of length, area, or volume. In general, it is also called n\"-dimensional volume, n\"-volume, or simply volume. It is used throughout real analysis, in particular to define Lebesgue integration. Sets that can be assigned a Lebesgue measure are called Lebesgue-measurable; the measure of the Lebesgue-measurable set \"A\" is here denoted by \"λ\"(\"A\").\n\nHenri Lebesgue described this measure in the year 1901, followed the next year by his description of the Lebesgue integral. Both were published as part of his dissertation in 1902.\n\nThe Lebesgue measure is often denoted by \"dx\", but this should not be confused with the distinct notion of a volume form.\n\nGiven a subset formula_1, with the length of interval formula_2 given by formula_3, the Lebesgue outer measure formula_4 is defined as\n\nThe Lebesgue measure is defined on the Lebesgue \"σ\"-algebra, which is the collection of all sets formula_6 which satisfy the \"Carathéodory criterion\" which requires that for every formula_7,\n\nFor any set in the Lebesgue \"σ\"-algebra, its Lebesgue measure is given by its Lebesgue outer measure formula_9.\n\nSets that are not included in the Lebesgue \"σ\"-algebra are not Lebesgue-measurable. Such sets do exist (e.g. Vitali sets), i.e., the Lebesgue \"σ\"-algebra is strictly contained in the power set of formula_10.\n\nThe first part of the definition states that the subset formula_6 of the real numbers is reduced to its outer measure by coverage by sets of open intervals. Each of these sets of intervals formula_12 covers formula_6 in the sense that when the intervals are combined together by union, they contain formula_6. The total length of any covering interval set can easily overestimate the measure of formula_6, because formula_6 is a subset of the union of the intervals, and so the intervals may include points which are not in formula_6. The Lebesgue outer measure emerges as the greatest lower bound (infimum) of the lengths from among all possible such sets. Intuitively, it is the total length of those interval sets which fit formula_6 most tightly and do not overlap.\n\nThat characterizes the Lebesgue outer measure. Whether this outer measure translates to the Lebesgue measure proper depends on an additional condition. This condition is tested by taking subsets formula_19 of the real numbers using formula_6 as an instrument to split formula_19 into two partitions: the part of formula_19 which intersects with formula_6 and the remaining part of formula_19 which is not in formula_6: the set difference of formula_19 and formula_6. These partitions of formula_19 are subject to the outer measure. If for all possible such subsets formula_19 of the real numbers, the partitions of formula_19 cut apart by formula_6 have outer measures whose sum is the outer measure of formula_19, then the outer Lebesgue measure of formula_6 gives its Lebesgue measure. Intuitively, this condition means that the set formula_6 must not have some curious properties which causes a discrepancy in the measure of another set when formula_6 is used as a \"mask\" to \"clip\" that set, hinting at the existence of sets for which the Lebesgue outer measure does not give the Lebesgue measure. (Such sets are, in fact, not Lebesgue-measurable.)\n\nBULLET::::- Any open or closed interval of real numbers is Lebesgue-measurable, and its Lebesgue measure is the length . The open interval has the same measure, since the difference between the two sets consists only of the end points \"a\" and \"b\" and has measure zero.\nBULLET::::- Any Cartesian product of intervals and is Lebesgue-measurable, and its Lebesgue measure is , the area of the corresponding rectangle.\nBULLET::::- Moreover, every Borel set is Lebesgue-measurable. However, there are Lebesgue-measurable sets which are not Borel sets.\nBULLET::::- Any countable set of real numbers has Lebesgue measure 0.\nBULLET::::- In particular, the Lebesgue measure of the set of rational numbers is 0, although the set is dense in R.\nBULLET::::- The Cantor set is an example of an uncountable set that has Lebesgue measure zero.\nBULLET::::- If the axiom of determinacy holds then all sets of reals are Lebesgue-measurable. Determinacy is however not compatible with the axiom of choice.\nBULLET::::- Vitali sets are examples of sets that are not measurable with respect to the Lebesgue measure. Their existence relies on the axiom of choice.\nBULLET::::- Osgood curves are simple plane curves with positive Lebesgue measure (it can be obtained by small variation of the Peano curve construction). The dragon curve is another unusual example.\nBULLET::::- Any line in formula_36, for formula_37, has a zero Lebesgue measure. In general, every proper hyperplane has a zero Lebesgue measure in its ambient space.\n\nThe Lebesgue measure on R has the following properties:\n\nBULLET::::1. If \"A\" is a cartesian product of intervals \"I\" × \"I\" × ... × \"I\", then \"A\" is Lebesgue-measurable and formula_38 Here, \"I\" denotes the length of the interval \"I\".\nBULLET::::2. If \"A\" is a disjoint union of countably many disjoint Lebesgue-measurable sets, then \"A\" is itself Lebesgue-measurable and \"λ\"(\"A\") is equal to the sum (or infinite series) of the measures of the involved measurable sets.\nBULLET::::3. If \"A\" is Lebesgue-measurable, then so is its complement.\nBULLET::::4. \"λ\"(\"A\") ≥ 0 for every Lebesgue-measurable set \"A\".\nBULLET::::5. If \"A\" and \"B\" are Lebesgue-measurable and \"A\" is a subset of \"B\", then \"λ\"(\"A\") ≤ \"λ\"(\"B\"). (A consequence of 2, 3 and 4.)\nBULLET::::6. Countable unions and intersections of Lebesgue-measurable sets are Lebesgue-measurable. (Not a consequence of 2 and 3, because a family of sets that is closed under complements and disjoint countable unions does not need to be closed under countable unions: formula_39.)\nBULLET::::7. If \"A\" is an open or closed subset of R (or even Borel set, see metric space), then \"A\" is Lebesgue-measurable.\nBULLET::::8. If \"A\" is a Lebesgue-measurable set, then it is \"approximately open\" and \"approximately closed\" in the sense of Lebesgue measure (see the regularity theorem for Lebesgue measure).\nBULLET::::9. A Lebesgue-measurable set can be \"squeezed\" between a containing open set and a contained closed set. This property has been used as an alternative definition of Lebesgue measurability. More precisely, formula_40 is Lebesgue-measurable if and only if for every formula_41 there exist an open set formula_42 and a closed set formula_43 such that formula_44 and formula_45.\nBULLET::::10. A Lebesgue-measurable set can be \"squeezed\" between a containing Gset and a contained F. I.e, if \"A\" is Lebesgue-measurable then there exist a Gset \"G\" and an F \"F\" such that \"G\" ⊇ \"A\" ⊇ \"F\" and \"λ\"(\"G\" \\ \"A\") = \"λ\"(\"A\" \\ \"F\") = 0.\nBULLET::::11. Lebesgue measure is both locally finite and inner regular, and so it is a Radon measure.\nBULLET::::12. Lebesgue measure is strictly positive on non-empty open sets, and so its support is the whole of R.\nBULLET::::13. If \"A\" is a Lebesgue-measurable set with \"λ(\"A\") = 0 (a null set), then every subset of \"A\" is also a null set. A fortiori, every subset of \"A\" is measurable.\nBULLET::::14. If \"A\" is Lebesgue-measurable and \"x\" is an element of R, then the \"translation of \"A\" by x\", defined by \"A\" + \"x\" = {\"a\" + \"x\" : \"a\" ∈ \"A\"}, is also Lebesgue-measurable and has the same measure as \"A\".\nBULLET::::15. If \"A\" is Lebesgue-measurable and formula_46, then the \"dilation of formula_19 by formula_48\" defined by formula_49 is also Lebesgue-measurable and has measure formula_50\nBULLET::::16. More generally, if \"T\" is a linear transformation and \"A\" is a measurable subset of R, then \"T\"(\"A\") is also Lebesgue-measurable and has the measure formula_51.\n\nAll the above may be succinctly summarized as follows:\n\nThe Lebesgue measure also has the property of being \"σ\"-finite.\n\nA subset of R is a \"null set\" if, for every ε > 0, it can be covered with countably many products of \"n\" intervals whose total volume is at most ε. All countable sets are null sets.\n\nIf a subset of R has Hausdorff dimension less than \"n\" then it is a null set with respect to \"n\"-dimensional Lebesgue measure. Here Hausdorff dimension is relative to the Euclidean metric on R (or any metric Lipschitz equivalent to it). On the other hand, a set may have topological dimension less than \"n\" and have positive \"n\"-dimensional Lebesgue measure. An example of this is the Smith–Volterra–Cantor set which has topological dimension 0 yet has positive 1-dimensional Lebesgue measure.\n\nIn order to show that a given set \"A\" is Lebesgue-measurable, one usually tries to find a \"nicer\" set \"B\" which differs from \"A\" only by a null set (in the sense that the symmetric difference (\"A\" − \"B\") formula_53(\"B\" − \"A\") is a null set) and then show that \"B\" can be generated using countable unions and intersections from open or closed sets.\n\nThe modern construction of the Lebesgue measure is an application of Carathéodory's extension theorem. It proceeds as follows.\n\nFix . A box in R is a set of the form\nwhere , and the product symbol here represents a Cartesian product. The volume of this box is defined to be\n\nFor \"any\" subset \"A\" of R, we can define its outer measure \"λ\"*(\"A\") by:\n\nWe then define the set \"A\" to be Lebesgue-measurable if for every subset \"S\" of R,\n\nThese Lebesgue-measurable sets form a \"σ\"-algebra, and the Lebesgue measure is defined by for any Lebesgue-measurable set \"A\".\n\nThe existence of sets that are not Lebesgue-measurable is a consequence of a certain set-theoretical axiom, the axiom of choice, which is independent from many of the conventional systems of axioms for set theory. The Vitali theorem, which follows from the axiom, states that there exist subsets of R that are not Lebesgue-measurable. Assuming the axiom of choice, non-measurable sets with many surprising properties have been demonstrated, such as those of the Banach–Tarski paradox.\n\nIn 1970, Robert M. Solovay showed that the existence of sets that are not Lebesgue-measurable is not provable within the framework of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory in the absence of the axiom of choice (see Solovay's model).\n\nThe Borel measure agrees with the Lebesgue measure on those sets for which it is defined; however, there are many more Lebesgue-measurable sets than there are Borel measurable sets. The Borel measure is translation-invariant, but not complete.\n\nThe Haar measure can be defined on any locally compact group and is a generalization of the Lebesgue measure (R with addition is a locally compact group).\n\nThe Hausdorff measure is a generalization of the Lebesgue measure that is useful for measuring the subsets of R of lower dimensions than \"n\", like submanifolds, for example, surfaces or curves in R and fractal sets. The Hausdorff measure is not to be confused with the notion of Hausdorff dimension.\n\nIt can be shown that there is no infinite-dimensional analogue of Lebesgue measure.\n\nBULLET::::- Lebesgue's density theorem\nBULLET::::- Lebesgue measure of the set of Liouville numbers\nBULLET::::- Non-measurable set\nBULLET::::- Vitali set\n"}
{"id": "18201", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18201", "title": "Lake Champlain", "text": "Lake Champlain\n\nLake Champlain (; ; Abenaki: \"Pitawbagok\"; ) is a natural freshwater lake in North America mainly within the borders of the United States (in the states of Vermont and New York) but partially situated across the Canada–U.S. border, in the Canadian province of Quebec.\n\nThe New York portion of the Champlain Valley includes the eastern portions of Clinton County and Essex County. Most of this area is part of the Adirondack Park. There are recreational facilities in the park and along the relatively undeveloped coastline of Lake Champlain. The cities of Plattsburgh, New York and Burlington, Vermont are on the lake's western and eastern shores, respectively, and the Town of Ticonderoga, New York is in the region's southern part. The Quebec portion is in the regional county municipalities of Le Haut-Richelieu and Brome-Missisquoi. There are a number of islands in the lake; the largest include Grand Isle, Isle La Motte, and North Hero, all part of Grand Isle County, Vermont.\n\nThe Champlain Valley is the northernmost unit of a landform system known as the Great Appalachian Valley, which stretches between Quebec, Canada, to the north, and Alabama, US, to the south. The Champlain Valley is a physiographic section of the larger Saint Lawrence Valley, which in turn is part of the larger Appalachian physiographic division.\n\nLake Champlain is one of numerous large lakes scattered in an arc through Labrador, in Canada, the northern United States, and the Northwest Territories of Canada. It is the thirteenth largest lake by area in the US. Approximately in area, the lake is long and across at its widest point, and has a maximum depth of approximately . The lake varies seasonally from about above mean sea level.\n\nLake Champlain is in the Lake Champlain Valley between the Green Mountains of Vermont and the Adirondack Mountains of New York, drained northward by the -long Richelieu River into the St. Lawrence River at Sorel-Tracy, Quebec, northeast and downstream of Montreal, Quebec. It also receives the waters from the -long Lake George, so its basin collects waters from the northwestern slopes of the Green Mountains and the northernmost eastern peaks of the Adirondack Mountains.\n\nLake Champlain drains nearly half of Vermont, and approximately 250,000 people get their drinking water from the lake.\n\nThe lake is fed in Vermont by the LaPlatte, Lamoille, Missisquoi, Poultney, and Winooski rivers, along with Lewis Creek, Little Otter Creek, and Otter Creek. In New York, it is fed by the Ausable, Boquet, Great Chazy, La Chute, Little Ausable, Little Chazy, Salmon, and Saranac rivers, along with Putnam Creek. In Quebec, it is fed by the Pike River.\n\nIt is connected to the Hudson River by the Champlain Canal.\n\nParts of the lake freeze each winter, and in some winters the entire lake surface freezes, referred to as \"closing\". In July and August, the lake temperature reaches an average of .\n\nThe Chazy Reef is an extensive Ordovician carbonate rock formation that extends from Tennessee to Quebec and Newfoundland. It occurs in prominent outcropping at Goodsell Ridge, Isle La Motte, the northernmost island in Lake Champlain.\n\nThe oldest reefs are around \"The Head\" of the south end of the island; slightly younger reefs are found at the Fisk Quarry, and the youngest (the famous coral reefs) are in fields to the north. Together, these three sites provide a unique narrative of events that took place over 450 million years ago in the ocean in the Southern Hemisphere, long before Lake Champlain's emergence 20,000 years ago.\n\nThe lake has long acted as a border between indigenous nations much as it is today between the USA and Canada. The lake is located at the frontier between Abenaki and Mohawk (Iroquois Confederacy) traditional territories. The official toponym for the lake according to the orthography established by the Grand Council of Wanab-aki Nation is Pitawbagok (alternative orthographies include Petonbowk and Bitawbagok), meaning 'middle lake', 'lake in between' or 'double lake'.\n\nThe Mohawk name in modern orthography as standardized in 1993 is Kaniatarakwà:ronte, meaning \"a bulged lake\" or “lake with a bulge in it.\" An alternate name is Kaniá:tare tsi kahnhokà:ronte (phonetic English spelling \"Caniaderi Guarunte\" ), meaning 'door of the country' or 'lake to the country'. The lake is an important eastern gateway to Iroquois Confederacy lands.\n\nThe lake was named after the French explorer Samuel de Champlain, who encountered it in July 1609. While the ports of Burlington, Vermont, Port Henry, New York, and Plattsburgh, New York today are primarily used by small craft, ferries, and lake cruise ships, they were of substantial commercial and military importance in the 18th and 19th centuries.\n\nNew France allocated concessions all along lake Champlain to French settlers and built forts to defend the waterways. In colonial times, Lake Champlain was used as a water (or, in winter, ice) passage between the Saint Lawrence and Hudson valleys. Travelers found it easier to journey by boats and sledges on the lake rather than go overland on unpaved and frequently mud-bound roads. The lake's northern tip at Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu, Quebec (known as St. John in colonial times under British rule), is a short distance from Montreal, Quebec. The southern tip at Whitehall (Skenesborough in revolutionary times) is a short distance from Saratoga, Glens Falls, and Albany, New York.\n\nForts were built at Ticonderoga and Crown Point (Fort St. Frederic) to control passage on the lake in colonial times. Important battles were fought at Ticonderoga in 1758 and 1775. During the Revolutionary War, the British and Americans conducted a frenetic shipbuilding race through the spring and summer of 1776, at opposite ends of the lake, and fought a significant naval engagement on October 11 at the Battle of Valcour Island. While it was a tactical defeat for the Americans, and the small fleet led by Benedict Arnold was almost destroyed, the Americans gained a strategic victory; the British invasion was delayed long enough so the approach of winter prevented the fall of these forts until the following year. In this period, the Continental Army gained strength and was victorious at Saratoga.\n\nAt the start of the Revolutionary War, British forces occupied the Champlain Valley. However, it did not take long for rebel leaders to realize the importance of controlling Lake Champlain. Early in the war, the colonial militias attempted to expel the British from Boston; however, this undertaking could not be achieved without heavy artillery. The British forts at Ticonderoga and Crown Point, on Lake Champlain, were known to have ample supplies of artillery and were weakly manned by the British. Thus, the colonial militias devised a plan to take control of the two forts and bring the guns back to the fight in Boston.\nThe necessity of controlling the two forts at Ticonderoga and Crown Point placed Lake Champlain as a strategic arena during the Revolutionary War. By taking control of these forts, Americans not only gained heavy artillery, but control of a vast water highway, as well: Lake Champlain provided a direct invasion route to British Canada. However, had the British controlled the lake, they could have divided the colonies of New England and further depleted the Continental Army.\n\nThe Continental Army's first offensive action took place in May 1775, three weeks after the Battles of Lexington and Concord. Ethan Allen, accompanied by 200 Green Mountain Boys, was ordered to capture Fort Ticonderoga and retrieve supplies for the fight in Boston. Benedict Arnold shared the command with Allen, and in early May 1775, they captured Fort Ticonderoga, Crown Point, and the southern Loyalist settlement of Skenesborough. As a result of Allen’s offensive attack on the Champlain Valley in 1775, the American forces controlled the Lake Champlain waterway.\n\nThe Continental Army realized the strategic advantage of controlling Lake Champlain, as it leads directly to the heart of Quebec. Immediately after taking Forts Ticonderoga and Crown Point, the Americans began planning an attack on British Canada. The American siege of Quebec was a two-pronged assault and occurred throughout the winter of 1775–1776. Brigadier General Richard Montgomery led the first assault up the Champlain Valley into Canada, while Benedict Arnold led a second army to Quebec via the Maine wilderness.\n\nDespite the strategic advantage of controlling a direct route to Quebec by way of the Champlain Valley, the American siege of British Canada during the winter of 1775 failed. The Continental Army mistakenly assumed they would receive support from the Canadians upon their arrival at Quebec. This was not the case, and the rebel army struggled to take Quebec with diminishing supplies, support, and harsh northern winter weather.\n\nThe Continental Army was forced to camp outside Quebec’s walls for the winter, with reinforcements from New York, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Connecticut allowing the soldiers to maintain their siege of the city. The reinforcements traveled hundreds of miles up the frozen Lake Champlain and St. Lawrence River, but were too late and too few to influence a successful siege of Quebec. In May 1776, with the arrival of a British convoy carrying 10,000 British and Hessian troops to Canada, the Continental forces retreated back down the Champlain Valley to reevaluate their strategy.\n\"I know of no better method than to secure the important posts of Ticonderoga and Crown Point, and by building a number of armed vessels to command the lakes, otherwise the forces now in Canada will be brought down upon us as quick as possible, having nothing to oppose them… They will doubtless try to construct some armed vessels and then endeavor to penetrate the country toward New York.\" (Brigadier General John Sullivan to George Washington, June 24, 1776).\n\nBoth British and American forces spent the summer of 1776 building their naval fleets, at opposite ends of Lake Champlain. By the October 1776, the Continental Army had 16 operating naval vessels on Lake Champlain, a great increase to the four small ships they had at the beginning of the summer. General Benedict Arnold commanded the American naval fleet on Lake Champlain, which was composed of volunteers and soldiers drafted from the Northern Army. With great contrast to the Continental navy, experienced Royal Navy officers, British seamen, and Hessian artillerymen manned the British fleet on Lake Champlain. By the end of the summer of 1776, the opposing armies were prepared to battle over the strategic advantage of controlling Lake Champlain.\n\nOn October 11, 1776, the British and American naval fleets met on the western side of Valcour Island, on Lake Champlain. American General Benedict Arnold established the location, as it provided the Continental fleet with a natural defensive position. The British and American vessels engaged in combat for much of the day, only stopping due to the impending nightfall.\n\nAfter a long day of combat, the American fleet was in worse shape than the experienced British Navy. Upon ceasefire, Arnold called a council of war with his fellow officers, proposing to escape the British fleet via rowboats under the cover of night. As the British burned Arnold's flagship, the \"Royal Savage,\" to the east, the Americans rowed past the British lines.\n\nThe following morning, the British learned of the Americans' escape and set out after the fleeing Continental vessels. On October 13, the British fleet caught up to the struggling American ships near Split Rock Mountain. With no hope of fighting off the powerful British navy, Arnold ordered his men to run their five vessels aground in Ferris Bay, Panton, Vermont. The depleted Continental army escaped on land back to Fort Ticonderoga and Mount Independence; however, they no longer controlled the Lake Champlain waterway.\n\nThe approaching winter of 1776–1777 restricted British movement along the recently controlled Lake Champlain. As the British abandoned Crown Point and returned to Canada for the winter, the Americans reduced their garrisons in the Champlain Valley from 13,000 to 2,500 soldiers.\n\nIn early 1777, British General John Burgoyne led 8,000 troops from Canada, down Lake Champlain, and into the Champlain Valley. The goal of this invasion was to divide the New England colonies, thus forcing the Continental Army into a separated fight on multiple fronts. Lake Champlain provided Burgoyne with protected passage deep into the American colonies. Burgoyne’s army reached Fort Ticonderoga and Mount Independence in late June 1777. During the night of July 5, the American forces fled Ticonderoga as the British took control of the fort. However, Burgoyne’s southern campaign did not go uncontested.\n\nOn October 7, 1777, American General Horatio Gates, who occupied Bemis Heights, met Burgoyne’s army at the Second Battle of Freeman’s Farm. At Freeman’s Farm, Burgoyne’s army suffered its final defeat and ended their invasion south into the colonies. Ten days later, on October 17, 1777, British General Burgoyne surrendered his army at Saratoga. This defeat was instrumental to the momentum of the Revolutionary War, as the defeat of the British army along the Champlain-Hudson waterway convinced France to ally with the American army.\n\nFollowing the failed British campaign led by General Burgoyne, the British still maintained control over the Champlain waterway for the duration of the Revolutionary War. The British used the Champlain waterway to supply raids across the Champlain Valley from 1778 to 1780, and Lake Champlain permitted direct transportation of supplies from the British posts at the northern end of the lake.\n\nWith the end of the Revolutionary War in 1783, the British naval fleet on Lake Champlain retreated up to St. John’s. However, British troops garrisoned at Fort Dutchman's Point (North Hero, Vermont) and Fort au Fer (Champlain, New York) on Lake Champlain, did not leave until the 1796 Jay Treaty.\n\nEager to take back control of Lake Champlain following the end of the Revolutionary War, Americans flocked to settle the Champlain Valley. Many individuals emigrated from Massachusetts and other New England colonies, such as Salmon Dutton, a settler of Cavendish, Vermont. Dutton emigrated in 1782 and worked as a surveyor, town official, and toll road owner. His home had a dooryard garden, typical of mid-19th century New England village homes, and his experience settling in the Champlain Valley depicts the industries and lifestyles surrounding Lake Champlain following the Revolutionary War.\n\nSimilar to the experience of Salmon Dutton, former colonial militia Captain Hezekiah Barnes settled in Charlotte, Vermont, in 1787. Following the war, Barnes also worked as a road surveyor; he also established an inn and trading post in Charlotte, along the main trade route from Montreal down Lake Champlain. Barnes’s stagecoach inn was built in traditional Georgian style, with 10 fireplaces and a ballroom on the interior, and a wraparound porch on the outside. In 1800, Continental Army Captain Benjamin Harrington established a distillery business in Shelburne, Vermont, which supplied his nearby inn. Furthermore, Captain Stevens and Jeremiah Trescott built a water-powered sawmill in South Royalton, Vermont, in the late 1700s. These individual accounts shed light on the significance of Lake Champlain during the post-Revolutionary War period.\n\nDuring the War of 1812, British and American forces faced each other in the Battle of Lake Champlain, also known as the Battle of Plattsburgh, fought on September 11, 1814. This ended the final British invasion of the northern states during the War of 1812. It was fought just prior to the signing of the Treaty of Ghent, and the American victory denied the British any leverage to demand exclusive control over the Great Lakes or territorial gains against the New England states.\n\nThree US Naval ships have been named after this battle: , , and a cargo ship used during World War I.\n\nFollowing the War of 1812, the U.S. Army began construction on \"Fort Blunder\", an unnamed fortification built at the northernmost end of Lake Champlain to protect against attacks from British Canada. Its nickname came from a surveying error: the initial phase of construction on the fort turned out to be taking place on a point north of the Canada–U.S. border. Once this error was spotted, construction was abandoned. Locals scavenged materials used in the abandoned fort for use in their homes and public buildings.\n\nBy the Webster-Ashburton Treaty of 1842, the Canada–U.S. border was adjusted northward to include the strategically important site of \"Fort Blunder\" on the US side. In 1844, work was begun to replace the remains of the 1812-era fort with a massive new Third System masonry fortification, known as Fort Montgomery. Portions of this fort are still standing.\n\nIn the early 19th century, the construction of the Champlain Canal connected Lake Champlain to the Hudson River system, allowing north-south commerce by water from New York City to Montreal and Atlantic Canada.\n\nIn 1909, 65,000 people celebrated the 300th anniversary of the French discovery of the lake. Attending dignitaries included President William Howard Taft, along with representatives from France, Canada, and the United Kingdom.\n\nIn 1929, then-New York Governor Franklin Roosevelt and Vermont Governor John Weeks dedicated the first bridge to span the lake, built from Crown Point to Chimney Point. This bridge lasted until December 2009. Severe deterioration was found, and the bridge was demolished and replaced with the Lake Champlain Bridge, which opened in November 2011.\n\nOn February 19, 1932, boats were able to sail on Lake Champlain. It was the first time the lake was known to be free of ice during the winter at that time.\n\nLake Champlain briefly became the nation's sixth Great Lake on March 6, 1998, when President Clinton signed Senate Bill 927. This bill, which was led by U.S. Senator Patrick Leahy of Vermont and reauthorized the National Sea Grant Program, contained a line declaring Lake Champlain to be a Great Lake. This status enabled its neighboring states to apply for additional federal research and education funds allocated to these national resources. However, following a small uproar, the Great Lake status was rescinded on March 24 (although New York and Vermont universities continue to receive funds to monitor and study the lake).\n\nIn 1609, Samuel de Champlain wrote that he saw a lake monster long, as thick as a man's thigh, with silver-gray scales a dagger could not penetrate. The alleged monster had jaws with sharp and dangerous teeth. Native Americans claimed to have seen similar monsters long. This mysterious creature is likely the original Lake Champlain monster. The monster has been memorialized in sports teams' names and mascots, i.e., the Vermont Lake Monsters and Champ, the mascot of the state's minor league baseball team. A Vermont Historical Society publication recounts the story and offers possible explanations for accounts of the so-called monster: \"floating logs, schools of large sturgeons diving in a row, or flocks of black birds flying close to the water.\"\n\nA pollution prevention, control, and restoration plan for Lake Champlain was first endorsed in October 1996 by the governors of New York and Vermont, and the regional administrators of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). In April 2003, the plan was updated, and Quebec signed onto it. The plan is being implemented by the Lake Champlain Basin Program and its partners at the state, provincial, federal, and local levels. Renowned as a model for interstate and international cooperation, its primary goals are to reduce phosphorus inputs to Lake Champlain, reduce toxic contamination, minimize the risks to humans from water-related health hazards, and control the introduction, spread, and impact of non-native nuisance species to preserve the integrity of the Lake Champlain ecosystem.\n\nSenior staff who helped organize the Environmental Protection Agency in 1970 recall that International Paper was one of the first companies to call upon the brand new agency, because it was being pushed by both New York and Vermont with regard to a discharge of pollution into Lake Champlain.\n\nAgricultural and urban runoff from the watershed or drainage basin is the primary source of excess phosphorus, which exacerbates algae blooms in Lake Champlain. The most problematic blooms have been cyanobacteria, commonly called blue-green algae, in the northeastern part of the Lake, primarily Missisquoi Bay.\n\nTo reduce phosphorus runoff to this part of the lake, Vermont and Quebec agreed to reduce their inputs by 60% and 40%, respectively, by an agreement signed in 2002. While agricultural sources (manure and fertilizers) are the primary sources of phosphorus (about 70%) in the Missisquoi basin, runoff from developed land and suburbs is estimated to contribute about 46% of the phosphorus runoff basin-wide to Lake Champlain, and agricultural lands contributed about 38%.\n\nIn 2002, the cleanup plan noted that the lake had the capacity to absorb of phosphorus each year. In 2009, a judge noted that were still flowing in annually, more than twice what the lake could handle. Sixty municipal and industrial sewage plants discharge processed waste from the Vermont side.\n\nIn 2008, the EPA expressed concerns to the State of Vermont that the Lake's cleanup was not progressing fast enough to meet the original cleanup goal of 2016. The state, however, cites its Clean and Clear Action Plan as a model that will produce positive results for Lake Champlain.\n\nIn 2007, Vermont banned phosphates for dishwasher use starting in 2010. This will prevent an estimated from flowing into the lake. While this represents 0.6% of the phosphate pollution, it took US$1.9 million to remove the pollutant from treated wastewater, an EPA requirement.\n\nDespite concerns about pollution, Lake Champlain is safe for swimming, fishing, and boating. It is considered a world-class fishery for salmonid species (Lake trout and Atlantic salmon) and bass. About 81 fish species live in the lake, and more than 300 bird species rely on it for habitat and as a resource during migrations.\n\nBy 2008, at least six institutions were monitoring lake water health:\nBULLET::::1. Conservation Law Foundation, which in 2002 appointed a \"lakekeeper,\" who reviews the state's pollution controls\nBULLET::::2. Friends of Missisquoi Bay, formed in 2003\nBULLET::::3. Lake Champlain Committee\nBULLET::::4. Vermont Water Resources Board, which hired a water quality expert in 2008 to write water quality standards and create wetland protection rules\nBULLET::::5. Vermont Agency of Natural Resources, which in 2007 appointed a \"lake czar\" to oversee pollution control\nBULLET::::6. Clean and Clear, an agency of the Vermont state government, established in 2004\nBULLET::::7. Nature Conservancy, a non-profit group which focuses on biodiversity and ecosystem health.\n\nIn 2001, scientists estimated that farming contributed 38% of the phosphorus runoff. By 2010, results of environmentally conscious farming practices, enforced by law, had made any positive contribution to lake cleanliness. A federally funded study was started to analyze this problem and to arrive at a solution.\n\nBiologists have been trying to control lampreys in the lake since 1985 or earlier. Lampreys are native to the area but have expanded in population to such an extent that they wounded nearly all lake trout in 2006 and 70–80% of salmon. The use of pesticides against the lamprey has reduced their casualties of other fish to 35% of salmon and 31% of lake trout. The goal was 15% of salmon and 25% of lake trout.\n\nThe federal and state governments originally budgeted US$18 million for lake programs for 2010. This was later supplemented by an additional US$6.5 million from the federal government.\n\nIn 2010, the estimate of cormorant population, now classified as a nuisance species because they take so much of the lake fish, ranged from 14,000 to 16,000. A Fish and Wildlife commissioner said the ideal population would be 3,300 or about 3 per . Cormorants had disappeared from the lake (and all northern lakes) due to the use of DDT in the 1940s and 1950s, which made their eggs more fragile and reduced breeding populations.\n\nRing-billed gulls are also considered a nuisance, and measures have been taken to reduce their population. Authorities are trying to encourage the return of black crowned night herons, cattle egrets, and great blue herons, which disappeared during the time DDT was being widely used.\n\nIn 1989, UNESCO designated the area around Lake Champlain as the Champlain-Adirondack Biosphere Reserve.\n\nThe Alburgh Peninsula (also known as the Alburgh Tongue), extending south from the Quebec shore of the lake into Vermont, and Province Point, the southernmost tip of a small promontory approximately in size a few kilometres (miles) to the northeast of the town of East Alburgh, Vermont, are connected by land to the rest of the state only via Canada. This is a distinction shared with the state of Alaska, Point Roberts, Washington, and the Northwest Angle in Minnesota. All of these are practical exclaves of the United States contiguous with Canada. Unlike the other cases, highway bridges across the lake provide direct access to the Alburgh peninsula from within the United States (from three directions). \n\nTwo roadways cross over the lake, connecting Vermont and New York:\n\nBULLET::::- Since November 2011, the Lake Champlain Bridge has crossed the lake's southern part, connecting Chimney Point in Vermont with Crown Point, New York. It replaced Champlain Bridge, which was closed in 2009 because of severe structural problems that could have resulted in a collapse.\n\nIn 2009, the bridge had been used by 3,400 drivers per day, and driving around the southern end of the lake added two hours to the trip. Ferry service was re-established to take some of the traffic burden. On December 28, 2009, the bridge was destroyed by a controlled demolition. A new bridge was rapidly constructed by a joint state commitment, opening on November 7, 2011.\n\nBULLET::::- To the north, US 2 runs from Rouses Point, New York, to Grand Isle County, Vermont, in the town of Alburgh, before continuing south along a chain of islands towards Burlington. To the east, Vermont Route 78 runs from an intersection with US 2 in Alburgh through East Alburgh to Swanton. The US 2-VT 78 route technically runs from the New York mainland to an extension of the mainland between two arms of the lake and then to the Vermont mainland, but it provides a direct route across the two main arms of the lake's northern part.\n\nNorth of Ticonderoga, New York, the lake widens appreciably; ferry service is operated by the Lake Champlain Transportation Company at:\nBULLET::::- Charlotte, Vermont, to Essex, New York (may not travel when the lake is frozen)\nBULLET::::- Burlington, Vermont, to Port Kent, New York (seasonal)\nBULLET::::- Grand Isle, Vermont, to Cumberland Head, part of Plattsburgh, New York (year-round icebreaking service)\n\nWhile the old bridge was being demolished and the new one constructed, Lake Champlain Transportation\nCompany operated a free, 24-hour ferry from just south of the bridge to Chimney\nPoint in Vermont at the expense of the states of New York and Vermont at a cost to the states of about $10 per car.\n\nThe most southerly crossing is the Fort Ticonderoga Ferry, connecting Ticonderoga, New York with Shoreham, Vermont, just north of the historic fort.\n\nFour significant railroad crossings were built over the lake. As of 2016, only one remains.\nBULLET::::- The \"floating\" rail trestle from Larabees Point, Vermont to Ticonderoga, New York was operated by the Addison Branch of the Rutland Railroad. It was abandoned in 1918 due to a number of accidents which resulted in locomotives and rail cars falling into the lake.\nBULLET::::- The Island Line Causeway, a marble rock-landfill causeway that stretched from Colchester (on the mainland) north and west to South Hero, Vermont. Two breaks in the causeway were spanned by a fixed iron trestle and a swing bridge that could be opened to allow boats to pass. Rutland Railroad (later Rutland Railway) operated trains over this causeway from 1901–1961. The Railway was officially abandoned in 1963, with tracks and trestles removed over the course of the 10 years that followed. The marble causeway still remains, as does the fixed iron trestle that bridges the lesser of the two gaps. The swing bridge over the navigation channel was removed in the early 1970s.\n\nNow called Colchester Park, the main three-mile (5 km) causeway has been adapted and preserved as a recreation area for cyclists, runners, and anglers. Two smaller marble rock-landfill causeways were also erected as part of this line that connected Grand Isle to North Hero, and spanned from North Hero to Alburgh.\n\nBULLET::::- The Alburgh, Vermont – Rouses Point, New York rail trestle. From sometime in the late 19th century until 1964, this wooden trestle carried two railroads (the Rutland Railroad and the Central Vermont Railroad) over the lake just south of the US 2 vehicular bridge. The iron swing bridge at the center (over the navigation channel) has been removed. Most of the wooden pilings remain and can be seen looking south from the US 2 bridge. Part of the trestle on the Rouses Point side has been converted for use as an access pier associated with the local marina.\nBULLET::::- The Swanton – Alburgh, Vermont rail trestle. Built in the same manner as at Rouses Point, it crosses the lake just south of Missisquoi Bay and the Canada–U.S. border, within yards south of the Vermont Route 78 bridge. It is still in use by the New England Central Railroad.\n\nLake Champlain has been connected to the Erie Canal via the Champlain Canal since the canal's official opening September 9, 1823, the same day as the opening of the Erie Canal from Rochester on Lake Ontario to Albany. It connects to the St. Lawrence River via the Richelieu River, with the Chambly Canal bypassing rapids on the river since 1843. Together with these waterways the lake is part of the Lakes to Locks Passage. The Lake Champlain Seaway, a project to use the lake to bring ocean-going ships from New York City to Montreal, was proposed in the late 19th century and considered as late as the 1960s, but rejected for various reasons. The lake is also part of the 740-mile Northern Forest Canoe Trail, which begins in Old Forge, New York, and ends in Fort Kent, Maine.\n\nBurlington, Vermont (pop. 42,217, 2010 Census) is the largest city on the lake. The 2nd and 3rd most populated cities/towns are Plattsburgh, New York, and South Burlington, Vermont, respectively. The fourth-largest community is the town of Colchester.\n\nLake Champlain contains roughly 80 islands, three of which comprise four entire Vermont towns (most of Grand Isle County). The largest islands:\nBULLET::::- South Hero Island, the largest, containing the towns of Grand Isle, Vermont and South Hero, Vermont\nBULLET::::- North Hero Island, containing the town of North Hero, Vermont\nBULLET::::- Isle La Motte, containing the town of Isle La Motte, Vermont\nBULLET::::- Valcour Island, New York\nBULLET::::- Juniper Island (Lake Champlain)\nBULLET::::- Three Sisters\nBULLET::::- Four Brothers\nBULLET::::- Savage Island\nBULLET::::- Burton Island (State Park)\nBULLET::::- Cloak Island\nBULLET::::- Garden Island (Gunboat Island)\nBULLET::::- Crab Island, New York\nBULLET::::- Dameas Island\nBULLET::::- Hen Island\nBULLET::::- Butler's Island\nBULLET::::- Carleton's Prize\nBULLET::::- Young Island\nBULLET::::- Providence Island\nBULLET::::- Stave Island\nBULLET::::- Sunset Island\n\nBULLET::::- Bluff Point Lighthouse, on Valcour Island near the New York shore, was built in 1871; it was manned by a full-time lightkeeper until 1930, making it one of the last lighthouses to be manned on the Lake\nBULLET::::- Cumberland Head Light, which operated until 1934, is an historic stone lighthouse located on Cumberland Head, which is privately owned\nBULLET::::- Isle La Motte lighthouse, on the northern end of the island was originally red, but it faded to pink over time; it is privately owned\nBULLET::::- Juniper Island Light is a cast iron lighthouse that dates from 1846; in 1954, it was deactivated and replaced by a steel tower; it is privately owned\nBULLET::::- On Point Au Roche, part of Beekmantown, New York, there is a privately owned, historic lighthouse\nBULLET::::- Split Rock Lighthouse is located south of Essex, New York, near a natural boundary of the territory between the Mohawk and Algonquin tribes\n\nAll active navigational aids on the American portion of the lake are maintained by USCG Burlington station, along with those on international Lake Memphremagog to the east.\nAids to navigation on the Canadian portion of the lake are maintained by the Canadian Coast Guard.\n\nThere are a number of parks in the Lake Champlain region in both New York and Vermont.\n\nThose on the New York side of the lake include: Point Au Roche State Park, which park grounds have hiking and cross country skiing trails, and a public beach; and the Ausable Point State Park. The Cumberland Bay State Park is located on Cumberland Head, with a campground, city beach, and sports fields.\n\nThere are various parks along the lake on the Vermont side, including Sand Bar State Park in Milton, featuring a natural sand beach, swimming, canoe and kayak rentals, food concession, picnic grounds and a play area. At , Grand Isle State Park contains camping facilities, a sand volleyball court, a nature walk trail, a horseshoe pit and a play area. Button Bay State Park in Ferrisburgh features campsites, picnic areas, a nature center and a swimming pool. Burlington's Waterfront Park is a revitalized industrial area.\n\nCoast Guard Station Burlington provides \"Search and Rescue, Law Enforcement and Ice Rescue services 24 hours a day, 365 days a year.\" Services are also provided by local, and state, and federal governments bordering on the lake, including the U.S. Border Patrol, Royal Canadian Mounted Police, Vermont State Police, New York State Police Marine Detail, and Vermont Fish and Wildlife wardens.\n\nBULLET::::- Champlain Sea, post-glacial predecessor to Lake Champlain\nBULLET::::- Île aux Noix\nBULLET::::- List of lakes in Vermont\nBULLET::::- List of New York rivers\nBULLET::::- List of rivers of Quebec\nBULLET::::- List of rivers in Vermont\nBULLET::::- Odziozo\n\nBULLET::::- \"Bloom: the Plight of Lake Champlain\" (PBS film series)\nBULLET::::- \"Champlain: The Lake Between\" Documentary produced by Vermont Public Television\nBULLET::::- ECHO, Leahy Center for Lake Champlain\nBULLET::::- Ethan Allen Homestead Museum\nBULLET::::- Lake Champlain Community Sailing Center\nBULLET::::- Lake Champlain Basin Atlas\nBULLET::::- Lake Champlain Basin Program\nBULLET::::- Lake Champlain Maritime Museum\nBULLET::::- Lake Champlain Quadricentennial\nBULLET::::- International flood study\nBULLET::::- Shelburne Museum\nBULLET::::- Lake Champlain United\nBULLET::::- Lake Champlain International\n"}
{"id": "18203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18203", "title": "Lambda calculus", "text": "Lambda calculus\n\nLambda calculus (also written as λ-calculus) is a formal system in mathematical logic for expressing computation based on function abstraction and application using variable binding and substitution. It is a universal model of computation that can be used to simulate any Turing machine. It was introduced by the mathematician Alonzo Church in the 1930s as part of his research into the foundations of mathematics.\n\nLambda calculus consists of constructing lambda terms and performing reduction operations on them. In the simplest form of lambda calculus, terms are built using only the following rules:\n! Syntax !! Name !! Description\n\nproducing expressions such as: (λ\"x\".λ\"y\".(λ\"z\".(λ\"x\".\"z x\") (λ\"y\".\"z y\")) (\"x y\")). Parentheses can be dropped if the expression is unambiguous. For some applications, terms for logical and mathematical constants and operations may be included.\n\nThe reduction operations include:\n\n! Operation !! Name !! Description\n\nIf De Bruijn indexing is used, then α-conversion is no longer required as there will be no name collisions. If repeated application of the reduction steps eventually terminates, then by the Church–Rosser theorem it will produce a β-normal form.\n\nLambda calculus is Turing complete, that is, it is a universal model of computation that can be used to simulate any Turing machine. Its namesake, the Greek letter lambda (λ), is used in lambda expressions and lambda terms to denote binding a variable in a function.\n\nLambda calculus may be \"untyped\" or \"typed\". In typed lambda calculus, functions can be applied only if they are capable of accepting the given input's \"type\" of data. Typed lambda calculi are \"weaker\" than the untyped lambda calculus, which is the primary subject of this article, in the sense that \"typed lambda calculi can express less\" than the untyped calculus can, but on the other hand typed lambda calculi allow more things to be proved; in the simply typed lambda calculus it is, for example, a theorem that every evaluation strategy terminates for every simply typed lambda-term, whereas evaluation of untyped lambda-terms need not terminate. One reason there are many different typed lambda calculi has been the desire to do more (of what the untyped calculus can do) without giving up on being able to prove strong theorems about the calculus.\n\nLambda calculus has applications in many different areas in mathematics, philosophy, linguistics, and computer science. Lambda calculus has played an important role in the development of the theory of programming languages. Functional programming languages implement the lambda calculus. Lambda calculus is also a current research topic in Category theory.\n\nThe lambda calculus was introduced by mathematician Alonzo Church in the 1930s as part of an investigation into the foundations of mathematics. The original system was shown to be logically inconsistent in 1935 when Stephen Kleene and J. B. Rosser developed the Kleene–Rosser paradox.\n\nSubsequently, in 1936 Church isolated and published just the portion relevant to computation, what is now called the untyped lambda calculus. In 1940, he also introduced a computationally weaker, but logically consistent system, known as the simply typed lambda calculus.\n\nUntil the 1960s when its relation to programming languages was clarified, the lambda calculus was only a formalism. Thanks to Richard Montague and other linguists' applications in the semantics of natural language, the lambda calculus has begun to enjoy a respectable place in both linguistics and computer science.\n\nThere is a bit of controversy over the reason for Church's use of the Greek letter lambda (λ) as the notation for function-abstraction in the lambda calculus, perhaps in part due to conflicting explanations by Church himself. According to Cardone and Hindley (2006):\n\nBy the way, why did Church choose the notation “λ”? In [an unpublished 1964 letter to Harald Dickson] he stated clearly that it came from the notation “formula_1” used for class-abstraction by Whitehead and Russell, by first modifying “formula_1” to “∧formula_3” to distinguish function-abstraction from class-abstraction, and then changing “∧” to “λ” for ease of printing.\n\nThis origin was also reported in [Rosser, 1984, p.338]. On the other hand, in his later years Church told two enquirers that the choice was more accidental: a symbol was needed and λ just happened to be chosen.\n\nDana Scott has also addressed this controversy in various public lectures.\nScott recounts that he once posed a question about the origin of the lambda symbol to Church's son-in-law John Addison, who then wrote his father-in-law a postcard:\n\nDear Professor Church,\n\nRussell had the iota operator, Hilbert had the epsilon operator. Why did you choose lambda for your operator?\n\nAccording to Scott, Church's entire response consisted of returning the postcard with the following annotation: \"eeny, meeny, miny, moe\".\n\nComputable functions are a fundamental concept within computer science and mathematics. The lambda calculus provides a simple semantics for computation, enabling properties of computation to be studied formally. The lambda calculus incorporates two simplifications that make this semantics simple.\nThe first simplification is that the lambda calculus treats functions \"anonymously\", without giving them explicit names. For example, the function \ncan be rewritten in \"anonymous form\" as \n(read as \"a tuple of and is mapped to formula_6\"). Similarly, \ncan be rewritten in anonymous form as\nwhere the input is simply mapped to itself.\n\nThe second simplification is that the lambda calculus only uses functions of a single input. An ordinary function that requires two inputs, for instance the formula_9 function, can be reworked into an equivalent function that accepts a single input, and as output returns \"another\" function, that in turn accepts a single input. For example, \ncan be reworked into \nThis method, known as currying, transforms a function that takes multiple arguments into a chain of functions each with a single argument.\n\nFunction application of the formula_9 function to the arguments (5, 2), yields at once\nwhereas evaluation of the curried version requires one more step\nto arrive at the same result.\n\nThe lambda calculus consists of a language of lambda terms, which is defined by a certain formal syntax, and a set of transformation rules, which allow manipulation of the lambda terms. These transformation rules can be viewed as an equational theory or as an operational definition.\n\nAs described above, all functions in the lambda calculus are anonymous functions, having no names. They only accept one input variable, with currying used to implement functions with several variables.\n\nThe syntax of the lambda calculus defines some expressions as valid lambda calculus expressions and some as invalid, just as some strings of characters are valid C programs and some are not. A valid lambda calculus expression is called a \"lambda term\".\n\nThe following three rules give an inductive definition that can be applied to build all syntactically valid lambda terms:\nBULLET::::- a variable, formula_3, is itself a valid lambda term\nBULLET::::- if formula_25 is a lambda term, and formula_3 is a variable, then formula_27 is a lambda term (called an abstraction);\nBULLET::::- if formula_25 and formula_29 are lambda terms, then formula_30 is a lambda term (called an application).\nNothing else is a lambda term. Thus a lambda term is valid if and only if it can be obtained by repeated application of these three rules. However, some parentheses can be omitted according to certain rules. For example, the outermost parentheses are usually not written. See \"Notation\", below.\n\nAn abstraction formula_31 is a definition of an anonymous function that is capable of taking a single input formula_3 and substituting it into the expression formula_25. \nIt thus defines an anonymous function that takes formula_3 and returns formula_25. For example, formula_36 is an abstraction for the function formula_37 using the term formula_38 for formula_25. The definition of a function with an abstraction merely \"sets up\" the function but does not invoke it. The abstraction binds the variable formula_3 in the term formula_25.\n\nAn application formula_42 represents the application of a function formula_25 to an input formula_29, that is, it represents the act of calling function formula_25 on input formula_29 to produce formula_47.\n\nThere is no concept in lambda calculus of variable declaration. In a definition such as formula_48 (i.e. formula_49), the lambda calculus treats formula_21 as a variable that is not yet defined. The abstraction formula_48 is syntactically valid, and represents a function that adds its input to the yet-unknown formula_21.\n\nBracketing may be used and may be needed to disambiguate terms. For example, formula_53 and formula_54 denote different terms (although they coincidentally reduce to the same value). Here, the first example defines a function whose lambda term is the result of applying x to the child function, while the second example is the application of the outermost function to the input x, which returns the child function. Therefore, both examples evaluate to the identity function formula_55.\n\nIn lambda calculus, functions are taken to be 'first class values', so functions may be used as the inputs, or be returned as outputs from other functions.\n\nFor example, formula_55 represents the identity function, formula_8, and formula_58 represents the identity function applied to formula_21. Further, formula_60 represents the constant function formula_61, the function that always returns formula_21, no matter the input. In lambda calculus, function application is regarded as left-associative, so that formula_63 means formula_64.\n\nThere are several notions of \"equivalence\" and \"reduction\" that allow lambda terms to be \"reduced\" to \"equivalent\" lambda terms.\n\nA basic form of equivalence, definable on lambda terms, is alpha equivalence. It captures the intuition that the particular choice of a bound variable, in an abstraction, does not (usually) matter.\nFor instance, formula_55 and formula_66 are alpha-equivalent lambda terms, and they both represent the same function (the identity function). \nThe terms formula_3 and formula_21 are not alpha-equivalent, because they are not bound in an abstraction.\nIn many presentations, it is usual to identify alpha-equivalent lambda terms.\n\nThe following definitions are necessary in order to be able to define β-reduction:\n\nThe free variables of a term are those variables not bound by an abstraction. The set of free variables of an expression is defined inductively:\nBULLET::::- The free variables of formula_3 are just formula_3\nBULLET::::- The set of free variables of formula_31 is the set of free variables of formula_25, but with formula_3 removed\nBULLET::::- The set of free variables of formula_42 is the union of the set of free variables of formula_25 and the set of free variables of formula_29.\n\nFor example, the lambda term representing the identity formula_55 has no free variables, but the function formula_78 has a single free variable, formula_21.\n\nSuppose formula_25, formula_29 and formula_82 are lambda terms and formula_3 and formula_21 are variables.\nThe notation formula_85 indicates substitution of formula_82 for formula_3 in formula_25 in a \"capture-avoiding\" manner. This is defined so that:\nBULLET::::- formula_89;\nBULLET::::- formula_90 if formula_91;\nBULLET::::- formula_92;\nBULLET::::- formula_93;\nBULLET::::- formula_94 if formula_91 and formula_21 is not in the free variables of formula_82. The variable formula_21 is said to be \"fresh\" for formula_82.\n\nFor example, formula_100, and formula_101.\n\nThe freshness condition (requiring that formula_21 is not in the free variables of formula_82) is crucial in order to ensure that substitution does not change the meaning of functions.\nFor example, a substitution is made that ignores the freshness condition: formula_104. This substitution turns the constant function formula_105 into the identity formula_55 by substitution.\n\nIn general, failure to meet the freshness condition can be remedied by alpha-renaming with a suitable fresh variable.\nFor example, switching back to our correct notion of substitution, in formula_107 the abstraction can be renamed with a fresh variable formula_108, to obtain formula_109, and the meaning of the function is preserved by substitution.\n\nThe β-reduction rule states that an application of the form formula_110 reduces to the term formula_111. The notation formula_112 is used to indicate that formula_113 β-reduces to formula_114.\nFor example, for every formula_29, formula_116. This demonstrates that formula_117 really is the identity.\nSimilarly, formula_118, which demonstrates that formula_119 is a constant function.\n\nThe lambda calculus may be seen as an idealised version of a functional programming language, like Haskell or Standard ML.\nUnder this view, β-reduction corresponds to a computational step. This step can be repeated by additional β-reductions until there are no more applications left to reduce. In the untyped lambda calculus, as presented here, this reduction process may not terminate.\nFor instance, consider the term formula_120.\nHere formula_121.\nThat is, the term reduces to itself in a single β-reduction, and therefore the reduction process will never terminate.\n\nAnother aspect of the untyped lambda calculus is that it does not distinguish between different kinds of data.\nFor instance, it may be desirable to write a function that only operates on numbers. However, in the untyped lambda calculus, there is no way to prevent a function from being applied to truth values, strings, or other non-number objects.\n\nLambda expressions are composed of:\n\nBULLET::::- variables \"v\", \"v\", …;\nBULLET::::- the abstraction symbols λ (lambda) and . (dot);\nBULLET::::- parentheses ().\n\nThe set of lambda expressions, Λ, can be defined inductively:\n\nBULLET::::1. If \"x\" is a variable, then \"x\" ∈ Λ.\nBULLET::::2. If \"x\" is a variable and \"M\" ∈ Λ, then (λ\"x\".\"M\") ∈ Λ.\nBULLET::::3. If \"M\", \"N\" ∈ Λ, then (\"M N\") ∈ Λ.\n\nInstances of rule 2 are known as \"abstractions\" and instances of rule 3 are known as \"applications\".\n\nTo keep the notation of lambda expressions uncluttered, the following conventions are usually applied:\nBULLET::::- Outermost parentheses are dropped: M N instead of (M N).\nBULLET::::- Applications are assumed to be left associative: M N P may be written instead of ((M N) P).\nBULLET::::- The body of an abstraction extends as far right as possible: λ\"x\".\"M N\" means λ\"x\".(\"M N\") and not (λ\"x\".\"M\") \"N\".\nBULLET::::- A sequence of abstractions is contracted: λ\"x\".λ\"y\".λ\"z\".\"N\" is abbreviated as λ\"xyz\".\"N\".\n\nThe abstraction operator, λ, is said to bind its variable wherever it occurs in the body of the abstraction. Variables that fall within the scope of an abstraction are said to be \"bound\". In an expression λ\"x\".\"M\", the part λ\"x\" is often called \"binder\", as a hint that the variable \"x\" is getting bound by appending λ\"x\" to \"M\". All other variables are called \"free\". For example, in the expression λ\"y\".\"x x y\", \"y\" is a bound variable and \"x\" is a free variable. Also a variable is bound by its nearest abstraction. In the following example the single occurrence of \"x\" in the expression is bound by the second lambda: λ\"x\".\"y\" (λ\"x\".\"z x\").\n\nThe set of \"free variables\" of a lambda expression, \"M\", is denoted as FV(\"M\") and is defined by recursion on the structure of the terms, as follows:\nBULLET::::1. FV(\"x\") = {\"x\"}, where \"x\" is a variable.\nBULLET::::2. FV(λ\"x\".\"M\") = FV(\"M\") \\ {\"x\"}.\nBULLET::::3. FV(\"M N\") = FV(\"M\") ∪ FV(\"N\").\n\nAn expression that contains no free variables is said to be \"closed\". Closed lambda expressions are also known as \"combinators\" and are equivalent to terms in combinatory logic.\n\nThe meaning of lambda expressions is defined by how expressions can be reduced.\n\nThere are three kinds of reduction:\nBULLET::::- α-conversion: changing bound variables;\nBULLET::::- β-reduction: applying functions to their arguments;\nBULLET::::- η-reduction: which captures a notion of extensionality.\n\nWe also speak of the resulting equivalences: two expressions are \"α-equivalent\", if they can be α-converted into the same expression. β-equivalence and η-equivalence are defined similarly.\n\nThe term \"redex\", short for \"reducible expression\", refers to subterms that can be reduced by one of the reduction rules. For example, (λ\"x\".\"M\") \"N\" is a β-redex in expressing the substitution of \"N\" for \"x\" in \"M\". The expression to which a redex reduces is called its \"reduct\"; the reduct of (λ\"x\".\"M\") \"N\" is \"M\"[\"x\" := \"N\"].\n\nIf \"x\" is not free in \"M\", λ\"x\".\"M x\" is also an η-redex, with a reduct of \"M\".\n\nα-conversion, sometimes known as α-renaming, allows bound variable names to be changed. For example, α-conversion of λ\"x\".\"x\" might yield λ\"y\".\"y\". Terms that differ only by α-conversion are called \"α-equivalent\". Frequently, in uses of lambda calculus, α-equivalent terms are considered to be equivalent.\n\nThe precise rules for α-conversion are not completely trivial. First, when α-converting an abstraction, the only variable occurrences that are renamed are those that are bound to the same abstraction. For example, an α-conversion of λ\"x\".λ\"x\".\"x\" could result in λ\"y\".λ\"x\".\"x\", but it could \"not\" result in λ\"y\".λ\"x\".\"y\". The latter has a different meaning from the original. This is analogous to the programming notion of variable shadowing.\n\nSecond, α-conversion is not possible if it would result in a variable getting captured by a different abstraction. For example, if we replace \"x\" with \"y\" in λ\"x\".λ\"y\".\"x\", we get λ\"y\".λ\"y\".\"y\", which is not at all the same.\n\nIn programming languages with static scope, α-conversion can be used to make name resolution simpler by ensuring that no variable name masks a name in a containing scope (see α-renaming to make name resolution trivial).\n\nIn the De Bruijn index notation, any two α-equivalent terms are syntactically identical.\n\nSubstitution, written \"M\"[\"V\" := \"N\"], is the process of replacing all \"free\" occurrences of the variable \"V\" in the expression \"M\" with expression \"N\". Substitution on terms of the lambda calculus is defined by recursion on the structure of terms, as follows (note: x and y are only variables while M and N are any lambda expression):\n\nTo substitute into an abstraction, it is sometimes necessary to α-convert the expression. For example, it is not correct for (λ\"x\".\"y\")[\"y\" := \"x\"] to result in λ\"x\".\"x\", because the substituted \"x\" was supposed to be free but ended up being bound. The correct substitution in this case is λ\"z\".\"x\", up to α-equivalence. Substitution is defined uniquely up to α-equivalence.\n\nβ-reduction captures the idea of function application. β-reduction is defined in terms of substitution: the β-reduction of (λ\"V\".\"M\") \"N\" is \"M\"[\"V\" := \"N\"].\n\nFor example, assuming some encoding of 2, 7, ×, we have the following β-reduction: (λ\"n\".\"n\" × 2) 7 → 7 × 2.\n\nβ-reduction can be seen to be the same as the concept of \"local reducibility\" in natural deduction, via the Curry–Howard isomorphism.\n\nη-reduction expresses the idea of extensionality, which in this context is that two functions are the same if and only if they give the same result for all arguments. η-reduction converts between λ\"x\".\"f\" \"x\" and \"f\" whenever \"x\" does not appear free in \"f\".\n\nη-reduction can be seen to be the same as the concept of \"local completeness\" in natural deduction, via the Curry–Howard isomorphism.\n\nFor the untyped lambda calculus, β-reduction as a rewriting rule is neither strongly normalising nor weakly normalising.\n\nHowever, it can be shown that β-reduction is confluent when working up to α-conversion (i.e. we consider two normal forms to be equal if it is possible to α-convert one into the other).\n\nTherefore, both strongly normalising terms and weakly normalising terms have a unique normal form. For strongly normalising terms, any reduction strategy is guaranteed to yield the normal form, whereas for weakly normalising terms, some reduction strategies may fail to find it.\n\nThe basic lambda calculus may be used to model booleans, arithmetic, data structures and recursion, as illustrated in the following sub-sections.\n\nThere are several possible ways to define the natural numbers in lambda calculus, but by far the most common are the Church numerals, which can be defined as follows:\nand so on. Or using the alternative syntax presented above in \"Notation\":\n\nA Church numeral is a higher-order function—it takes a single-argument function \"f\", and returns another single-argument function. The Church numeral \"n\" is a function that takes a function \"f\" as argument and returns the \"n\"-th composition of \"f\", i.e. the function \"f\" composed with itself \"n\" times. This is denoted \"f\" and is in fact the \"n\"-th power of \"f\" (considered as an operator); \"f\" is defined to be the identity function. Such repeated compositions (of a single function \"f\") obey the laws of exponents, which is why these numerals can be used for arithmetic. (In Church's original lambda calculus, the formal parameter of a lambda expression was required to occur at least once in the function body, which made the above definition of 0 impossible.)\n\nOne way of thinking about the Church numeral \"n\", which is often useful when analysing programs, is as an instruction 'repeat \"n\" times'. For example, using the PAIR and NIL functions defined below, one can define a function that constructs a (linked) list of \"n\" elements all equal to \"x\" by repeating 'prepend another \"x\" element' \"n\" times, starting from an empty list. The lambda term is\nBy varying what is being repeated, and varying what argument that function being repeated is applied to, a great many different effects can be achieved.\n\nWe can define a successor function, which takes a Church numeral \"n\" and returns \"n\" + 1 by adding another application of \"f\", where '(mf)x' means the function 'f' is applied 'm' times on 'x':\nBecause the \"m\"-th composition of \"f\" composed with the \"n\"-th composition of \"f\" gives the \"m\"+\"n\"-th composition of \"f\", addition can be defined as follows:\nPLUS can be thought of as a function taking two natural numbers as arguments and returning a natural number; it can be verified that\nand\nare β-equivalent lambda expressions. Since adding \"m\" to a number \"n\" can be accomplished by adding 1 \"m\" times, an alternative definition is:\nSimilarly, multiplication can be defined as\nAlternatively\nsince multiplying \"m\" and \"n\" is the same as repeating the add \"n\" function \"m\" times and then applying it to zero.\nExponentiation has a rather simple rendering in Church numerals, namely\nThe predecessor function defined by PRED \"n\" = \"n\" − 1 for a positive integer \"n\" and PRED 0 = 0 is considerably more difficult. The formula\ncan be validated by showing inductively that if \"T\" denotes (λ\"g\".λ\"h\".\"h\" (\"g\" \"f\")), then T(λ\"u\".\"x\") = (λ\"h\".\"h\"(\"f\"(\"x\"))) for \"n\" > 0. Two other definitions of PRED are given below, one using conditionals and the other using pairs. With the predecessor function, subtraction is straightforward. Defining\nSUB \"m\" \"n\" yields \"m\" − \"n\" when \"m\" > \"n\" and 0 otherwise.\n\nBy convention, the following two definitions (known as Church booleans) are used for the boolean values TRUE and FALSE:\nThen, with these two lambda terms, we can define some logic operators (these are just possible formulations; other expressions are equally correct):\nWe are now able to compute some logic functions, for example:\n\nand we see that AND TRUE FALSE is equivalent to FALSE.\n\nA \"predicate\" is a function that returns a boolean value. The most fundamental predicate is ISZERO, which returns TRUE if its argument is the Church numeral 0, and FALSE if its argument is any other Church numeral:\nThe following predicate tests whether the first argument is less-than-or-equal-to the second:\nand since \"m\" = \"n\", if LEQ \"m\" \"n\" and LEQ \"n\" \"m\", it is straightforward to build a predicate for numerical equality.\n\nThe availability of predicates and the above definition of TRUE and FALSE make it convenient to write \"if-then-else\" expressions in lambda calculus. For example, the predecessor function can be defined as:\nwhich can be verified by showing inductively that \"n\" (λ\"g\".λ\"k\".ISZERO (\"g\" 1) \"k\" (PLUS (\"g\" \"k\") 1)) (λ\"v\".0) is the add \"n\" − 1 function for \"n\" > 0.\n\nA pair (2-tuple) can be defined in terms of TRUE and FALSE, by using the Church encoding for pairs. For example, PAIR encapsulates the pair (\"x\",\"y\"), FIRST returns the first element of the pair, and SECOND returns the second.\n\nA linked list can be defined as either NIL for the empty list, or the PAIR of an element and a smaller list. The predicate NULL tests for the value NIL. (Alternatively, with NIL := FALSE, the construct \"l\" (λ\"h\".λ\"t\".λ\"z\".deal_with_head_\"h\"_and_tail_\"t\") (deal_with_nil) obviates the need for an explicit NULL test).\n\nAs an example of the use of pairs, the shift-and-increment function that maps (\"m\", \"n\") to (\"n\", \"n\" + 1) can be defined as\nwhich allows us to give perhaps the most transparent version of the predecessor function:\n\nThere is a considerable body of programming idioms for lambda calculus. Many of these were originally developed in the context of using lambda calculus as a foundation for programming language semantics, effectively using lambda calculus as a low-level programming language. Because several programming languages include the lambda calculus (or something very similar) as a fragment, these techniques also see use in practical programming, but may then be perceived as obscure or foreign.\n\nIn lambda calculus, a library would take the form of a collection of previously defined functions, which as lambda-terms are merely particular constants. The pure lambda calculus does not have a concept of named constants since all atomic lambda-terms are variables, but one can emulate having named constants by setting aside a variable as the name of the constant, using abstraction to bind that variable in the main body, and apply that abstraction to the intended definition. Thus to use \"f\" to mean \"M\" (some explicit lambda-term) in \"N\" (another lambda-term, the \"main program\"), one can say\nAuthors often introduce syntactic sugar, such as let, to permit writing the above in the more intuitive order\nBy chaining such definitions, one can write a lambda calculus \"program\" as zero or more function definitions, followed by one lambda-term using those functions that constitutes the main body of the program.\n\nA notable restriction of this let is that the name \"f\" is not defined in \"M\", since \"M\" is outside the scope of the abstraction binding \"f\"; this means a recursive function definition cannot be used as the \"M\" with let. The more advanced letrec syntactic sugar construction that allows writing recursive function definitions in that naive style instead additionally employs fixed-point combinators.\n\nRecursion is the definition of a function using the function itself. Lambda calculus cannot express this as directly as some other notations: all functions are anonymous in lambda calculus, so we can't refer to a value which is yet to be defined, inside the lambda term defining that same value. However, recursion can still be achieved by arranging for a lambda expression to receive itself as its argument value, for example in  (λ\"x\".\"x\" \"x\") \"E\".\n\nConsider the factorial function F(\"n\") recursively defined by\n\nIn the lambda expression which is to represent this function, a \"parameter\" (typically the first one) will be assumed to receive the lambda expression itself as its value, so that calling it – applying it to an argument – will amount to recursion. Thus to achieve recursion, the intended-as-self-referencing argument (called \"r\" here) must always be passed to itself within the function body, at a call point:\n\nThe self-application achieves replication here, passing the function's lambda expression on to the next invocation as an argument value, making it available to be referenced and called there.\n\nThis solves it but requires re-writing each recursive call as self-application. We would like to have a generic solution, without a need for any re-writes:\n\nGiven a lambda term with first argument representing recursive call (e.g. G here), the \"fixed-point\" combinator FIX will return a self-replicating lambda expression representing the recursive function (here, F). The function does not need to be explicitly passed to itself at any point, for the self-replication is arranged in advance, when it is created, to be done each time it is called. Thus the original lambda expression (FIX G) is re-created inside itself, at call-point, achieving self-reference.\n\nIn fact, there are many possible definitions for this FIX operator, the simplest of them being:\n\nIn the lambda calculus, Y \"g\"  is a fixed-point of \"g\", as it expands to:\n\nNow, to perform our recursive call to the factorial function, we would simply call (Y G) \"n\",  where \"n\" is the number we are calculating the factorial of. Given \"n\" = 4, for example, this gives:\n\nEvery recursively defined function can be seen as a fixed point of some suitably defined function closing over the recursive call with an extra argument, and therefore, using Y, every recursively defined function can be expressed as a lambda expression. In particular, we can now cleanly define the subtraction, multiplication and comparison predicate of natural numbers recursively.\n\nCertain terms have commonly accepted names:\nSeveral of these have direct applications in the \"elimination of abstraction\" that turns lambda terms into combinator calculus terms.\n\nIf \"N\" is a lambda-term without abstraction, but possibly containing named constants (combinators), then there exists a lambda-term \"T\"(\"x\",\"N\") which is equivalent to λ\"x\".\"N\" but lacks abstraction (except as part of the named constants, if these are considered non-atomic). This can also be viewed as anonymising variables, as \"T\"(\"x\",\"N\") removes all occurrences of \"x\" from \"N\", while still allowing argument values to be substituted into the positions where \"N\" contains an \"x\". The conversion function \"T\" can be defined by:\nIn either case, a term of the form \"T\"(\"x\",\"N\") \"P\" can reduce by having the initial combinator I, K, or S grab the argument \"P\", just like β-reduction of (λ\"x\".\"N\") \"P\" would do. I returns that argument. K throws the argument away, just like (λ\"x\".\"N\") would do if \"x\" has no free occurrence in \"N\". S passes the argument on to both subterms of the application, and then applies the result of the first to the result of the second.\n\nThe combinators B and C are similar to S, but pass the argument on to only one subterm of an application (B to the \"argument\" subterm and C to the \"function\" subterm), thus saving a subsequent K if there is no occurrence of \"x\" in one subterm. In comparison to B and C, the S combinator actually conflates two functionalities: rearranging arguments, and duplicating an argument so that it may be used in two places. The W combinator does only the latter, yielding the B, C, K, W system as an alternative to SKI combinator calculus.\n\nA typed lambda calculus is a typed formalism that uses the lambda-symbol (formula_122) to denote anonymous function abstraction. In this context, types are usually objects of a syntactic nature that are assigned to lambda terms; the exact nature of a type depends on the calculus considered (see kinds below). From a certain point of view, typed lambda calculi can be seen as refinements of the untyped lambda calculus but from another point of view, they can also be considered the more fundamental theory and \"untyped lambda calculus\" a special case with only one type.\n\nTyped lambda calculi are foundational programming languages and are the base of typed functional programming languages such as ML and Haskell and, more indirectly, typed imperative programming languages. Typed lambda calculi play an important role in the design of type systems for programming languages; here typability usually captures desirable properties of the program, e.g. the program will not cause a memory access violation.\n\nTyped lambda calculi are closely related to mathematical logic and proof theory via the Curry–Howard isomorphism and they can be considered as the internal language of classes of categories, e.g. the simply typed lambda calculus is the language of Cartesian closed categories (CCCs).\n\nA function \"F\": N → N of natural numbers is a computable function if and only if there exists a lambda expression \"f\" such that for every pair of \"x\", \"y\" in N, \"F\"(\"x\")=\"y\" if and only if \"f\" \"x\" = \"y\",  where \"x\" and \"y\" are the Church numerals corresponding to \"x\" and \"y\", respectively and = meaning equivalence with β-reduction. This is one of the many ways to define computability; see the Church–Turing thesis for a discussion of other approaches and their equivalence.\n\nThere is no algorithm that takes as input any two lambda expressions and outputs TRUE or FALSE depending on whether or not the two expressions are equivalent. More precisely, no computable function can decide the equivalence. This was historically the first problem for which undecidability could be proven. As usual for such a proof, \"computable\" means computable by any model of computation that is Turing complete.\n\nChurch's proof first reduces the problem to determining whether a given lambda expression has a \"normal form\". A normal form is an equivalent expression that cannot be reduced any further under the rules imposed by the form. Then he assumes that this predicate is computable, and can hence be expressed in lambda calculus. Building on earlier work by Kleene and constructing a Gödel numbering for lambda expressions, he constructs a lambda expression \"e\" that closely follows the proof of Gödel's first incompleteness theorem. If \"e\" is applied to its own Gödel number, a contradiction results.\n\nAs pointed out by Peter Landin's 1965 paper \"A Correspondence between ALGOL 60 and Church's Lambda-notation\", sequential procedural programming languages can be understood in terms of the lambda calculus, which provides the basic mechanisms for procedural abstraction and procedure (subprogram) application.\n\nFor example, in Lisp the \"square\" function can be expressed as a lambda expression as follows:\n\nThe above example is an expression that evaluates to a first-class function. The symbol codice_1 creates an anonymous function, given a list of parameter names, codice_2 – just a single argument in this case, and an expression that is evaluated as the body of the function, codice_3. Anonymous functions are sometimes called lambda expressions.\n\nFor example, Pascal and many other imperative languages have long supported passing subprograms as arguments to other subprograms through the mechanism of function pointers. However, function pointers are not a sufficient condition for functions to be first class datatypes, because a function is a first class datatype if and only if new instances of the function can be created at run-time. And this run-time creation of functions is supported in Smalltalk, JavaScript, and more recently in Scala, Eiffel (\"agents\"), C# (\"delegates\") and C++11, among others.\n\nWhether a term is normalising or not, and how much work needs to be done in normalising it if it is, depends to a large extent on the reduction strategy used. The distinction between reduction strategies relates to the distinction in functional programming languages between eager evaluation and lazy evaluation.\n\nBULLET::::- Full β-reductions: Any redex can be reduced at any time. This means essentially the lack of any particular reduction strategy—with regard to reducibility, \"all bets are off\".\nBULLET::::- Applicative order: The leftmost, innermost redex is always reduced first. Intuitively this means a function's arguments are always reduced before the function itself. Applicative order always attempts to apply functions to normal forms, even when this is not possible.\nBULLET::::- Normal order: The leftmost, outermost redex is always reduced first. That is, whenever possible the arguments are substituted into the body of an abstraction before the arguments are reduced.\nBULLET::::- Call by value: Only the outermost redexes are reduced: a redex is reduced only when its right hand side has reduced to a value (variable or abstraction).\nBULLET::::- Call by name: As normal order, but no reductions are performed inside abstractions. For example, λ\"x\".(λ\"x\".\"x\")\"x\" is in normal form according to this strategy, although it contains the redex (λ\"x\".\"x\")\"x\".\nBULLET::::- Call by need: As normal order, but function applications that would duplicate terms instead name the argument, which is then reduced only \"when it is needed\". Called in practical contexts \"lazy evaluation\". In implementations this \"name\" takes the form of a pointer, with the redex represented by a thunk.\n\nApplicative order is not a normalising strategy. The usual counterexample is as follows: define Ω = ωω where ω = λ\"x\".\"xx\". This entire expression contains only one redex, namely the whole expression; its reduct is again Ω. Since this is the only available reduction, Ω has no normal form (under any evaluation strategy). Using applicative order, the expression KIΩ = (λ\"x\".λ\"y\".\"x\") (λ\"x\".\"x\")Ω is reduced by first reducing Ω to normal form (since it is the rightmost redex), but since Ω has no normal form, applicative order fails to find a normal form for KIΩ.\n\nIn contrast, normal order is so called because it always finds a normalising reduction, if one exists. In the above example, KIΩ reduces under normal order to \"I\", a normal form. A drawback is that redexes in the arguments may be copied, resulting in duplicated computation (for example, (λ\"x\".\"xx\") ((λ\"x\".\"x\")\"y\") reduces to ((λ\"x\".\"x\")\"y\") ((λ\"x\".\"x\")\"y\") using this strategy; now there are two redexes, so full evaluation needs two more steps, but if the argument had been reduced first, there would now be none).\n\nThe positive tradeoff of using applicative order is that it does not cause unnecessary computation, if all arguments are used, because it never substitutes arguments containing redexes and hence never needs to copy them (which would duplicate work). In the above example, in applicative order (λ\"x\".\"xx\") ((λ\"x\".\"x\")\"y\") reduces first to (λ\"x\".\"xx\")\"y\" and then to the normal order \"yy\", taking two steps instead of three.\n\nMost \"purely\" functional programming languages (notably Miranda and its descendants, including Haskell), and the proof languages of theorem provers, use \"lazy evaluation\", which is essentially the same as call by need. This is like normal order reduction, but call by need manages to avoid the duplication of work inherent in normal order reduction using \"sharing\". In the example given above, (λ\"x\".\"xx\") ((λ\"x\".\"x\")\"y\") reduces to ((λ\"x\".\"x\")\"y\") ((λ\"x\".\"x\")\"y\"), which has two redexes, but in call by need they are represented using the same object rather than copied, so when one is reduced the other is too.\n\nWhile the idea of β-reduction seems simple enough, it is not an atomic step, in that it must have a non-trivial cost when estimating computational complexity. To be precise, one must somehow find the location of all of the occurrences of the bound variable \"V\" in the expression \"E\", implying a time cost, or one must keep track of these locations in some way, implying a space cost. A naïve search for the locations of \"V\" in \"E\" is \"O\"(\"n\") in the length \"n\" of \"E\". This has led to the study of systems that use explicit substitution. Sinot's director strings offer a way of tracking the locations of free variables in expressions.\n\nThe Church–Rosser property of the lambda calculus means that evaluation (β-reduction) can be carried out in \"any order\", even in parallel. This means that various nondeterministic evaluation strategies are relevant. However, the lambda calculus does not offer any explicit constructs for parallelism. One can add constructs such as Futures to the lambda calculus. Other process calculi have been developed for describing communication and concurrency.\n\nIn Lévy's 1988 paper \"Sharing in the Evaluation of lambda Expressions\", he defines a notion of optimal sharing, such that no work is \"duplicated\". For example, performing a β-reduction in normal order on (λ\"x\".\"xx\") (II) reduces it to II (II). The argument II is duplicated by the application to the first lambda term. If the reduction was done in an applicative order first, we save work because work is not duplicated: (λ\"x\".\"xx\") (II) reduces to (λ\"x\".\"xx\") I. On the other hand, using applicative order can result in redundant reductions or even possibly never reduce to normal form. For example, performing a β-reduction in normal order on (λ\"f\".f I) (λy.(λ\"x\".\"xx\") (y I)) yields (λy.(λ\"x\".\"xx\") (y I)) I, (λ\"x\".\"xx\") (II) which we know we can do without duplicating work. Doing the same but in applicative order yields (λ\"f\".f I) (λy.y I (y I)), (λy.y I (y I)) I, I I (I I), and now work is duplicated.\n\nLévy shows the existence of lambda terms where there \"does not exist\" a sequence of reductions which reduces them without duplicating work. The below lambda term is such an example.\n\nIt is composed of three similar terms, x=((λg. ... ) (λh.y)) and y=((λf. ...) (λw.z) ), and finally z=λw.(h(w(λy.y))). There are only two possible β-reductions to be done here, on x and on y. Reducing the outer x term first results in the inner y term being duplicated, and each copy will have to be reduced, but reducing the inner y term first will duplicate its argument z, which will cause work to be duplicated when the values of h and w are made known. Incidentally, the above term reduces to the identity function (λy.y), and is constructed by making wrappers which make the identity function available to the binders g=λh..., f=λw..., h=λx.x (at first), and w=λz.z (at first), all of which are applied to the innermost term λy.y.\n\nThe precise notion of duplicated work relies on noticing that after the first reduction of I I is done, the value of the other I I can be determined, because they have the same structure (and in fact they have exactly the same values), and result from a common ancestor. Such similar structures can each be assigned a label that can be tracked across reductions. If a name is assigned to the redex that produces all the resulting II terms, and then all duplicated occurrences of II can be tracked and reduced in one go. However, it is not obvious that a redex will produce the II term. Identifying the structures that are similar in different parts of a lambda term can involve a complex algorithm and can possibly have a complexity equal to the history of the reduction itself.\n\nWhile Lévy defines the notion of optimal sharing, he does not provide an algorithm to do it. In Vincent van Oostrom, Kees-Jan van de Looij, and Marijn Zwitserlood's paper \"Lambdascope: Another optimal implementation of the lambda-calculus\", they provide such an algorithm by transforming lambda terms into interaction nets, which are then reduced. Roughly speaking, the resulting reduction is optimal because every term that would have the same labels as per Lévy's paper would also be the same graph in the interaction net. In the paper, they mention that their prototype implementation of Lambdascope performs as well as the \"optimised\" version of the reference optimal higher order machine BOHM.\n\nMore details can be found in the short article About the efficient reduction of lambda terms.\n\nThe fact that lambda calculus terms act as functions on other lambda calculus terms, and even on themselves, led to questions about the semantics of the lambda calculus. Could a sensible meaning be assigned to lambda calculus terms? The natural semantics was to find a set \"D\" isomorphic to the function space \"D\" → \"D\", of functions on itself. However, no nontrivial such \"D\" can exist, by cardinality constraints because the set of all functions from \"D\" to \"D\" has greater cardinality than \"D\", unless \"D\" is a singleton set.\n\nIn the 1970s, Dana Scott showed that, if only continuous functions were considered, a set or domain \"D\" with the required property could be found, thus providing a model for the lambda calculus.\n\nThis work also formed the basis for the denotational semantics of programming languages.\n\nThese extensions are in the lambda cube:\nBULLET::::- Typed lambda calculus – Lambda calculus with typed variables (and functions)\nBULLET::::- System F – A typed lambda calculus with type-variables\nBULLET::::- Calculus of constructions – A typed lambda calculus with types as first-class values\n\nThese formal systems are extensions of lambda calculus that are not in the lambda cube:\nBULLET::::- Binary lambda calculus – A version of lambda calculus with binary I/O, a binary encoding of terms, and a designated universal machine.\nBULLET::::- Lambda-mu calculus – An extension of the lambda calculus for treating classical logic\n\nThese formal systems are variations of lambda calculus:\nBULLET::::- Kappa calculus – A first-order analogue of lambda calculus\n\nThese formal systems are related to lambda calculus:\n\nBULLET::::- Combinatory logic – A notation for mathematical logic without variables\nBULLET::::- SKI combinator calculus – A computational system based on the S, K and I combinators, equivalent to lambda calculus, but reducible without variable substitutions\n\nBULLET::::- Applicative computing systems – Treatment of objects in the style of the lambda calculus\nBULLET::::- Cartesian closed category – A setting for lambda calculus in category theory\nBULLET::::- Categorical abstract machine – A model of computation applicable to lambda calculus\nBULLET::::- Curry–Howard isomorphism – The formal correspondence between programs and proofs\nBULLET::::- De Bruijn index – notation disambugating alpha conversions\nBULLET::::- De Bruijn notation – notation using postfix modification functions\nBULLET::::- Deductive lambda calculus – The consideration of the problems associated with considering lambda calculus as a Deductive system.\nBULLET::::- Domain theory – Study of certain posets giving denotational semantics for lambda calculus\nBULLET::::- Evaluation strategy – Rules for the evaluation of expressions in programming languages\nBULLET::::- Explicit substitution – The theory of substitution, as used in β-reduction\nBULLET::::- Functional programming\nBULLET::::- Harrop formula – A kind of constructive logical formula such that proofs are lambda terms\nBULLET::::- Interaction nets\nBULLET::::- Kleene–Rosser paradox – A demonstration that some form of lambda calculus is inconsistent\nBULLET::::- Knights of the Lambda Calculus – A semi-fictional organization of LISP and Scheme hackers\nBULLET::::- Krivine machine – An abstract machine to interpret call-by-name in lambda calculus\nBULLET::::- Lambda calculus definition – Formal definition of the lambda calculus.\nBULLET::::- Let expression – An expression closely related to an abstraction.\nBULLET::::- Minimalism (computing)\nBULLET::::- Rewriting – Transformation of formulæ in formal systems\nBULLET::::- SECD machine – A virtual machine designed for the lambda calculus\nBULLET::::- Scott–Curry theorem – A theorem about sets of lambda terms\nBULLET::::- To Mock a Mockingbird – An introduction to Haskell (programming language) and lambda calculus\nBULLET::::- Universal Turing machine – A formal computing machine that is equivalent to lambda calculus\nBULLET::::- Unlambda – An esoteric functional programming language based on combinatory logic\nBULLET::::- Abelson, Harold & Gerald Jay Sussman. Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs. The MIT Press. .\nBULLET::::- Hendrik Pieter Barendregt \"Introduction to Lambda Calculus\".\nBULLET::::- Henk Barendregt, The Impact of the Lambda Calculus in Logic and Computer Science. The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, Volume 3, Number 2, June 1997.\nBULLET::::- Barendregt, Hendrik Pieter, \"The Type Free Lambda Calculus\" pp1091–1132 of \"Handbook of Mathematical Logic\", North-Holland (1977)\nBULLET::::- Cardone and Hindley, 2006. History of Lambda-calculus and Combinatory Logic. In Gabbay and Woods (eds.), \"Handbook of the History of Logic\", vol. 5. Elsevier.\nBULLET::::- Church, Alonzo, \"An unsolvable problem of elementary number theory\", American Journal of Mathematics, 58 (1936), pp. 345–363. This paper contains the proof that the equivalence of lambda expressions is in general not decidable.\nBULLET::::- Alonzo Church, \"The Calculi of Lambda-Conversion\" ()\nBULLET::::- Kleene, Stephen, \"A theory of positive integers in formal logic\", American Journal of Mathematics, 57 (1935), pp. 153–173 and 219–244. Contains the lambda calculus definitions of several familiar functions.\nBULLET::::- Landin, Peter, \"A Correspondence Between ALGOL 60 and Church's Lambda-Notation\", Communications of the ACM, vol. 8, no. 2 (1965), pages 89–101. Available from the ACM site. A classic paper highlighting the importance of lambda calculus as a basis for programming languages.\nBULLET::::- Larson, Jim, \"An Introduction to Lambda Calculus and Scheme\". A gentle introduction for programmers.\nBULLET::::- Schalk, A. and Simmons, H. (2005) \"An introduction to λ-calculi and arithmetic with a decent selection of exercises. Notes for a course in the Mathematical Logic MSc at Manchester University.\nBULLET::::- de Queiroz, Ruy J.G.B. (2008) \"On Reduction Rules, Meaning-as-Use and Proof-Theoretic Semantics\". \"Studia Logica\", 90(2):211–247. . A paper giving a formal underpinning to the idea of 'meaning-is-use' which, even if based on proofs, it is different from proof-theoretic semantics as in the Dummett–Prawitz tradition since it takes reduction as the rules giving meaning.\nBULLET::::- Hankin, Chris, \"An Introduction to Lambda Calculi for Computer Scientists,\"\nMonographs/textbooks for graduate students:\nBULLET::::- Morten Heine Sørensen, Paweł Urzyczyn, \"Lectures on the Curry–Howard isomorphism\", Elsevier, 2006, is a recent monograph that covers the main topics of lambda calculus from the type-free variety, to most typed lambda calculi, including more recent developments like pure type systems and the lambda cube. It does not cover subtyping extensions.\nBULLET::::- covers lambda calculi from a practical type system perspective; some topics like dependent types are only mentioned, but subtyping is an important topic.\n\n\"Some parts of this article are based on material from FOLDOC, used with .\"\n\nBULLET::::- Graham Hutton, Lambda Calculus, a short (12 minutes) Computerphile video on the Lambda Calculus\nBULLET::::- Helmut Brandl, \"A Step by Step Introduction into Lambda Calculus\"\nBULLET::::- Achim Jung, \"A Short Introduction to the Lambda Calculus\"-(PDF)\nBULLET::::- Dana Scott, \"A timeline of lambda calculus\"-(PDF)\nBULLET::::- David C. Keenan, \"To Dissect a Mockingbird: A Graphical Notation for the Lambda Calculus with Animated Reduction\"\nBULLET::::- Raúl Rojas, \"A Tutorial Introduction to the Lambda Calculus\"-(PDF)\nBULLET::::- Peter Selinger, \"Lecture Notes on the Lambda Calculus\"-(PDF)\nBULLET::::- L. Allison, \"Some executable λ-calculus examples\"\nBULLET::::- Georg P. Loczewski, \"The Lambda Calculus and A++\"\nBULLET::::- Bret Victor, \"Alligator Eggs: A Puzzle Game Based on Lambda Calculus\"\nBULLET::::- \"Lambda Calculus\" on Safalra's Website\nBULLET::::- LCI Lambda Interpreter a simple yet powerful pure calculus interpreter\nBULLET::::- Lambda Calculus links on Lambda-the-Ultimate\nBULLET::::- Mike Thyer, Lambda Animator, a graphical Java applet demonstrating alternative reduction strategies.\nBULLET::::- Implementing the Lambda calculus using C++ Templates\nBULLET::::- Marius Buliga, \"Graphic lambda calculus\"\nBULLET::::- \"Lambda Calculus as a Workflow Model\" by Peter Kelly, Paul Coddington, and Andrew Wendelborn; mentions graph reduction as a common means of evaluating lambda expressions and discusses the applicability of lambda calculus for distributed computing (due to the Church–Rosser property, which enables parallel graph reduction for lambda expressions).\nBULLET::::- Shane Steinert-Threlkeld, \"Lambda Calculi\", \"Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy\"\nBULLET::::- Anton Salikhmetov, \"Macro Lambda Calculus\"\n"}
{"id": "18208", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18208", "title": "Lossy compression", "text": "Lossy compression\n\nIn information technology, lossy compression or irreversible compression is the class of data encoding methods that uses inexact approximations and partial data discarding to represent the content. These techniques are used to reduce data size for storing, handling, and transmitting content. The different versions of the photo of the cat to the right show how higher degrees of approximation create coarser images as more details are removed. This is opposed to lossless data compression (reversible data compression) which does not degrade the data. The amount of data reduction possible using lossy compression is much higher than through lossless techniques.\n\nWell-designed lossy compression technology often reduces file sizes significantly before degradation is noticed by the end-user. Even when noticeable by the user, further data reduction may be desirable (e.g., for real-time communication, to reduce transmission times, or to reduce storage needs). The most widely used lossy compression algorithm is the discrete cosine transform (DCT), first published by Nasir Ahmed, T. Natarajan and K. R. Rao in 1974. Recently, a new family of sinusoidal-hyperbolic transform functions, which have comparable properties and performance with DCT, have been proposed for lossy compression.\n\nLossy compression is most commonly used to compress multimedia data (audio, video, and images), especially in applications such as streaming media and internet telephony. By contrast, lossless compression is typically required for text and data files, such as bank records and text articles. It can be advantageous to make a master lossless file which can then be used to produce additional copies from. This allows one to avoid basing new compressed copies off of a lossy source file, which would yield additional artifacts and further unnecessary information loss.\n\nIt is possible to compress many types of digital data in a way that reduces the size of a computer file needed to store it, or the bandwidth needed to transmit it, with no loss of the full information contained in the original file. A picture, for example, is converted to a digital file by considering it to be an array of dots and specifying the color and brightness of each dot. If the picture contains an area of the same color, it can be compressed without loss by saying \"200 red dots\" instead of \"red dot, red dot, ...(197 more times)..., red dot.\"\n\nThe original data contains a certain amount of information, and there is a lower limit to the size of file that can carry all the information. Basic information theory says that there is an absolute limit in reducing the size of this data. When data is compressed, its entropy increases, and it cannot increase indefinitely. As an intuitive example, most people know that a compressed ZIP file is smaller than the original file, but repeatedly compressing the same file will not reduce the size to nothing. Most compression algorithms can recognize when further compression would be pointless and would in fact increase the size of the data.\n\nIn many cases, files or data streams contain more information than is needed for a particular purpose. For example, a picture may have more detail than the eye can distinguish when reproduced at the largest size intended; likewise, an audio file does not need a lot of fine detail during a very loud passage. Developing lossy compression techniques as closely matched to human perception as possible is a complex task. Sometimes the ideal is a file that provides exactly the same perception as the original, with as much digital information as possible removed; other times, perceptible loss of quality is considered a valid trade-off for the reduced data.\n\nThe terms 'irreversible' and 'reversible' are preferred over 'lossy' and 'lossless' respectively for some applications, such as medical image compression, to circumvent the negative implications of 'loss'. The type and amount of loss can affect the utility of the images. Artifacts or undesirable effects of compression may be clearly discernible yet the result still useful for the intended purpose. Or lossy compressed images may be 'visually lossless', or in the case of medical images, so-called Diagnostically Acceptable Irreversible Compression (DAIC) may have been applied.\n\nSome forms of lossy compression can be thought of as an application of transform coding, which is a type of data compression used for digital images, digital audio signals, and digital video. The transformation is typically used to enable better (more targeted) quantization. Knowledge of the application is used to choose information to discard, thereby lowering its bandwidth. The remaining information can then be compressed via a variety of methods. When the output is decoded, the result may not be identical to the original input, but is expected to be close enough for the purpose of the application.\n\nThe most common form of lossy compression is a transform coding method, the discrete cosine transform (DCT), which was first published by Nasir Ahmed, T. Natarajan and K. R. Rao in 1974. DCT is the most widely used form of lossy compression, for popular image compression formats (such as JPEG), video coding standards (such as MPEG and H.264/AVC) and audio compression formats (such as MP3 and AAC).\n\nIn the case of audio data, a popular form of transform coding is perceptual coding, which transforms the raw data to a domain that more accurately reflects the information content. For example, rather than expressing a sound file as the amplitude levels over time, one may express it as the frequency spectrum over time, which corresponds more accurately to human audio perception. While data reduction (compression, be it lossy or lossless) is a main goal of transform coding, it also allows other goals: one may represent data more accurately for the original amount of space – for example, in principle, if one starts with an analog or high-resolution digital master, an MP3 file of a given size should provide a better representation than a raw uncompressed audio in WAV or AIFF file of the same size. This is because uncompressed audio can only reduce file size by lowering bit rate or depth, whereas compressing audio can reduce size while maintaining bit rate and depth. This compression becomes a selective loss of the least significant data, rather than losing data across the board. Further, a transform coding may provide a better domain for manipulating or otherwise editing the data – for example, equalization of audio is most naturally expressed in the frequency domain (boost the bass, for instance) rather than in the raw time domain.\n\nFrom this point of view, perceptual encoding is not essentially about \"discarding\" data, but rather about a \"better representation\" of data. Another use is for backward compatibility and graceful degradation: in color television, encoding color via a luminance-chrominance transform domain (such as YUV) means that black-and-white sets display the luminance, while ignoring the color information. Another example is chroma subsampling: the use of color spaces such as YIQ, used in NTSC, allow one to reduce the resolution on the components to accord with human perception – humans have highest resolution for black-and-white (luma), lower resolution for mid-spectrum colors like yellow and green, and lowest for red and blues – thus NTSC displays approximately 350 pixels of luma per scanline, 150 pixels of yellow vs. green, and 50 pixels of blue vs. red, which are proportional to human sensitivity to each component.\n\nLossy compression formats suffer from generation loss: repeatedly compressing and decompressing the file will cause it to progressively lose quality. This is in contrast with lossless data compression, where data will not be lost via the use of such a procedure. Information-theoretical foundations for lossy data compression are provided by rate-distortion theory. Much like the use of probability in optimal coding theory, rate-distortion theory heavily draws on Bayesian estimation and decision theory in order to model perceptual distortion and even aesthetic judgment.\n\nThere are two basic lossy compression schemes:\n\nBULLET::::- In \"lossy transform codecs\", samples of picture or sound are taken, chopped into small segments, transformed into a new basis space, and quantized. The resulting quantized values are then entropy coded.\nBULLET::::- In \"lossy predictive codecs\", previous and/or subsequent decoded data is used to predict the current sound sample or image frame. The error between the predicted data and the real data, together with any extra information needed to reproduce the prediction, is then quantized and coded.\n\nIn some systems the two techniques are combined, with transform codecs being used to compress the error signals generated by the predictive stage.\n\nThe advantage of lossy methods over lossless methods is that in some cases a lossy method can produce a much smaller compressed file than any lossless method, while still meeting the requirements of the application. Lossy methods are most often used for compressing sound, images or videos. This is because these types of data are intended for human interpretation where the mind can easily \"fill in the blanks\" or see past very minor errors or inconsistencies – ideally lossy compression is transparent (imperceptible), which can be verified via an ABX test. Data files using lossy compression are smaller in size and thus cost less to store and to transmit over the Internet, a crucial consideration for streaming video services such as Netflix and streaming audio services such as Spotify.\n\nA study conducted by the Audio Engineering Library concluded that lossy compression formats such as MP3s have distinct effects on timbral and emotional characteristics, tending to strengthen negative emotional qualities and weaken positive ones. The study further noted that the trumpet is the instrument most affected by compression, while the horn is least.\n\nWhen a user acquires a lossily compressed file, (for example, to reduce download time) the retrieved file can be quite different from the original at the bit level while being indistinguishable to the human ear or eye for most practical purposes. Many compression methods focus on the idiosyncrasies of human physiology, taking into account, for instance, that the human eye can see only certain wavelengths of light. The psychoacoustic model describes how sound can be highly compressed without degrading perceived quality. Flaws caused by lossy compression that are noticeable to the human eye or ear are known as compression artifacts.\n\nThe compression ratio (that is, the size of the compressed file compared to that of the uncompressed file) of lossy video codecs is nearly always far superior to that of the audio and still-image equivalents.\n\nBULLET::::- Video can be compressed immensely (e.g. 100:1) with little visible quality loss\nBULLET::::- Audio can often be compressed at 10:1 with almost imperceptible loss of quality\nBULLET::::- Still images are often lossily compressed at 10:1, as with audio, but the quality loss is more noticeable, especially on closer inspection.\n\nAn important caveat about lossy compression (formally transcoding), is that editing lossily compressed files causes digital generation loss from the re-encoding. This can be avoided by only producing lossy files from (lossless) originals and only editing (copies of) original files, such as images in raw image format instead of JPEG. If data which has been compressed lossily is decoded and compressed losslessly, the size of the result can be comparable with the size of the data before lossy compression, but the data already lost cannot be recovered. When deciding to use lossy conversion without keeping the original, one should remember that format conversion may be needed in the future to achieve compatibility with software or devices (format shifting), or to avoid paying patent royalties for decoding or distribution of compressed files.\n\nBy modifying the compressed data directly without decoding and re-encoding, some editing of lossily compressed files without degradation of quality is possible. Editing which reduces the file size as if it had been compressed to a greater degree, but without more loss than this, is sometimes also possible.\n\nThe primary programs for lossless editing of JPEGs are codice_1, and the derived codice_2 (which also preserves Exif information), and Jpegcrop (which provides a Windows interface).\n\nThese allow the image to be\nBULLET::::- cropped\nBULLET::::- rotated, flipped, and flopped, or\nBULLET::::- converted to grayscale (by dropping the chrominance channel).\nWhile unwanted information is destroyed, the quality of the remaining portion is unchanged.\n\nSome other transforms are possible to some extent, such as joining images with the same encoding (composing side by side, as on a grid) or pasting images (such as logos) onto existing images (both via Jpegjoin), or scaling.\n\nSome changes can be made to the compression without re-encoding:\nBULLET::::- optimizing the compression (to reduce size without change to the decoded image)\nBULLET::::- converting between progressive and non-progressive encoding.\n\nThe freeware Windows-only IrfanView has some lossless JPEG operations in its codice_3 plugin.\n\nMetadata, such as ID3 tags, Vorbis comments, or Exif information, can usually be modified or removed without modifying the underlying data.\n\nOne may wish to downsample or otherwise decrease the resolution of the represented source signal and the quantity of data used for its compressed representation without re-encoding, as in bitrate peeling, but this functionality is not supported in all designs, as not all codecs encode data in a form that allows less important detail to simply be dropped. Some well-known designs that have this capability include JPEG 2000 for still images and H.264/MPEG-4 AVC based Scalable Video Coding for video. Such schemes have also been standardized for older designs as well, such as JPEG images with progressive encoding, and MPEG-2 and MPEG-4 Part 2 video, although those prior schemes had limited success in terms of adoption into real-world common usage. Without this capacity, which is often the case in practice, to produce a representation with lower resolution or lower fidelity than a given one, one needs to start with the original source signal and encode, or start with a compressed representation and then decompress and re-encode it (transcoding), though the latter tends to cause digital generation loss.\n\nAnother approach is to encode the original signal at several different bitrates, and then either choose which to use (as when streaming over the internet – as in RealNetworks' \"SureStream\" – or offering varying downloads, as at Apple's iTunes Store), or broadcast several, where the best that is successfully received is used, as in various implementations of hierarchical modulation. Similar techniques are used in mipmaps, pyramid representations, and more sophisticated scale space methods. Some audio formats feature a combination of a lossy format and a lossless correction which when combined reproduce the original signal; the correction can be stripped, leaving a smaller, lossily compressed, file. Such formats include MPEG-4 SLS (Scalable to Lossless), WavPack, OptimFROG DualStream, and DTS-HD Master Audio in lossless (XLL) mode).\n\nBULLET::::- Discrete cosine transform (DCT)\nBULLET::::- JPEG\nBULLET::::- WebP (high-density lossless or lossy compression of RGB and RGBA images)\nBULLET::::- High Efficiency Image Format (HEIF)\nBULLET::::- Better Portable Graphics (BPG) (lossless or lossy compression)\nBULLET::::- JPEG XR, a successor of JPEG with support for high dynamic range, wide gamut pixel formats (lossless or lossy compression)\nBULLET::::- Wavelet compression\nBULLET::::- JPEG 2000, JPEG's successor format that uses wavelets (lossless or lossy compression)\nBULLET::::- DjVu\nBULLET::::- ICER, used by the Mars Rovers, related to JPEG 2000 in its use of wavelets\nBULLET::::- PGF, Progressive Graphics File (lossless or lossy compression)\nBULLET::::- Cartesian Perceptual Compression, also known as CPC\nBULLET::::- Fractal compression\nBULLET::::- JBIG2 (lossless or lossy compression)\nBULLET::::- S3TC texture compression for 3D computer graphics hardware\n\nBULLET::::- glTF\n\nBULLET::::- Discrete cosine transform (DCT)\nBULLET::::- H.261\nBULLET::::- Motion JPEG\nBULLET::::- MPEG-1 Part 2\nBULLET::::- MPEG-2 Part 2 (H.262)\nBULLET::::- MPEG-4 Part 2 (H.263)\nBULLET::::- Advanced Video Coding (AVC / H.264 / MPEG-4 AVC) (may also be lossless, even in certain video sections)\nBULLET::::- High Efficiency Video Coding (HEVC / H.265)\nBULLET::::- Ogg Theora (noted for its lack of patent restrictions)\nBULLET::::- VC-1\nBULLET::::- Wavelet compression\nBULLET::::- Motion JPEG 2000\nBULLET::::- Dirac\nBULLET::::- Sorenson video codec\n\nBULLET::::- Modified discrete cosine transform (MDCT)\nBULLET::::- Dolby Digital (AC-3)\nBULLET::::- Adaptive Transform Acoustic Coding (ATRAC)\nBULLET::::- MPEG Layer III (MP3)\nBULLET::::- Advanced Audio Coding (AAC / MP4 Audio)\nBULLET::::- Ogg Vorbis (noted for its lack of patent restrictions)\nBULLET::::- Windows Media Audio (WMA) (lossless codec available too)\nBULLET::::- LDAC\nBULLET::::- Constrained Energy Lapped Transform (CELT)\nBULLET::::- Opus (mostly for real-time applications)\nBULLET::::- Adaptive differential pulse-code modulation (ADPCM)\nBULLET::::- Master Quality Authenticated (MQA)\nBULLET::::- MPEG-1 Audio Layer II (MP2)\nBULLET::::- Musepack (based on Musicam)\nBULLET::::- aptX/ aptX-HD\n\nBULLET::::- Linear predictive coding (LPC)\nBULLET::::- Adaptive predictive coding (APC)\nBULLET::::- Code-excited linear prediction (CELP)\nBULLET::::- Algebraic code-excited linear prediction (ACELP)\nBULLET::::- Relaxed code-excited linear prediction (RCELP)\nBULLET::::- Low-delay CELP (LD-CELP)\nBULLET::::- Adaptive Multi-Rate (used in GSM and 3GPP)\nBULLET::::- Codec2 (noted for its lack of patent restrictions)\nBULLET::::- Speex (noted for its lack of patent restrictions)\nBULLET::::- Modified discrete cosine transform (MDCT)\nBULLET::::- AAC-LD\nBULLET::::- Constrained Energy Lapped Transform (CELT)\nBULLET::::- Opus (mostly for real-time applications)\nResearchers have (semi-seriously) performed lossy compression on text by either using a thesaurus to substitute short words for long ones, or generative text techniques, although these sometimes fall into the related category of lossy data conversion.\n\nA general kind of lossy compression is to lower the resolution of an image, as in image scaling, particularly decimation. One may also remove less \"lower information\" parts of an image, such as by seam carving. Many media transforms, such as Gaussian blur, are, like lossy compression, irreversible: the original signal cannot be reconstructed from the transformed signal. However, in general these will have the same size as the original, and are not a form of compression. Lowering resolution has practical uses, as the NASA New Horizons craft will transmit thumbnails of its encounter with Pluto-Charon before it sends the higher resolution images. Another solution for slow connections is the usage of Image interlacing which progressively defines the image. Thus a partial transmission is enough to preview the final image, in a lower resolution version, without creating a scaled and a full version too.\n\nBULLET::::- Data compression\nBULLET::::- Lossless compression\nBULLET::::- Compression artifact\nBULLET::::- Rate–distortion theory\nBULLET::::- List of codecs\nBULLET::::- Lenna\nBULLET::::- Image scaling\nBULLET::::- Seam carving\nBULLET::::- Transcoding\n\nBULLET::::- Lossy audio formats, comparing the speed and compression strength of five lossy audio formats.\nBULLET::::- Data compression basics, including chapters on lossy compression of images, audio and video.\nBULLET::::- Lossy PNG image compression (research)\n(Wayback Machine copy)\nBULLET::::- Using lossy GIF/PNG compression for the web (article)\nBULLET::::- JPG for Archiving, comparing the suitability of JPG and lossless compression for image archives\n"}
{"id": "18209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18209", "title": "Lossless compression", "text": "Lossless compression\n\nLossless compression is a class of data compression algorithms that allows the original data to be perfectly reconstructed from the compressed data. By contrast, lossy compression permits reconstruction only of an approximation of the original data, though usually with greatly improved compression rates (and therefore reduced media sizes).\n\nLossless data compression is used in many applications. For example, it is used in the ZIP file format and in the GNU tool gzip. It is also often used as a component within lossy data compression technologies (e.g. lossless mid/side joint stereo preprocessing by MP3 encoders and other lossy audio encoders).\n\nLossless compression is used in cases where it is important that the original and the decompressed data be identical, or where deviations from the original data would be unfavourable. Typical examples are executable programs, text documents, and source code. Some image file formats, like PNG or GIF, use only lossless compression, while others like TIFF and MNG may use either lossless or lossy methods. Lossless audio formats are most often used for archiving or production purposes, while smaller lossy audio files are typically used on portable players and in other cases where storage space is limited or exact replication of the audio is unnecessary.\n\nMost lossless compression programs do two things in sequence: the first step generates a \"statistical model\" for the input data, and the second step uses this model to map input data to bit sequences in such a way that \"probable\" (e.g. frequently encountered) data will produce shorter output than \"improbable\" data.\n\nThe primary encoding algorithms used to produce bit sequences are Huffman coding (also used by DEFLATE) and arithmetic coding. Arithmetic coding achieves compression rates close to the best possible for a particular statistical model, which is given by the information entropy, whereas Huffman compression is simpler and faster but produces poor results for models that deal with symbol probabilities close to 1.\n\nThere are two primary ways of constructing statistical models: in a \"static\" model, the data is analyzed and a model is constructed, then this model is stored with the compressed data. This approach is simple and modular, but has the disadvantage that the model itself can be expensive to store, and also that it forces using a single model for all data being compressed, and so performs poorly on files that contain heterogeneous data. \"Adaptive\" models dynamically update the model as the data is compressed. Both the encoder and decoder begin with a trivial model, yielding poor compression of initial data, but as they learn more about the data, performance improves. Most popular types of compression used in practice now use adaptive coders.\n\nLossless compression methods may be categorized according to the type of data they are designed to compress. While, in principle, any general-purpose lossless compression algorithm (\"general-purpose\" meaning that they can accept any bitstring) can be used on any type of data, many are unable to achieve significant compression on data that are not of the form for which they were designed to compress. Many of the lossless compression techniques used for text also work reasonably well for indexed images.\n\nThese techniques take advantage of the specific characteristics of images such as the common phenomenon of contiguous 2-D areas of similar tones.\nEvery pixel but the first is replaced by the difference to its left neighbor. This leads to small values having a much higher probability than large values.\nThis is often also applied to sound files, and can compress files that contain mostly low frequencies and low volumes.\nFor images, this step can be repeated by taking the difference to the top pixel, and then in videos, the difference to the pixel in the next frame can be taken.\n\nA hierarchical version of this technique takes neighboring pairs of data points, stores their difference and sum, and on a higher level with lower resolution continues with the sums. This is called discrete wavelet transform. JPEG2000 additionally uses data points from other pairs and multiplication factors to mix them into the difference. These factors must be integers, so that the result is an integer under all circumstances. So the values are increased, increasing file size, but hopefully the distribution of values is more peaked. \n\nThe adaptive encoding uses the probabilities from the previous sample in sound encoding, from the left and upper pixel in image encoding, and additionally from the previous frame in video encoding. In the wavelet transformation, the probabilities are also passed through the hierarchy.\n\nMany of these methods are implemented in open-source and proprietary tools, particularly LZW and its variants. Some algorithms are patented in the United States and other countries and their legal usage requires licensing by the patent holder. Because of patents on certain kinds of LZW compression, and in particular licensing practices by patent holder Unisys that many developers considered abusive, some open source proponents encouraged people to avoid using the Graphics Interchange Format (GIF) for compressing still image files in favor of Portable Network Graphics (PNG), which combines the LZ77-based deflate algorithm with a selection of domain-specific prediction filters. However, the patents on LZW expired on June 20, 2003.\n\nMany of the lossless compression techniques used for text also work reasonably well for indexed images, but there are other techniques that do not work for typical text that are useful for some images (particularly simple bitmaps), and other techniques that take advantage of the specific characteristics of images (such as the common phenomenon of contiguous 2-D areas of similar tones, and the fact that color images usually have a preponderance of a limited range of colors out of those representable in the color space).\n\nAs mentioned previously, lossless sound compression is a somewhat specialized area. Lossless sound compression algorithms can take advantage of the repeating patterns shown by the wave-like nature of the data – essentially using autoregressive models to predict the \"next\" value and encoding the (hopefully small) difference between the expected value and the actual data. If the difference between the predicted and the actual data (called the \"error\") tends to be small, then certain difference values (like 0, +1, −1 etc. on sample values) become very frequent, which can be exploited by encoding them in few output bits.\n\nIt is sometimes beneficial to compress only the differences between two versions of a file (or, in video compression, of successive images within a sequence). This is called delta encoding (from the Greek letter Δ, which in mathematics, denotes a difference), but the term is typically only used if both versions are meaningful outside compression and decompression. For example, while the process of compressing the error in the above-mentioned lossless audio compression scheme could be described as delta encoding from the approximated sound wave to the original sound wave, the approximated version of the sound wave is not meaningful in any other context.\n\nBy operation of the pigeonhole principle, no lossless compression algorithm can efficiently compress all possible data. For this reason, many different algorithms exist that are designed either with a specific type of input data in mind or with specific assumptions about what kinds of redundancy the uncompressed data are likely to contain.\n\nSome of the most common lossless compression algorithms are listed below.\n\nBULLET::::- bzip2 – Combines Burrows–Wheeler transform with RLE and Huffman coding\nBULLET::::- Finite State Entropy – Entropy encoding, a tabled variant of ANS, used by LZFSE and Zstandard\nBULLET::::- Huffman coding – Entropy encoding, pairs well with other algorithms, used by Unix's codice_1 utility\nBULLET::::- Lempel-Ziv compression (LZ77 and LZ78) – Dictionary-based algorithm that forms the basis for many other algorithms\nBULLET::::- Lempel–Ziv–Markov chain algorithm (LZMA) – Very high compression ratio, used by 7zip and xz\nBULLET::::- Lempel–Ziv–Oberhumer (LZO) – Designed for speed at the expense of compression ratios\nBULLET::::- Lempel–Ziv–Storer–Szymanski (LZSS) – Used by WinRAR in tandem with Huffman coding\nBULLET::::- DEFLATE – Combines LZSS compression with Huffman coding, used by ZIP, gzip, and PNG images\nBULLET::::- Lempel–Ziv–Welch (LZW) – Used by GIF images and Unix's codice_2 utility\nBULLET::::- Lempel–Ziv Finite State Entropy (LZFSE) – Combines Lempel–Ziv and Finite State Entropy, used by iOS and macOS\nBULLET::::- Zstandard – Combines LZ77, Finite State Entropy, and Huffman coding, used by the Linux kernel\nBULLET::::- Prediction by partial matching (PPM) – Optimized for compressing plain text\nBULLET::::- Run-length encoding (RLE) – Simple scheme that provides good compression of data containing lots of runs of the same value\n\nBULLET::::- Apple Lossless (ALAC – Apple Lossless Audio Codec)\nBULLET::::- Adaptive Transform Acoustic Coding (ATRAC)\nBULLET::::- Audio Lossless Coding (also known as MPEG-4 ALS)\nBULLET::::- Direct Stream Transfer (DST)\nBULLET::::- Dolby TrueHD\nBULLET::::- DTS-HD Master Audio\nBULLET::::- Free Lossless Audio Codec (FLAC)\nBULLET::::- Meridian Lossless Packing (MLP)\nBULLET::::- Monkey's Audio (Monkey's Audio APE)\nBULLET::::- MPEG-4 SLS (also known as HD-AAC)\nBULLET::::- OptimFROG\nBULLET::::- Original Sound Quality (OSQ)\nBULLET::::- RealPlayer (RealAudio Lossless)\nBULLET::::- Shorten (SHN)\nBULLET::::- TTA (True Audio Lossless)\nBULLET::::- WavPack (WavPack lossless)\nBULLET::::- WMA Lossless (Windows Media Lossless)\n\nBULLET::::- HEIF – High Efficiency Image File Format (lossless or lossy compression, using HEVC)\nBULLET::::- ILBM – (lossless RLE compression of Amiga IFF images)\nBULLET::::- LDCT – Lossless Discrete Cosine Transform\nBULLET::::- JBIG2 – (lossless or lossy compression of B&W images)\nBULLET::::- JPEG 2000 – (includes lossless compression method via LeGall-Tabatabai 5/3 reversible integer wavelet transform)\nBULLET::::- JPEG XR – formerly \"WMPhoto\" and \"HD Photo\", includes a lossless compression method\nBULLET::::- JPEG-LS – (lossless/near-lossless compression standard)\nBULLET::::- PCX – PiCture eXchange\nBULLET::::- PDF – Portable Document Format (lossless or lossy compression)\nBULLET::::- PNG – Portable Network Graphics\nBULLET::::- TIFF – Tagged Image File Format (lossless or lossy compression)\nBULLET::::- TGA – Truevision TGA\nBULLET::::- WebP – (lossless or lossy compression of RGB and RGBA images)\nBULLET::::- FLIF – Free Lossless Image Format\n\nBULLET::::- OpenCTM – Lossless compression of 3D triangle meshes\n\nSee this list of lossless video codecs.\n\nCryptosystems often compress data (the \"plaintext\") \"before\" encryption for added security. When properly implemented, compression greatly increases the unicity distance by removing patterns that might facilitate cryptanalysis. However, many ordinary lossless compression algorithms produce headers, wrappers, tables, or other predictable output that might instead make cryptanalysis easier. Thus, cryptosystems must utilize compression algorithms whose output does not contain these predictable patterns.\n\nGenetics compression algorithms (not to be confused with genetic algorithms) are the latest generation of lossless algorithms that compress data (typically sequences of nucleotides) using both conventional compression algorithms and specific algorithms adapted to genetic data. In 2012, a team of scientists from Johns Hopkins University published the first genetic compression algorithm that does not rely on external genetic databases for compression. HAPZIPPER was tailored for HapMap data and achieves over 20-fold compression (95% reduction in file size), providing 2- to 4-fold better compression much faster than leading general-purpose compression utilities.\n\nGenomic sequence compression algorithms, also known as DNA sequence compressors, explore the fact that DNA sequences have characteristic properties, such as inverted repeats. The most successful compressors are XM and GeCo. For eukaryotes XM is slightly better in compression ratio, though for sequences larger than 100 MB its computational requirements are impractical.\n\nSelf-extracting executables contain a compressed application and a decompressor. When executed, the decompressor transparently decompresses and runs the original application. This is especially often used in demo coding, where competitions are held for demos with strict size limits, as small as 1k.\nThis type of compression is not strictly limited to binary executables, but can also be applied to scripts, such as JavaScript.\n\nLossless compression algorithms and their implementations are routinely tested in head-to-head benchmarks. There are a number of better-known compression benchmarks. Some benchmarks cover only the data compression ratio, so winners in these benchmarks may be unsuitable for everyday use due to the slow speed of the top performers. Another drawback of some benchmarks is that their data files are known, so some program writers may optimize their programs for best performance on a particular data set. The winners on these benchmarks often come from the class of context-mixing compression software.\n\nMatt Mahoney, in his February 2010 edition of the free booklet \"Data Compression Explained\", additionally lists the following:\nBULLET::::- The Calgary Corpus dating back to 1987 is no longer widely used due to its small size. Matt Mahoney currently maintains the Calgary Compression Challenge, created and maintained from May 21, 1996 through May 21, 2016 by Leonid A. Broukhis.\nBULLET::::- The Large Text Compression Benchmark and the similar Hutter Prize both use a trimmed Wikipedia XML UTF-8 data set.\nBULLET::::- The Generic Compression Benchmark, maintained by Mahoney himself, test compression on random data.\nBULLET::::- Sami Runsas (author of NanoZip) maintains Compression Ratings, a benchmark similar to Maximum Compression multiple file test, but with minimum speed requirements. It also offers a calculator that allows the user to weight the importance of speed and compression ratio. The top programs here are fairly different due to speed requirement. In January 2010, the top programs were NanoZip followed by FreeArc, CCM, flashzip, and 7-Zip.\nBULLET::::- The Monster of Compression benchmark by N. F. Antonio tests compression on 1Gb of public data with a 40-minute time limit. As of Dec. 20, 2009 the top ranked archiver is NanoZip 0.07a and the top ranked single file compressor is ccmx 1.30c, both context mixing.\n\nThe Compression Ratings website published a chart summary of the \"frontier\" in compression ratio and time.\n\nThe Compression Analysis Tool is a Windows application that enables end users to benchmark the performance characteristics of streaming implementations of LZF4, DEFLATE, ZLIB, GZIP, BZIP2 and LZMA using their own data. It produces measurements and charts with which users can compare the compression speed, decompression speed and compression ratio of the different compression methods and to examine how the compression level, buffer size and flushing operations affect the results.\n\nLossless data compression algorithms cannot guarantee compression for all input data sets. In other words, for any lossless data compression algorithm, there will be an input data set that does not get smaller when processed by the algorithm, and for any lossless data compression algorithm that makes at least one file smaller, there will be at least one file that it makes larger. This is easily proven with elementary mathematics using a counting argument, as follows:\n\nBULLET::::- Assume that each file is represented as a string of bits of some arbitrary length.\nBULLET::::- Suppose that there is a compression algorithm that transforms every file into an output file that is no longer than the original file, and that at least one file will be compressed into an output file that is shorter than the original file.\nBULLET::::- Let \"M\" be the least number such that there is a file \"F\" with length \"M\" bits that compresses to something shorter. Let \"N\" be the length (in bits) of the compressed version of \"F\".\nBULLET::::- Because \"N\"<\"M\", every file of length \"N\" keeps its size during compression. There are 2 such files. Together with \"F\", this makes 2+1 files that all compress into one of the 2 files of length \"N\".\nBULLET::::- But 2 is smaller than 2+1, so by the pigeonhole principle there must be some file of length \"N\" that is simultaneously the output of the compression function on two different inputs. That file cannot be decompressed reliably (which of the two originals should that yield?), which contradicts the assumption that the algorithm was lossless.\nBULLET::::- We must therefore conclude that our original hypothesis (that the compression function makes no file longer) is necessarily untrue.\n\nAny lossless compression algorithm that makes some files shorter must necessarily make some files longer, but it is not necessary that those files become \"very much\" longer. Most practical compression algorithms provide an \"escape\" facility that can turn off the normal coding for files that would become longer by being encoded. In theory, only a single additional bit is required to tell the decoder that the normal coding has been turned off for the entire input; however, most encoding algorithms use at least one full byte (and typically more than one) for this purpose. For example, DEFLATE compressed files never need to grow by more than 5 bytes per 65,535 bytes of input.\n\nIn fact, if we consider files of length N, if all files were equally probable, then for any lossless compression that reduces the size of some file, the expected length of a compressed file (averaged over all possible files of length N) must necessarily be \"greater\" than N. So if we know nothing about the properties of the data we are compressing, we might as well not compress it at all. A lossless compression algorithm is useful only when we are more likely to compress certain types of files than others; then the algorithm could be designed to compress those types of data better.\n\nThus, the main lesson from the argument is not that one risks big losses, but merely that one cannot always win. To choose an algorithm always means implicitly to select a \"subset\" of all files that will become usefully shorter. This is the theoretical reason why we need to have different compression algorithms for different kinds of files: there cannot be any algorithm that is good for all kinds of data.\n\nThe \"trick\" that allows lossless compression algorithms, used on the type of data they were designed for, to consistently compress such files to a shorter form is that the files the algorithms are designed to act on all have some form of easily modeled redundancy that the algorithm is designed to remove, and thus belong to the subset of files that that algorithm can make shorter, whereas other files would not get compressed or even get bigger. Algorithms are generally quite specifically tuned to a particular type of file: for example, lossless audio compression programs do not work well on text files, and vice versa.\n\nIn particular, files of random data cannot be consistently compressed by any conceivable lossless data compression algorithm: indeed, this result is used to \"define\" the concept of randomness in algorithmic complexity theory.\n\nIt's provably impossible to create an algorithm that can losslessly compress any data. While there have been many claims through the years of companies achieving \"perfect compression\" where an arbitrary number \"N\" of random bits can always be compressed to \"N\" − 1 bits, these kinds of claims can be safely discarded without even looking at any further details regarding the purported compression scheme. Such an algorithm contradicts fundamental laws of mathematics because, if it existed, it could be applied repeatedly to losslessly reduce any file to length 0. Allegedly \"perfect\" compression algorithms are often derisively referred to as \"magic\" compression algorithms for this reason.\n\nOn the other hand, it has also been proven that there is no algorithm to determine whether a file is incompressible in the sense of Kolmogorov complexity. Hence it's possible that any particular file, even if it appears random, may be significantly compressed, even including the size of the decompressor. An example is the digits of the mathematical constant \"pi\", which appear random but can be generated by a very small program. However, even though it cannot be determined whether a particular file is incompressible, a simple theorem about incompressible strings shows that over 99% of files of any given length cannot be compressed by more than one byte (including the size of the decompressor).\n\nAbstractly, a compression algorithm can be viewed as a function on sequences (normally of octets). Compression is successful if the resulting sequence is shorter than the original sequence (and the instructions for the decompression map). For a compression algorithm to be lossless, the compression map must form an injection from \"plain\" to \"compressed\" bit sequences.\n\nThe pigeonhole principle prohibits a bijection between the collection of sequences of length \"N\" and any subset of the collection of sequences of length \"N\"−1. Therefore, it is not possible to produce a lossless algorithm that reduces the size of every possible input sequence.\n\nMost everyday files are relatively 'sparse' in an information entropy sense, and thus, most lossless algorithms a layperson is likely to apply on regular files compress them relatively well. This may, through misapplication of intuition, lead some individuals to conclude that a well-designed compression algorithm can compress \"any\" input, thus, constituting a \"magic compression algorithm\".\n\nReal compression algorithm designers accept that streams of high information entropy cannot be compressed, and accordingly, include facilities for detecting and handling this condition. An obvious way of detection is applying a raw compression algorithm and testing if its output is smaller than its input. Sometimes, detection is made by heuristics; for example, a compression application may consider files whose names end in \".zip\", \".arj\" or \".lha\" uncompressible without any more sophisticated detection. A common way of handling this situation is quoting input, or uncompressible parts of the input in the output, minimizing the compression overhead. For example, the zip data format specifies the 'compression method' of 'Stored' for input files that have been copied into the archive verbatim.\n\nMark Nelson, in response to claims of magic compression algorithms appearing in comp.compression, has constructed a 415,241 byte binary file of highly entropic content, and issued a public challenge of $100 to anyone to write a program that, together with its input, would be smaller than his provided binary data yet be able to reconstitute it without error.\n\nThe FAQ for the comp.compression newsgroup contains a challenge by Mike Goldman offering $5,000 for a program that can compress random data. Patrick Craig took up the challenge, but rather than compressing the data, he split it up into separate files all of which ended in the number \"5\", which was not stored as part of the file. Omitting this character allowed the resulting files (plus, in accordance with the rules, the size of the program that reassembled them) to be smaller than the original file. However, no actual compression took place, and the information stored in the names of the files was necessary to reassemble them in the correct order in the original file, and this information was not taken into account in the file size comparison. The files themselves are thus not sufficient to reconstitute the original file; the file names are also necessary. Patrick Craig agreed that no meaningful compression had taken place, but argued that the wording of the challenge did not actually require this. A full history of the event, including discussion on whether or not the challenge was technically met, is on Patrick Craig's web site.\n\nBULLET::::- Comparison of file archivers\nBULLET::::- Data compression\nBULLET::::- David A. Huffman\nBULLET::::- Entropy (information theory)\nBULLET::::- Grammar-based code\nBULLET::::- Information theory\nBULLET::::- Kolmogorov complexity\nBULLET::::- List of codecs\nBULLET::::- Lossless Transform Audio Compression (LTAC)\nBULLET::::- Lossy compression\nBULLET::::- Precompressor\nBULLET::::- Universal code (data compression)\nBULLET::::- Normal number\nBULLET::::- (790 pages)\nBULLET::::- (488 pages)\n\nBULLET::::- overview of\nBULLET::::- US patent #7,096,360, \"[a]n \"Frequency-Time Based Data Compression Method\" supporting the compression, encryption, decompression, and decryption and persistence of many binary digits through frequencies where each frequency represents many bits.\"\n"}
{"id": "18210", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18210", "title": "Larry Niven", "text": "Larry Niven\n\nLaurence van Cott Niven (; born April 30, 1938) is an American science fiction writer. His best-known works are \"Ringworld\" (1970), which received Hugo, Locus, Ditmar, and Nebula awards, and \"The Mote in God's Eye\" (1974). The Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America named him the 2015 recipient of the Damon Knight Memorial Grand Master Award. His work is primarily hard science fiction, using big science concepts and theoretical physics. It also often includes elements of detective fiction and adventure stories. His fantasy includes the series \"The Magic Goes Away\", rational fantasy dealing with magic as a non-renewable resource.\n\nNiven was born in Los Angeles. He is a great-grandson of Edward L. Doheny, an oil tycoon who drilled the first successful well in the Los Angeles City Oil Field in 1892 and was subsequently implicated in the Teapot Dome scandal. He briefly attended the California Institute of Technology and graduated with a Bachelor of Arts in mathematics (with a minor in psychology) from Washburn University in Topeka, Kansas in 1962. He also completed a year of graduate work in mathematics at the University of California, Los Angeles. On September 6, 1969, he married Marilyn Joyce \"Fuzzy Pink\" Wisowaty, a science fiction and Regency literature fan. He is an agnostic.\n\nNiven is the author of numerous science fiction short stories and novels, beginning with his 1964 story \"The Coldest Place\". In this story, the coldest place concerned is the dark side of Mercury, which at the time the story was written was thought to be tidally locked with the Sun (it was found to rotate in a 2:3 resonance after Niven received payment for the story, but before it was published).\n\nAlgis Budrys said in 1968 that Niven becoming a top writer despite the New Wave was evidence that \"trends are for second-raters\". In addition to the Nebula award in 1970 and the Hugo and Locus awards in 1971 for \"Ringworld\", Niven won the Hugo Award for Best Short Story for \"Neutron Star\" in 1967. He won the same award in 1972, for \"Inconstant Moon\", and in 1975 for \"The Hole Man\". In 1976, he won the Hugo Award for Best Novelette for \"The Borderland of Sol\".\n\nNiven has written scripts for three science fiction television series: the original \"Land of the Lost\" series; \"\", for which he adapted his early story \"The Soft Weapon\"; and \"The Outer Limits\", for which he adapted his story \"Inconstant Moon\" into an episode of the same name.\n\nNiven has also written for the DC Comics character Green Lantern, including in his stories hard science fiction concepts such as universal entropy and the redshift effect.\n\nHe has included limited psi gifts (mind over matter) in some characters in his stories; like Gil Hamilton's psychic arm which can only reach as far as a corporeal arm could, though it can, for example, reach through solid materials and manipulate objects on the other side, and through videophone screens, or Matt Keller's ability to make people not notice him.\n\nSeveral of his stories predicted the black market in transplant organs (\"organlegging\").\n\nMany of Niven's stories—sometimes called the Tales of Known Space—take place in his Known Space universe, in which humanity shares the several habitable star systems nearest to the Sun with over a dozen alien species, including the aggressive feline Kzinti and the very intelligent but cowardly Pierson's Puppeteers, which are frequently central characters. The \"Ringworld\" series is part of the Tales of Known Space, and Niven has shared the setting with other writers since a 1988 anthology, \"The Man-Kzin Wars\" (Baen Books, jointly edited with Jerry Pournelle and Dean Ing). There have been several volumes of short stories and novellas.\n\nNiven has also written a logical fantasy series \"The Magic Goes Away\", which utilizes an exhaustible resource called \"mana\" to power a rule-based \"technological\" magic. \"The Draco Tavern\" series of short stories take place in a more light-hearted science fiction universe, and are told from the point of view of the proprietor of an omni-species bar. The whimsical \"Svetz\" series consists of a collection of short stories, \"The Flight of the Horse\", and a novel, \"Rainbow Mars\", which involve a nominal time machine sent back to retrieve long-extinct animals, but which travels, in fact, into alternative realities and brings back mythical creatures such as a Roc and a Unicorn. Much of his writing since the 1970s has been in collaboration, particularly with Jerry Pournelle and Steven Barnes, but also Brenda Cooper and Edward M. Lerner.\n\nOne of Niven's best known humorous works is \"Man of Steel, Woman of Kleenex\", in which he uses real-world physics to underline the difficulties of Superman and a human woman (Lois Lane or Lana Lang) mating.\n\nNiven appeared in the 1980 science documentary film \"Target... Earth?\"\n\nNiven's most famous contribution to the SF genre comes from his novel \"Ringworld\", in which he envisions a Ringworld: a band of material, roughly a million miles wide, of approximately the same diameter as Earth's orbit, rotating around a star. The idea's genesis came from Niven's attempts to imagine a more efficient version of a Dyson sphere, which could produce the effect of surface gravity through rotation. Given that spinning a Dyson sphere would result in the atmosphere pooling around the equator, the Ringworld removes all the extraneous parts of the structure, leaving a spinning band landscaped on the sun-facing side, with the atmosphere and inhabitants kept in place through centrifugal force and high perimeter walls (rim walls). After publication of \"Ringworld\", Dan Alderson and Ctein, two fannish friends of Niven, analyzed the structure and told Niven that the Ringworld was dynamically unstable such that if the center of rotation drifts away from the central sun, gravitational forces will not \"re-center\" it, thus allowing the ring to eventually contact the sun and be destroyed. Niven used this as a core plot element in the sequel novel, \"The Ringworld Engineers\".\n\nThis idea proved influential, serving as an alternative to a full Dyson sphere that required fewer assumptions (such as artificial gravity) and allowed a day/night cycle to be introduced (through the use of a smaller ring of \"shadow squares\", rotating between the ring and its sun). This was further developed by Iain M. Banks in his Culture series, which features about ringworld–size megastructures called Orbitals that orbit a star rather than encircling it entirely (actual \"Rings\" and Dyson \"Spheres\" are also mentioned but are much rarer). Alastair Reynolds also uses ringworlds in his 2008 novel \"House of Suns\". The Ringworld-like namesake of the \"Halo\" video game series is the eponymous Halo megastructure/superweapon.\n\nThe original release of \"\" paid homage to Larry Niven on a card called \"Nevinyrral's Disk\", with Nevinyrral being \"Larry Niven\" spelled backwards. Subsequent sets have featured no new cards featuring Nevinyrral, although the character is sporadically quoted on the flavor text of various cards. \"Netrunner\" paid a similar homage to Larry Niven with the card \"Nevinyrral\".\n\nAccording to author Michael Moorcock, in 1967 Niven was among those Science Fiction Writers of America members who voiced opposition to the Vietnam War. However, in 1968 Niven's name appeared in a pro-war ad in \"Galaxy Science Fiction\".\n\nNiven was an adviser to Ronald Reagan on the creation of the Strategic Defense Initiative antimissile policy, as part of the Citizens' Advisory Council on National Space Policy – as covered in the BBC documentary \"Pandora's Box\" by Adam Curtis. The council also convinced Vice President Dan Quayle to support the single-stage-to-orbit concept for a reusable space ship that led to the building of the DC-X.\n\nIn 2007, Niven, in conjunction with a group of science fiction writers known as SIGMA, led by Pournelle, began advising the U.S. Department of Homeland Security as to future trends affecting terror policy and other topics.\n\nLarry Niven is also known in science fiction fandom for \"Niven's Law\": \"There is no cause so right that one cannot find a fool following it\". Over the course of his career Niven has added to this first law a list of Niven's Laws which he describes as \"how the Universe works\" as far as he can tell.\n\nBULLET::::- with bibliography\nBULLET::::- Larry Niven at Fantastic Fiction\n\nBULLET::::- Audio interview with Larry Niven\n"}
{"id": "18212", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18212", "title": "Linux distribution", "text": "Linux distribution\n\nA Linux distribution (often abbreviated as distro) is an operating system made from a software collection, which is based upon the Linux kernel and, often, a package management system. Linux users usually obtain their operating system by downloading one of the Linux distributions, which are available for a wide variety of systems ranging from embedded devices (for example, OpenWrt) and personal computers (for example, Linux Mint) to powerful supercomputers (for example, Rocks Cluster Distribution).\n\nA typical Linux distribution comprises a Linux kernel, GNU tools and libraries, additional software, documentation, a window system (the most common being the X Window System), a window manager, and a desktop environment. Most of the included software is free and open-source software made available both as compiled binaries and in source code form, allowing modifications to the original software. Usually, Linux distributions optionally include some proprietary software that may not be available in source code form, such as binary blobs required for some device drivers.\nA Linux distribution may also be described as a particular assortment of application and utility software (various GNU tools and libraries, for example), packaged together with the Linux kernel in such a way that its capabilities meet the needs of many users. The software is usually adapted to the distribution and then packaged into software packages by the distribution's maintainers. The software packages are available online in so-called repositories, which are storage locations usually distributed around the world. Beside glue components, such as the distribution installers (for example, Debian-Installer and Anaconda) or the package management systems, there are only very few packages that are originally written from the ground up by the maintainers of a Linux distribution.\n\nAlmost six hundred Linux distributions exist, with close to five hundred out of those in active development. Because of the huge availability of software, distributions have taken a wide variety of forms, including those suitable for use on desktops, servers, laptops, netbooks, mobile phones and tablets, as well as minimal environments typically for use in embedded systems. There are commercially backed distributions, such as Fedora (Red Hat), openSUSE (SUSE) and Ubuntu (Canonical Ltd.), and entirely community-driven distributions, such as Debian, Slackware, Gentoo and Arch Linux. Most distributions come ready to use and pre-compiled for a specific instruction set, while some distributions (such as Gentoo) are distributed mostly in source code form and compiled locally during installation.\n\nLinus Torvalds developed the Linux kernel and distributed its first version, 0.01, in 1991. Linux was initially distributed as source code only, and later as a pair of downloadable floppy disk images one bootable and containing the Linux kernel itself, and the other with a set of GNU utilities and tools for setting up a file system. Since the installation procedure was complicated, especially in the face of growing amounts of available software, distributions sprang up to simplify this.\n\nEarly distributions included the following:\nBULLET::::- H. J. Lu's \"Boot-root\", the aforementioned disk image pair with the kernel and the absolute minimal tools to get started, in late 1991\nBULLET::::- MCC Interim Linux, which was made available to the public for download in February 1992\nBULLET::::- Softlanding Linux System (SLS), released in 1992, was the most comprehensive distribution for a short time, including the X Window System\nBULLET::::- Yggdrasil Linux/GNU/X, a commercial distribution first released in December 1992\n\nThe two oldest and still active distribution projects started in 1993. The SLS distribution was not well maintained, so in July 1993 a new distribution, called Slackware and based on SLS, was released by Patrick Volkerding. Also dissatisfied with SLS, Ian Murdock set to create a free distribution by founding Debian, which had its first release in December 1993.\n\nUsers were attracted to Linux distributions as alternatives to the DOS and Microsoft Windows operating systems on IBM PC compatible computers, Mac OS on the Apple Macintosh, and proprietary versions of Unix. Most early adopters were familiar with Unix from work or school. They embraced Linux distributions for their low (if any) cost, and availability of the source code for most or all of the software included.\n\nOriginally, the distributions were simply a convenience, offering a free alternative to proprietary versions of Unix but later they became the usual choice even for Unix or Linux experts.\n\nAs of 2017, Linux has become more popular in server and embedded devices markets than in the desktop market. For example, Linux is used on over 50% of web servers, whereas its desktop market share is about 3.7%.\n\nMany Linux distributions provide an installation system akin to that provided with other modern operating systems. On the other hand, some distributions, including Gentoo Linux, provide only the binaries of a basic kernel, compilation tools, and an installer; the installer compiles all the requested software for the specific architecture of the user's computer, using these tools and the provided source code.\n\nDistributions are normally segmented into \"packages\". Each package contains a specific application or service. Examples of packages are a library for handling the PNG image format, a collection of fonts or a web browser.\n\nThe package is typically provided as compiled code, with installation and removal of packages handled by a package management system (PMS) rather than a simple file archiver. Each package intended for such a PMS contains meta-information such as a package description, version, and \"dependencies\". The package management system can evaluate this meta-information to allow package searches, to perform an automatic upgrade to a newer version, to check that all dependencies of a package are fulfilled, and/or to fulfill them automatically.\n\nAlthough Linux distributions typically contain much more software than proprietary operating systems, it is normal for local administrators to also install software not included in the distribution. An example would be a newer version of a software application than that supplied with a distribution, or an alternative to that chosen by the distribution (for example, KDE Plasma Workspaces rather than GNOME or vice versa for the user interface layer). If the additional software is distributed in source-only form, this approach requires local compilation. However, if additional software is locally added, the \"state\" of the local system may fall out of synchronization with the state of the package manager's database. If so, the local administrator will be required to take additional measures to ensure the entire system is kept up to date. The package manager may no longer be able to do so automatically.\n\nMost distributions install packages, including the kernel and other core operating system components, in a predetermined configuration. Few now require or even permit configuration adjustments at first install time. This makes installation less daunting, particularly for new users, but is not always acceptable. For specific requirements, much software must be carefully configured to be useful, to work correctly with other software, or to be secure, and local administrators are often obliged to spend time reviewing and reconfiguring assorted software.\n\nSome distributions go to considerable lengths to specifically adjust and customize most or all of the software included in the distribution. Not all do so. Some distributions provide configuration tools to assist in this process.\n\nBy replacing \"everything\" provided in a distribution, an administrator may reach a \"distribution-less\" state: everything was retrieved, compiled, configured, and installed locally. It is possible to build such a system from scratch, avoiding a distribution altogether. One needs a way to generate the first binaries until the system is \"self-hosting\". This can be done via compilation on another system capable of building binaries for the intended target (possibly by cross-compilation). For example, see Linux From Scratch.\n\nIn broad terms, Linux distributions may be:\nBULLET::::- Commercial or non-commercial\nBULLET::::- Designed for enterprise users, power users, or for home users\nBULLET::::- Supported on multiple types of hardware, or platform-specific, even to the extent of certification by the platform vendor\nBULLET::::- Designed for servers, desktops, or embedded devices\nBULLET::::- General purpose or highly specialized toward specific machine functionalities (e.g. firewalls, network routers, and computer clusters)\nBULLET::::- Targeted at specific user groups, for example through language internationalization and localization, or through inclusion of many music production or scientific computing packages\nBULLET::::- Built primarily for security, usability, portability, or comprehensiveness\nBULLET::::- Standard release or rolling release, see below.\n\nThe diversity of Linux distributions is due to technical, organizational, and philosophical variation among vendors and users. The permissive licensing of free software means that any user with sufficient knowledge and interest can customize an existing distribution or design one to suit his or her own needs.\n\nRolling Linux distributions are kept updated using small and frequent updates. Software contained in a rolling distribution's software stack is usually standard release, though.\n\nRolling releases can be either:\n\nBULLET::::- Full-rolling distributions\nBULLET::::- Part-/semi-/half-rolling distributions\n\nThe terms \"partially rolling\" and \"partly rolling\" (along with synonyms \"semi-rolling\" and \"half-rolling\"), \"fully rolling\", \"truly rolling\" and \"optionally rolling\" are all standard terms used by software developers and users.\n\nRepositories of rolling distributions usually contains very recent software releases – often the latest stable software releases available. They have pseudo-releases and installation media that are simply a snapshot of the software distribution at the time of the release of the installation image. Typically, a rolling release operating system installed from an older installation medium can be fully updated post-installation to a current state.\n\nThere are pros and cons to both standard release and rolling release software development methodologies.\n\nIn terms of the software development process, standard releases require significant development effort being spent on keeping old versions up to date due to propagating bug fixes back to the newest branch, versus focusing more on the newest development branch. Also, unlike rolling releases, standard releases require more than one code branch to be developed and maintained, which increases the software development and software maintenance workload of the software developers and software maintainers.\n\nOn the other hand, software features and technology planning are easier in standard releases due to a better understanding of upcoming features in the next version(s) rather than simply the whim of the developers at any given time. Software release cycles can also be synchronized with those of major upstream software projects, such as desktop environments. \n\nAs far as the user experience, standard releases are often viewed as more stable and bug-free since software conflicts can be more easily addressed and the software stack more thoroughly tested and evaluated, during the software development cycle. For this reason, they tend to be the preferred choice in enterprise environments and mission-critical tasks.\n\nHowever, rolling releases offer more current software which can also provide increased stability and fewer software bugs along with the additional benefits of new features, greater functionality, faster running speeds, and improved system and application security. Regarding software security, the rolling release model can have advantages in timely security updates, fixing system or application security bugs and vulnerabilities, that standard releases may have to wait till the next release for or patch in various versions. In a rolling release distribution, where the user has \"chosen\" to run it as a highly dynamic system, the constant flux of software packages can introduce new unintended vulnerabilities.\n\nA \"live\" distribution is a Linux distribution that can be booted from removable storage media such as optical discs or USB flash drives, instead of being installed on and booted from a hard disk drive. The portability of installation-free distributions makes them advantageous for applications such as demonstrations, borrowing someone else's computer, rescue operations, or as installation media for a standard distribution.\n\nWhen the operating system is booted from a read-only medium such as a CD or DVD, any user data that needs to be retained between sessions cannot be stored on the boot device but must be written to another storage device, such as a USB flash drive or a hard disk drive.\n\nMany Linux distributions provide a \"live\" form in addition to their conventional form, which is a network-based or removable-media image intended to be used only for installation; such distributions include SUSE, Ubuntu, Linux Mint, MEPIS and Fedora. Some distributions, including Knoppix, Puppy Linux, Devil-Linux, SuperGamer, SliTaz GNU/Linux and , are designed primarily for live use. Additionally, some minimal distributions can be run directly from as little space as one floppy disk without the need to change the contents of the system's hard disk drive.\n\nThe website DistroWatch lists many Linux distributions, and displays some of the ones that have the most web traffic on the site. The Wikimedia Foundation released an analysis of the browser User Agents of visitors to WMF websites until 2015, which includes details of the most popular Operating System identifiers, including some Linux distributions. Many of the popular distributions are listed below.\n\nBULLET::::- Debian, a non-commercial distribution and one of the earliest, maintained by a volunteer developer community with a strong commitment to free software principles and democratic project management\nBULLET::::- Knoppix, the first Live CD distribution to run completely from removable media without installation to a hard disk, derived from Debian\nBULLET::::- Linux Mint Debian Edition (LMDE) uses Debian packages directly (rather than Ubuntu's)\nBULLET::::- Ubuntu, a desktop and server distribution derived from Debian, maintained by British company Canonical Ltd.\nBULLET::::- there are several distributions based on Ubuntu that mainly replace the GNOME stock desktop environment, like: Kubuntu based on KDE, Lubuntu based on LXQT, Xubuntu based on XFCE, Ubuntu MATE based on MATE, Ubuntu Budgie based on Budgie. Other official forks have specific uses like: Ubuntu Kylin for Chinese speaking users, or Ubuntu Studio for media content creators.\nBULLET::::- Linux Mint, a distribution based on and compatible with Ubuntu. Supports multiple desktop environments, among others GNOME Shell fork Cinnamon and GNOME 2 fork MATE.\n\nBULLET::::- Fedora, a community distribution sponsored by American company Red Hat and the successor to the company's previous offering, Red Hat Linux. It aims to be a technology testbed for Red Hat's commercial Linux offering, where new open source software is prototyped, developed, and tested in a communal setting before maturing into Red Hat Enterprise Linux.\nBULLET::::- Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL), a derivative of Fedora, maintained and commercially supported by Red Hat. It seeks to provide tested, secure, and stable Linux server and workstation support to businesses.\nBULLET::::- CentOS, a distribution derived from the same sources used by Red Hat, maintained by a dedicated volunteer community of developers with both 100% Red Hat-compatible versions and an upgraded version that is not always 100% upstream compatible.\nBULLET::::- Oracle Linux, which is a derivative of Red Hat Enterprise Linux, maintained and commercially supported by Oracle\nBULLET::::- Scientific Linux, a distribution derived from the same sources used by Red Hat, maintained by Fermilab\nBULLET::::- Mandriva Linux was a Red Hat Linux derivative popular in several European countries and Brazil, backed by the French company of the same name. After the company went bankrupt, it was superseded by OpenMandriva Lx, although a number of derivatives now have a larger user base.\nBULLET::::- Mageia, a community fork of Mandriva Linux created in 2010\nBULLET::::- PCLinuxOS, a derivative of Mandriva, which grew from a group of packages into a community-spawned desktop distribution\nBULLET::::- openSUSE, a community distribution mainly sponsored by German company SUSE.\nBULLET::::- SUSE Linux Enterprise, derived from openSUSE, maintained and commercially supported by SUSE\nBULLET::::- Arch Linux, a rolling release distribution targeted at experienced Linux users and maintained by a volunteer community, offers official binary packages and a wide range of unofficial user-submitted source packages. Packages are usually defined by a single PKGBUILD text file.\nBULLET::::- Manjaro Linux, a derivative of Arch Linux that includes a graphical installer and other ease-of-use features for less experienced Linux users. Rolling release packages from Arch repositories are held for further testing to achieve increased stability, and packages identified as addressing security issues of critical or high severity are \"fast-tracked\" to the stable branch.\nBULLET::::- Gentoo, a distribution targeted at power users, known for its FreeBSD Ports-like automated system for compiling applications from source code\nBULLET::::- Chrome OS, Google's commercial operating system based on Chromium OS that only runs on Chromebooks, Chromeboxes and tablet computers. Like Android, it has the Google Play Store and other Google apps\nBULLET::::- Slackware, created in 1993, one of the first Linux distributions and among the earliest still maintained, committed to remain highly Unix-like and easily modifiable by end users\n\nOther distributions target specific niches, such as:\n\nBULLET::::- \"Routers\" for example, targeted by the tiny embedded router distribution OpenWrt\nBULLET::::- \"Internet of things\" for example, targeted by Ubuntu Core\nBULLET::::- \"Home theater PCs\" for example, targeted by KnoppMyth, Kodi (former XBMC) and Mythbuntu\nBULLET::::- \"Specific platforms\" for example, Raspbian targets the Raspberry Pi platform\nBULLET::::- \"Education\" examples are Edubuntu and Karoshi, server systems based on PCLinuxOS\nBULLET::::- \"Scientific computer servers and workstations\" for example, targeted by Scientific Linux\nBULLET::::- \"Digital audio workstations for music production\" for example, targeted by Ubuntu Studio\nBULLET::::- \"Computer Security, digital forensics and penetration testing\" examples are Kali Linux and Parrot Security OS\nBULLET::::- \"Privacy and anonymity\" for example, targeted by Tails, Whonix, Qubes, or FreedomBox\nBULLET::::- \"Offline use\" for example, Endless OS\nBULLET::::- Microsoft's Azure Sphere\n\nWhether Google's Android counts as a Linux distribution is a matter of definition. It uses the Linux kernel, so the Linux Foundation and Chris DiBona, Google's open source chief, agree that Android is a Linux distribution; others, such as Google engineer Patrick Brady, disagree by noting the lack of support for many GNU tools in Android, including glibc.\n\nOther non-GNU distributions include Cyanogenmod, its fork LineageOS, Android-x86 and recently Tizen and Mer/Sailfish OS.\n\nThe Free Standards Group is an organization formed by major software and hardware vendors that aims to improve interoperability between different distributions. Among their proposed standards are the Linux Standard Base, which defines a common ABI and packaging system for Linux, and the Filesystem Hierarchy Standard which recommends a standard filenaming chart, notably the basic directory names found on the root of the tree of any Linux filesystem. Those standards, however, see limited use, even among the distributions developed by members of the organization.\n\nThe diversity of Linux distributions means that not all software runs on all distributions, depending on what libraries and other system attributes are required. Packaged software and software repositories are usually specific to a particular distribution, though cross-installation is sometimes possible on closely related distributions.\n\nThe process of constantly switching between distributions is often referred to as \"distro hopping\". Virtual machines such as VirtualBox and VMware Workstation virtualize hardware allowing users to test live media on a virtual machine. Some websites like DistroWatch offer lists of popular distributions, and link to screenshots of operating systems as a way to get a first impression of various distributions.\n\nThere are tools available to help people select an appropriate distribution, such as several versions of the Linux Distribution Chooser, and the universal package search tool \"whohas\". There are easy ways to try out several Linux distributions before deciding on one: Multi Distro is a Live CD that contains nine space-saving distributions.\n\nThere are several ways to install a Linux distribution. Nowadays, the most common method of installing Linux is by booting from a live USB memory stick, which can be created by using an USB image writer application and the ISO image, which can be downloaded from the various Linux distribution websites. DVD disks, CD disks, network installations and even other hard drives can also be used as \"installation media\".\n\nEarly Linux distributions were installed using sets of floppies but this has been abandoned by all major distributions. Nowadays most distributions offer CD and DVD sets with the vital packages on the first disc and less important packages on later ones. They usually also allow installation over a network after booting from either a set of floppies or a CD with only a small amount of data on it.\n\nNew users tend to begin by partitioning a hard drive in order to keep their previously installed operating system. The Linux distribution can then be installed on its own separate partition without affecting previously saved data.\n\nIn a Live CD setup, the computer boots the entire operating system from CD without first installing it on the computer's hard disk. Some distributions have a Live CD \"installer\", where the computer boots the operating system from the disk, and then proceeds to install it onto the computer's hard disk, providing a seamless transition from the OS running from the CD to the OS running from the hard disk.\n\nBoth servers and personal computers that come with Linux already installed are available from vendors including Hewlett-Packard, Dell and System76.\n\nOn embedded devices, Linux is typically held in the device's firmware and may or may not be consumer-accessible. \n\nAnaconda, one of the more popular installers, is used by Red Hat Enterprise Linux, Fedora (which uses the Fedora Media Writer) and other distributions to simplify the installation process. Debian, Ubuntu and many others use Debian-Installer.\n\nSome distributions let the user install Linux on top of their current system, such as WinLinux or coLinux. Linux is installed to the Windows hard disk partition, and can be started from inside Windows itself.\n\nVirtual machines (such as VirtualBox or VMware) also make it possible for Linux to be run inside another OS. The VM software simulates a separate computer onto which the Linux system is installed. After installation, the virtual machine can be booted as if it were an independent computer.\n\nVarious tools are also available to perform full dual-boot installations from existing platforms without a CD, most notably:\n\nBULLET::::- The (now deprecated) Wubi installer, which allows Windows users to download and install Ubuntu or its derivatives into a FAT32 or an NTFS partition without an installation CD, allowing users to easily dual boot between either operating system on the same hard drive without losing data. Replaced by Ubiquity.\nBULLET::::- Win32-loader, which is in the process of being integrated in official Debian CDs/DVDs, and allows Windows users to install Debian without a CD, though it performs a network installation and thereby requires repartitioning\nBULLET::::- UNetbootin, which allows Windows and Linux users to perform similar no-CD network installations for a wide variety of Linux distributions and additionally provides live USB creation support\n\nSome specific proprietary software products are not available in any form for Linux. As of September 2015, the Steam gaming service has 1,500 games available on Linux, compared to 2,323 games for Mac and 6,500 Windows games. Emulation and API-translation projects like Wine and CrossOver make it possible to run non-Linux-based software on Linux systems, either by emulating a proprietary operating system or by translating proprietary API calls (e.g., calls to Microsoft's Win32 or DirectX APIs) into native Linux API calls. A virtual machine can also be used to run a proprietary OS (like Microsoft Windows) on top of Linux.\n\nComputer hardware is usually sold with an operating system other than Linux already installed by the original equipment manufacturer (OEM). In the case of IBM PC compatibles the OS is usually Microsoft Windows; in the case of Apple Macintosh computers it has always been a version of Apple's OS, currently macOS; Sun Microsystems sold SPARC hardware with the Solaris installed; video game consoles such as the Xbox, PlayStation, and Wii each have their own proprietary OS. This limits Linux's market share: consumers are unaware that an alternative exists, they must make a conscious effort to use a different operating system, and they must either perform the actual installation themselves, or depend on support from a friend, relative, or computer professional.\n\nHowever, it is possible to buy hardware with Linux already installed. Lenovo, Hewlett-Packard, Dell, Affordy, Purism, and System76 all sell general-purpose Linux laptops, and custom-order PC manufacturers will also build Linux systems (but possibly with the Windows key on the keyboard). Fixstars Solutions (formerly Terra Soft) sells Macintosh computers and PlayStation 3 consoles with Yellow Dog Linux installed.\n\nIt is more common to find embedded devices sold with Linux as the default manufacturer-supported OS, including the Linksys NSLU2 NAS device, TiVo's line of personal video recorders, and Linux-based cellphones (including Android smartphones), PDAs, and portable music players. \n\nThe current Microsoft Windows license lets the manufacturer determine the refund policy. With previous versions of Windows, it was possible to obtain a refund if the manufacturer failed to provide the refund by litigation in the small claims courts. On 15 February 1999, a group of Linux users in Orange County, California held a \"Windows Refund Day\" protest in an attempt to pressure Microsoft into issuing them refunds. In France, the Linuxfrench and AFUL (French speaking Libre Software Users' Association) organizations along with free software activist Roberto Di Cosmo started a \"Windows Detax\" movement, which led to a 2006 petition against \"racketiciels\" (translation: Racketware) with 39,415 signatories and the DGCCRF branch of the French government filing several complaints against bundled software. On March 24, 2014, a new international petition was launched by AFUL on the Avaaz platform, translated into several languages and supported by many organizations around the world.\n\nThere are no official figures on popularity, adoption, downloads or installed base of Linux distributions.\n\nThere are also no official figures for the total number of Linux systems, partly due to the difficulty of quantifying the number of PCs running Linux (see Desktop Linux#Measuring adoption), since many users download Linux distributions. Hence, the sales figures for Linux systems and commercial Linux distributions indicate a much lower number of Linux systems and level of Linux adoption than is the case; this is mainly due to Linux being free and open source software that can be downloaded free of charge. A Linux Counter Project had kept track of a running guesstimate of the number of Linux systems, but did not distinguish between rolling release and standard release distributions. It ceased operation in August of 2018, though a few related blog posts were created through October 2018.\n\nBULLET::::- Comparison of Linux distributions\nBULLET::::- Lightweight Linux distribution\nBULLET::::- List of Linux distributions\n\nBULLET::::- The LWN.net Linux Distribution List – a categorized list with information about each entry\nBULLET::::- List of GNU/Linux distributions considered free by the Free Software Foundation\nBULLET::::- Google's approach to a large-scale live upgrading between two widely different Linux distributions: presentation and text version, LinuxCon 2013, by Marc Merlin\nBULLET::::- Rolling release vs. fixed release Linux, ZDNet, February 3, 2015, by Steven J. Vaughan-Nichols\n"}
{"id": "18213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18213", "title": "Los Angeles Dodgers", "text": "Los Angeles Dodgers\n\nThe Los Angeles Dodgers are an American professional baseball team based in Los Angeles, California. They compete in Major League Baseball (MLB) as a member club of the National League (NL) West division. Established in 1883 in Brooklyn, New York, the team moved to Los Angeles before the 1958 season. They played for four seasons at the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum before moving to their current home of Dodger Stadium in .\n\nThe Dodgers have won six World Series championships and twenty three National League pennants. Eleven NL MVP award winners have played for the Dodgers, winning a total of thirteen MVP Awards; eight Cy Young Award winners have also pitched for the Dodgers, winning a total of twelve Cy Young Awards. The team has eighteen Rookie of the Year Award winners, more than twice as many as the second place New York Yankees 8. The Dodgers have had four consecutive Rookies of the Year from 1979 to 1982 and five in a row from 1992 to 1996.\n\nAlthough they were winners of the National League pennant in the 2017 and 2018 seasons, the Dodgers lost in both the 2017 and 2018 World Series.\n\nIn the early 20th century, the team, then known as the Brooklyn Robins, won league pennants in 1916 and 1920, losing the World Series both times, first to Boston and then Cleveland. In the 1930s, the team changed its name to the Dodgers, after the Brooklyn pedestrians who dodged the streetcars in the city. \n\nIn 1941, the Dodgers captured their third National League pennant, only to lose to the New York Yankees. This marked the onset of the Dodgers–Yankees rivalry, as the Dodgers would face them in their next six World Series appearances. Led by Jackie Robinson, the first black Major League Baseball player of the modern era; and three-time National League Most Valuable Player Roy Campanella, also signed out of the Negro Leagues, the Dodgers captured their first World Series title in 1955 by defeating the Yankees for the first time, a story notably described in the 1972 book \"The Boys of Summer\".\n\nFollowing the 1957 season the team left Brooklyn. In just their second season in Los Angeles, the Dodgers won their second World Series title, beating the Chicago White Sox in six games in 1959. Spearheaded by the dominant pitching style of Sandy Koufax and Don Drysdale, the Dodgers captured three pennants in the 1960s and won two more World Series titles, sweeping the Yankees in four games in 1963, and edging the Minnesota Twins in seven in 1965. The 1963 sweep was their second victory against the Yankees, and their first against them as a Los Angeles team. The Dodgers won four more pennants in 1966, 1974, 1977 and 1978, but lost in each World Series appearance. They went on to win the World Series again in 1981, thanks in part to pitching sensation Fernando Valenzuela. \n\nThe early 1980s were affectionately dubbed \"Fernandomania.\" In 1988, another pitching hero, Orel Hershiser, again led them to a World Series victory, aided by one of the most memorable home runs of all time, by their injured star outfielder Kirk Gibson coming off the bench to pinch hit with two outs in the bottom of the ninth inning of game 1, in his only appearance of the series. The Dodgers won the pennant in 2017 and 2018, but lost the World Series to the Houston Astros and Boston Red Sox respectively. \n\nThe Dodgers share a fierce rivalry with the San Francisco Giants,dating back to when the two franchises played in New York City. Both teams moved west for the 1958 season. Both the Brooklyn/Los Angeles Dodgers and the New York/San Francisco Giants have appeared in the World Series 20 times. The Giants have won two more World Series (8); when the two teams were based in New York, the Giants won five World Series championships, and the Dodgers one. After the move to California, the Dodgers have won five 5 World Series to the Giants have won 3.\n\nThe Dodgers were founded in 1883 as the Brooklyn Atlantics, taking the name of a defunct team that had played in Brooklyn before them. The team joined the American Association in 1884 and won the AA championship in 1889 before joining the National League in 1890. They promptly won the NL Championship their first year in the League. The team was known alternatively as the Bridegrooms, Grooms, Superbas, Robins, and Trolley Dodgers before officially becoming the Brooklyn Dodgers in the 1930s.\n\nIn Brooklyn, the Dodgers won the NL pennant several times (1890, 1899, 1900, 1916, 1920, 1941, 1947, 1949, 1952, 1953, 1955, 1956) and the World Series in 1955. After moving to Los Angeles, the team won National League pennants in 1959, 1963, 1965, 1966, 1974, 1977, 1978, 1981, 1988, 2017, and 2018, with World Series championships in 1959, 1963, 1965, 1981 and 1988. In all, the Dodgers have appeared in 20 World Series: 9 in Brooklyn and 11 in Los Angeles.\n\nFor most of the first half of the 20th century, no Major League Baseball team employed an African American player. Jackie Robinson became the first African American to play for a Major League Baseball team when he played his first major league game on April 15, 1947, as a member of the Brooklyn Dodgers. This was mainly due to general manager Branch Rickey's efforts. The deeply religious Rickey's motivation appears to have been primarily moral, although business considerations were also a factor. Rickey was a member of The Methodist Church, the antecedent denomination to The United Methodist Church of today, which was a strong advocate for social justice and active later in the American Civil Rights Movement.\n\nThis event was the harbinger of the integration of professional sports in the United States, the concomitant demise of the Negro Leagues, and is regarded as a key moment in the history of the American Civil Rights Movement. Robinson was an exceptional player, a speedy runner who sparked the team with his intensity. He was the inaugural recipient of the Rookie of the Year award, which is now named the Jackie Robinson Award in his honor. The Dodgers' willingness to integrate, when most other teams refused to, was a key factor in their 1947–1956 success. They won six pennants in those 10 years with the help of Robinson, three-time MVP Roy Campanella, Cy Young Award winner Don Newcombe, Jim Gilliam and Joe Black. Robinson would eventually go on to become the first African-American elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1962.\n\nReal estate investor Walter O'Malley acquired majority ownership of the Dodgers in 1950, when he bought the 25 percent share of co-owner Branch Rickey and became allied with the widow of the another equal partner, Mrs. John L. Smith. Before long, he was working to buy new land in Brooklyn to build a more accessible and profitable ballpark than the aging Ebbets Field. Beloved as it was, Ebbets Field was no longer well-served by its aging infrastructure and the Dodgers could no longer sell out the park even in the heat of a pennant race, despite largely dominating the National League from 1946 to 1957.\n\nO'Malley wanted to build a new, state of the art stadium in Brooklyn. But City Planner Robert Moses and New York politicians refused to grant him the eminent domain authority required to build pursuant to O'Malley's plans. To put pressure on the city, during the 1955 season, O'Malley announced that the team would play seven regular season games and one exhibition game at Jersey City's Roosevelt Stadium in 1956. Moses and the City considered this an empty threat, and did not believe O'Malley would go through with moving the team from New York City.\n\nAfter teams began to travel to and from games by air instead of train, it became possible to include locations in the far west. Los Angeles officials attended the 1956 World Series looking to the Washington Senators to move to the West Coast. When O'Malley heard that LA was looking for a club, he sent word to the Los Angeles officials that he was interested in talking. LA offered him what New York would not: a chance to buy land suitable for building a ballpark, and own that ballpark, giving him complete control over all revenue streams. When the news came out, NYC Mayor Robert F. Wagner, Jr. and Moses made an offer to build a ballpark on the World's Fair Grounds in Queens that would be shared by the Giants and Dodgers. However, O'Malley was interested in his park only under his conditions, and the plans for a new stadium in Brooklyn seemed like a pipe dream. O'Malley decided to move the Dodgers to California, convincing Giants owner Horace Stoneham to move to San Francisco instead of Minneapolis to keep the Giants-Dodgers rivalry alive on the West Coast.\n\nThe Dodgers played their final game at Ebbets Field on September 24, 1957, which the Dodgers won 2–0 over the Pittsburgh Pirates.\n\nNew York would remain a one-team town with the New York Yankees until 1962, when Joan Payson founded the New York Mets and brought National League baseball back to the city. The blue background used by the Dodgers, would be adopted by the Mets, honoring their New York NL forebears with a blend of Dodgers blue and Giants orange.\n\nThe Dodgers were the first Major League Baseball team to ever play in Los Angeles. On April 18, 1958, the Dodgers played their first LA game, defeating the former New York and now new San Francisco Giants, 6–5, before 78,672 fans at the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum. Catcher Roy Campanella, left partially paralyzed in an off-season accident, was never able to play in Los Angeles.\nConstruction on Dodger Stadium was completed in time for Opening Day 1962. With its clean, simple lines and its picturesque setting amid hills and palm trees, the ballpark quickly became an icon of the Dodgers and their new California lifestyle. O'Malley was determined that there would not be a bad seat in the house, achieving this by cantilevered grandstands that have since been widely imitated. More importantly for the team, the stadium's spacious dimensions, along with other factors, gave defense an advantage over offense and the Dodgers moved to take advantage of this by assembling a team that would excel with its pitching.\n\nSince moving to Los Angeles, the Dodgers have won 11 more National League Championships and five World Series rings.\n\nBULLET::::- First baseball team to win championships in different leagues in consecutive years (1889–1890)\nBULLET::::- First television broadcast (1939)\nBULLET::::- First use of batting helmets (1941)\nBULLET::::- First MLB team to employ and start an African-American player in the 20th century (Jackie Robinson, 1947)\nBULLET::::- First MLB team to have numbers on the front of their uniforms (1952)\nBULLET::::- First West Coast team (1958) – along with the San Francisco Giants\nBULLET::::- First Western team to win a World Series (1959)\nBULLET::::- First MLB team to allow a female sports journalist into a locker room (Anita Martini, 1974)\nBULLET::::- Largest home-opener attendance: 78,672 (1958) (since broken by the Colorado Rockies in 1993)\nBULLET::::- Largest single game attendance: 93,103 (1959) and 115,300 (2008) *World Record\nBULLET::::- First MLB team to open an office in Asia (1998)\nBULLET::::- Longest MLB record for home start going 13–0 (2009)\nBULLET::::- North American record for the buying of a sports team ($2 billion, 2012)\nBULLET::::- Most recent MLB team with the most no-hitters (26)\nBULLET::::- First MLB team to employ a female lead trainer (Sue Falsone, 2012)\n\nThe Dodgers' official history reports that the term \"Trolley Dodgers\" was attached to the Brooklyn ballclub due to the complex maze of trolley cars that weaved its way through the borough of Brooklyn.\n\nIn 1892, the city of Brooklyn (Brooklyn was an independent city until annexed by New York City in 1898) began replacing its slow-moving, horse-drawn trolley lines with the faster, more powerful electric trolley lines. Within less than three years, by the end of 1895, electric trolley accidents in Brooklyn had resulted in more than 130 deaths and maimed well over 500 people. Brooklyn's high profile, the significant number of widely reported accidents, and a trolley strike in early 1895, combined to create a strong association in the public's mind between Brooklyn and trolley dodging.\n\nSportswriters started using the name \"Trolley Dodgers\" to refer to the Brooklyn team early in the 1895 season. The name was shortened to, on occasion, the \"Brooklyn Dodgers\" as early as 1898.\n\nSportswriters in the early 20th century began referring to the Dodgers as the \"Bums\", in reference to the team's fans and possibly because of the \"street character\" nature of Jack Dawkins, the \"Artful Dodger\" in Charles Dickens' \"Oliver Twist\". Newspaper cartoonist Willard Mullin used a drawing of famous clown Emmett Kelly to depict \"Dem Bums\": the team would later use \"Weary Willie\" in promotional images, and Kelly himself was a club mascot during the 1950s.\n\nOther team names used by the franchise were the Atlantics, Grays, Grooms, Bridegrooms, Superbas and Robins. All of these nicknames were used by fans and sportswriters to describe the team, but not in any official capacity. The team's legal name was the Brooklyn Base Ball Club. However, the Trolley Dodger nickname was used throughout this period, simultaneously with these other nicknames, by fans and sportswriters of the day. The team did not use the name in any formal sense until 1932, when the word \"Dodgers\" appeared on team jerseys. The \"conclusive shift\" came in 1933, when both home and road jerseys for the team bore the name \"Dodgers\".\n\nExamples of how the many popularized names of the team were used are available from newspaper articles before 1932. A New York Times article describing a game in 1916 starts out: \"Jimmy Callahan, pilot of the Pirates, did his best to wreck the hopes the Dodgers have of gaining the National League pennant\", but then goes on to comment: \"the only thing that saved the Superbas from being toppled from first place was that the Phillies lost one of the two games played\". What is interesting about the use of these two nicknames is that most baseball statistics sites and baseball historians generally now refer to the pennant-winning 1916 Brooklyn team as the Robins. A 1918 New York Times article uses the nickname in its title: \"Buccaneers Take Last From Robins\", but the subtitle of the article reads: \"Subdue The Superbas By 11 To 4, Making Series An Even Break\".\n\nAnother example of the use of the many nicknames is found on the program issued at Ebbets Field for the 1920 World Series, which identifies the matchup in the series as \"Dodgers vs. Indians\" despite the fact that the Robins nickname had been in consistent use for around six years. The \"Robins\" nickname was derived from the name of their Hall of Fame manager, Wilbert Robinson, who led the team from 1914 to 1931.\n\nThe Dodgers' uniform has remained relatively unchanged since the 1930s. The home jersey is white with \"Dodgers\" written in script across the chest in royal. The road jersey is gray with \"Los Angeles\" written in script across the chest in royal. The word \"Dodgers\" was first used on the front of the team's home jersey in 1933; the uniform was then white with red pinstripes and a stylized \"B\" on the left shoulder. The Dodgers also wore green outlined uniforms and green caps throughout the 1937 season but reverted to blue the following year.\n\nThe current design was created in 1939, and has remained the same ever since with only cosmetic changes. Originally intended for the 1951 World Series for which the ballclub failed to qualify, red numbers under the \"Dodgers\" script were added to the home uniform in 1952. The road jersey also has a red uniform number under the script. When the franchise moved from Brooklyn to Los Angeles, the city name on the road jersey changed, and the stylized \"B\" was replaced with the interlocking \"LA\" on the caps in 1958. In 1970, the Dodgers removed the city name from the road jerseys and had \"Dodgers\" on both the home and away uniforms. The city script returned to the road jerseys in 1999, and the tradition-rich Dodgers flirted with an alternate uniform for the first time since 1944 (when all-blue satin uniforms were introduced). These 1999 alternate jerseys had a royal top with the \"Dodgers\" script in white across the chest, and the red number on the front. These were worn with white pants and a new cap with silver brim, top button and Dodger logo. These alternates proved unpopular and the team abandoned them after only one season. In 2014, the Dodgers introduced an alternate road jersey: a gray version with the \"Dodgers\" script instead of the city name. In 2018, the Dodgers wore their 60th anniversary patch to honor the 60 years of being in Los Angeles.\n\nThe Dodgers have been groundbreaking in their signing of players from Asia; mainly Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan. Former owner Peter O'Malley began reaching out in 1980 by starting clinics in China and South Korea, building baseball fields in two Chinese cities, and in 1998 becoming the first major league team to open an office in Asia. The Dodgers were the second team to start a Japanese player in recent history, pitcher Hideo Nomo, the first team to start a South Korean player, pitcher Chan Ho Park, and the first Taiwanese player, Chin-Feng Chen. In addition, they were the first team to send out three Asian pitchers, from different Asian countries, in one game: Park, Hong-Chih Kuo of Taiwan, and Takashi Saito of Japan. In the 2008 season, the Dodgers had the most Asian players on its roster of any major league team with five. They included Japanese pitchers Takashi Saito and Hiroki Kuroda; South Korean pitcher Chan Ho Park; and Taiwanese pitcher Hong-Chih Kuo and infielder Chin-Lung Hu. In 2005, the Dodgers' Hee Seop Choi became the first Asian player to compete in the Home Run Derby. For the 2013 season, the Dodgers signed starting pitcher Hyun-Jin Ryu with a six-year, $36 million contract, after posting a bid of nearly $27 million to acquire him from the KBO's Hanhwa Eagles. For the 2016 season, the Dodgers signed starting pitcher Kenta Maeda with an eight-year, $25 million contract, after posting a bid of $20 million to acquire him from the NPB's Hiroshima Toyo Carp.\n\nThe Dodgers' rivalry with the San Francisco Giants dates back to the 19th century, when the two teams were based in New York; the rivalry with the New York Yankees took place when the Dodgers were based in New York, but was revived with their East Coast/West Coast World Series battles in 1963, 1977, 1978, and 1981. The Dodgers rivalry with the Philadelphia Phillies also dates back to their days in New York, but was most fierce during the 1970s, 1980s, and 2000s. The Dodgers also had a heated rivalry with the Cincinnati Reds during the 1970s, 1980s and early 1990s. The rivalry with the Los Angeles Angels and the San Diego Padres dates back to the Angels' and Padres' respective inaugural seasons (Angels in 1961, Padres in 1969). Regional proximity is behind the rivalries with both the Angels and the Padres.\n\nThe Dodgers–Giants rivalry is one of the longest-standing rivalries in U.S. baseball.\n\nThe feud between the Dodgers and the San Francisco Giants began in the late 19th century when both clubs were based in New York City, with the Dodgers playing in Brooklyn and the Giants playing at the Polo Grounds in Manhattan. After the 1957 season, Dodgers owner Walter O'Malley moved the team to Los Angeles for financial and other reasons. Along the way, he managed to convince Giants owner Horace Stoneham—who was considering moving his team to Minnesota—to preserve the rivalry by bringing his team to California as well. New York baseball fans were stunned and heartbroken by the move. Given that the cities of Los Angeles and San Francisco have been bitter rivals in economic, cultural, and political arenas for over a century and a half, the new venue in California became fertile ground for its transplantation.\n\nEach team's ability to endure for over a century while moving across an entire continent, as well as the rivalry's leap from a cross-city to a cross-state engagement, have led to the rivalry being considered one of the greatest in American sports history.\n\nUnlike many other historic baseball match-ups in which one team remains dominant for most of their history, the Dodgers–Giants rivalry has exhibited a persistent balance in the respective successes of the two teams. While the Giants have more wins in franchise history, the Dodgers and Giants are tied for most National League Pennants at 23, though the Giants have won eight World Series titles, while the Dodgers have won six. The 2010 World Series was the Giants' first championship since moving to California, while the Dodgers had won five World Series titles since their move, their last title coming in the 1988 World Series.. \n\nThis rivalry refers to a series of games played with the Los Angeles Angels. The Freeway Series takes its name from the massive freeway system in the greater Los Angeles metropolitan area, the home of both teams; one could travel from one team's stadium to the other simply by traveling along Interstate 5. The term is akin to \"Subway Series\" which refers to meetings between New York City baseball teams. The term \"\"Freeway Series\"\" also inspired the official name of the region's NHL rivalry: the \"Freeway Face-Off.\"\n\nThe Dodgers–Yankees rivalry is one of the most well-known rivalries in Major League Baseball. The two teams have met eleven times in the World Series, more times than any other pair from the American and National Leagues. The initial significance was embodied in the two teams' proximity in New York City, when the Dodgers initially played in Brooklyn. After the Dodgers moved to Los Angeles in 1958, the rivalry retained its significance as the two teams represented the dominant cities on each coast of the United States, and since the 1980s, the two largest cities in the United States.\n\nAlthough the rivalry's significance arose from the two teams' numerous World Series meetings, the Yankees and Dodgers have not met in the World Series since . They would not play each other in a non-exhibition game until 2004, when they played a three-game interleague series. Their last meeting was in August 2019, when the Yankees won two out of three games in Los Angeles.\n\nThe Dodgers have a loyal fanbase, evidenced by the fact that the Dodgers were the first MLB team to attract more than 3 million fans in a season (in 1978), and accomplished that feat six more times before any other franchise did it once. The Dodgers drew at least 3 million fans for 15 consecutive seasons from 1996 to 2010, the longest such streak in all of MLB. On July 3, 2007, Dodgers management announced that total franchise attendance, dating back to 1901, had reached 175 million, a record for all professional sports. In 2007, the Dodgers set a franchise record for single-season attendance, attracting over 3.8 million fans. In 2009, the Dodgers led MLB in total attendance. The Dodger baseball cap is consistently in the top three in sales. During the 2011–2012 season, Frank McCourt, the owner of the Dodgers at that time, was going through a rough divorce with his wife over who should be the owner of the Dodger team. Instead, Frank McCourt paid $131 million to his wife as part of the divorce settlement. As a result, the team payroll was financially low for a big-budget team crippling the Dodgers in the free-agent market. Collectively, the team performance waned due to the distracting drama in the front office resulting in low attendance numbers.\n\nGiven the team's proximity to Hollywood, numerous celebrities can often be seen attending home games at Dodger Stadium. Celebrities such as co-owner Magic Johnson, Mary Hart, Larry King, Tiger Woods, Alyssa Milano and Shia LaBeouf are known to sit at field box seats behind home plate where they sign autographs for fellow Dodger fans. Actor Bryan Cranston is a lifelong Dodger fan.\n\nThe Dodgers set the world record for the largest attendance for a single baseball game during an exhibition game against the Boston Red Sox on March 28, 2008 at the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum in honor of the Dodgers 50th anniversary, with 115,300 fans in attendance. All proceeds from the game benefited the official charity of the Dodgers, ThinkCure! which supports cancer research at Children's Hospital Los Angeles and City of Hope. Primarily Dodgers fans are from their own location in southern California and also parts of southern Nevada; however there are also strong pockets of Dodger support in Mexico and throughout Asia, and their away games throughout the US will usually attract substantial numbers of expat and traveling fans.\n\nVin Scully called Dodgers games from 1950 to 2016. His longtime partners were Jerry Doggett (1956–1987) and Ross Porter (1977–2004). In 1976, he was selected by Dodgers fans as the Most Memorable Personality (on the field or off) in the team's history. He is also a recipient of the Baseball Hall of Fame's Ford C. Frick Award for broadcasters (inducted in 1982). Unlike the modern style in which multiple sportscasters have an on-air conversation (usually with one functioning as play-by-play announcer and the other[s] as color commentator), Scully, Doggett and Porter generally called games solo, trading with each other inning-by-inning. In the 1980s and 1990s, Scully would call the entire radio broadcast except for the third and seventh inning, allowing the other Dodger commentators to broadcast an inning.\n\nWhen Doggett retired after the 1987 season, he was replaced by Hall-of-Fame Dodgers pitcher Don Drysdale, who previously broadcast games for the California Angels and Chicago White Sox. Drysdale died in his hotel room following a heart attack before a game in Montreal in 1993. This was a difficult broadcast for Scully and Porter who could not mention it on-air until Drysdale's family had been notified and the official announcement made. He was replaced by former Dodgers outfielder Rick Monday. Porter's tenure ended after the 2004 season, after which the format of play-by-play announcers and color commentators was installed, led by Monday and newcomer Charley Steiner. Scully, however, continued to announce solo.\n\nScully called roughly 100 games per season (all home games and road games in California and Arizona) for both flagship radio station KLAC and on television for SportsNet LA. Scully was simulcast for the first three innings of each of his appearances, then announced only for the TV audience. If Scully was calling the game, Steiner took over play-by-play on radio beginning with the fourth inning, with Monday as color commentator. If Scully was not calling the game, Steiner and Orel Hershiser called the entire game on television while Monday and Kevin Kennedy did the same on radio. In the event the Dodgers were in post-season play, Scully called the first three and last three innings of the radio broadcast alone and Steiner and Monday handled the middle innings. Vin Scully retired from calling games in 2016. His tenure with the Dodgers was the longest with any single sports team at 67 years. Youthful announcer Joe Davis was selected in 2017 by Dodgers management to handle play by play on television with Orel Hershiser as his colorman.\n\nThe Dodgers also broadcast on radio in Spanish, and the play-by-play is voiced by another Frick Award winner, Jaime Jarrín, who has been with the Dodgers since 1959. The color analyst for some games is former Dodger pitcher Fernando Valenzuela, for whom Jarrin once translated post-game interviews. The Spanish-language radio flagship station is KTNQ.\n\nBULLET::::- Owner: Guggenheim Baseball Management\nBULLET::::- Chairman/Controlling Partner: Mark Walter\nBULLET::::- Partner: Earvin \"Magic\" Johnson\nBULLET::::- Partner: Peter Guber\nBULLET::::- Partner: Todd Boehly\nBULLET::::- Partner: Billie Jean King\nBULLET::::- Partner: Ilana Kloss\nBULLET::::- Partner: Robert \"Bobby\" Patton, Jr.\nBULLET::::- Partner: Alan Smolinisky\nBULLET::::- Partner: Robert L. Plummer\n\nBULLET::::- President/chief executive officer: Stan Kasten\nBULLET::::- President of Baseball Operations: Andrew Friedman\nBULLET::::- General Manager: Dave Roberts\n\nBULLET::::- Leo Durocher 1938–1941\nBULLET::::- Pee Wee Reese 1950–1958\nBULLET::::- Duke Snider 1962\nBULLET::::- Maury Wills 1963–1966\nBULLET::::- Davey Lopes 1978–1979\n\nKoufax, Campanella, and Robinson were the first Dodgers to have their numbers retired, in a ceremony at Dodger Stadium on June 4, 1972. This was the year in which Koufax was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame; Robinson and Campanella were already Hall-of-Famers.\n\nAlston's number was retired in the year following his retirement as the Dodgers manager, six years before he was inducted into the Hall of Fame.\n\nGilliam died suddenly in 1978 after a 28-year career with the Dodgers organization. The Dodgers retired his number two days after his death, prior to Game 1 of the 1978 World Series. As of 2018, he is the only non-Hall-of-Famer to have his number retired by the Dodgers (Alston's number was retired before he was elected to the Hall of Fame).\n\nBeginning in 1980, the Dodgers have retired the numbers of longtime Dodgers (Snider, Reese, Drysdale, Lasorda, and Sutton) during the seasons in which each was inducted into the Hall of Fame.\n\nIn 1997, 50 years after he broke the color barrier and 25 years after the Dodgers retired his number, Robinson's No. 42 was retired throughout Major League Baseball. Robinson is the only major league baseball player to have this honor bestowed upon him. Starting in the 2007 season, Jackie Robinson Day (April 15, commemorating Opening Day of Robinson's rookie season of 1947) has featured many or all players and coaches wearing the number 42 as a tribute to Robinson.\n\nThe Dodgers have not issued the number 34 since the departure of Fernando Valenzuela in 1991, although it has not been officially retired.\n\nBULLET::::- Charlie Byrne (1883–1897)\nBULLET::::- Charles Ebbets (1898–1925)\nBULLET::::- Edward McKeever (1925, interim)\nBULLET::::- Wilbert Robinson (1925–1929)\nBULLET::::- Frank B. York (1930–1932)\nBULLET::::- Stephen McKeever (1933–1938)\nBULLET::::- Larry MacPhail (1939–1942)\nBULLET::::- Branch Rickey (1943–1950)\nBULLET::::- Walter O'Malley (1950–1970)\nBULLET::::- Peter O'Malley (1970–1997)\nBULLET::::- Bob Graziano (1998–2004)\nBULLET::::- Jamie McCourt (2004–2009)\nBULLET::::- Dennis Mannion (2009–2010)\nBULLET::::- Stan Kasten (2012–present)\n\nSince 1884, the Dodgers have used a total of 31 Managers, the most current being Dave Roberts, who was appointed following the 2015 postseason, after the departure of Don Mattingly.\n\nOver the nearly 43 years from 1954 to mid-1996, the Dodgers employed only two managers, Walter Alston and Tommy Lasorda, both of whom are in the Hall of Fame. During this entire time period of extraordinary stability, the Dodgers were family owned by Walter O'Malley and then his son Peter O'Malley. It was during this era that the Dodgers won 11 of their 21 pennants, and all six of their World Series championships.\n\nThe managers of the Los Angeles Dodgers (1958–present) are as follows:\nBULLET::::- Walter Alston (1958–1976) (in Brooklyn since 1954)\nBULLET::::- Tommy Lasorda (1976–1996)\nBULLET::::- Bill Russell (1996–1998)\nBULLET::::- Glenn Hoffman (1998)\nBULLET::::- Davey Johnson (1999–2000)\nBULLET::::- Jim Tracy (2001–2005)\nBULLET::::- Grady Little (2006–2007)\nBULLET::::- Joe Torre (2008–2010)\nBULLET::::- Don Mattingly (2011–2015)\nBULLET::::- Dave Roberts (2016–present)\n\nBULLET::::- Larry MacPhail (1938–1942)\nBULLET::::- Branch Rickey (1943–1950)\nBULLET::::- Buzzie Bavasi (1950–1968)\nBULLET::::- Fresco Thompson (1968)\nBULLET::::- Al Campanis (1968–1987)\nBULLET::::- Fred Claire (1987–1998)\nBULLET::::- Tommy Lasorda (1998)\nBULLET::::- Kevin Malone (1999–2001)\nBULLET::::- Dave Wallace (2001)\nBULLET::::- Dan Evans (2001–2004)\nBULLET::::- Paul DePodesta (2004–2005)\nBULLET::::- Ned Colletti (2005–2014)\nBULLET::::- Farhan Zaidi (2014–2018)\nBULLET::::- Vacant (2019–present)\n\nDuring their time in Brooklyn, stadium organist Gladys Goodding became so well known that fans would joke that she was \"the only Dodger who played every game without an error\".\n\nFrom the Dodgers' move to Los Angeles from Brooklyn in 1958, the Dodgers employed a handful of well-known public address announcers; the most famous of which was John Ramsey, who served as the PA voice of the Dodgers from 1958 until his retirement in 1982; he was also well known for announcing at other venerable Los Angeles venues, including the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum and Sports Arena, and the Forum. Ramsey died in 1990.\n\nFrom 1958 to 1982, Doug Moore, Philip Petty, and Dennis Packer served as back-up voices for John Ramsey for the Dodgers, California Angels, Los Angeles Chargers, USC football and Los Angeles Rams. Packer was Ramsey's primary backup for the Los Angeles Lakers and Los Angeles Kings until Ramsey's retirement from the Forum in 1978. Thereafter, Packer became the public address announcer for the Lakers, Kings, indoor soccer and indoor tennis events at the Forum.\n\nNick Nickson, a radio broadcaster for the Los Angeles Kings, replaced John Ramsey as the Dodger Stadium public address announcer in 1983 and served in that capacity through the 1989 season to work with the Kings full-time.\n\nDennis Packer and Pete Arbogast were emulators of John Ramsey, using the same stentorian style of announcing Ramsey was famous for. Packer and Arbogast shared the stadium announcing chores for the 1994 FIFA World Cup matches at the Rose Bowl. Arbogast won the Dodgers job on the day that Ramsey died on January 25, 1990, by doing a verbatim imitation of Ramsey's opening and closing remarks that were standard at each game. His replacement, in 1994 was Mike Carlucci, who remained as the Dodgers' PA voice announcer until he resigned in 2001 to concentrate on his voiceover and acting career along with his Olympics announcing duties.\n\nFrom 2002 to 2014, the Dodgers public address announcer was Eric Smith, who also announces for the Los Angeles Clippers and USC Trojans.\n\nOn April 3, 2015 the Dodgers announced that former radio broadcaster Todd Leitz was hired to become their new public address announcer. Leitz was an anchor and news reporter in Los Angeles at KNX 1070 AM for 10 years, and a news reporter at KABC 790 for two years.\n\nFrom 1988 to 2015, Nancy Bea enjoyed popularity behind the Dodger Stadium keyboard similar to Gladys Goodding. Since retirement in 2015, Beal's replacement and current organist is Dieter Ruehle, who also plays at Staples Center for Los Angeles Kings games.\n\nVin Scully is permanently honored in the Baseball Hall of Fame's \"Scribes & Mikemen\" exhibit as a result of winning the Ford C. Frick Award in 1982. Frick Award recipients are not official members of the Hall.\n\nSue Falsone, was the first female physical therapist in Major League baseball, and from 2012 to 2013, was the first female head athletic trainer.\n\n! style=\";Level\n! style=\";Team\n! style=\";League\n! style=\";Location\nrowspan=5\"Rookie\"\n\nBULLET::::- 1994 in baseball\nBULLET::::- Dodger Dog\nBULLET::::- List of Los Angeles Dodgers broadcasters\nBULLET::::- List of Los Angeles Dodgers managers\nBULLET::::- List of Los Angeles Dodgers seasons\nBULLET::::- List of World Series champions\nBULLET::::- Los Angeles Dodgers all-time roster\nBULLET::::- Roy Campanella Award\n\nBULLET::::- Red Barber, \"Rhubarb in the Catbird Seat\"\nBULLET::::- Stanley Cohen, \"Dodgers! The First 100 Years\"\nBULLET::::- Robert W. Creamer, \"Stengel: His Life and Times\"\nBULLET::::- Steve Delsohn, \" True Blue: The Dramatic History of the Los Angeles Dodgers, Told By the Men Who Lived It\"\nBULLET::::- Carl Erskine and Vin Scully, \"Tales From the Dodger Dugout: Extra Innings\"\nBULLET::::- Harvey Froemmer, \"New York City Baseball\"\nBULLET::::- Steve Garvey, \"My Bat Boy Days: Lessons I Learned from the Boys of Summer\"\nBULLET::::- Cliff Gewecke, \"Day by Day in Dodgers History\"\nBULLET::::- Andrew Goldblatt, \"The Giants and the Dodgers: Four Cities, Two Teams, One Rivalry\"\nBULLET::::- Richard Goldstein, \"Superstars and Screwballs: 100 Years of Brooklyn Baseball\"\nBULLET::::- Peter Golenbock, \"Bums: An Oral History of the Brooklyn Dodgers\"\nBULLET::::- Doris Kearns Goodwin, \"Wait Till Next Year: A Memoir\"\nBULLET::::- Frank Graham, \"The Brooklyn Dodgers: An Informal History\"\nBULLET::::- Orel Hershiser with Jerry B. Jenkins, \"Out of the Blue\"\nBULLET::::- Donald Honig, \"The Los Angeles Dodgers: Their First quarter Century\"\nBULLET::::- Roger Kahn, \"The Boys of Summer\"\nBULLET::::- Roger Kahn, \"The Era 1947–1957: When the Yankees, the Giants and the Dodgers Ruled the World\"\nBULLET::::- Mark Langill, \"The Los Angeles Dodgers\"\nBULLET::::- Tommy Lasorda with David Fisher, \"The Artful Dodger\"\nBULLET::::- Jane Leavy, \"Sandy Koufax: A Lefty's Legacy\"\nBULLET::::- Joseph McCauley, \"Ebbets Field: Brooklyn's Baseball Shrine\"\nBULLET::::- William McNeil, \"The Dodgers Encyclopedia\"\nBULLET::::- Tom Meany (editor), \"The Artful Dodgers\"\nBULLET::::- Andrew Paul Mele, \"A Brooklyn Dodgers Reader\"\nBULLET::::- John J. Monteleone (editor), \"Branch Rickey's Little Blue Book\"\nBULLET::::- Thomas Oliphant, \"Praying for Gil Hodges: A Memoir of the 1955 World Series and One Family's Love of the Brooklyn Dodgers\"\nBULLET::::- David Plaut, \"Chasing October: The Dodgers-Giants Pennant Race of 1962\"\nBULLET::::- Carl E. Prince, \"Brooklyn's Dodgers: The Bums, The Borough and The Best of Baseball\"\nBULLET::::- Jackie Robinson, \"I Never Had It Made\"\nBULLET::::- Gene Schoor, \"The Complete Dodgers Record Book\"\nBULLET::::- Gene Schoor, \"The Pee Wee Reese Story\"\nBULLET::::- Duke Snider with Bill Gilbert, \"The Duke of Flatbush\"\nBULLET::::- Michael Shapiro, \"The Last Good Season: Brooklyn, The Dodgers, and Their Final Pennant Race Together\"\nBULLET::::- Glen Stout, \"The Dodgers: 120 Years of Dodgers Baseball\"\nBULLET::::- Neil J. Sullivan, \"The Dodgers Move West\"\nBULLET::::- Jules Tygiel, \"Baseball's Great Experiment: Jackie Robinson and His Legacy\"\nBULLET::::- John Weaver, \"Los Angeles: The Enormous Village, 1781–1981\"\nBULLET::::- Los Angeles Dodgers Baseball Reference.com\nBULLET::::- \"The 1960s Dodgers: Two Parts Patience, One Part Creative Insanity\" by Steve Treder, November 10, 2004. Article on the 1960s Los Angeles Dodgers in \"The Hardball Times\".\n"}
{"id": "18214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18214", "title": "Louis Andriessen", "text": "Louis Andriessen\n\nLouis Andriessen (; born 6 June 1939) is a Dutch composer and pianist based in Amsterdam. He is a lecturer at the Royal Conservatory of The Hague. He was recipient of the Gaudeamus International Composers Award in 1959.\n\nAndriessen was born in Utrecht into a musical family, the son of the composer Hendrik Andriessen (1892–1981), brother of composers Jurriaan Andriessen (1925–1996) and Caecilia Andriessen (1931–2019) and nephew of Willem Andriessen (1887–1964).\n\nAndriessen originally studied with his father and Kees van Baaren at the Royal Conservatory of The Hague, before embarking upon two years of study with Italian composer Luciano Berio in Milan and Berlin. He later joined the faculty of the Royal Conservatory.\n\nIn 1969 Andriessen co-founded STEIM in Amsterdam. He also helped found the instrumental groups Orkest de Volharding and Hoketus, both of which performed compositions of the same names. He later became closely involved in the ongoing Schonberg and Asko ensembles and inspired the formation of the British ensemble Icebreaker.\n\nAndriessen, a widower, was married to guitarist Jeanette Yanikian (1935–2008). They were a couple for over 40 years and were married in 1996.\n\nAndriessen's early works show experimentation with various contemporary trends: post war serialism (\"Series\", 1958), pastiche (\"Anachronie I\", 1966–67), and tape (\"Il Duce\", 1973). His reaction to what he perceived as the conservatism of much of the Dutch contemporary music scene quickly moved him to form a radically alternative musical aesthetic of his own. Since the early 1970s he has refused to write for conventional symphony orchestras and has instead opted to write for his own idiosyncratic instrumental combinations, which often retain some traditional orchestral instruments alongside electric guitars, electric basses, and congas.\n\nAndriessen's mature music combines the influences of jazz, American minimalism, Igor Stravinsky and Claude Vivier. His harmonic writing eschews the consonant modality of much minimalism, preferring post war European dissonance, often crystallised into large blocks of sound. Large scale pieces such as \"De Staat\" ['Republic'] (1972–76), for example, are influenced by the energy of the big band music of Count Basie and Stan Kenton and the repetitive procedures of Steve Reich, both combined with bright, clashing dissonances. Andriessen's music is thus anti-Germanic and anti-Romantic, and marks a departure from post war European serialism and its offshoots. He has also played a role in providing alternatives to traditional performance practice techniques, often specifying forceful, rhythmic articulations, and amplified, non-vibrato, singing.\n\nOther notable works include \"Workers Union\" (1975), a melodically indeterminate piece \"for any loud sounding group of instruments\"; \"Mausoleum\" (1979) for 2 baritones and large ensemble; \"De Tijd\" ['Time'] (1979–81) for female singers and ensemble; \"De Snelheid\" ['Velocity'] (1982–83), for 3 amplified ensembles; \"De Materie\" ['Matter'] (1984–88), a large four-part work for voices and ensemble; collaborations with filmmaker and librettist Peter Greenaway on the film \"M is for Man, Music, Mozart\" and the operas \"Rosa: A Horse Drama\" (1994) and \"Writing to Vermeer\" (1998); and \"La Passione\" (2000–02) for female voice, violin and ensemble.\n\nBULLET::::- 1959 Gaudeamus International Composers Award\nBULLET::::- 1977 Matthijs Vermeulen Award for \"De Staat\"\nBULLET::::- 1977 UNESCO International Rostrum of Composers in Paris\nBULLET::::- 1992 Matthijs Vermeulen Award for M. is for Man, Music and Mozart; Facing Death, Dances, Hout en Lacrimosa\nBULLET::::- 1993 Edison Award\nBULLET::::- 2011 Grawemeyer Award for Music Composition for the multimedia opera \"La Commedia\" (2004–2008).\nBULLET::::- 2016 Marie-Josée Kravis Prize for New Music\n\nAndriessen's primary publishers are Boosey & Hawkes and Donemus.\nComplete list of works: \nBULLET::::- \"Rondo Barbaro\" (1954) for piano\nBULLET::::- \"Sonata\" (1956) for flute and piano (dedicated to Lucas van Regteren Altena)\nBULLET::::- \"Elegy\" (1957) for cello and piano\nBULLET::::- \"Elegy\" (1957) for double bass and piano (arrangement by Quirijn van Regteren Altena)\nBULLET::::- \"Nuit d'été\" (1957) for piano four hands\nBULLET::::- \"Quartet in two movements\" (1957) for string quartet\nBULLET::::- \"Séries\" (1958) for 2 pianos\nBULLET::::- \"Nocturnen\" (1959) (text by the composer) for 2 sopranos, orchestra (dedicated to Jeanette Yanikian)\nBULLET::::- \"Percosse\" (1959) for flute, trumpet, bassoon and percussion\nBULLET::::- \"Prospettive e Retrospettive\" (1959) for piano\nBULLET::::- \"Trois Pièces\" (1961) for piano left hand\nBULLET::::- \"Aanloop en sprongen\" (1961) (Rincorsa e salti) for flute, oboe and clarinet in Bb\nBULLET::::- \"Ittrospezione I\" (1961) for piano 4 hands\nBULLET::::- \"Joli commentaire\" (1961) for piano 4 hands\nBULLET::::- \"Paintings\" (1961) for one flutist (or recorder player) and one pianist\nBULLET::::- \"Étude pour les timbres\" (1962) for piano\nBULLET::::- \"Triplum\" (1962) for guitar (dedicated to Jeanette Yanikian)\nBULLET::::- \"Canzone 3 (Utinam)\" (1962) for voice and piano\nBULLET::::- \"Constructions for a Ballet\" (1962, revision 2009) for orchestra, including \"Ondine, timbres voor orkest\"\nBULLET::::- \"Plein-chant\" (1963) for flute and harp (dedicated to Eugenie van des Grinten and Veronica Reyns)\nBULLET::::- \"Ittrospezione II\" (1963) for large orchestra\nBULLET::::- \"Sweet\" (1964) for alto (treble) recorder (dedicated to Frans Brüggen)\nBULLET::::- \"Registers\" (1963) for piano\nBULLET::::- \"A flower song II\" (1964) for oboe solo\nBULLET::::- \"A flower song III\" (1964) for violoncello solo\nBULLET::::- \"Ittrospezione III (Concept I)\" (1964) for 2 pianos and 3 instrumental groups\nBULLET::::- \"Double\" (1965) for clarinet and piano (dedicated to George Pieterson and Tan Crone)\nBULLET::::- \"Ittrospezione III (Concept II)\" – Fragment (1965) tenor saxophone ad libitum, 2 pianos (section of Ittrospezione III [Concept II]; may be performed separately)\nBULLET::::- \"Beatles Songs\" (1966) (satirical arrangements of four Beatles songs) for female voice and piano\nBULLET::::- \"Souvenirs d'enfance\" (1954–1966) for piano. Including amongst others: Nocturne, Ricercare, Allegro Marcato, As you like it, Blokken, Strawinsky, Rondo opus 1, Étude pour les timbres, dotted quarter note = 70\nBULLET::::- \"Rage, rage against the dying of the light\" (1966) for 4 trombones\nBULLET::::- \"Anachronie I\" (1966–67) for large orchestra\nBULLET::::- \"The Garden of Ryoan-gi\" (1967) for 3 electronic organs\nBULLET::::- \"Worum es ging und worum es geht\" (1967) (with Misha Mengelberg) for orchestra\nBULLET::::- \"Contra tempus\" (1967–1968) for large ensemble\nBULLET::::- \"Choralvorspiele\" (1969) for barrel organ\nBULLET::::- \"Anachronie II\" (1969) for oboe, small orchestra (4 horns, harp, piano, strings)\nBULLET::::- \"Hoe het is\" (1969) for 52 strings and live electronics\nBULLET::::- \"Sonate op.2 nr.1\" (1969) for piano with interruptions from string quartet (based on Piano Sonata No. 1 by Ludwig van Beethoven)\nBULLET::::- \"Reconstructie\" (1969) (with Reinbert de Leeuw, Misha Mengelberg, Peter Schat, Jan van Vlijmen; libretto by Hugo Claus, Harry Mulisch) Morality opera for soloists, 3 mixed choruses (4 voices each), orchestra (11 winds, 7 brass, 2 guitars, 11 keyboards, 10 strings), live electronics\nBULLET::::- \"De negen symfonieën van Beethoven\" (1970) for ice cream bell, orchestra\nBULLET::::- \"Spektakel\" (1970) for improvisational ensemble (saxophone [+ bass clarinet], viola, bass guitar, electronic organ [+ piano], percussion [or other instruments]), small orchestra (12 winds, 4 horns, 6 percussion)\nBULLET::::- \"Vergeet mij niet\" (1970) (Forget me not) for oboe\nBULLET::::- \"Le voile du bonheur\" (1966–1971) for violin and piano\nBULLET::::- \"een, twee\" (1971) for organ, 10 instrumentalists and piano\nBULLET::::- \"In Memoriam\" (1971) for tape\nBULLET::::- \"Volkslied\" (1971) for an unlimited amount and kinds of instruments (in all octaves) (based on the Dutch national anthem \"Wilhelmus van Nassouwe\" and on The Internationale)\nBULLET::::- \"De Volharding\" (1972) (Perseverance) for piano and wind instruments (written for Orkest de Volharding)\nBULLET::::- \"Dat gebeurt in Vietnam\" (1972) (That's going on in Vietnam) for wind ensemble\nBULLET::::- \"Arrangement of Solidaritätslied by Hanns Eisler\" (1972) for wind ensemble\nBULLET::::- \"Arrangement of Streikslied by Hanns Eisler\" (1972) for wind ensemble\nBULLET::::- \"Arrangement of In C by Terry Riley\" (1972) for wind ensemble\nBULLET::::- \"Arrangement of Bereits sprach der Welt by Hanns Eisler\" (1972) for wind ensemble\nBULLET::::- \"Arrangement of Tango by Igor Stravinsky\" (1972) for wind ensemble\nBULLET::::- \"Arrangement of La création du monde by Darius Milhaud\" (1972) for wind ensemble\nBULLET::::- \"Thanh Hoa\" (1972) (text by Nguyen Thai Mao) for voice and piano\nBULLET::::- \"Canzone 3: Utinam\" (1972) (text from the Book of Job) for soprano, piano, 1962; Thanh Hoa (text by Nguyen Thay Mao), voice, piano\nBULLET::::- \"On Jimmy Yancey\" (1973) for 9 winds, piano and double bass (written for Orkest de Volharding)\nBULLET::::- \"Voor Sater\" (1973) for wind ensemble\nBULLET::::- \"Amsterdam Vrij\" (1973) for wind ensemble\nBULLET::::- \"Il Duce\" (1973) for tape\nBULLET::::- \"The family\" (1973) for ensemble (film music)\nBULLET::::- \"Melodie\" (1972–1974) for alto recorder (or other flute) and piano\nBULLET::::- \"Arrangement of Ipanema and Gavea from Saudades do Brasil by Darius Milhaud\" (1974) for wind ensemble\nBULLET::::- \"Il Principe\" (1974) (text by Niccolò Machiavelli) for 2 mixed choruses, 8 winds, 3 horns, tuba, bass guitar, piano\nBULLET::::- \"Wals\" (1974) for piano\nBULLET::::- \"Symfonieën der Nederlanden\" (1974) for 2 or more symphonic bands (minimum 32 players)\nBULLET::::- \"Nederland, let op uw schoonheyt\" (1975) for symphonic band\nBULLET::::- \"Workers Union\" (1975) for any loud-sounding group of instruments\nBULLET::::- \"De Staat\" (1972–76) (text by Plato) for 2 sopranos, 2 mezzo-sopranos, 4 oboes (3rd, 4th + English horn), 4 horns, 4 trumpets, 3 trombones, bass trombone, 2 harps, 2 electric guitars, 4 violas, bass guitar, 2 pianos (also transcribed for two pianos in 1992 by Cees van Zeeland and Gerard Bouwhuis)\nBULLET::::- \"Mattheus passie\" (1976) (text by Louis Ferron) Music theatre work for 8 mixed voices, 2 oboes (both + English horn), Hammond organ, string quartet, double bass\nBULLET::::- \"Hoketus\" (1975–76) for 2 panpipes, 2 alto saxophones ad libitum, 2 bass guitars, 2 pianos, 2 electric pianos, 2 congas\nBULLET::::- \"Orpheus\" (1977) (text by Lodewijk de Boer) Music theatre work for 8 mixed voices, lyricon, electric guitar, bass guitar, synthesizer, percussion\nBULLET::::- \"Symphonie voor losse snaren\" (1978) for 12 strings\nBULLET::::- \"Laat toch vrij die straat\" (1978) (text by Jaap van der Merwe) for voice and piano\nBULLET::::- \"Hymn to the Memory of Darius Milhaud\" (1978) (version of chamber work)\nBULLET::::- \"Felicitatie\" (1979) for 3 trumpets\nBULLET::::- \"Toespraak\" (1979) for speaker who also plays trombone\nBULLET::::- \"Mausoleum\" (1979 rev. 1981) (texts by Mikhail Bakunin, Arthur Arnould) for 2 high baritones, orchestra (12 brass, 2 harps, cimbalom, 2 pianos, 2 percussion, minimum 10 strings, bass guitar)\nBULLET::::- \"Music for the film The Alien\" (1980) (Rudolf van den Berg)\nBULLET::::- \"George Sand\" (1980) (text by Mia Meyer) Music theatre work for 8 mixed voices, 4 pianos\nBULLET::::- \"Un beau baiser\" (1980) for mixed chorus\nBULLET::::- \"Messe des pauvres by Erik Satie\", arrangement by Louis Andriessen for choir, 15 solo strings, accordion, contrabass clarinet and harp (1980)\nBULLET::::- \"Ende\" (1981) for 2 alto recorders (1 player) (dedicated to Frans Brüggen)\nBULLET::::- \"Anfang\" (1981) for sopranino recorder and piano\nBULLET::::- \"De Tijd\" (1979–81) (text by St. Augustine of Hippo) for female chorus, percussion ensemble, orchestra (6 flutes, 2 alto flutes, 3 clarinets, contrabass clarinet, 6 trumpets, 2 harps, 2 pianos, Hammond organ, strings, 2 bass guitars)\nBULLET::::- \"Commentaar\" (1981) (text by Wilhelm Schön) for voice and piano\nBULLET::::- \"La voce\" (1981) (to a text by Cesare Pavese) for cello and voice\nBULLET::::- \"Disco\" (1982) for violin and piano\nBULLET::::- \"Overture to Orpheus\" (1982) for harpsichord\nBULLET::::- \"De Snelheid\" (1982–83 rev. 1984) for 3 amplified ensembles\nBULLET::::- \"Y después\" (1983) (text by Federico García Lorca) for voice and piano\nBULLET::::- \"Menuet voor Marianne\" (1983) for piano\nBULLET::::- \"Trepidus\" (1983) for piano\nBULLET::::- \"Doctor Nero\" (1984) Music theatre work\nBULLET::::- \"Berceuse voor Annie van Os\" (1985) for piano\nBULLET::::- \"De Lijn\" (1986) for 3 flutes\nBULLET::::- \"Dubbelspoor\" (1986 rev. 1994) Ballet music for piano, harpsichord, celesta, glockenspiel\nBULLET::::- \"De Materie\" (1984–88) (texts from the Plakkaat van Verlatinge, Nicolaes Witsen, David Gorlaeus, Hadewijch, M.H.J. Schoenmaekers, Madame van Domselaer-Middelkoop, Willem Kloos, Marie Curie, Françoise Giroud). Music theatre work for soprano, tenor, 2 female speakers, 8 amplified mixed voices, amplified orchestra (15 winds, 13 brass, harp, 2 electric guitars, 2 pianos [one + electric piano], off-stage upright piano, celesta, 2 synthesizers, 6 percussion, minimum 9 strings, bass guitar. Two of its four sections may be performed separately as concert works: [2] Hadewijch, [3] De Stijl\nBULLET::::- \"De Toren\" (1988, rev. 2000) for carillon\nBULLET::::- \"Nietzsche redet\" (1989) (text by Friedrich Nietzsche) for speaker, alto flute, English horn, clarinet, bass clarinet, bassoon, 2 violins, viola, 2 celli, double bass, 2 pianos\nBULLET::::- \"Flora Tristan\" (1990) for mixed choir a cappella (text by Fleur Bourgonje)\nBULLET::::- \"Facing Death\" (1990) for amplified string quartet\nBULLET::::- \"Facing Death\" (1990) for saxophone quartet (arrangement by Aurelia Saxophone Quartet)\nBULLET::::- \"Dances\" (1991) (text by Joan Grant, choreography by Bianca van Dillen) For soprano, small orchestra (amplified harp, amplified piano, percussion, strings). May be performed as a concert work.\nBULLET::::- \"M is for Man, Music, Mozart\" (1991) (texts by the composer, Jeroen van der Linden, Peter Greenaway) for female jazz voice, flute (+ piccolo), soprano saxophone, alto saxophone, tenor saxophone, horn, 3 trumpets, 2 trombones, bass trombone, double bass, piano (TV score; may be performed as a concert work with one additional song)\nBULLET::::- \"Lacrimosa\" (1991) for 2 bassoons\nBULLET::::- \"Lacrimosa\" (1991) for 2 flutes (arrangement by Manuel Zurria)\nBULLET::::- \"Hout\" (1991) for tenor saxophone, electric guitar, piano and marimba (+ woodblocks)\nBULLET::::- \"Romance voor Caecilia\" (1991) for piano\nBULLET::::- \"Nadir en Zenit\" (1992) improvisations on poems by Sybren Polet for voice and piano (+ synthesizer)\nBULLET::::- \"...not being sundered\" (1992) (text by Rainer Maria Rilke) for soprano, flute, cello\nBULLET::::- \"Song Lines\" (1992) for 3–6 saxophones\nBULLET::::- \"Deuxième chorale\" (1992) for music box\nBULLET::::- \"The Memory of Roses\" (1992) for piano (+ toy piano)\nBULLET::::- \"Chorale\" (1992) for piano\nBULLET::::- \"M is Muziek, Monoloog en Moord\" (1993) (text by Lodewijk de Boer) Music theatre work\nBULLET::::- \"Lied\" (1993) for piano\nBULLET::::- \"Rosa - A Horse Drama: The Death of a Composer\" (1993–94) (libretto by Peter Greenaway) Opera for 2 sopranos, tenor, 2 baritones, female speaker, 8 mixed voices, orchestra.\nBULLET::::- \"Een lied van de zee\" (1994) (text by Hélène Swarth) for female voice\nBULLET::::- \"Zilver\" (1994) for flute, clarinet, violin, cello, piano, vibraphone and marimba\nBULLET::::- \"Base\" (1994) for piano left hand\nBULLET::::- \"Odysseus' Women\" (1995) (text by Homer, choreography by Beppie Blankert) for 2 sopranos, 2 altos, sampler\nBULLET::::- \"De komst van Willibrord\" (1995) for carillon\nBULLET::::- \"To Pauline O\" (1995) for oboe\nBULLET::::- \"Machmes Wos\" (1996) for voice, piano\nBULLET::::- \"Trilogie van de Laatste Dag\" (1996–97) (each of its three sections may be performed separately: (i) The Last Day (texts by Lucebert, folksong A Woman and Her Lass) for boy soprano, 4 male voices, orchestra; (ii) TAO (texts by Laozi, Kotaro Takamura) for 4 female voices, piano [+ voice, koto], small orchestra [5 winds, 2 horns, harp, piano (+ celesta), 2 percussion, minimum 14 strings]; (iii) Dancing on the Bones (text by the composer) for children's chorus, orchestra, 1997)\nBULLET::::- \"De herauten\" (1997) for 3 horns, 3 trumpets, 3 trombones, tuba, timpani\nBULLET::::- \"Not an Anfang\" (1997) for piano\nBULLET::::- \"De eerste minnaar\" (1998) (text by Ton Tellegen) for boy soprano, organ, 1998 (section of music theatre work Oldenbarneveldt; may be performed as a concert work)\nBULLET::::- \"Tuin van Zink\" (1998) for viola and live electronics\nBULLET::::- \"Writing to Vermeer\" (1997–99) (libretto by Peter Greenaway) Opera for 2 children's voices, 2 sopranos, mezzo-soprano, female chorus, orchestra (7 winds, 2 horns, 2 trumpets [2nd + bass trumpet], 2 harps, 2 electric guitars, cimbalom, 2 pianos, on-stage harpsichord, 2 percussion, minimum 22 strings), CD (music by Michel van der Aa)\nBULLET::::- \"Woodpecker\" (1999) for percussion\nBULLET::::- \"Image de Moreau\" (1999) for piano\nBULLET::::- \"Dirck Sweelinck Missed the Prince\" (1999) for harpsichord\nBULLET::::- \"Passeggiata in tram in America e ritorno\" (1999) (text by Dino Campana) for female Italian voice, violin and piano\nBULLET::::- \"What Shall I Buy You, Son?\" (2000) for voice, piano\nBULLET::::- \"Boodschappenlijstje van een gifmengster\" (2000) (text by the composer) for vocalist (also writes), voice (may be performed as Shopping List of a Poisoner [translated by Nicoline Gatehouse]\nBULLET::::- \"Inanna's Descent\" (2000) for mezzo-soprano, piccolo, oboe, violin, piano, 2 percussion ensembles (4–12 total players)\nBULLET::::- \"The New Math(s)\" (2000) (text by Hal Hartley) for soprano, transverse flute, violin, marimba, CD (music by Michel van der Aa), 2000 (film score; may be performed as a concert work)\nBULLET::::- \"Feli-citazione\" (2000) for piano\nBULLET::::- \"Passeggiata in tram in America e ritorno\" (2001) (text by Dino Campana) for female Italian voice, 3 trumpets, 3 trombones, electric guitar, electric violin, double bass, piano, percussion, 1998 (also version for voice, flute, horn, 3 trumpets, 3 trombones, amplified violin, double bass, piano\nBULLET::::- \"De vleugels van de herinnering\" (2001) (text by Larissa Tiginachvili [Dutch translation]) for voice, piano\nBULLET::::- \"Fanfare om te beginnen\" (2001) for 6 groups of horns\nBULLET::::- \"La Passione\" (2000–02) (text by Dino Campana) for female jazz voice, violin, small orchestra (7 winds, 7 brass, electric guitar, cimbalom, 2 pianos, synthesizer, 2 percussion, 3 violins, bass guitar)\nBULLET::::- \"Very Sharp Trumpet Sonata\" (2002) for trumpet\nBULLET::::- \"Tuin van Eros\" (Garden of Eros) (2002) for string quartet\nBULLET::::- \"Klokken voor Haarlem\" (Bells for Haarlem) (2002) for piano, celesta, synthesizer, vibraphone (+ glockenspiel)\nBULLET::::- \"Pupazzetti\" by Alfredo Casella, arranged by Louis Andriessen for ensemble in 2002–2003\nBULLET::::- \"Inanna\" (2003) texts by Hal Hartley, Theo J.H. Krispijn) for 4 voices, 3 actors, mixed chorus, contrabass clarinet, 4 saxophones, violin, film (by Hal Hartley)\nBULLET::::- \"Letter from Cathy\" (2003) (text from a letter by Cathy Berberian to the composer) for female jazz voice, harp, violin, double bass, piano, percussion\nBULLET::::- \"Tuin van Eros\" (2003) for violin and piano\nBULLET::::- \"RUTTMANN Opus II, III, IV\" (2003) for flute, 3 saxophones, horn, 3 trumpets, 3 trombones, double bass, piano (film music for a film of Walter Ruttman, written for the Filmmuseum Biennale 2003)\nBULLET::::- \"Haags Hakkûh\" (The Hague Hacking) (2003) for 2 pianos. Renamed to Haags Hakkûh Stukje (The Hague Hacking Scrap) in 2008.\nBULLET::::- \"Racconto dall'inferno\" (2004) (text by Dante Alighieri) for female jazz voice, small orchestra (8 winds, 6 brass, guitar, cimbalom, 2 pianos, 2 percussion, minimum 8 strings, bass guitar). Part II of La Commedia (2004–08).\nBULLET::::- \"De Opening\" (2005) for ensemble (combined Orkest De Volharding, ASKO Ensemble, Schoenberg Ensemble)\nBULLET::::- \"Vermeer Pictures\" (2005) concert suite for orchestra from \"Writing to Vermeer\" (arrangement by Clark Rundell)\nBULLET::::- \"XENIA\" (2005) for violin\nBULLET::::- \"Hymn to the memory of Darius Milhaud\" for ensemble (1974/2006)\nBULLET::::- \"Hellende Fanfare\" (Inclined fanfare; Fanfara inclinata) (2006) for voice and ensemble (Text by Dino Campana)\nBULLET::::- \"Raadsels\" (Riddle) (2006) for solo violin\nBULLET::::- \"Johann Sebastian Bach's Prelude in b minor from the Well-Tempered Clavier BWV 866\", arranged for string quartet with the first six bars augmented with a viola part by Igor Stravinsky, completed by Louis Andriessen (2006)\nBULLET::::- \"..miserere...\" (2006–07) for string quartet\nBULLET::::- \"The City of Dis or: The Ship of Fools\" (2007) for voices and ensemble. Part I of La Commedia (2004–08).\nBULLET::::- \"La Commedia\" (2004–08). Film opera in five parts (texts by Dante and Vondel and from the Old Testament)\nBULLET::::- \"Haags Hakkûh\" (The Hague Hacking) (2008) for two pianos and large ensemble\nBULLET::::- \"Christiaan Andriessens uitzicht op de Amstel\" (Christiaan Andriessen's view on the river Amstel) (2009) for ensemble\nBULLET::::- \"Life\" (2009) for ensemble, with film by Marijke van Warmerdam\nBULLET::::- \"Anaïs Nin\" (2009/10) for singer, ensemble and film\nBULLET::::- \"La Girò\" (2011), for violin solo and ensemble\nBULLET::::- \"Mysteriën\" (2013), for orchestra\nBULLET::::- \"Tapdance\" (2013), concerto for percussion and large ensemble\nBULLET::::- \"Two way ticket\" (2014), for piano\nBULLET::::- \"Theatre of the World\" (2013–15), a 'grotesque stagework' in nine scenes (Libretto by Helmut Krausser)\nBULLET::::- \"Signs and Symbols\" (2016), for wind ensemble\nBULLET::::- \"The Only One\", song cycle written for soprano Nora Fischer, first performed in the Royal Albert Hall at the 67th BBC Prom of 2019 on 8 September 2019.\n\nBULLET::::- Adlington, Robert: \"De Staat\". Hants. (UK): Ashgate (2004).\nBULLET::::- Andriessen, Louis and Elmer Schonberger (trans. Jeff Hamburg): \"The Apollonian Clockwork: On Stravinsky\" Amsterdam: Amsterdam UP (reprint, 2006).\nBULLET::::- Everett, Yayoi Uno. \"The Music of Louis Andriessen\". Cambridge: Cambridge University Press (2006). .\nBULLET::::- Trochimczyk, Maja (ed.): \"The Music of Louis Andriessen\". London: Routledge (2002).\nBULLET::::- Zegers, Mirjam (ed.): Trans. Clare Yates. \"The Art of Stealing Time\". Arc Publications. .\n\nBULLET::::- Andriessen page at Boosey and Hawkes: biography, works list, recordings and performance search.\nBULLET::::- Andriessen's artist page and recordings on Nonesuch Records\nBULLET::::- Documentary: \"Andriessen on Andriessen\"\nBULLET::::- The London Sinfonietta's Andriessen biography page\nBULLET::::- Louis Andriessen in conversation with Robert Davidson\n"}
