{"id": "17515", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17515", "title": "Luxembourg", "text": "Luxembourg\n\nLuxembourg ( ; ; ; ), officially the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, is a landlocked country in western Europe. It is bordered by Belgium to the west and north, Germany to the east, and France to the south. Its capital, Luxembourg City, is one of the four official capitals of the European Union (together with Brussels, Frankfurt, and Strasbourg) and the seat of the European Court of Justice, the highest judicial authority in the EU. Its culture, people, and languages are highly intertwined with its neighbours, making it essentially a mixture of French and German cultures, as evident by the nation's three official languages: French, German, and the national language of Luxembourgish. The repeated invasions by Germany, especially in World War II, resulted in the country's strong will for mediation between France and Germany and, among other things, led to the foundation of the European Union.\n\nWith an area of , it is one of the smallest sovereign states in Europe. In 2019, Luxembourg had a population of 613,894, which makes it one of the least-populous countries in Europe, but by far the one with the highest population growth rate. Foreigners account for nearly half of Luxembourg's population. As a representative democracy with a constitutional monarch, it is headed by Grand Duke Henri and is the world's only remaining sovereign grand duchy. Luxembourg is a developed country, with an advanced economy and one of the world's highest GDP (PPP) per capita. The City of Luxembourg with its old quarters and fortifications was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1994 due to the exceptional preservation of the vast fortifications and the old city.\n\nThe history of Luxembourg is considered to begin in 963, when count Siegfried acquired a rocky promontory and its Roman-era fortifications known as \"Lucilinburhuc\", \"little castle\", and the surrounding area from the Imperial Abbey of St. Maximin in nearby Trier. Siegfried's descendants increased their territory through marriage, war and vassal relations. At the end of the 13th century, the counts of Luxembourg reigned over a considerable territory. In 1308, Henry VII, Count of Luxembourg became King of the Germans and later Holy Roman Emperor. The House of Luxembourg produced four emperors during the High Middle Ages. In 1354, Charles IV elevated the county to the Duchy of Luxembourg. The duchy eventually became part of the Burgundian Circle and then one of the Seventeen Provinces of the Habsburg Netherlands.\nOver the centuries, the City and Fortress of Luxembourg, of great strategic importance situated between the Kingdom of France and the Habsburg territories, was gradually built up to be one of the most reputed fortifications in Europe. After belonging to both the France of Louis XIV and the Austria of Maria Theresa, Luxembourg became part of the First French Republic and Empire under Napoleon.\n\nThe present-day state of Luxembourg first emerged at the Congress of Vienna in 1815. The Grand Duchy, with its powerful fortress, became an independent state under the personal possession of William I of the Netherlands with a Prussian garrison to guard the city against another invasion from France. In 1839, following the turmoil of the Belgian Revolution, the purely French-speaking part of Luxembourg was ceded to Belgium and the Luxembourgish-speaking part (except the Arelerland, the area around Arlon) became what is the present state of Luxembourg.\n\nLuxembourg is a founding member of the European Union, OECD, United Nations, NATO, and Benelux. The city of Luxembourg, which is the country's capital and largest city, is the seat of several institutions and agencies of the EU. Luxembourg served on the United Nations Security Council for the years 2013 and 2014, which was a first in the country's history. As of 2018, Luxembourg citizens had visa-free or visa-on-arrival access to 186 countries and territories, ranking the Luxembourgish passport 5th in the world, tied with Austria, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, the United Kingdom and the United States.\n\nThe recorded history of Luxembourg begins with the acquisition of Lucilinburhuc (today Luxembourg Castle) situated on the Bock rock by Siegfried, Count of Ardennes, in 963 through an exchange act with St. Maximin's Abbey, Trier. Around this fort, a town gradually developed, which became the centre of a state of great strategic value.\n\nIn the 14th and early 15th centuries, three members of the House of Luxembourg reigned as Holy Roman Emperors. In 1437, the House of Luxembourg suffered a succession crisis, precipitated by the lack of a male heir to assume the throne, which led to the territories being sold by Duchess Elisabeth to Philip the Good of Burgundy.\n\nIn the following centuries, Luxembourg's fortress was steadily enlarged and strengthened by its successive occupants, the Bourbons, Habsburgs, Hohenzollerns and the French.\n\nAfter the defeat of Napoleon in 1815, Luxembourg was disputed between Prussia and the Netherlands. The Congress of Vienna formed Luxembourg as a Grand Duchy within the German Confederation. The Dutch king became, in personal union, the grand duke. Although he was supposed to rule the grand duchy as an independent country with an administration of its own, in reality he treated it similarly to a Dutch province. The Fortress of Luxembourg was manned by Prussian troops for the German Confederation. This arrangement was revised by the 1839 First Treaty of London, from which date Luxembourg's full independence is reckoned.\n\nAt the time of the Belgian Revolution of 1830–1839, and by the 1839 Treaty establishing full independence, Luxembourg's territory was reduced by more than half, as the predominantly francophone western part of the country was transferred to Belgium. In 1842 Luxembourg joined the German Customs Union (Zollverein). This resulted in the opening of the German market, the development of Luxembourg's steel industry, and expansion of Luxembourg's railway network from 1855 to 1875, particularly the construction of the Luxembourg-Thionville railway line, with connections from there to the European industrial regions. While Prussian troops still manned the fortress, in 1861, the Passerelle was opened, the first road bridge spanning the Pétrusse river valley, connecting the Ville Haute and the main fortification on the Bock with Luxembourg railway station, opened in 1859, on the then fortified Bourbon plateau to the south.\n\nAfter the Luxembourg Crisis of 1866 nearly led to war between Prussia and France, the Grand Duchy's independence and neutrality were again affirmed by the 1867 Second Treaty of London, Prussia's troops were withdrawn from the Fortress of Luxembourg, and its Bock and surrounding fortifications were dismantled.\n\nThe King of the Netherlands remained Head of State as Grand Duke of Luxembourg, maintaining a personal union between the two countries until 1890. At the death of William III, the throne of the Netherlands passed to his daughter Wilhelmina, while Luxembourg (then restricted to male heirs by the Nassau Family Pact) passed to Adolph of Nassau-Weilburg.\n\nAt the time of the Franco-Prussian war in 1870, despite allegations about French use of the Luxembourg railways for passing soldiers from Metz (then part of France) through the Duchy, and for forwarding provisions to Thionville, Luxembourg's neutrality was respected by Germany, and neither France nor Germany invaded the country. But in 1871, as a result of Germany's victory over France, Luxembourg's boundary with Lorraine, containing Metz and Thionville, changed from being a frontier with a part of France to a frontier with territory annexed to the German Empire as Alsace-Lorraine under the Treaty of Frankfurt. This allowed Germany the military advantage of controlling and expanding the railways there.\n\nIn August 1914, Imperial Germany violated Luxembourg's neutrality in the war by invading it in the war against France. This allowed Germany to use the railway lines, while at the same time denying them to France. Nevertheless, despite the German occupation, Luxembourg was allowed to maintain much of its independence and political mechanisms.\n\nIn 1940, after the outbreak of World War II, Luxembourg's neutrality was again violated when the Wehrmacht of Nazi Germany entered the country, \"entirely without justification\". In contrast to the First World War, under the German occupation of Luxembourg during World War II, the country was treated as German territory and informally annexed to the adjacent province of the Third Reich. A government in exile based in London supported the Allies, sending a small group of volunteers who participated in the Normandy invasion. Luxembourg was liberated in September 1944, and became a founding member of the United Nations in 1945. Luxembourg's neutral status under the constitution formally ended in 1948, and in 1949 it became a founding member of NATO.\n\nIn 1951, Luxembourg became one of the six founding countries of the European Coal and Steel Community, which in 1957 would become the European Economic Community and in 1993 the European Union. In 1999 Luxembourg joined the Eurozone. In 2005, a referendum on the EU treaty establishing a constitution for Europe was held.\n\nThe steel industry exploiting the Red Lands' rich iron-ore grounds in the beginning of the 20th century drove the country's industrialisation. After the decline of the steel industry in the 1970s, the country focused on establishing itself as a global financial centre and developed into the banking hub it is reputed for. Since the beginning of the 21st century, its governments have focused on developing the country into a knowledge economy, with the founding of the University of Luxembourg and a national space programme, projecting the first involvement in a robotic lunar expedition by 2020.\n\nLuxembourg is described as a \"full democracy\", with a parliamentary democracy headed by a constitutional monarch. Executive power is exercised by the Grand Duke and the cabinet, which consists of several other ministers. The Constitution of Luxembourg, the supreme law of Luxembourg, was adopted on 17 October 1868. The Grand Duke has the power to dissolve the legislature, in which case new elections must be held within three months. However, since 1919, sovereignty has resided with the Nation, exercised by the Grand Duke in accordance with the Constitution and the law.\n\nLegislative power is vested in the Chamber of Deputies, a unicameral legislature of sixty members, who are directly elected to five-year terms from four constituencies. A second body, the Council of State (\"Conseil d'État\"), composed of twenty-one ordinary citizens appointed by the Grand Duke, advises the Chamber of Deputies in the drafting of legislation.\n\nThe Grand Duchy has three lower tribunals (\"justices de paix\"; in Esch-sur-Alzette, the city of Luxembourg, and Diekirch), two district tribunals (Luxembourg and Diekirch), and a Superior Court of Justice (Luxembourg), which includes the Court of Appeal and the Court of Cassation. There is also an Administrative Tribunal and an Administrative Court, as well as a Constitutional Court, all of which are located in the capital.\n\nLuxembourg is divided into 12 cantons, which are further divided into 102 communes. Twelve of the communes have city status; the city of Luxembourg is the largest.\nLuxembourg has long been a prominent supporter of European political and economic integration. In efforts foreshadowing European integration, Luxembourg and Belgium in 1921 formed the Belgium–Luxembourg Economic Union (BLEU) to create a regime of inter-exchangeable currency and a common customs. Luxembourg is a member of the Benelux Economic Union and was one of the founding members of the European Economic Community (now the European Union). It also participates in the Schengen Group (named after the Luxembourg village of Schengen where the agreements were signed), whose goal is the free movement of citizens among member states. At the same time, the majority of Luxembourgers have consistently believed that European unity makes sense only in the context of a dynamic transatlantic relationship, and thus have traditionally pursued a pro-NATO, pro-US foreign policy. \n\nLuxembourg is the site of the European Court of Justice, the European Court of Auditors, the Statistical Office of the European Communities (\"Eurostat\") and other vital EU organs. The Secretariat of the European Parliament is located in Luxembourg, but the Parliament usually meets in Brussels and sometimes in Strasbourg.\n\nThe Army is situated on the \"Härebierg\" which is Luxemburgish and translates to \"men's mountain\". The army is under civilian control, with the Grand Duke as Commander-in-Chief. The Minister for Defence, currently François Bausch, oversees army operations. The professional head of the army is the Chief of Defence, who answers to the minister and holds the rank of general.\n\nBeing a landlocked country, it has no navy. Luxembourg also lacks an air force, though the 17 NATO AWACS aeroplanes are, for convenience, registered as aircraft of Luxembourg. In accordance with a joint agreement with Belgium, both countries have put forth funding for one A400M military cargo plane.\n\nLuxembourg has participated in the Eurocorps, has contributed troops to the UNPROFOR and IFOR missions in former Yugoslavia, and has participated with a small contingent in the current NATO SFOR mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Luxembourg troops have also deployed to Afghanistan, to support ISAF. The army has also participated in humanitarian relief missions such as setting up refugee camps for Kurds and providing emergency supplies to Albania.\n\nLuxembourg is one of the smallest countries in Europe, and ranked 167th in size of all the 194 independent countries of the world; the country is about in size, and measures long and wide. It lies between latitudes 49° and 51° N, and longitudes 5° and 7° E.\n\nTo the east, Luxembourg borders the German \"Bundesländer\" of Rhineland-Palatinate and Saarland, and to the south, it borders the French \"région\" of Grand Est (Lorraine). The Grand Duchy borders the Belgian Walloon Region, in particular the latter's provinces of Luxembourg and Liège, part of which comprises the German-speaking Community of Belgium, to the west and to the north, respectively.\n\nThe northern third of the country is known as the 'Oesling', and forms part of the Ardennes. It is dominated by hills and low mountains, including the Kneiff near Wilwerdange, which is the highest point, at 560 metres (1,837 ft). Other mountains are the 'Buurgplaaz' at 559 metres near Huldange and the 'Napoléonsgaard' at 554 metres near Rambrouch. The region is sparsely populated, with only one town (Wiltz) with a population of more than four thousand people.\n\nThe southern two-thirds of the country is called the \"Gutland\", and is more densely populated than the Oesling. It is also more diverse and can be divided into five geographic sub-regions. The Luxembourg plateau, in south-central Luxembourg, is a large, flat, sandstone formation, and the site of the city of Luxembourg. Little Switzerland, in the east of Luxembourg, has craggy terrain and thick forests. The Moselle valley is the lowest-lying region, running along the southeastern border. The Red Lands, in the far south and southwest, are Luxembourg's industrial heartland and home to many of Luxembourg's largest towns.\nThe border between Luxembourg and Germany is formed by three rivers: the Moselle, the Sauer, and the Our. Other major rivers are the Alzette, the Attert, the Clerve, and the Wiltz. The valleys of the mid-Sauer and Attert form the border between the Gutland and the Oesling.\n\nAccording to the 2012 Environmental Performance Index, Luxembourg is one of the world's best performers in environmental protection, ranking 4th out of 132 assessed countries Luxembourg also ranks 6th among the top ten most livable cities in the world by Mercer's.\n\nLuxembourg has an oceanic climate (Köppen: \"Cfb\"), marked by high precipitation, particularly in late summer. The summers are warm and winters cool.\n\nLuxembourg's stable and high-income market economy features moderate growth, low inflation, and a high level of innovation. Unemployment is traditionally low, although it had risen to 6.1% by May 2012, due largely to the effect of the 2008 global financial crisis. In 2011, according to the IMF, Luxembourg was the second richest country in the world, with a per capita GDP on a purchasing-power parity (PPP) basis of $80,119. Luxembourg is ranked 13th in The Heritage Foundation's Index of Economic Freedom, 26th in the United Nations Human Development Index, and 4th in the Economist Intelligence Unit's quality of life index.\n\nThe industrial sector, which was dominated by steel until the 1960s, has since diversified to include chemicals, rubber, and other products. During the past decades, growth in the financial sector has more than compensated for the decline in steel production. Services, especially banking and finance, account for the majority of economic output. Luxembourg is the world's second largest investment fund centre (after the United States), the most important private banking centre in the Eurozone and Europe's leading centre for reinsurance companies. Moreover, the Luxembourg government has aimed to attract Internet start-ups, with Skype and Amazon being two of the many Internet companies that have shifted their regional headquarters to Luxembourg. Other high-tech companies have established themselves in Luxembourg, including 3D scanner developer/manufacturer Artec 3D.\n\nIn April 2009, concern about Luxembourg's banking secrecy laws, as well as its reputation as a tax haven, led to its being added to a \"grey list\" of nations with questionable banking arrangements by the G20. In response, the country soon after adopted OECD standards on exchange of information and was subsequently added into the category of \"jurisdictions that have substantially implemented the internationally agreed tax standard\". In March 2010, the \"Sunday Telegraph\" reported that most of Kim Jong-Il's $4 billion in secret accounts is in Luxembourg banks. Amazon.co.uk also benefits from Luxembourg tax loopholes by channeling substantial UK revenues as reported by \"The Guardian\" in April 2012. Luxembourg ranked third on the Tax Justice Network's 2011 Financial Secrecy Index of the world's major tax havens, scoring only slightly behind the Cayman Islands. In 2013, Luxembourg is ranked as the 2nd safest tax haven in the world, behind Switzerland.\n\nIn early November 2014, just days after becoming head of the European Commission, the Luxembourg's former Prime Minister Jean-Claude Juncker was hit by media disclosures—derived from a document leak known as Luxembourg Leaks—that Luxembourg under his premiership had turned into a major European centre of corporate tax avoidance.\n\nAgriculture employed about 2.1% percent of Luxembourg's active population in 2010, when there were 2200 agricultural holdings with an average area per holding of 60 hectares.\n\nLuxembourg has especially close trade and financial ties to Belgium and the Netherlands (see Benelux), and as a member of the EU it enjoys the advantages of the open European market.\n\nWith $171 billion in May 2015, the country ranks eleventh in the world in holdings of U.S. Treasury securities. However, securities owned by non-Luxembourg residents, but held in custodial accounts in Luxembourg, are also included in this figure.\n\n, public debt of Luxembourg was at $14,865,000,000, or a per capita debt of $24,683. The debt to GDP was 21,40%.\n\nLuxembourg has efficient road, rail and air transport facilities and services. The road network has been significantly modernised in recent years with of motorways connecting the capital to adjacent countries. The advent of the high-speed TGV link to Paris has led to renovation of the city's railway station and a new passenger terminal at Luxembourg Airport was opened in 2008. Luxembourg city reintroduced trams in December 2017 and there are plans to open light-rail lines in adjacent areas within the next few years.\n\nThe number of cars per 1000 persons amount to 680.1 in Luxembourg — higher than all but two states, namely the Principality of Monaco and the British overseas territory of Gibraltar.\n\nIn 2019, it is set to become the first country to make public transportation free.\n\nThe telecommunications industry in Luxembourg is liberalised and the electronic communications networks are significantly developed. Competition between the different operators is guaranteed by the legislative framework Paquet Telecom of the Government of 2011 which transposes the European Telecom Directives into Luxembourgish law. This encourages the investment in networks and services. The regulator ILR – Institut Luxembourgeois de Régulation ensures the compliance to these legal rules.\n\nLuxembourg has modern and widely deployed optical fiber and cable networks throughout the country. In 2010, the Luxembourg Government launched its National strategy for very high-speed networks with the aim to become a global leader in terms of very high-speed broadband by achieving full 1 Gbit/s coverage of the country by 2020. In 2011, Luxembourg had an NGA coverage of 75%. In April 2013 Luxembourg featured the 6th highest download speed worldwide and the 2nd highest in Europe: 32,46 Mbit/s. The country's location in Central Europe, stable economy and low taxes favour the telecommunication industry.\n\nIt ranks 2nd in the world in the development of the Information and Communication Technologies in the ITU ICT Development Index and 8th in the Global Broadband Quality Study 2009 by the University of Oxford and the University of Oviedo.\nLuxembourg is connected to all major European Internet Exchanges (AMS-IX Amsterdam, DE-CIX Frankfurt, LINX London), datacenters and POPs through redundant optical networks. In addition, the country is connected to the virtual meetme room services (vmmr) of the international data hub operator Ancotel. This enables Luxembourg to interconnect with all major telecommunication operators and data carriers worldwide. The interconnection points are in Frankfurt, London, New York and Hong Kong. Luxembourg has established itself as one of the leading financial technology (FinTech) hubs in Europe, with the Luxembourg government supporting initiatives like the Luxembourg House of Financial Technology.\n\nSome 20 data centres are operating in Luxembourg. Six data centers are Tier IV Design certified: three of ebrc, two of LuxConnect and one of European Data Hub. In a survey on nine international data centers carried out in December 2012 and January 2013 and measuring availability (up-time) and performance (delay by which the data from the requested website was received), the top three positions were held by Luxembourg data centers.\n\n+Largest Groups of Immigrants:\nBULLET::::1. Portugal (100,460)\nBULLET::::2. France (38,384)\nBULLET::::3. Italy (21,877)\nBULLET::::4. Belgium (21,008)\nBULLET::::5. Germany (15,056)\nBULLET::::6. Montenegro (9,065)\nBULLET::::7. United Kingdom (6,946)\nBULLET::::8. Serbia (6,282)\nBULLET::::9. Netherlands (4,734)\nBULLET::::10. Spain (4,241)\nThe people of Luxembourg are called Luxembourgers. The immigrant population increased in the 20th century due to the arrival of immigrants from Belgium, France, Italy, Germany, and Portugal, with the majority coming from the latter: in 2013 there were about 88,000 inhabitants with Portuguese nationality. In 2013, there were 537,039 permanent residents, 44.5% of which were of foreign background or foreign nationals; the largest foreign ethnic groups were the Portuguese, comprising 16.4% of the total population, followed by the French (6.6%), Italians (3.4%), Belgians (3.3%) and Germans (2.3%). Another 6.4% were of other EU background, while the remaining 6.1% were of other non-EU, but largely other European, background.\n\nSince the beginning of the Yugoslav wars, Luxembourg has seen many immigrants from Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, and Serbia. Annually, over 10,000 new immigrants arrive in Luxembourg, mostly from the EU states, as well as Eastern Europe. In 2000 there were 162,000 immigrants in Luxembourg, accounting for 37% of the total population. There were an estimated 5,000 illegal immigrants in Luxembourg in 1999.\n\nThe linguistic situation of Luxembourg is complex. It is characterized by the existence of a language specific to the local population (Luxembourgish), mixed with the historical presence of the two major languages spoken in the surrounding countries (French and German).\n\nThree languages are recognised as official in Luxembourg: French, German, and Luxembourgish, a Franconian language of the Moselle region that is also spoken in neighbouring parts of Belgium, Germany and France. Though Luxembourgish is part of the West Central German group of High German languages, more than 5,000 words in the language are of French origin. The first printed sentences in Luxembourgish appeared in a weekly journal, the \"Luxemburger Wochenblatt\", in the second edition on 14 April 1821.\n\nApart from being one of the three official languages, Luxembourgish is also considered the national language of the Grand Duchy; it is the mother tongue or \"language of the heart\" for the local population.<br>\nEvery citizen or resident has the right to address the administration in the language of their choice among the three official languages and to be answered in that language.<br>\nDue to the historical influence of the Napoleonic Code on the legal system of the Grand Duchy, French is the sole language of the legislation. French is generally the preferred language of the government, administration and justice. The parliamentary debates are however mostly conducted in Luxembourgish, whereas the written government communications and the official documents (e.g. administrative or judicial decisions, passports etc.) are drafted only in French.\n\nEach of the three languages is used as the primary language in certain spheres of everyday life, without being exclusive. Luxembourgish is the language that Luxembourgers generally use to speak to each other, but it is not often used as the written language and the numerous expatriate workers (approximately 60% of the population) generally do not use it to speak to each other. Since the 1980s, however, an increasing number of novels have been written in Luxembourgish. Most official business is carried out in French. German is very often used in much of the media alongside with French. French is mostly used for written communications from the authorities to the public.\n\nA 2009 survey pointed out that French was the language spoken by most inhabitants (99%), followed by Luxembourgish (82%), German (81%), and English (72%).\n\nAlthough professional life is largely multilingual, French is described by private sector business leaders as the main working language of their companies (56%), followed by Luxembourgish (20%), English (18%), and German (6%).\n\nDue to the large community of Portuguese origin, the Portuguese language is de facto fairly present in Luxembourg though it remains limited to the relationships inside this community; although Portuguese does not have any official status, the administration sometimes holds certain informative documents available in Portuguese.\n\nLuxembourg is a secular state, but the state recognises certain religions as officially mandated religions. This gives the state a hand in religious administration and appointment of clergy, in exchange for which the state pays certain running costs and wages. Currently, religions covered by such arrangements are Roman Catholicism, Judaism, Greek Orthodoxy, Anglicanism, Russian Orthodoxy, Lutheranism, Calvinism, Mennonitism, and Islam.\n\nSince 1980 it has been illegal for the government to collect statistics on religious beliefs or practices. An estimation by the CIA Factbook for the year 2000 is that 87% of Luxembourgers are Catholic, including the grand ducal family, the remaining 13% being made up of Protestants, Orthodox Christians, Jews, Muslims, and those of other or no religion. According to a 2010 Pew Research Center study, 70.4% are Christian, 2.3% Muslim, 26.8% unaffiliated, and 0.5% other religions.\n\nAccording to a 2005 Eurobarometer poll, 44% of Luxembourg citizens responded that \"they believe there is a God\", whereas 28% answered that \"they believe there is some sort of spirit or life force\", and 22% that \"they do not believe there is any sort of spirit, god, or life force\".\n\nLuxembourg's education system is trilingual: the first years of primary school are in Luxembourgish, before changing to German; while in secondary school, the language of instruction changes to French. Proficiency in all three languages is required for graduation from secondary school, but half the students leave school without a certified qualification, with the children of immigrants being particularly disadvantaged. In addition to the three national languages, English is taught in compulsory schooling and much of the population of Luxembourg can speak English. The past two decades have highlighted the growing importance of English in several sectors, in particular the financial sector. Portuguese, the language of the largest immigrant community, is also spoken by large segments of the population, but by relatively few from outside the Portuguese-speaking community.\n\nThe University of Luxembourg is the only university based in Luxembourg. In 2014, Luxembourg School of Business, a graduate business school, has been created through private initiative and has received the accreditation from the Ministry of Higher Education and Research of Luxembourg in 2017. Two American universities maintain satellite campuses in the country, Miami University (Dolibois European Center) and Sacred Heart University (Luxembourg Campus).\n\nAccording to data from the World Health Organization, healthcare spending on behalf of the government of Luxembourg topped $4.1 Billion, amounting to about $8,182 for each citizen in the nation. The nation of Luxembourg collectively spent nearly 7% of its Gross Domestic Product on health, placing it among the highest spending countries on health services and related programs in 2010 among other well-off nations in Europe with high average income among its population.\n\nLuxembourg has been overshadowed by the culture of its neighbours. It retains a number of folk traditions, having been for much of its history a profoundly rural country. There are several notable museums, located mostly in the capital. These include the National Museum of History and Art (NMHA), the Luxembourg City History Museum, and the new Grand Duke Jean Museum of Modern Art (Mudam). The National Museum of Military History (MNHM) in Diekirch is especially known for its representations of the Battle of the Bulge. The city of Luxembourg itself is on the UNESCO World Heritage List, on account of the historical importance of its fortifications.\n\nThe country has produced some internationally known artists, including the painters Théo Kerg, Joseph Kutter and Michel Majerus, and photographer Edward Steichen, whose \"The Family of Man\" exhibition has been placed on UNESCO's Memory of the World register, and is now permanently housed in Clervaux. Movie star Loretta Young was of Luxembourgish descent.\n\nLuxembourg was the first city to be named European Capital of Culture twice. The first time was in 1995. In 2007, the European Capital of Culture was to be a cross-border area consisting of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, the Rheinland-Pfalz and Saarland in Germany, the Walloon Region and the German-speaking part of Belgium, and the Lorraine area in France. The event was an attempt to promote mobility and the exchange of ideas, crossing borders physically, psychologically, artistically and emotionally.\n\nLuxembourg was represented at the World Expo 2010 in Shanghai, China, from 1 May to 31 October 2010 with its own pavilion. The pavilion was based on the transliteration of the word Luxembourg into Chinese, \"Lu Sen Bao\", which means \"Forest and Fortress\". It represented Luxembourg as the \"Green Heart in Europe\".\n\nUnlike most countries in Europe, sport in Luxembourg is not concentrated upon a particular national sport, but encompasses a number of sports, both team and individual. Despite the lack of a central sporting focus, over 100,000 people in Luxembourg, out of a total population of near 500,000–600,000, are licensed members of one sports federation or another. The largest sports venue in the country is d'Coque, an indoor arena and Olympic swimming pool in Kirchberg, north-eastern Luxembourg City, which has a capacity of 8,300. The arena is used for basketball, handball, gymnastics, and volleyball, including the final of the 2007 Women's European Volleyball Championship. The national stadium (also the country's largest) is the Stade Josy Barthel, in western Luxembourg City; named after the country's only official Olympic gold medallist, the stadium has a capacity of 8,054.\n\nLuxembourg cuisine reflects its position on the border between the Latin and Germanic worlds, being heavily influenced by the cuisines of neighboring France and Germany. More recently, it has been enriched by its many Italian and Portuguese immigrants.\n\nMost native Luxembourg dishes, consumed as the traditional daily fare, share roots in the country's folk dishes the same as in neighboring Germany.\n\nLuxembourg sells the most alcohol in Europe per capita. However, the large proportion of alcohol purchased by customers from neighboring countries contributes to the statistically high level of alcohol sales per capita; this level of alcohol sales is thus not representative of the actual alcohol consumption of the Luxembourg population.\n\nThe main languages of media in Luxembourg are French and German. The newspaper with the largest circulation is the German-language daily \"Luxemburger Wort\". Because of the strong multilingualism in Luxembourg, newspapers often alternate articles in French and articles in German, without translation. In addition there are both English and Portuguese radio and national print publications, but accurate audience figures are difficult to gauge since the national media survey by ILRES is conducted in French.\n\nLuxembourg is known in Europe for its radio and television stations (Radio Luxembourg and RTL Group). It is also the uplink home of SES, carrier of major European satellite services for Germany and Britain.\n\nDue to a 1988 law that established a special tax scheme for audiovisual investment, the film and co-production in Luxembourg has grown steadily. There are some 30 registered production companies in Luxembourg.\n\nLuxembourg won an Oscar in 2014 in the Animated Short Films category with \"Mr Hublot\".\n\nBULLET::::- List of Luxembourgers\n\nBULLET::::- Outline of Luxembourg\n\nBULLET::::- Plan d'action national luxembourgeois en matière de TIC et de haut-débit\nBULLET::::- CEE- Europe's Digital Competitiveness Report –Volume 2: i2010 –ICT Country Profiles- page 40-41\nBULLET::::- Inauguration of LU-CIX\nBULLET::::- Art and Culture in Luxembourg\n\nBULLET::::- The Official Portal of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg\nBULLET::::- Luxembourg from \"UCB Libraries GovPubs\"\nBULLET::::- Luxembourg profile from the BBC News\nBULLET::::- \"Luxembourg's Constitution of 1868 with Amendments through 2009\", English Translation 2012\n"}
{"id": "17516", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17516", "title": "Location parameter", "text": "Location parameter\n\nIn statistics, a location family is a class of probability distributions that is parametrized by a scalar- or vector-valued parameter formula_1, which determines the \"location\" or shift of the distribution. Formally, this means that the probability density functions or probability mass functions in this class have the form\nHere, formula_1 is called the location parameter. Examples of location parameters include the mean, the median, and the mode.\n\nThus in the one-dimensional case if formula_1 is increased, the probability density or mass function shifts rigidly to the right, maintaining its exact shape.\n\nA location parameter can also be found in families having more than one parameter, such as location–scale families. In this case, the probability density function or probability mass function will be a special case of the more general form\nwhere formula_1 is the location parameter, \"θ\" represents additional parameters, and formula_7 is a function parametrized on the additional parameters.\n\nAn alternative way of thinking of location families is through the concept of additive noise. If formula_1 is a constant and \"W\" is random noise with probability density formula_9 then formula_10 has probability density formula_11 and its distribution is therefore part of a location family.\n\nBULLET::::- Central tendency\nBULLET::::- Location test\nBULLET::::- Invariant estimator\nBULLET::::- Scale parameter\nBULLET::::- Two-moment decision models\n"}
{"id": "17519", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17519", "title": "Larry Wall", "text": "Larry Wall\n\nLarry Arnold Wall (born September 27, 1954) is an American computer programmer and author. He created the Perl programming language.\n\nWall grew up in Los Angeles and then Bremerton, Washington, before starting higher education at Seattle Pacific University in 1976, majoring in chemistry and music and later pre-medicine with a hiatus of several years working in the university's computing center before graduating with a bachelor's degree in Natural and Artificial Languages.\n\nWhile in graduate school at the University of California, Berkeley, Wall and his wife were studying linguistics with the intention of finding an unwritten language, perhaps in Africa, and creating a writing system for it. They would then use this new writing system to translate various texts into the language, among them the Bible. Due to health reasons these plans were cancelled, and they remained in the United States, where Wall instead joined the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory after he finished graduate school.\n\nWall is an active member of the New Life, Church of the Nazarene. \n\nWall is the author of the codice_1 Usenet client and the widely used codice_2 program. He has won the International Obfuscated C Code Contest twice and was the recipient of the first Free Software Foundation Award for the Advancement of Free Software in 1998.\n\nBeyond his technical skills, Wall has a reputation for his wit and often sarcastic sense of humour,<ref name='www.perl.com/pub/a/1999/03/pm.ht'></ref> which he displays in the comments to his source code or on Usenet. For example: \"We all agree on the necessity of compromise. We just can't agree on when it's necessary to compromise\" and:\n\nWall developed the Perl interpreter and language while working for System Development Corporation, which later became part of Unisys. He is the co-author of \"Programming Perl\" (often referred to as the \"Camel Book\" and published by O'Reilly), which is the definitive resource for Perl programmers; and edited the \"Perl Cookbook\". He then became employed full-time by O'Reilly Media to further develop Perl and write books on the subject.\n\nWall's training as a linguist is apparent in his books, interviews, and lectures. He often compares Perl to a natural language and explains his decisions in Perl's design with linguistic rationale. He also often uses linguistic terms for Perl language constructs, so instead of traditional terms such as \"variable\", \"function\", and \"accessor\" he sometimes says \"noun\", \"verb\", and \"topicalizer\".\n\nWall's Christian faith has influenced some of the terminology of Perl, such as the name itself, a biblical reference to the \"pearl of great price\" (Matthew 13:46). Similar references are the function name \"bless\", and the organization of Raku (previously known as Perl 6) design documents with categories such as \"apocalypse\" and \"exegesis\". Wall has also alluded to his faith when he has spoken at conferences, including a rather straightforward statement of his beliefs at the August 1997 Perl Conference and a discussion of \"Pilgrim's Progress\" at the YAPC (Yet Another Perl Conference) in June 2000.\n\nWall continues to oversee further development of Perl and serves as the benevolent dictator for life of the Perl project. The official Perl documentation states that:\nBULLET::::1. Larry is always by definition right about how Perl should behave. This means he has final veto power on the core functionality.\nBULLET::::2. Larry is allowed to change his mind about any matter at a later date, regardless of whether he previously invoked Rule 1.\n\nBULLET::::- List of computer scientists\nBULLET::::- List of programmers\n\nBULLET::::- Slightly Skeptical View on Larry Wall and Perl (Softpanorama Larry Wall's page)\nBULLET::::- \"Perl, the first Postmodern Language\"\n\nBULLET::::- 1997\nBULLET::::- 1998\nBULLET::::- 1999\nBULLET::::- 2000\nBULLET::::- 2001\nBULLET::::- 2002\nBULLET::::- 2003\nBULLET::::- 2004\nBULLET::::- 2005\nBULLET::::- 2006\nBULLET::::- 2007\n"}
{"id": "17524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17524", "title": "Language", "text": "Language\n\nA language is a structured system of communication. Language, in a broader sense, is the method of communication that involves the use of – particularly human – \"languages\". \n\nThe scientific study of language is called linguistics. Questions concerning the philosophy of language, such as whether words can represent experience, have been debated at least since Gorgias and Plato in ancient Greece. Thinkers such as Rousseau have argued that language originated from emotions while others like Kant have held that it originated from rational and logical thought. 20th-century philosophers such as Wittgenstein argued that philosophy is really the study of language. Major figures in linguistics include Ferdinand de Saussure and Noam Chomsky.\n\nEstimates of the number of human languages in the world vary between 5,000 and 7,000. However, any precise estimate depends on the arbitrary and western in its origin distinction (dichotomy) between languages and dialects. Natural languages are spoken or signed, but any language can be encoded into secondary media using auditory, visual, or tactile stimuli – for example, in writing, whistling, signing, or braille. This is because human language is modality-independent. Depending on philosophical perspectives regarding the definition of language and meaning, when used as a general concept, \"language\" may refer to the cognitive ability to learn and use systems of complex communication, or to describe the set of rules that makes up these systems, or the set of utterances that can be produced from those rules. All languages rely on the process of semiosis to relate signs to particular meanings. Oral, manual and tactile languages contain a phonological system that governs how symbols are used to form sequences known as words or morphemes, and a syntactic system that governs how words and morphemes are combined to form phrases and utterances.\n\nHuman language has the properties of productivity and displacement, and relies entirely on social convention and learning. Its complex structure affords a much wider range of expressions than any known system of animal communication. Language is thought to have originated when early hominins started gradually changing their primate communication systems, acquiring the ability to form a theory of other minds and a shared intentionality. This development is sometimes thought to have coincided with an increase in brain volume, and many linguists see the structures of language as having evolved to serve specific communicative and social functions. Language is processed in many different locations in the human brain, but especially in Broca's and Wernicke's areas. Humans acquire language through social interaction in early childhood, and children generally speak fluently by approximately three years old. The use of language is deeply entrenched in human culture. Therefore, in addition to its strictly communicative uses, language also has many social and cultural uses, such as signifying group identity, social stratification, as well as social grooming and entertainment.\n\nLanguages evolve and diversify over time, and the history of their evolution can be reconstructed by comparing modern languages to determine which traits their ancestral languages must have had in order for the later developmental stages to occur. A group of languages that descend from a common ancestor is known as a language family. The Indo-European family is the most widely spoken and includes languages as diverse as English, Russian and Hindi; the Sino-Tibetan family includes Mandarin and the other Chinese languages, Bodo and Tibetan; the Afro-Asiatic family includes Arabic, Somali, and Hebrew; the Bantu languages include Swahili, and Zulu, and hundreds of other languages spoken throughout Africa; and the Malayo-Polynesian languages include Indonesian, Malay, Tagalog, and hundreds of other languages spoken throughout the Pacific. The languages of the Dravidian family, spoken mostly in Southern India, include Tamil, Telugu and Kannada. Academic consensus holds that between 50% and 90% of languages spoken at the beginning of the 21st century will probably have become extinct by the year 2100.\n\nThe English word \"language\" derives ultimately from Proto-Indo-European \"tongue, speech, language\" through Latin \"lingua\", \"language; tongue\", and Old French \"language\". The word is sometimes used to refer to codes, ciphers, and other kinds of artificially constructed communication systems such as formally defined computer languages used for computer programming. Unlike conventional human languages, a formal language in this sense is a system of signs for encoding and decoding information. This article specifically concerns the properties of natural human language as it is studied in the discipline of linguistics.\n\nAs an object of linguistic study, \"language\" has two primary meanings: an abstract concept, and a specific linguistic system, e.g. \"French\". The Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure, who defined the modern discipline of linguistics, first explicitly formulated the distinction using the French word \"langage\" for language as a concept, \"langue\" as a specific instance of a language system, and \"parole\" for the concrete usage of speech in a particular language.\n\nWhen speaking of language as a general concept, definitions can be used which stress different aspects of the phenomenon. These definitions also entail different approaches and understandings of language, and they also inform different and often incompatible schools of linguistic theory. Debates about the nature and origin of language go back to the ancient world. Greek philosophers such as Gorgias and Plato debated the relation between words, concepts and reality. Gorgias argued that language could represent neither the objective experience nor human experience, and that communication and truth were therefore impossible. Plato maintained that communication is possible because language represents ideas and concepts that exist independently of, and prior to, language.\n\nDuring the Enlightenment and its debates about human origins, it became fashionable to speculate about the origin of language. Thinkers such as Rousseau and Herder argued that language had originated in the instinctive expression of emotions, and that it was originally closer to music and poetry than to the logical expression of rational thought. Rationalist philosophers such as Kant and Descartes held the opposite view. Around the turn of the 20th century, thinkers began to wonder about the role of language in shaping our experiences of the world – asking whether language simply reflects the objective structure of the world, or whether it creates concepts that it in turn imposes on our experience of the objective world. This led to the question of whether philosophical problems are really firstly linguistic problems. The resurgence of the view that language plays a significant role in the creation and circulation of concepts, and that the study of philosophy is essentially the study of language, is associated with what has been called the linguistic turn and philosophers such as Wittgenstein in 20th-century philosophy. These debates about language in relation to meaning and reference, cognition and consciousness remain active today.\n\nOne definition sees language primarily as the mental faculty that allows humans to undertake linguistic behaviour: to learn languages and to produce and understand utterances. This definition stresses the universality of language to all humans, and it emphasizes the biological basis for the human capacity for language as a unique development of the human brain. Proponents of the view that the drive to language acquisition is innate in humans argue that this is supported by the fact that all cognitively normal children raised in an environment where language is accessible will acquire language without formal instruction. Languages may even develop spontaneously in environments where people live or grow up together without a common language; for example, creole languages and spontaneously developed sign languages such as Nicaraguan Sign Language. This view, which can be traced back to the philosophers Kant and Descartes, understands language to be largely innate, for example, in Chomsky's theory of Universal Grammar, or American philosopher Jerry Fodor's extreme innatist theory. These kinds of definitions are often applied in studies of language within a cognitive science framework and in neurolinguistics.\n\nAnother definition sees language as a formal system of signs governed by grammatical rules of combination to communicate meaning. This definition stresses that human languages can be described as closed structural systems consisting of rules that relate particular signs to particular meanings. This structuralist view of language was first introduced by Ferdinand de Saussure, and his structuralism remains foundational for many approaches to language.\n\nSome proponents of Saussure's view of language have advocated a formal approach which studies language structure by identifying its basic elements and then by presenting a formal account of the rules according to which the elements combine in order to form words and sentences. The main proponent of such a theory is Noam Chomsky, the originator of the generative theory of grammar, who has defined language as the construction of sentences that can be generated using transformational grammars. Chomsky considers these rules to be an innate feature of the human mind and to constitute the rudiments of what language is. By way of contrast, such transformational grammars are also commonly used to provide formal definitions of language are commonly used in formal logic, in formal theories of grammar, and in applied computational linguistics. In the philosophy of language, the view of linguistic meaning as residing in the logical relations between propositions and reality was developed by philosophers such as Alfred Tarski, Bertrand Russell, and other formal logicians.\n\nYet another definition sees language as a system of communication that enables humans to exchange verbal or symbolic utterances. This definition stresses the social functions of language and the fact that humans use it to express themselves and to manipulate objects in their environment. Functional theories of grammar explain grammatical structures by their communicative functions, and understand the grammatical structures of language to be the result of an adaptive process by which grammar was \"tailored\" to serve the communicative needs of its users.\n\nThis view of language is associated with the study of language in pragmatic, cognitive, and interactive frameworks, as well as in sociolinguistics and linguistic anthropology. Functionalist theories tend to study grammar as dynamic phenomena, as structures that are always in the process of changing as they are employed by their speakers. This view places importance on the study of linguistic typology, or the classification of languages according to structural features, as it can be shown that processes of grammaticalization tend to follow trajectories that are partly dependent on typology. In the philosophy of language, the view of pragmatics as being central to language and meaning is often associated with Wittgenstein's later works and with ordinary language philosophers such as J.L. Austin, Paul Grice, John Searle, and W.O. Quine.\n\nA number of features, many of which were described by Charles Hockett and called design features set human language apart from other known systems of communication, such as those used by non-human animals.\n\nCommunication systems used by other animals such as bees or apes are closed systems that consist of a finite, usually very limited, number of possible ideas that can be expressed. In contrast, human language is open-ended and productive, meaning that it allows humans to produce a vast range of utterances from a finite set of elements, and to create new words and sentences. This is possible because human language is based on a dual code, in which a finite number of elements which are meaningless in themselves (e.g. sounds, letters or gestures) can be combined to form an infinite number of larger units of meaning (words and sentences). However, one study has demonstrated that an Australian bird, the chestnut-crowned babbler, is capable of using the same acoustic elements in different arrangements to create two functionally distinct vocalizations. Additionally, pied babblers have demonstrated the ability to generate two functionally distinct vocalisations composed of the same sound type, which can only be distinguished by the number of repeated elements.\n\nSeveral species of animals have proved to be able to acquire forms of communication through social learning: for instance a bonobo named Kanzi learned to express itself using a set of symbolic lexigrams. Similarly, many species of birds and whales learn their songs by imitating other members of their species. However, while some animals may acquire large numbers of words and symbols, none have been able to learn as many different signs as are generally known by an average 4 year old human, nor have any acquired anything resembling the complex grammar of human language.\n\nHuman languages also differ from animal communication systems in that they employ grammatical and semantic categories, such as noun and verb, present and past, which may be used to express exceedingly complex meanings. Human language is also unique in having the property of recursivity: for example, a noun phrase can contain another noun phrase (as in \"<nowiki>the chimpanzee]'s lips]</nowiki>\") or a clause can contain another clause (as in \"<nowiki>[I see [the dog is running</nowiki>\"). Human language is also the only known natural communication system whose adaptability may be referred to as \"modality independent\". This means that it can be used not only for communication through one channel or medium, but through several. For example, spoken language uses the auditive modality, whereas sign languages and writing use the visual modality, and braille writing uses the tactile modality.\n\nHuman language is also unique in being able to refer to abstract concepts and to imagined or hypothetical events as well as events that took place in the past or may happen in the future. This ability to refer to events that are not at the same time or place as the speech event is called \"displacement\", and while some animal communication systems can use displacement (such as the communication of bees that can communicate the location of sources of nectar that are out of sight), the degree to which it is used in human language is also considered unique.\n\nTheories about the origin of language differ in regard to their basic assumptions about what language is. Some theories are based on the idea that language is so complex that one cannot imagine it simply appearing from nothing in its final form, but that it must have evolved from earlier pre-linguistic systems among our pre-human ancestors. These theories can be called continuity-based theories. The opposite viewpoint is that language is such a unique human trait that it cannot be compared to anything found among non-humans and that it must therefore have appeared suddenly in the transition from pre-hominids to early man. These theories can be defined as discontinuity-based. Similarly, theories based on the generative view of language pioneered by Noam Chomsky see language mostly as an innate faculty that is largely genetically encoded, whereas functionalist theories see it as a system that is largely cultural, learned through social interaction.\n\nChomsky is one prominent proponent of a discontinuity-based theory of human language origins. He suggests that for scholars interested in the nature of language, \"talk about the evolution of the language capacity is beside the point.\" Chomsky proposes that perhaps \"some random mutation took place [...] and it reorganized the brain, implanting a language organ in an otherwise primate brain.\" Though cautioning against taking this story literally, Chomsky insists that \"it may be closer to reality than many other fairy tales that are told about evolutionary processes, including language.\"\n\nContinuity-based theories are held by a majority of scholars, but they vary in how they envision this development. Those who see language as being mostly innate, for example psychologist Steven Pinker, hold the precedents to be animal cognition, whereas those who see language as a socially learned tool of communication, such as psychologist Michael Tomasello, see it as having developed from animal communication in primates: either gestural or vocal communication to assist in cooperation. Other continuity-based models see language as having developed from music, a view already espoused by Rousseau, Herder, Humboldt, and Charles Darwin. A prominent proponent of this view is archaeologist Steven Mithen. Stephen Anderson states that the age of spoken languages is estimated at 60,000 to 100,000 years and that: Researchers on the evolutionary origin of language generally find it plausible to suggest that language was invented only once, and that all modern spoken languages are thus in some way related, even if that relation can no longer be recovered ... because of limitations on the methods available for reconstruction.\n\nBecause language emerged in the early prehistory of man, before the existence of any written records, its early development has left no historical traces, and it is believed that no comparable processes can be observed today. Theories that stress continuity often look at animals to see if, for example, primates display any traits that can be seen as analogous to what pre-human language must have been like. And early human fossils can be inspected for traces of physical adaptation to language use or pre-linguistic forms of symbolic behaviour. Among the signs in human fossils that may suggest linguistic abilities are: the size of the brain relative to body mass, the presence of a larynx capable of advanced sound production and the nature of tools and other manufactured artifacts.\n\nIt was mostly undisputed that pre-human australopithecines did not have communication systems significantly different from those found in great apes in general. However, a 2017 study on Ardipithecus ramidus challenges this belief. Scholarly opinions vary as to the developments since the appearance of the genus \"Homo\" some 2.5 million years ago. Some scholars assume the development of primitive language-like systems (proto-language) as early as \"Homo habilis\" (2.3 million years ago) while others place the development of primitive symbolic communication only with \"Homo erectus\" (1.8 million years ago) or \"Homo heidelbergensis\" (0.6 million years ago), and the development of language proper with Anatomically Modern \"Homo sapiens\" with the Upper Paleolithic revolution less than 100,000 years ago.\n\nThe study of language, linguistics, has been developing into a science since the first grammatical descriptions of particular languages in India more than 2000 years ago, after the development of the Brahmi script. Modern linguistics is a science that concerns itself with all aspects of language, examining it from all of the theoretical viewpoints described above.\n\nThe academic study of language is conducted within many different disciplinary areas and from different theoretical angles, all of which inform modern approaches to linguistics. For example, descriptive linguistics examines the grammar of single languages, theoretical linguistics develops theories on how best to conceptualize and define the nature of language based on data from the various extant human languages, sociolinguistics studies how languages are used for social purposes informing in turn the study of the social functions of language and grammatical description, neurolinguistics studies how language is processed in the human brain and allows the experimental testing of theories, computational linguistics builds on theoretical and descriptive linguistics to construct computational models of language often aimed at processing natural language or at testing linguistic hypotheses, and historical linguistics relies on grammatical and lexical descriptions of languages to trace their individual histories and reconstruct trees of language families by using the comparative method.\n\nThe formal study of language is often considered to have started in India with Pāṇini, the 5th century BC grammarian who formulated 3,959 rules of Sanskrit morphology. However, Sumerian scribes already studied the differences between Sumerian and Akkadian grammar around 1900 BC. Subsequent grammatical traditions developed in all of the ancient cultures that adopted writing.\n\nIn the 17th century AD, the French Port-Royal Grammarians developed the idea that the grammars of all languages were a reflection of the universal basics of thought, and therefore that grammar was universal. In the 18th century, the first use of the comparative method by British philologist and expert on ancient India William Jones sparked the rise of comparative linguistics. The scientific study of language was broadened from Indo-European to language in general by Wilhelm von Humboldt. Early in the 20th century, Ferdinand de Saussure introduced the idea of language as a static system of interconnected units, defined through the oppositions between them.\n\nBy introducing a distinction between diachronic and synchronic analyses of language, he laid the foundation of the modern discipline of linguistics. Saussure also introduced several basic dimensions of linguistic analysis that are still fundamental in many contemporary linguistic theories, such as the distinctions between syntagm and paradigm, and the Langue-parole distinction, distinguishing language as an abstract system (\"langue\"), from language as a concrete manifestation of this system (\"parole\").\n\nIn the 1960s, Noam Chomsky formulated the generative theory of language. According to this theory, the most basic form of language is a set of syntactic rules that is universal for all humans and which underlies the grammars of all human languages. This set of rules is called Universal Grammar; for Chomsky, describing it is the primary objective of the discipline of linguistics. Thus, he considered that the grammars of individual languages are only of importance to linguistics insofar as they allow us to deduce the universal underlying rules from which the observable linguistic variability is generated.\n\nIn opposition to the formal theories of the generative school, functional theories of language propose that since language is fundamentally a tool, its structures are best analyzed and understood by reference to their functions. Formal theories of grammar seek to define the different elements of language and describe the way they relate to each other as systems of formal rules or operations, while functional theories seek to define the functions performed by language and then relate them to the linguistic elements that carry them out. The framework of cognitive linguistics interprets language in terms of the concepts (which are sometimes universal, and sometimes specific to a particular language) which underlie its forms. Cognitive linguistics is primarily concerned with how the mind creates meaning through language.\n\nSpeaking is the default modality for language in all cultures. The production of spoken language depends on sophisticated capacities for controlling the lips, tongue and other components of the vocal apparatus, the ability to acoustically decode speech sounds, and the neurological apparatus required for acquiring and producing language. The study of the genetic bases for human language is at an early stage: the only gene that has definitely been implicated in language production is FOXP2, which may cause a kind of congenital language disorder if affected by mutations.\n\n The brain is the coordinating center of all linguistic activity; it controls both the production of linguistic cognition and of meaning and the mechanics of speech production. Nonetheless, our knowledge of the neurological bases for language is quite limited, though it has advanced considerably with the use of modern imaging techniques. The discipline of linguistics dedicated to studying the neurological aspects of language is called neurolinguistics.\n\nEarly work in neurolinguistics involved the study of language in people with brain lesions, to see how lesions in specific areas affect language and speech. In this way, neuroscientists in the 19th century discovered that two areas in the brain are crucially implicated in language processing. The first area is Wernicke's area, which is in the posterior section of the superior temporal gyrus in the dominant cerebral hemisphere. People with a lesion in this area of the brain develop receptive aphasia, a condition in which there is a major impairment of language comprehension, while speech retains a natural-sounding rhythm and a relatively normal sentence structure. The second area is Broca's area, in the posterior inferior frontal gyrus of the dominant hemisphere. People with a lesion to this area develop expressive aphasia, meaning that they know what they want to say, they just cannot get it out. They are typically able to understand what is being said to them, but unable to speak fluently. Other symptoms that may be present in expressive aphasia include problems with fluency, articulation, word-finding, word repetition, and producing and comprehending complex grammatical sentences, both orally and in writing. Those with this aphasia also exhibit ungrammatical speech and show inability to use syntactic information to determine the meaning of sentences. Both expressive and receptive aphasia also affect the use of sign language, in analogous ways to how they affect speech, with expressive aphasia causing signers to sign slowly and with incorrect grammar, whereas a signer with receptive aphasia will sign fluently, but make little sense to others and have difficulties comprehending others' signs. This shows that the impairment is specific to the ability to use language, not to the physiology used for speech production.\n\nWith technological advances in the late 20th century, neurolinguists have also incorporated non-invasive techniques such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and electrophysiology to study language processing in individuals without impairments.\n\nSpoken language relies on human physical ability to produce sound, which is a longitudinal wave propagated through the air at a frequency capable of vibrating the ear drum. This ability depends on the physiology of the human speech organs. These organs consist of the lungs, the voice box (larynx), and the upper vocal tract – the throat, the mouth, and the nose. By controlling the different parts of the speech apparatus, the airstream can be manipulated to produce different speech sounds.\n\nThe sound of speech can be analyzed into a combination of segmental and suprasegmental elements. The segmental elements are those that follow each other in sequences, which are usually represented by distinct letters in alphabetic scripts, such as the Roman script. In free flowing speech, there are no clear boundaries between one segment and the next, nor usually are there any audible pauses between words. Segments therefore are distinguished by their distinct sounds which are a result of their different articulations, and they can be either vowels or consonants. Suprasegmental phenomena encompass such elements as stress, phonation type, voice timbre, and prosody or intonation, all of which may have effects across multiple segments.\n\nConsonants and vowel segments combine to form syllables, which in turn combine to form utterances; these can be distinguished phonetically as the space between two inhalations. Acoustically, these different segments are characterized by different formant structures, that are visible in a spectrogram of the recorded sound wave (See illustration of Spectrogram of the formant structures of three English vowels). Formants are the amplitude peaks in the frequency spectrum of a specific sound.\n\nVowels are those sounds that have no audible friction caused by the narrowing or obstruction of some part of the upper vocal tract. They vary in quality according to the degree of lip aperture and the placement of the tongue within the oral cavity. Vowels are called \"close\" when the lips are relatively closed, as in the pronunciation of the vowel (English \"ee\"), or \"open\" when the lips are relatively open, as in the vowel (English \"ah\"). If the tongue is located towards the back of the mouth, the quality changes, creating vowels such as (English \"oo\"). The quality also changes depending on whether the lips are rounded as opposed to unrounded, creating distinctions such as that between (unrounded front vowel such as English \"ee\") and (rounded front vowel such as German \"ü\").\n\nConsonants are those sounds that have audible friction or closure at some point within the upper vocal tract. Consonant sounds vary by place of articulation, i.e. the place in the vocal tract where the airflow is obstructed, commonly at the lips, teeth, alveolar ridge, palate, velum, uvula, or glottis. Each place of articulation produces a different set of consonant sounds, which are further distinguished by manner of articulation, or the kind of friction, whether full closure, in which case the consonant is called \"occlusive\" or \"stop\", or different degrees of aperture creating \"fricatives\" and \"approximants\". Consonants can also be either \"voiced or unvoiced\", depending on whether the vocal cords are set in vibration by airflow during the production of the sound. Voicing is what separates English in \"bus\" (unvoiced sibilant) from in \"buzz\" (voiced sibilant).\n\nSome speech sounds, both vowels and consonants, involve release of air flow through the nasal cavity, and these are called \"nasals\" or \"nasalized\" sounds. Other sounds are defined by the way the tongue moves within the mouth: such as the l-sounds (called \"laterals\", because the air flows along both sides of the tongue), and the r-sounds (called \"rhotics\") that are characterized by how the tongue is positioned relative to the air stream.\n\nBy using these speech organs, humans can produce hundreds of distinct sounds: some appear very often in the world's languages, whereas others are much more common in certain language families, language areas, or even specific to a single language.\n\nWhen described as a system of symbolic communication, language is traditionally seen as consisting of three parts: signs, meanings, and a code connecting signs with their meanings. The study of the process of semiosis, how signs and meanings are combined, used, and interpreted is called semiotics. Signs can be composed of sounds, gestures, letters, or symbols, depending on whether the language is spoken, signed, or written, and they can be combined into complex signs, such as words and phrases. When used in communication, a sign is encoded and transmitted by a sender through a channel to a receiver who decodes it.\nSome of the properties that define human language as opposed to other communication systems are: the arbitrariness of the linguistic sign, meaning that there is no predictable connection between a linguistic sign and its meaning; the duality of the linguistic system, meaning that linguistic structures are built by combining elements into larger structures that can be seen as layered, e.g. how sounds build words and words build phrases; the discreteness of the elements of language, meaning that the elements out of which linguistic signs are constructed are discrete units, e.g. sounds and words, that can be distinguished from each other and rearranged in different patterns; and the productivity of the linguistic system, meaning that the finite number of linguistic elements can be combined into a theoretically infinite number of combinations.\n\nThe rules by which signs can be combined to form words and phrases are called syntax or grammar. The meaning that is connected to individual signs, morphemes, words, phrases, and texts is called semantics. The division of language into separate but connected systems of sign and meaning goes back to the first linguistic studies of de Saussure and is now used in almost all branches of linguistics.\n\nLanguages express meaning by relating a sign form to a meaning, or its content. Sign forms must be something that can be perceived, for example, in sounds, images, or gestures, and then related to a specific meaning by social convention. Because the basic relation of meaning for most linguistic signs is based on social convention, linguistic signs can be considered arbitrary, in the sense that the convention is established socially and historically, rather than by means of a natural relation between a specific sign form and its meaning.\n\nThus, languages must have a vocabulary of signs related to specific meaning. The English sign \"dog\" denotes, for example, a member of the species \"Canis familiaris\". In a language, the array of arbitrary signs connected to specific meanings is called the lexicon, and a single sign connected to a meaning is called a lexeme. Not all meanings in a language are represented by single words. Often, semantic concepts are embedded in the morphology or syntax of the language in the form of grammatical categories.\n\nAll languages contain the semantic structure of predication: a structure that predicates a property, state, or action. Traditionally, semantics has been understood to be the study of how speakers and interpreters assign truth values to statements, so that meaning is understood to be the process by which a predicate can be said to be true or false about an entity, e.g. \"<nowiki>[x [is y]]\" or \"[x [does y]]</nowiki>\". Recently, this model of semantics has been complemented with more dynamic models of meaning that incorporate shared knowledge about the context in which a sign is interpreted into the production of meaning. Such models of meaning are explored in the field of pragmatics.\n\nDepending on modality, language structure can be based on systems of sounds (speech), gestures (sign languages), or graphic or tactile symbols (writing). The ways in which languages use sounds or signs to construct meaning are studied in phonology. The study of how humans produce and perceive vocal sounds is called phonetics. In spoken language, meaning is produced when sounds become part of a system in which some sounds can contribute to expressing meaning and others do not. In any given language, only a limited number of the many distinct sounds that can be created by the human vocal apparatus contribute to constructing meaning.\n\nSounds as part of a linguistic system are called phonemes. Phonemes are abstract units of sound, defined as the smallest units in a language that can serve to distinguish between the meaning of a pair of minimally different words, a so-called minimal pair. In English, for example, the words \"bat\" and \"pat\" form a minimal pair, in which the distinction between and differentiates the two words, which have different meanings. However, each language contrasts sounds in different ways. For example, in a language that does not distinguish between voiced and unvoiced consonants, the sounds and (if they both occur) could be considered a single phoneme, and consequently, the two pronunciations would have the same meaning. Similarly, the English language does not distinguish phonemically between aspirated and non-aspirated pronunciations of consonants, as many other languages like Korean and Hindi do: the unaspirated in \"spin\" and the aspirated in \"pin\" are considered to be merely different ways of pronouncing the same phoneme (such variants of a single phoneme are called allophones), whereas in Mandarin Chinese, the same difference in pronunciation distinguishes between the words 'crouch' and 'eight' (the accent above the á means that the vowel is pronounced with a high tone).\n\nAll spoken languages have phonemes of at least two different categories, vowels and consonants, that can be combined to form syllables. As well as segments such as consonants and vowels, some languages also use sound in other ways to convey meaning. Many languages, for example, use stress, pitch, duration, and tone to distinguish meaning. Because these phenomena operate outside of the level of single segments, they are called suprasegmental. Some languages have only a few phonemes, for example, Rotokas and Pirahã language with 11 and 10 phonemes respectively, whereas languages like Taa may have as many as 141 phonemes. In sign languages, the equivalent to phonemes (formerly called cheremes) are defined by the basic elements of gestures, such as hand shape, orientation, location, and motion, which correspond to manners of articulation in spoken language.\n\nWriting systems represent language using visual symbols, which may or may not correspond to the sounds of spoken language. The Latin alphabet (and those on which it is based or that have been derived from it) was originally based on the representation of single sounds, so that words were constructed from letters that generally denote a single consonant or vowel in the structure of the word. In syllabic scripts, such as the Inuktitut syllabary, each sign represents a whole syllable. In logographic scripts, each sign represents an entire word, and will generally bear no relation to the sound of that word in spoken language.\n\nBecause all languages have a very large number of words, no purely logographic scripts are known to exist. Written language represents the way spoken sounds and words follow one after another by arranging symbols according to a pattern that follows a certain direction. The direction used in a writing system is entirely arbitrary and established by convention. Some writing systems use the horizontal axis (left to right as the Latin script or right to left as the Arabic script), while others such as traditional Chinese writing use the vertical dimension (from top to bottom). A few writing systems use opposite directions for alternating lines, and others, such as the ancient Maya script, can be written in either direction and rely on graphic cues to show the reader the direction of reading.\n\nIn order to represent the sounds of the world's languages in writing, linguists have developed the International Phonetic Alphabet, designed to represent all of the discrete sounds that are known to contribute to meaning in human languages.\n\nGrammar is the study of how meaningful elements called \"morphemes\" within a language can be combined into utterances. Morphemes can either be \"free\" or \"bound\". If they are free to be moved around within an utterance, they are usually called \"words\", and if they are bound to other words or morphemes, they are called affixes. The way in which meaningful elements can be combined within a language is governed by rules. The rules for the internal structure of words are called morphology. The rules of the internal structure of phrases and sentences are called \"syntax\".\n\nGrammar can be described as a system of categories and a set of rules that determine how categories combine to form different aspects of meaning. Languages differ widely in whether they are encoded through the use of categories or lexical units. However, several categories are so common as to be nearly universal. Such universal categories include the encoding of the grammatical relations of participants and predicates by grammatically distinguishing between their relations to a predicate, the encoding of temporal and spatial relations on predicates, and a system of grammatical person governing reference to and distinction between speakers and addressees and those about whom they are speaking.\n\nLanguages organize their parts of speech into classes according to their functions and positions relative to other parts. All languages, for instance, make a basic distinction between a group of words that prototypically denotes things and concepts and a group of words that prototypically denotes actions and events. The first group, which includes English words such as \"dog\" and \"song\", are usually called nouns. The second, which includes \"run\" and \"sing\", are called verbs. Another common category is the adjective: words that describe properties or qualities of nouns, such as \"red\" or \"big\". Word classes can be \"open\" if new words can continuously be added to the class, or relatively \"closed\" if there is a fixed number of words in a class. In English, the class of pronouns is closed, whereas the class of adjectives is open, since an infinite number of adjectives can be constructed from verbs (e.g. \"saddened\") or nouns (e.g. with the -like suffix, as in \"noun-like\"). In other languages such as Korean, the situation is the opposite, and new pronouns can be constructed, whereas the number of adjectives is fixed.\n\nWord classes also carry out differing functions in grammar. Prototypically, verbs are used to construct predicates, while nouns are used as arguments of predicates. In a sentence such as \"Sally runs\", the predicate is \"runs\", because it is the word that predicates a specific state about its argument \"Sally\". Some verbs such as \"curse\" can take two arguments, e.g. \"Sally cursed John\". A predicate that can only take a single argument is called \"intransitive\", while a predicate that can take two arguments is called \"transitive\".\n\nMany other word classes exist in different languages, such as conjunctions like \"and\" that serve to join two sentences, articles that introduce a noun, interjections such as \"wow!\", or ideophones like \"splash\" that mimic the sound of some event. Some languages have positionals that describe the spatial position of an event or entity. Many languages have classifiers that identify countable nouns as belonging to a particular type or having a particular shape. For instance, in Japanese, the general noun classifier for humans is \"nin\" (人), and it is used for counting humans, whatever they are called:\n\nFor trees, it would be:\n\nIn linguistics, the study of the internal structure of complex words and the processes by which words are formed is called morphology. In most languages, it is possible to construct complex words that are built of several morphemes. For instance, the English word \"unexpected\" can be analyzed as being composed of the three morphemes \"un-\", \"expect\" and \"-ed\".\n\nMorphemes can be classified according to whether they are independent morphemes, so-called roots, or whether they can only co-occur attached to other morphemes. These bound morphemes or affixes can be classified according to their position in relation to the root: \"prefixes\" precede the root, suffixes follow the root, and infixes are inserted in the middle of a root. Affixes serve to modify or elaborate the meaning of the root. Some languages change the meaning of words by changing the phonological structure of a word, for example, the English word \"run\", which in the past tense is \"ran\". This process is called \"ablaut\". Furthermore, morphology distinguishes between the process of inflection, which modifies or elaborates on a word, and the process of derivation, which creates a new word from an existing one. In English, the verb \"sing\" has the inflectional forms \"singing\" and \"sung\", which are both verbs, and the derivational form \"singer\", which is a noun derived from the verb with the agentive suffix \"-er\".\n\nLanguages differ widely in how much they rely on morphological processes of word formation. In some languages, for example, Chinese, there are no morphological processes, and all grammatical information is encoded syntactically by forming strings of single words. This type of morpho-syntax is often called isolating, or analytic, because there is almost a full correspondence between a single word and a single aspect of meaning. Most languages have words consisting of several morphemes, but they vary in the degree to which morphemes are discrete units. In many languages, notably in most Indo-European languages, single morphemes may have several distinct meanings that cannot be analyzed into smaller segments. For example, in Latin, the word \"bonus\", or \"good\", consists of the root \"bon-\", meaning \"good\", and the suffix -\"us\", which indicates masculine gender, singular number, and nominative case. These languages are called \"fusional languages\", because several meanings may be fused into a single morpheme. The opposite of fusional languages are agglutinative languages which construct words by stringing morphemes together in chains, but with each morpheme as a discrete semantic unit. An example of such a language is Turkish, where for example, the word \"evlerinizden\", or \"from your houses\", consists of the morphemes, \"ev-ler-iniz-den\" with the meanings \"house-plural-your-from\". The languages that rely on morphology to the greatest extent are traditionally called polysynthetic languages. They may express the equivalent of an entire English sentence in a single word. For example, in Persian the single word \"nafahmidamesh\" means \"I didn't understand it\" consisting of morphemes \"na-fahm-id-am-esh\" with the meanings, \"negation.understand.past.I.it\". As another example with more complexity, in the Yupik word \"tuntussuqatarniksatengqiggtuq\", which means \"He had not yet said again that he was going to hunt reindeer\", the word consists of the morphemes \"tuntu-ssur-qatar-ni-ksaite-ngqiggte-uq\" with the meanings, \"reindeer-hunt-future-say-negation-again-third.person.singular.indicative\", and except for the morpheme \"tuntu\" (\"reindeer\") none of the other morphemes can appear in isolation.\n\nMany languages use morphology to cross-reference words within a sentence. This is sometimes called \"agreement\". For example, in many Indo-European languages, adjectives must cross-reference the noun they modify in terms of number, case, and gender, so that the Latin adjective \"bonus\", or \"good\", is inflected to agree with a noun that is masculine gender, singular number, and nominative case. In many polysynthetic languages, verbs cross-reference their subjects and objects. In these types of languages, a single verb may include information that would require an entire sentence in English. For example, in the Basque phrase \"ikusi nauzu\", or \"you saw me\", the past tense auxiliary verb \"n-au-zu\" (similar to English \"do\") agrees with both the subject (you) expressed by the \"n\"- prefix, and with the object (me) expressed by the – \"zu\" suffix. The sentence could be directly transliterated as \"see you-did-me\"\n\nAnother way in which languages convey meaning is through the order of words within a sentence. The grammatical rules for how to produce new sentences from words that are already known is called syntax. The syntactical rules of a language determine why a sentence in English such as \"I love you\" is meaningful, but \"*love you I\" is not. Syntactical rules determine how word order and sentence structure is constrained, and how those constraints contribute to meaning. For example, in English, the two sentences \"the slaves were cursing the master\" and \"the master was cursing the slaves\" mean different things, because the role of the grammatical subject is encoded by the noun being in front of the verb, and the role of object is encoded by the noun appearing after the verb. Conversely, in Latin, both \"Dominus servos vituperabat\" and \"Servos vituperabat dominus\" mean \"the master was reprimanding the slaves\", because \"servos\", or \"slaves\", is in the accusative case, showing that they are the grammatical object of the sentence, and \"dominus\", or \"master\", is in the nominative case, showing that he is the subject.\n\nLatin uses morphology to express the distinction between subject and object, whereas English uses word order. Another example of how syntactic rules contribute to meaning is the rule of inverse word order in questions, which exists in many languages. This rule explains why when in English, the phrase \"John is talking to Lucy\" is turned into a question, it becomes \"Who is John talking to?\", and not \"John is talking to who?\". The latter example may be used as a way of placing special emphasis on \"who\", thereby slightly altering the meaning of the question. Syntax also includes the rules for how complex sentences are structured by grouping words together in units, called phrases, that can occupy different places in a larger syntactic structure. Sentences can be described as consisting of phrases connected in a tree structure, connecting the phrases to each other at different levels. To the right is a graphic representation of the syntactic analysis of the English sentence \"the cat sat on the mat\". The sentence is analyzed as being constituted by a noun phrase, a verb, and a prepositional phrase; the prepositional phrase is further divided into a preposition and a noun phrase, and the noun phrases consist of an article and a noun.\n\nThe reason sentences can be seen as being composed of phrases is because each phrase would be moved around as a single element if syntactic operations were carried out. For example, \"the cat\" is one phrase, and \"on the mat\" is another, because they would be treated as single units if a decision was made to emphasize the location by moving forward the prepositional phrase: \"[And] on the mat, the cat sat\". There are many different formalist and functionalist frameworks that propose theories for describing syntactic structures, based on different assumptions about what language is and how it should be described. Each of them would analyze a sentence such as this in a different manner.\n\nLanguages can be classified in relation to their grammatical types. Languages that belong to different families nonetheless often have features in common, and these shared features tend to correlate. For example, languages can be classified on the basis of their basic word order, the relative order of the verb, and its constituents in a normal indicative sentence. In English, the basic order is SVO: \"The snake(S) bit(V) the man(O)\", whereas for example, the corresponding sentence in the Australian language Gamilaraay would be \"d̪uyugu n̪ama d̪ayn yiːy\" (snake man bit), SOV. Word order type is relevant as a typological parameter, because basic word order type corresponds with other syntactic parameters, such as the relative order of nouns and adjectives, or of the use of prepositions or postpositions. Such correlations are called implicational universals. For example, most (but not all) languages that are of the SOV type have postpositions rather than prepositions, and have adjectives before nouns.\n\nAll languages structure sentences into Subject, Verb, and Object, but languages differ in the way they classify the relations between actors and actions. English uses the nominative-accusative word typology: in English transitive clauses, the subjects of both intransitive sentences (\"I run\") and transitive sentences (\"I love you\") are treated in the same way, shown here by the nominative pronoun \"I\". Some languages, called ergative, Gamilaraay among them, distinguish instead between Agents and Patients. In ergative languages, the single participant in an intransitive sentence, such as \"I run\", is treated the same as the patient in a transitive sentence, giving the equivalent of \"me run\". Only in transitive sentences would the equivalent of the pronoun \"I\" be used. In this way the semantic roles can map onto the grammatical relations in different ways, grouping an intransitive subject either with Agents (accusative type) or Patients (ergative type) or even making each of the three roles differently, which is called the tripartite type.\n\nThe shared features of languages which belong to the same typological class type may have arisen completely independently. Their co-occurrence might be due to universal laws governing the structure of natural languages, \"language universals\", or they might be the result of languages evolving convergent solutions to the recurring communicative problems that humans use language to solve.\n\nWhile humans have the ability to learn any language, they only do so if they grow up in an environment in which language exists and is used by others. Language is therefore dependent on communities of speakers in which children learn language from their elders and peers and themselves transmit language to their own children. Languages are used by those who speak them to communicate and to solve a plethora of social tasks. Many aspects of language use can be seen to be adapted specifically to these purposes. Due to the way in which language is transmitted between generations and within communities, language perpetually changes, diversifying into new languages or converging due to language contact. The process is similar to the process of evolution, where the process of descent with modification leads to the formation of a phylogenetic tree.\n\nHowever, languages differ from biological organisms in that they readily incorporate elements from other languages through the process of diffusion, as speakers of different languages come into contact. Humans also frequently speak more than one language, acquiring their first language or languages as children, or learning new languages as they grow up. Because of the increased language contact in the globalizing world, many small languages are becoming endangered as their speakers shift to other languages that afford the possibility to participate in larger and more influential speech communities.\n\nThe semantic study of meaning assumes that meaning is in a relation between signs and meanings that are firmly established through social convention. However, semantics does not study the way in which social conventions are made and affect language. Rather, when studying the way in which words and signs are used, it is often the case that words have different meanings, depending on the social context of use. An important example of this is the process called deixis, which describes the way in which certain words refer to entities through their relation between a specific point in time and space when the word is uttered. Such words are, for example, the word, \"I\" (which designates the person speaking), \"now\" (which designates the moment of speaking), and \"here\" (which designates the position of speaking). Signs also change their meanings over time, as the conventions governing their usage gradually change. The study of how the meaning of linguistic expressions changes depending on context is called pragmatics. Deixis is an important part of the way that we use language to point out entities in the world. Pragmatics is concerned with the ways in which language use is patterned and how these patterns contribute to meaning. For example, in all languages, linguistic expressions can be used not just to transmit information, but to perform actions. Certain actions are made only through language, but nonetheless have tangible effects, e.g. the act of \"naming\", which creates a new name for some entity, or the act of \"pronouncing someone man and wife\", which creates a social contract of marriage. These types of acts are called speech acts, although they can also be carried out through writing or hand signing.\n\nThe form of linguistic expression often does not correspond to the meaning that it actually has in a social context. For example, if at a dinner table a person asks, \"Can you reach the salt?\", that is, in fact, not a question about the length of the arms of the one being addressed, but a request to pass the salt across the table. This meaning is implied by the context in which it is spoken; these kinds of effects of meaning are called conversational implicatures. These social rules for which ways of using language are considered appropriate in certain situations and how utterances are to be understood in relation to their context vary between communities, and learning them is a large part of acquiring communicative competence in a language.\n\nAll healthy, normally developing human beings learn to use language. Children acquire the language or languages used around them: whichever languages they receive sufficient exposure to during childhood. The development is essentially the same for children acquiring sign or oral languages. This learning process is referred to as first-language acquisition, since unlike many other kinds of learning, it requires no direct teaching or specialized study. In \"The Descent of Man\", naturalist Charles Darwin called this process \"an instinctive tendency to acquire an art\".\nFirst language acquisition proceeds in a fairly regular sequence, though there is a wide degree of variation in the timing of particular stages among normally developing infants. From birth, newborns respond more readily to human speech than to other sounds. Around one month of age, babies appear to be able to distinguish between different speech sounds. Around six months of age, a child will begin babbling, producing the speech sounds or handshapes of the languages used around them. Words appear around the age of 12 to 18 months; the average vocabulary of an eighteen-month-old child is around 50 words. A child's first utterances are holophrases (literally \"whole-sentences\"), utterances that use just one word to communicate some idea. Several months after a child begins producing words, he or she will produce two-word utterances, and within a few more months will begin to produce telegraphic speech, or short sentences that are less grammatically complex than adult speech, but that do show regular syntactic structure. From roughly the age of three to five years, a child's ability to speak or sign is refined to the point that it resembles adult language. Studies published in 2013 have indicated that unborn fetuses are capable of language acquisition to some degree.\n\nAcquisition of second and additional languages can come at any age, through exposure in daily life or courses. Children learning a second language are more likely to achieve native-like fluency than adults, but in general, it is very rare for someone speaking a second language to pass completely for a native speaker. An important difference between first language acquisition and additional language acquisition is that the process of additional language acquisition is influenced by languages that the learner already knows.\n\nLanguages, understood as the particular set of speech norms of a particular community, are also a part of the larger culture of the community that speaks them. Languages differ not only in pronunciation, vocabulary, and grammar, but also through having different \"cultures of speaking.\" Humans use language as a way of signalling identity with one cultural group as well as difference from others. Even among speakers of one language, several different ways of using the language exist, and each is used to signal affiliation with particular subgroups within a larger culture. Linguists and anthropologists, particularly sociolinguists, ethnolinguists, and linguistic anthropologists have specialized in studying how ways of speaking vary between speech communities.\n\nLinguists use the term \"varieties\" to refer to the different ways of speaking a language. This term includes geographically or socioculturally defined dialects as well as the jargons or styles of subcultures. Linguistic anthropologists and sociologists of language define communicative style as the ways that language is used and understood within a particular culture.\n\nBecause norms for language use are shared by members of a specific group, communicative style also becomes a way of displaying and constructing group identity. Linguistic differences may become salient markers of divisions between social groups, for example, speaking a language with a particular accent may imply membership of an ethnic minority or social class, one's area of origin, or status as a second language speaker. These kinds of differences are not part of the linguistic system, but are an important part of how people use language as a social tool for constructing groups.\n\nHowever, many languages also have grammatical conventions that signal the social position of the speaker in relation to others through the use of registers that are related to social hierarchies or divisions. In many languages, there are stylistic or even grammatical differences between the ways men and women speak, between age groups, or between social classes, just as some languages employ different words depending on who is listening. For example, in the Australian language Dyirbal, a married man must use a special set of words to refer to everyday items when speaking in the presence of his mother-in-law. Some cultures, for example, have elaborate systems of \"social deixis\", or systems of signalling social distance through linguistic means. In English, social deixis is shown mostly through distinguishing between addressing some people by first name and others by surname, and in titles such as \"Mrs.\", \"boy\", \"Doctor\", or \"Your Honor\", but in other languages, such systems may be highly complex and codified in the entire grammar and vocabulary of the language. For instance, in languages of east Asia such as Thai, Burmese, and Javanese, different words are used according to whether a speaker is addressing someone of higher or lower rank than oneself in a ranking system with animals and children ranking the lowest and gods and members of royalty as the highest.\n\nThroughout history a number of different ways of representing language in graphic media have been invented. These are called writing systems.\n\nThe use of writing has made language even more useful to humans. It makes it possible to store large amounts of information outside of the human body and retrieve it again, and it allows communication across distances that would otherwise be impossible. Many languages conventionally employ different genres, styles, and registers in written and spoken language, and in some communities, writing traditionally takes place in an entirely different language than the one spoken. There is some evidence that the use of writing also has effects on the cognitive development of humans, perhaps because acquiring literacy generally requires explicit and formal education.\n\nThe invention of the first writing systems is roughly contemporary with the beginning of the Bronze Age in the late 4th millennium BC. The Sumerian archaic cuneiform script and the Egyptian hieroglyphs are generally considered to be the earliest writing systems, both emerging out of their ancestral proto-literate symbol systems from 3400–3200 BC with the earliest coherent texts from about 2600 BC. It is generally agreed that Sumerian writing was an independent invention; however, it is debated whether Egyptian writing was developed completely independently of Sumerian, or was a case of cultural diffusion. A similar debate exists for the Chinese script, which developed around 1200 BC. The pre-Columbian Mesoamerican writing systems (including among others Olmec and Maya scripts) are generally believed to have had independent origins.\n\nAll languages change as speakers adopt or invent new ways of speaking and pass them on to other members of their speech community. Language change happens at all levels from the phonological level to the levels of vocabulary, morphology, syntax, and discourse. Even though language change is often initially evaluated negatively by speakers of the language who often consider changes to be \"decay\" or a sign of slipping norms of language usage, it is natural and inevitable.\n\nChanges may affect specific sounds or the entire phonological system. Sound change can consist of the replacement of one speech sound or phonetic feature by another, the complete loss of the affected sound, or even the introduction of a new sound in a place where there had been none. Sound changes can be \"conditioned\" in which case a sound is changed only if it occurs in the vicinity of certain other sounds. Sound change is usually assumed to be \"regular\", which means that it is expected to apply mechanically whenever its structural conditions are met, irrespective of any non-phonological factors. On the other hand, sound changes can sometimes be \"sporadic\", affecting only one particular word or a few words, without any seeming regularity. Sometimes a simple change triggers a chain shift in which the entire phonological system is affected. This happened in the Germanic languages when the sound change known as Grimm's law affected all the stop consonants in the system. The original consonant * became /b/ in the Germanic languages, the previous * in turn became /p/, and the previous * became /f/. The same process applied to all stop consonants and explains why Italic languages such as Latin have \"p\" in words like pater\" and pisces\", whereas Germanic languages, like English, have father\" and fish\".\n\nAnother example is the Great Vowel Shift in English, which is the reason that the spelling of English vowels do not correspond well to their current pronunciation. This is because the vowel shift brought the already established orthography out of synchronization with pronunciation. Another source of sound change is the erosion of words as pronunciation gradually becomes increasingly indistinct and shortens words, leaving out syllables or sounds. This kind of change caused Latin \"mea domina\" to eventually become the French \"madame\" and American English \"ma'am\".\n\nChange also happens in the grammar of languages as discourse patterns such as idioms or particular constructions become grammaticalized. This frequently happens when words or morphemes erode and the grammatical system is unconsciously rearranged to compensate for the lost element. For example, in some varieties of Caribbean Spanish the final /s/ has eroded away. Since Standard Spanish uses final /s/ in the morpheme marking the second person subject \"you\" in verbs, the Caribbean varieties now have to express the second person using the pronoun \"tú\". This means that the sentence \"what's your name\" is \"¿como te llamas?\" in Standard Spanish, but in Caribbean Spanish. The simple sound change has affected both morphology and syntax. Another common cause of grammatical change is the gradual petrification of idioms into new grammatical forms, for example, the way the English \"going to\" construction lost its aspect of movement and in some varieties of English has almost become a full-fledged future tense (e.g. \"I'm gonna\").\n\nLanguage change may be motivated by \"language internal\" factors, such as changes in pronunciation motivated by certain sounds being difficult to distinguish aurally or to produce, or through patterns of change that cause some rare types of constructions to drift towards more common types. Other causes of language change are social, such as when certain pronunciations become emblematic of membership in certain groups, such as social classes, or with ideologies, and therefore are adopted by those who wish to identify with those groups or ideas. In this way, issues of identity and politics can have profound effects on language structure.\n\nOne important source of language change is contact and resulting diffusion of linguistic traits between languages. Language contact occurs when speakers of two or more languages or varieties interact on a regular basis. Multilingualism is likely to have been the norm throughout human history and most people in the modern world are multilingual. Before the rise of the concept of the ethno-national state, monolingualism was characteristic mainly of populations inhabiting small islands. But with the ideology that made one people, one state, and one language the most desirable political arrangement, monolingualism started to spread throughout the world. Nonetheless, there are only 250 countries in the world corresponding to some 6000 languages, which means that most countries are multilingual and most languages therefore exist in close contact with other languages.\n\nWhen speakers of different languages interact closely, it is typical for their languages to influence each other. Through sustained language contact over long periods, linguistic traits diffuse between languages, and languages belonging to different families may converge to become more similar. In areas where many languages are in close contact, this may lead to the formation of language areas in which unrelated languages share a number of linguistic features. A number of such language areas have been documented, among them, the Balkan language area, the Mesoamerican language area, and the Ethiopian language area. Also, larger areas such as South Asia, Europe, and Southeast Asia have sometimes been considered language areas, because of widespread diffusion of specific areal features.\n\nLanguage contact may also lead to a variety of other linguistic phenomena, including language convergence, borrowing, and relexification (replacement of much of the native vocabulary with that of another language). In situations of extreme and sustained language contact, it may lead to the formation of new mixed languages that cannot be considered to belong to a single language family. One type of mixed language called pidgins occurs when adult speakers of two different languages interact on a regular basis, but in a situation where neither group learns to speak the language of the other group fluently. In such a case, they will often construct a communication form that has traits of both languages, but which has a simplified grammatical and phonological structure. The language comes to contain mostly the grammatical and phonological categories that exist in both languages. Pidgin languages are defined by not having any native speakers, but only being spoken by people who have another language as their first language. But if a Pidgin language becomes the main language of a speech community, then eventually children will grow up learning the pidgin as their first language. As the generation of child learners grow up, the pidgin will often be seen to change its structure and acquire a greater degree of complexity. This type of language is generally called a creole language. An example of such mixed languages is Tok Pisin, the official language of Papua New-Guinea, which originally arose as a Pidgin based on English and Austronesian languages; others are Kreyòl ayisyen, the French-based creole language spoken in Haiti, and Michif, a mixed language of Canada, based on the Native American language Cree and French.\n\n! Language !! Native speakers(millions)\nMandarin848\nSpanish329 \nEnglish328\nPortuguese250\nArabic221\nHindi 182\nBengali181\nRussian144\nJapanese122\nJavanese84.3\n\"SIL Ethnologue\" defines a \"living language\" as \"one that has at least one speaker for whom it is their first language\". The exact number of known living languages varies from 6,000 to 7,000, depending on the precision of one's definition of \"language\", and in particular, on how one defines the distinction between languages and dialects. As of 2016, \"Ethnologue\" cataloged 7,097 living human languages. The \"Ethnologue\" establishes linguistic groups based on studies of mutual intelligibility, and therefore often includes more categories than more conservative classifications. For example, the Danish language that most scholars consider a single language with several dialects is classified as two distinct languages (Danish and Jutish) by the \"Ethnologue\".\n\nAccording to the \"Ethnologue\", 389 languages (nearly 6%) have more than a million speakers. These languages together account for 94% of the world's population, whereas 94% of the world's languages account for the remaining 6% of the global population. To the right is a table of the world's 10 most spoken languages with population estimates from the \"Ethnologue\" (2009 figures).\n\nThere is no clear distinction between a language and a dialect, notwithstanding a famous aphorism attributed to linguist Max Weinreich that \"a language is a dialect with an army and navy\". For example, national boundaries frequently override linguistic difference in determining whether two linguistic varieties are languages or dialects. Hakka, Cantonese and Mandarin are, for example, often classified as \"dialects\" of Chinese, even though they are more different from each other than Swedish is from Norwegian. Before the Yugoslav civil war, Serbo-Croatian was generally considered a single language with two normative variants, but due to sociopolitical reasons, Croatian and Serbian are now often treated as separate languages and employ different writing systems. In other words, the distinction may hinge on political considerations as much as on cultural differences, distinctive writing systems, or degree of mutual intelligibility.\n\nThe world's languages can be grouped into language families consisting of languages that can be shown to have common ancestry. Linguists recognize many hundreds of language families, although some of them can possibly be grouped into larger units as more evidence becomes available and in-depth studies are carried out. At present, there are also dozens of language isolates: languages that cannot be shown to be related to any other languages in the world. Among them are Basque, spoken in Europe, Zuni of New Mexico, Purépecha of Mexico, Ainu of Japan, Burushaski of Pakistan, and many others.\n\nThe language family of the world that has the most speakers is the Indo-European languages, spoken by 46% of the world's population. This family includes major world languages like English, Spanish, French, German, Russian, and Hindustani (Hindi/Urdu). The Indo-European family achieved prevalence first during the Eurasian Migration Period (c. 400–800 AD), and subsequently through the European colonial expansion, which brought the Indo-European languages to a politically and often numerically dominant position in the Americas and much of Africa. The Sino-Tibetan languages are spoken by 20% of the world's population and include many of the languages of East Asia, including Hakka, Mandarin Chinese, Cantonese, and hundreds of smaller languages.\n\nAfrica is home to a large number of language families, the largest of which is the Niger-Congo language family, which includes such languages as Swahili, Shona, and Yoruba. Speakers of the Niger-Congo languages account for 6.9% of the world's population. A similar number of people speak the Afroasiatic languages, which include the populous Semitic languages such as Arabic, Hebrew language, and the languages of the Sahara region, such as the Berber languages and Hausa.\n\nThe Austronesian languages are spoken by 5.5% of the world's population and stretch from Madagascar to maritime Southeast Asia all the way to Oceania. It includes such languages as Malagasy, Māori, Samoan, and many of the indigenous languages of Indonesia and Taiwan. The Austronesian languages are considered to have originated in Taiwan around 3000 BC and spread through the Oceanic region through island-hopping, based on an advanced nautical technology. Other populous language families are the Dravidian languages of South Asia (among them Kannada Tamil and Telugu), the Turkic languages of Central Asia (such as Turkish), the Austroasiatic (among them Khmer), and Tai–Kadai languages of Southeast Asia (including Thai).\n\nThe areas of the world in which there is the greatest linguistic diversity, such as the Americas, Papua New Guinea, West Africa, and South-Asia, contain hundreds of small language families. These areas together account for the majority of the world's languages, though not the majority of speakers. In the Americas, some of the largest language families include the Quechumaran, Arawak, and Tupi-Guarani families of South America, the Uto-Aztecan, Oto-Manguean, and Mayan of Mesoamerica, and the Na-Dene, Iroquoian, and Algonquian language families of North America. In Australia, most indigenous languages belong to the Pama-Nyungan family, whereas New Guinea is home to a large number of small families and isolates, as well as a number of Austronesian languages.\n\nLanguage endangerment occurs when a language is at risk of falling out of use as its speakers die out or shift to speaking another language. Language loss occurs when the language has no more native speakers, and becomes a \"dead language\". If eventually no one speaks the language at all, it becomes an \"extinct language\". While languages have always gone extinct throughout human history, they have been disappearing at an accelerated rate in the 20th and 21st centuries due to the processes of globalization and neo-colonialism, where the economically powerful languages dominate other languages.\n\nThe more commonly spoken languages dominate the less commonly spoken languages, so the less commonly spoken languages eventually disappear from populations. The total number of languages in the world is not known. Estimates vary depending on many factors. The consensus is that there are between 6,000 and 7,000 languages spoken as of 2010, and that between 50–90% of those will have become extinct by the year 2100. The top 20 languages, those spoken by more than 50 million speakers each, are spoken by 50% of the world's population, whereas many of the other languages are spoken by small communities, most of them with less than 10,000 speakers.\n\nThe United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) operates with five levels of language endangerment: \"safe\", \"vulnerable\" (not spoken by children outside the home), \"definitely endangered\" (not spoken by children), \"severely endangered\" (only spoken by the oldest generations), and \"critically endangered\" (spoken by few members of the oldest generation, often semi-speakers). Notwithstanding claims that the world would be better off if most adopted a single common \"lingua franca\", such as English or Esperanto, there is a consensus that the loss of languages harms the cultural diversity of the world. It is a common belief, going back to the biblical narrative of the tower of Babel in the Old Testament, that linguistic diversity causes political conflict, but this is contradicted by the fact that many of the world's major episodes of violence have taken place in situations with low linguistic diversity, such as the Yugoslav and American Civil War, or the genocide of Rwanda, whereas many of the most stable political units have been highly multilingual.\n\nMany projects aim to prevent or slow this loss by revitalizing endangered languages and promoting education and literacy in minority languages. Across the world, many countries have enacted specific legislation to protect and stabilize the language of indigenous speech communities. A minority of linguists have argued that language loss is a natural process that should not be counteracted, and that documenting endangered languages for posterity is sufficient.\n\nBULLET::::- Human communication\nBULLET::::- Listening\nBULLET::::- Speaking\nBULLET::::- Reading\nBULLET::::- Writing\nBULLET::::- Attitude\nBULLET::::- Body language (approachable)\nBULLET::::- Humor\nBULLET::::- Social skills\nBULLET::::- International auxiliary language\nBULLET::::- List of language regulators\nBULLET::::- List of official languages\nBULLET::::- Outline of linguistics\nBULLET::::- Problem of religious language\nBULLET::::- Psycholinguistics\nBULLET::::- Speech-language pathology\nBULLET::::- Father Tongue hypothesis\nBULLET::::- \"First Impressions: We start to pick up words, food preferences and hand-eye coordination long before being born\", \"Scientific American\", vol. 313, no. 1 (July 2015), p. 24.\nBULLET::::- (pbk)\nBULLET::::- World Atlas of Language Structures: a large database of structural (phonological, grammatical, lexical) properties of languages\nBULLET::::- Ethnologue: Languages of the World is a comprehensive catalog of all of the world's known living languages\nBULLET::::- Beth Skwarecki, \"Babies Learn to Recognize Words in the Womb\", \"Science\", 26 August 2013\n"}
{"id": "17528", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17528", "title": "Laura Bush", "text": "Laura Bush\n\nLaura Welch Bush (\"née\" Laura Lane Welch; born November 4, 1946) is an American educator who was First Lady of the United States during the presidency of her husband, George W. Bush, from 2001 to 2009. Bush previously served as First Lady of Texas from 1995 to 2000.\n\nBorn in Midland, Texas, Bush graduated from Southern Methodist University in 1968 with a bachelor's degree in education, and took a job as a second grade teacher. After attaining her master's degree in library science at the University of Texas at Austin, she was employed as a librarian.\n\nBush met her future husband, George W. Bush, in 1977, and they were married later that year. The couple had twin daughters in 1981. Bush's political involvement began during her marriage. She campaigned with her husband during his unsuccessful 1978 run for the United States Congress, and later for his successful Texas gubernatorial campaign.\n\nAs First Lady of Texas, Bush implemented many initiatives focused on health, education, and literacy. In 1999–2000, she aided her husband in campaigning for the presidency in a number of ways, such as delivering a keynote address at the 2000 Republican National Convention, which gained her national attention. She became First Lady after her husband was inaugurated as president on January 20, 2001.\n\nPolled by The Gallup Organization as one of the most popular First Ladies, Bush was involved in national and global concerns during her tenure. She continued to advance her trademark interests of education and literacy by establishing the annual National Book Festival in 2001, and encouraged education on a worldwide scale. She also advanced women's causes through The Heart Truth and Susan G. Komen for the Cure organizations. She represented the United States during her foreign trips, which tended to focus on HIV/AIDS and malaria awareness.\n\nLaura Lane Welch was born on November 4, 1946, in Midland, Texas, the only child of Harold Welch and Jenna Louise Hawkins Welch.\n\nBush is of English, French, and Swiss ancestry. Her father was a house builder and later successful real estate developer, while her mother worked as the bookkeeper for her father's business. Early on, her parents encouraged her to read, leading to what would become her love of reading. She said, \"I learned [how important reading is] at home from my mother. When I was a little girl, my mother would read stories to me. I have loved books and going to the library ever since. In the summer, I liked to spend afternoons reading in the library. I enjoyed the \"Little House on the Prairie\" and \"Little Women\" books, and many others ... Reading gives you enjoyment throughout your life.\" Bush has also credited her second grade teacher, Charlene Gnagy, for inspiring her interest in education.\n\nOn the night of November 6, 1963, two days after her 17th birthday, Laura Welch ran a stop sign and struck another car, killing its driver. The victim was her close friend and classmate Michael Dutton Douglas. By some accounts, Douglas had been Welch's boyfriend at one time, but she stated that he was not her boyfriend at that time but rather a very close friend. Bush and her passenger, both 17, were treated for minor injuries. According to the accident report released by the city of Midland in 2000, in response to an open-records request, she was not charged in the incident. Bush's spokesman said, \"It was a very tragic accident that deeply affected the families and was very painful for all involved, including the community at large.\" In her book \"Spoken from the Heart\" she says that the crash caused her to lose her faith \"for many, many years\".\n\nShe attended James Bowie Elementary School, San Jacinto Junior High School, and Robert E. Lee High School in Midland. She graduated from Lee in 1964 and went on to attend Southern Methodist University in Dallas where she was a member of Kappa Alpha Theta. She graduated in 1968 with a Bachelor of Science degree in Education.\n\nAfter graduating from SMU, she began her career as a school teacher at Longfellow Elementary School in the Dallas Independent School District. She then taught for three years at John F. Kennedy Elementary School, a Houston Independent School District school in Houston, until 1972.\n\nIn 1973, Bush attained a Master of Science degree in Library Science from the University of Texas at Austin. She was soon employed as a librarian at the Kashmere Gardens Branch at the Houston Public Library. The following year, she moved back to Austin and took another job as a librarian in the Austin Independent School District school Dawson Elementary until 1977. She reflected on her employment experiences to a group of children in 2003, saying, \"I worked as a teacher and librarian and I learned how important reading is in school and in life.\"\n\nShe met George W. Bush in July 1977 when mutual friends Joe and Jan O'Neill invited her and Bush to a backyard barbecue at their home. He proposed to her at the end of September and they were married on November 5 of that year, the day after her 31st birthday. at the First United Methodist Church in Midland, the same church in which she had been baptized. Laura bought a tan, two-toned dress off the rack for the wedding. The couple honeymooned in Cozumel, Mexico. George W. Bush detailed his choice to marry Laura as the \"best decision of [his] life\". Laura, an only child, said she gained \"brothers and sisters and wonderful in-laws\" who all accepted her after she wed George W. Bush.\n\nThe year after their marriage, the couple began campaigning for George W. Bush's 1978 Congressional candidacy. According to George Bush, when he asked her to marry him, she had said, \"Yes. But only if you promise me that I'll never have to make a campaign speech.\" She soon relented, and gave her first stump speech for him in 1978 on the courthouse steps in Muleshoe, Texas. After narrowly winning the primary, he lost the general election.\n\nBush attended the inauguration of father-in-law George H. W. Bush as Vice President in January 1981, after he and his running mate Ronald Reagan won the 1980 presidential election. She attributed her father-in-law's election to the vice presidency with giving her and her husband national exposure.\nThe Bushes had tried to conceive for three years, but pregnancy did not happen easily. On November 25, 1981, Laura Bush gave birth to fraternal twin daughters, Barbara and Jenna. The twins were born five weeks early by an emergency Caesarean section, as Laura had developed life-threatening pre-eclampsia (toxemia).\n\nGeorge W. Bush credited his wife with his decision to stop drinking in 1986. She reflected that she thought her husband \"was drinking too much\" amid her knowing it was not his desired way of living. Approaching him, she related that her father had been alcoholic and it was not a pattern she wished to repeat in their family.\nShe is also credited with having a stabilizing effect on his private life. According to \"People\" magazine reporter Jane Simms Podesta, \"She is the steel in his back. She is a civilizing influence on him. I think she built him, in many ways, into the person he is today.\"\n\nBush traveled to Kuwait in April 1993, accompanying her father-in-law and mother-in-law as well as brothers-in-law Jeb and Marvin Bush after former President Bush was invited to return to the Middle East for the first time since his presidency.\n\nSeveral times a year, Bush and her husband travel to their sprawling family estate, the Bush compound, better known as Walker's Point. Located in Kennebunkport, Maine, the compound is where Bush family gatherings have been held for nearly 100 years.\n\nBush became the First Lady of Texas when her husband was elected as the Governor of Texas and served as first lady of that state from January 17, 1995, to December 21, 2000. When asked about her interest in politics, she responded \"It doesn't drive me.\"\n\nThough during her years in the Governor's Mansion, she did not hold a single formal event, Laura worked for women's and children's causes including health, education, and literacy. She implemented four major initiatives: Take Time For Kids, an awareness campaign to educate parents and caregivers on parenting; family literacy, through cooperation with the Barbara Bush Foundation for Family Literacy, she urged Texas communities to establish family literacy programs; Reach Out and Read, a pediatric reading program; and Ready to Read, an early childhood educational program.\n\nShe raised money for public libraries through her establishment of the Texas Book Festival, and established the First Lady's Family Literacy Initiative, which encouraged families to read together. Bush further established \"Rainbow Rooms\" across the state, in an effort to provide emergency services for neglected or abused children. Through this, she promoted the Adopt-a-Caseworker Program to provide support for Child Protective Services. She used her position to advocate Alzheimer's disease and breast cancer awareness as well.\n\nHer husband announced his campaign for President of the United States in mid-1999, something that she agreed to. She did say, however, that she had never dreamed that he would run for office. The Bush campaign worked to assure voters that as First Lady, she would not seek to emulate then-First Lady Hillary Clinton. When asked who she would be like out of the past First Ladies, she insisted it would be herself.\nIn July, she delivered a keynote address to the delegates at the 2000 Republican National Convention, which put her on the national stage. In December 2000, her husband resigned as Governor of Texas to prepare for his inauguration as President of the United States in January 2001.\n\nAs First Lady, Bush was involved in issues of concern to children and women, both nationally and internationally. Her major initiatives included education and women's health.\n\nEarly into the administration, Bush made it known that she would focus much of her attention on education. This included recruiting highly qualified teachers to ensure that young children would be taught well. She also focused on early child development. In 2001, to promote reading and education, she partnered with the Library of Congress to launch the annual National Book Festival. In January 2002, Bush testified before the Senate Committee on Education, asking for higher teachers' salaries and better training for Head Start programs. She is also credited with creating a national initiative called \"Ready to Read, Ready to Learn\", which promotes reading at a young age. To promote American patriotic heritage in schools, she helped launch the National Anthem Project. In 2006, Bush and media executives worked together to provide a $500,000 grant for school libraries along the Gulf Coast which had been devastated by Hurricanes Katrina and Rita.\n\nImmediately following the September 11, 2001 attacks, Bush spoke regarding America's children:\n\n[W]e need to reassure our children that they are safe in their homes and schools. We need to reassure them that many people love them and care for them, and that while there are some bad people in the world, there are many more good people.\n\nThe following day, she composed open letters to America's families, focusing on elementary and middle school students, which she distributed through state education officials. She took an interest in mitigating the emotional effects of the attacks on children, particularly the disturbing images repeatedly replayed on television. On the one-year anniversary, she encouraged parents to instead read to their children, and perhaps light a candle in memoriam, saying, \"Don't let your children see the images, especially on September 11, when you know it'll probably be on television again and again – the plane hitting the building or the buildings falling.\"\n\nLater in her tenure, she was honored by the United Nations, as the body named her honorary ambassador for the United Nations' Decade of Literacy. In this position, she announced that she would host a Conference on Global Literacy. The conference, held in September 2006, encouraged a constant effort to promote literacy and highlighted many successful literacy programs. She coordinated this as a result of her many trips abroad where she witnessed how literacy benefited children in poorer nations.\n\nOn July 28, 2008, she visited Carl Sandburg Home National Historic Site in Flat Rock, North Carolina, where she met with superintendent Connie Backlund and the Friends of Carl Sandburg Home's President Linda Holt as well as various students from Boys and Girls Club of Henderson County, North Carolina.\n\nOn October 3, 2008, she visited Laura Ingalls Wilder Historic Home and Museum where she praised her works such as \"Farmer Boy\", \"These Happy Golden Years\" and \"The Little House on the Prairie\", the last of which she had felt an association with as a child. During the same Laura Ingalls Wilder's estate visit, she said that she read her books to her daughters and gave the writer Save America's Treasures grant.\n\nOn September 11, 2001, Bush had been hosting her in-laws George H. W. Bush and Barbara Bush at the White House and was scheduled to give a testimony to Congress on education. Instead, during the September 11 attacks, Bush was taken to inside the White House and placed in an underground bunker, later being met by her husband, who had returned to Washington from Florida.\n\nTwo weeks after the September 11 terrorist attacks, Bush inaugurated a music concert at the Kennedy Center, organized to raise funds for families of the victims. Though she received applause, she returned the compliment to members of the audience and added that although the event was tragic, Americans had deepened their appreciation \"of life itself, how fragile it can be, what a gift it is and how much we need each other\". Senator Ted Kennedy, who introduced Bush at the event, praised her and said he knew his late brother, President John F. Kennedy, would also be proud of her. Bush believes the September 11 attacks ignited the interest in the way Afghan women were treated.\n\nAnother of her signature issues were those relating to the health and well being of women. She established the Women's Health and Wellness Initiative and became involved with two major campaigns.\n\nBush first became involved with The Heart Truth awareness campaign in 2003. It is an organization established by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute to raise awareness about heart disease in women, and how to prevent the condition. She serves in the honorary position of ambassador for the program leading the federal government's effort to give women a \"wake up call\" about the risk of heart disease. She commented on the disease: \"Like many women, I assumed heart disease was a man's disease and cancer was what we would fear the most. Yet heart disease kills more women in our country than all forms of cancer combined. When it comes to heart disease, education, prevention, and even a little red dress can save lives.\" She has undertaken a signature personal element of traveling around the country and talking to women at hospital and community events featuring the experiences of women who live, or had lived, with the condition. This outreach was credited with saving the life of one woman who went to the hospital after experiencing symptoms of a heart attack.\n\nWith her predecessor, former First Lady Nancy Reagan, Bush dedicated the First Ladies Red Dress Collection at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in May 2005. It is an exhibit containing red suits worn by former First Ladies Lady Bird Johnson, Betty Ford, Rosalynn Carter, Nancy Reagan, Barbara Bush, Hillary Clinton, and Laura Bush meant to raise awareness by highlighting America's first ladies. She has participated in fashion shows displaying red dresses worn on celebrities as well.\n\nBush's mother, Jenna Welch, was diagnosed with breast cancer at the age of 78. She endured surgery and currently has no further signs of cancer. Laura Bush has become a breast cancer activist on her mother's behalf through her involvement in the Susan G. Komen for the Cure. She applauded the foundation's efforts in eliminating cancer and said, \"A few short years ago, a diagnosis of breast cancer left little hope of recovery. But thanks to the work of the Komen Foundation ... more women and men are beating breast cancer and beating the odds.\" She used her position to gain international support for the foundation through the Partnership for Breast Cancer Awareness and Research of the Americas, an initiative that unites experts from the United States, Brazil, Costa Rica and Mexico.\n\nIn November 2001, she became the first person other than a president to deliver the weekly presidential radio address. She used the opportunity to discuss the plight of women in Afghanistan leading up to the U.S. invasion of Afghanistan, saying \"The brutal oppression of women is a central goal of the terrorists.\" Her husband was originally to give the address but he felt that she should do it; she later recalled, \"At that moment, it was not that I found my voice. Instead, it was as if my voice found me.\" Her words summarized one of the goals and moral rationales of the U.S. involvement in Afghanistan and it became one of the more famous speeches of his administration. In May 2002, she made a speech to the people of Afghanistan through Radio Liberty. In March 2005, she made the first of three trips to that country as First Lady.\n\nBush campaigned for Republicans around the country in 2002 for that year's midterm elections, attending and hosting fundraisers as well as giving speeches that were deemed as the Bush administration \"working against women's rights issues and using women to do their dirty work\" and partly a test for Bush on how well she could campaign for her husband in the impending two years when he sought re-election.\n\nDuring the 2004 election cycle, Bush made joint appearances with her husband on the campaign trail, including in battleground states such as Florida. She advocated for his re-election in a speech at the 2004 Republican National Convention, and was credited with having raised $15 million for her husband's campaign as well as the Republican Party while still succeeding in keeping a separate schedule that allowed for her to tend to the traditional duties she had as First Lady. In a July 2004 interview, Teresa Heinz, wife of Democratic presidential nominee John Kerry, said, \"Well, you know, I don't know Laura Bush. But she seems to be calm, and she has a sparkle in her eye, which is good. But I don't know that she's ever had a real job—I mean, since she's been grown up.\" Heinz later apologized for the remark, and Bush stated that she forgave her while insisting her apology was unnecessary, citing her understanding of the \"trick questions\" asked by the media.\n\nBush was a participant in the 2006 midterm elections, beginning her campaigning in April. Though her poll numbers had decreased from an 80% approval rating, they still superseded that of President Bush, whose approval rating was only praised by a third of Americans. Ed Henry of CNN noted Bush's popularity, writing, \"The first lady is treated like a rock star on the campaign trail – with local Republicans lining up for photographs and autographs – as she criss-crosses the country to help candidates.\" Bush relied on a strategy of praising the Republican candidate for their achievements and attending events alongside them. In September 2008, Bush spoke during the first night of the 2008 Republican National Convention, her joint appearance with Cindy McCain geared toward raising hurricane relief funds for victims of Hurricane Gustav.\n\nLaura Bush's approval ratings have consistently ranked very high. In January 2006, a \"USA Today\"/CBS/Gallup poll recorded her approval rating at 82 percent and disapproval at 13 percent. That places Bush as one of the most popular first ladies. Former White House Press Secretary Ari Fleischer said, \"She is more popular, and more welcome, in many parts of the country than the president ... In races where the moderates are in the most trouble, Laura Bush is the one who can do the most good.\"\n\nSady Doyle reasoned that Bush was hard to dislike due to her adopting \"the least partisan causes\" such as literacy and breast cancer, which would attract the support of most Americans and her coming off as a \"mild, polite, ordinary woman who might go to church with your mother, or organize suburban potlucks\". Doyle furthered that her statements were never enough to offend others and the harshest criticism that could be bestowed upon her was that she was boring.\n\nShe disagreed with Fox News' Chris Wallace in 2006 when Wallace asked why the American people were beginning to lose confidence in President Bush, saying, \"Well, I don't think they are. And I don't really believe those polls. I travel around the country, I see people, I see their response to my husband, I see their response to me. There are a lot of difficult challenges right now in the United States ... All of those decisions that the President has to make surrounding each one of these very difficult challenges are hard. They're hard decisions to make. And of course some people are unhappy about what some of those decisions are. But I think people know that he is doing what he thinks is right for the United States, that he's doing what he – especially in the war on terror, what he thinks he is obligated to do for the people in the United States, and that is to protect them ... When his polls were really high they weren't on the front page.\"\n\nDuring the January 2005 second inauguration ceremonies for her husband, Laura Bush was looked highly upon by \"People\" magazine, \"The Washington Post\", and others for her elegance and fashion sense. At the inauguration she wore a winter white cashmere dress and matching coat designed by Oscar de la Renta. Following the inauguration were the inaugural galas, to which Bush wore a pale, aqua lace gown, sprinkled with crystals, with long sleeves in a silver blue mist. The tulle gown was also designed for her by de la Renta. According to \"The Washington Post\", \"[I]t made her look radiant and glamorous.\"\n\nDuring her husband's second term, Bush was more involved in foreign matters. She traveled to numerous countries as a representative of the United States.\n\nAs First Lady, she took five goodwill trips to Africa. The purpose of these has mostly been to raise awareness about HIV/AIDS and malaria, but Bush has also stressed the need for education and greater opportunities for women. She has taken many other trips to other countries to promote and gain support for President Bush's Emergency Plan for AIDS relief; these countries include Zambia (2007), Mozambique (2007), Mali (2007), Senegal (2007), and Haiti (2008).\n\nIn mid-2007, she took a trip to Myanmar where she spoke out in support of the pro-democracy movement, and urged Burmese soldiers and militias to refrain from violence. Later that October, she ventured to the Middle East. Bush said she was in the region in an attempt to improve America's image by highlighting concern for women's health, specifically promoting her breast cancer awareness work with the US-Middle East Partnership for Breast Cancer Awareness and Research. She defined the trip as successful, saying that stereotypes were broken on both sides.\n\nOverall, Bush traveled to 77 countries in the eight years of her husband's presidency, touring 67 of those during the second term.\n\nBush is a Republican and has identified herself with the GOP since her marriage.\n\nWhen asked about abortion in 2000, Bush said she did not believe \"Roe v. Wade\" should be overturned. She did not comment on whether women had the right to an abortion. She did say, however, that the country should do \"what we can to limit the number of abortions, to try to reduce the number of abortions in a lot of ways, and that is, by talking about responsibility with girls and boys, by teaching abstinence, having abstinence classes everywhere in schools and in churches and in Sunday school\".\n\nBush responded to a question during a 2006 interview concerning the Federal Marriage Amendment by calling for elected leaders not to politicize same-sex marriage, \"I don't think it should be used as a campaign tool, obviously. It requires a lot of sensitivity to just talk about the issue ... a lot of sensitivity.\"\n\nOn July 12, 2005, while in South Africa, Bush suggested her husband replace retiring Supreme Court justice Sandra Day O'Connor with another woman. On October 2, during a private dinner at the White House with his wife, President Bush nominated Harriet Miers to replace O'Connor. Later that month, after Miers had faced intense criticism, Laura Bush questioned whether the charges were sexist in nature.\n\nIn late October 2008, days before that year's Presidential election, Bush hosted a three-hour session with staffers and historians discussing how she would like to be remembered, leading to this meeting being termed the \"legacy lunch\".\n\nAccording to historian Myra Gutin, this was the first time in history that a First Lady had ever directly reached out to historians to talk about her accomplishments. Attendants of the meeting said that Bush wanted to change the perception that she was a traditional First Lady in that she always stayed by her husband's side. Bush's chief of staff Anita McBride called this characterization of Bush \"unfair\" and though conceding that she was traditional, McBride noted Bush broke from tradition in addressing issues that were not customary.\n\nIn April 2009, three months after the Bushes left office, Martha Gore wrote an op-ed piece titled \"Laura Bush: A First Lady who made America proud\", where she positively assessed Bush's role as First Lady and expressed Bush's successes were rooted in the dignity she brought to the office despite her reserved style as well as her making a good role model for young women and representing American womanhood at its finest. Gore concluded, \"Now that Ms. Bush has returned to private life, she will continue to be remembered as a First Lady who did America proud.\" A 2014 poll which asked who was the most popular First Lady in the past 25 years found Bush ranked in fourth place (out of 4 candidates), behind Hillary Clinton, mother-in-law Barbara and direct successor Michelle Obama.\n\nIn February 2009, the month after she and her husband left office, Laura and George W. Bush moved into a new residence in Dallas. In November 2009, the former First Lady, accompanied by her husband, made a visit to families of veterans in Fort Hood. The couple expressed their wishes that the trip not be publicized. However, Fox News revealed the trip the following morning.\n\nIn May 2010, Bush released her memoir, \"Spoken from the Heart\", in conjunction with a national tour.\n\nOn May 11, 2010, during an interview on \"Larry King Live\", Bush was asked about same-sex marriage. She said she viewed it as a generational issue and believed it would be made legal in the future. Bush offered support for the issue by saying \"when couples are committed to each other and love each other ... they ought to have the same sort of rights that everyone has.\" Bush referred to her 2000 interview, reaffirming her support for \"Roe v. Wade\", \"I think it's important that [abortion] remain legal. Because I think it's important for people – that for medical reasons and, and other reasons.\"\nOn February 22, 2013, without her consent, she was included in a pro-gay advertisement from the Respect of Marriage Coalition. A statement from Bush's spokesperson states that Bush \"did not approve of her inclusion in this advertisement nor is she associated with the group that made the ad in any way. When she became aware of the advertisement last night, we requested that the group remove her from it.\"\n\nBush continued to remain involved and concerned over the state of women in Afghanistan, speaking out editorials and appearances during 2013 that the women and girls who had been helped could not be abandoned during and after the planned withdrawal of U.S. troops from Afghanistan. In March 2016, Bush wrote an op-ed for \"The Washington Post\" on changes occurring among women in Afghanistan while noting continued violence and calling for American involvement in Afghanistan to be consistent and predictable in continuing along with the international community \"to provide significant development assistance in the areas of health care, entrepreneurship and education\". In June 2016, Bush stated that she hoped the US remained in Afghanistan and had consulted with women there who feared the departure of American troops would create \"a vacuum\" similar to Iraq, furthering that the US \"would have to start all over again\" in the event that they withdrew troops. In late 2017, Bush and First Lady of Afghanistan Rula Ghani traveled to Washington to rally lawmaker support for Afghanistan and women there.\n\nIn April 2015, Bush criticized Rand Paul's isolationist stance on U.S. foreign aid, calling the view \"not really realistic\" and asserting the United States should save lives whenever it can. August, she shared the first public photos of her newborn granddaughter Poppy Louise.\n\nOn June 17, 2018, Bush wrote an opinion piece firmly opposing the Trump administration family separation policy in the Washington Post. She mentioned how her mother-in-law Barbara Bush had picked up a crying aids baby while on a visit to the HIV/Aids shelter \"Grandma's House\" in 1989. She mentioned this to indicate her shock upon discovery that the workers at the children's border shelter have been instructed \"not to pick up or touch the children to comfort them\".\n\nOn October 26, 2009, Bush spoke at the 25th Annual Women's Conference in Salt Lake City, Utah.\n\nOn May 31 2012 Bush and her husband unveiled their official portraits painted by John Howard Sanden in a ceremony at the White House attended by several members of their family and former members of the Bush administration. Bush jokingly told then First Lady Michelle Obama at the ceremony that \"nothing makes a house a home like having portraits of its former occupants staring down at you from the walls\". Bush was portrayed in the White House's Green Room in her portrait, wearing a midnight blue gown.\n\nOn July 25, 2012 she spoke at the Luisa Hunnewell's estate where she praised Edith Wharton's works, in particular \"Ethan Frome\" on her 150th anniversary. She also said that prior to this speech she also visited houses of Mark Twain at his 166th anniversary on November 29, 2001 and was a guest of the show Mark Twain Tonight. Ten years prior to the Luisa Hunnewell's estate visit she also visited Louisa May Alcott's Orchard House in Concord, Massachusetts at which she met with the National Trust for Historic Preservation's President and listened to Concord-Carlisle High School's chorus.\n\nIn April 2013, Bush was in attendance at a news conference, where she said the recently built George W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum was not a monument for her husband but instead a representation of the White House and the struggles of America during his tenure. She also mentioned not having trouble donating clothes to the library, admitting that she probably would have never worn them again in the first place. That month it was announced that she would serve as a keynote speaker for the 2013 Global Business Travel Association Convention in August. At the convention, she stressed the importance of child literacy, continuing her advocating of an issue that she had become associated with since her tenure as First Lady. In early August 2013, she reported that her husband was in stable condition after having a stent implanted in his heart, calling it \"terrific\" that it was caught in time, and stressed the importance of regular check ups with doctors. In September, she appeared at a fundraiser for the organization Solutions for Change.\n\nOn April 26, 2014, she gave a speech at the Ericsson Center in Plano, Texas, where she spoke on behalf of the company's mentoring program for girls. Throughout the month, she made appearances at fundraisers for schools in Colorado. On May 9, 2014, she was scheduled to speak at the Boston Convention and Exhibition Center on the anniversary of the Boston Marathon bombings. She was to arrive there with her daughter Barbara Pierce Bush, her husband George W. Bush, and Soledad O'Brien, a journalist.\n\nIn 2015, Bush had several speaking arrangements on issues relating to her husband's presidency. In July, the former First Lady, accompanied by her husband, attended the centennial anniversary of Tioga Road In Yosemite National Park in July and appeared in New Orleans in order to commemorate the tenth anniversary of Hurricane Katrina. In October, she was a featured speaker for Wayland Baptist University.\n\nBush was keynote speaker at the Go Red for Women Summit in Austin in February 2016, an event designed to promote both financing and awareness for women fighting heart disease. In March, Bush attended the funeral of Nancy Reagan in California. and attended the memorial service for victims in the Dallas police officers shooting four months later in July.\n\nIn January 2017, Bush attended the Inauguration of Donald Trump. On February 4, 2017, Bush appeared at the annual Union Regional Foundation's Heart of a Woman brunch, saying women do not worry about their own health due to often taking care of someone else and that their improving in health would benefit those around them. \nOn March 8, Bush was keynote speaker at the Illinois Holocaust Museum and Education Center's annual Humanitarian Awards Dinner, Bush relating that she had learned about the Holocaust through her father. In April, Bush was the keynote speaker of the 25th annual Art of Hope Gala at the Dallas Museum of Art. On May 17, Bush made her second visit to the Andrew Johnson Hermitage and gave the keynote address at the 117th Spring Outing celebration. On May 31, Bush delivered a speech at the South-Central Monarch Symposium on the monarch butterfly decline in recent years. On June 3, Bush served as the keynote speaker at the National Willa Cather Center dedication in Red Cloud, Nebraska and officially opened the center with a ribbon cut. The following month, Bush accepted an invitation to join the eminent international Council of Patrons of the Asian University for Women (AUW) in Chittagong, Bangladesh. The University, which is the product of east-west foundational partnerships (Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Open Society Foundation, IKEA Foundation etc.) and regional cooperation, serves extraordinarily talented women from 15 countries across Asia and the Middle East, including Afghanistan and Myanmar. In September, Bush delivered the keynote address at the Gateway to Opportunity luncheon at the Omni Dallas Hotel.\n\nOver the course of the Obama presidency, she developed an alliance with Michelle Obama, her immediate successor as First Lady. Despite their political differences, Michelle Obama has called Laura Bush both her friend and a role model, crediting Bush with setting \"a high bar\" for her during her tenure as First Lady. Bush defended Obama during her husband's campaign for president in 2008, publicly coming to her defense when she received criticism for a remark she made about being proud of her country for the first time in her adulthood during the campaign.\nObama sent Bush a note thanking her and after the election met with Bush at the White House in November 2008, Bush giving Obama a tour of her and her family's soon-to-be home.\n\nIn September 2009, Bush openly praised President Barack Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama. She reasoned that President Obama was performing well in the presidency despite having multiple initiatives taking place and complimented the First Lady's transformation of the White House into \"a comfortable home for her family\".\n\nThe following year, in September 2010, Bush and Obama commemorated the ninth anniversary of the September 11 attacks by leading a ceremony from a mountaintop to national memorial park.\nThe two both acted as keynote speakers and met with the families of the 40 victims of United Airlines Flight 93 plane crash. In their remarks, the two sang each other's praises. Obama thanked Bush for her handling of the aftermath of September 11 attacks, while Bush called her a \"first lady who serves this country with such grace\".\n\nIn July 2013, Bush and Obama appeared together in Africa at the First Ladies Summit. Their husbands were also present, leading White House staffer Ben Rhodes to refer to the joint appearance as proof of the support for Africa in the United States regardless of political party. In their remarks, both Bush and Obama stressed the importance of being role models.\n\nNine months later, on April 18, 2014, Bush spoke to \"Inquisitr\" regarding income inequality where she said next regarding Michelle Obama's income: \"I want to make sure that when she's working she's getting paid the same as men. I gotta say that First Ladies right now don't [get paid], even though that's a tough job!\" In August 2014, Bush and Obama appeared together at the Kennedy Center. Shortly afterward, Bush told \"The Washington Post\" that she believed Obama was ready to leave the White House.\n\nIn March 2015, Bush and Obama were named as co-chairs of the Find Your Park campaign, an attempt to increase national park support and introduce millennials to the park service before its centennial the following year. The pair made a joint appearance at the George W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum in September 2015, Bush appearing physically while Obama was present through a video call. Obama spoke of her admiration for Bush, who in turn mentioned their collaborations as \"a great example for the world to see that women in different political parties, in the United States, agree on so many issues\".\n\nIn the later months of 2012, Bush campaigned for Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney, hosting a fundraiser in September with Ann Romney and appearing in Livonia, Michigan, the following month for a Romney campaign event. Michigan spokeswoman for the Romney campaign Kelsey Knight said having Mrs. Bush there would \"just fuel the fire and the momentum we are seeing\". She also campaigned for vice presidential nominee Paul Ryan, telling a crowd in Detroit that he and Romney had \"better answers\" on the economy and foreign policy.\n\nAfter the 2012 election, where Romney lost to President Obama, Bush was asked in March 2013 during an interview whether the GOP's positions on social issues such as same-sex marriage and abortion led to more than half of female voters voting for the President. Bush responded that some of the candidates had \"frightened some candidates\", but at the same time expressed her liking of the Republican Party having room for difference of opinion and that within the party, \"we have room for all\".\n\nThroughout 2015, Bush was active in the presidential campaign of brother-in-law Jeb Bush, hosting fundraisers and endorsing him. This was the most politically involved she had been since leaving the White House seven years prior, supporting her brother-in-law alongside the rest of her family because, in her words, he was \"our candidate\".\nIn March she affirmed her support for her brother-in-law, calling herself and her husband \"huge Jeb supporters\". It was reported that she would be assisting the campaign's fundraising in Florida in October, Bloomberg News commenting that Jeb Bush was \"calling in help from perhaps the most popular member of his family\". According to Clay Johnson, a friend of the Bush family, she was reportedly surprised by Donald Trump's becoming frontrunner over the course of the election cycle. In February 2016, amid her brother-in-law's campaign trailing Trump in South Carolina polls, Bush traveled there with her husband. Jeb Bush dropped out of the race after the South Carolina primary. The following month, Bush declined answering if she would vote for Trump, who was the frontrunner in the Republican primary, should he become the nominee and said the U.S. was going through a xenophobic period at the time of the election cycle. Ultimately, Bush and her husband refused to vote for president in 2016.\n\nBush created the Laura Bush Foundation for America's Libraries \"to support the education of our nation's children by providing funds to update, extend, and diversify the book and print collections of America's school libraries\". Every year, the Laura Bush Foundation's grants awards more than $1,000,000 to US schools. The Laura Bush 21st Century Library Program grant, offered by the Institute of Museum and Library Services, provides funding for \"the recruitment and education of library students and continuing education for those already in the profession, as well as the development of new programs and curricula\". Bush's 21st Century Library Program is an equal opportunity grant that does not not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, disability, or age. In May 2015, Bush bestowed a $7,000 grant to six schools within Austin, Texas. After Hurricanes Katrina and Rita in 2005, the Laura Bush Foundation for America's Libraries awarded grants of $10,000 to $75,000 to school libraries whose collections were damaged or destroyed in the hurricanes. In 2017, after the devastation from Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and Maria as well the California wildfires, the foundation again is going to dedicate their resources to disaster-affected schools to rebuild their book collections.\n\nIn August 2007, the Laura W. Bush Institute for Women's Health (LWBIWH) was founded at the Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center. This institute aims to integrate research, education and community outreach in a multidisciplinary approach to women's health and has begun efforts to establish a multi-campus women's health institute in Amarillo, El Paso, Lubbock and the Permian Basin.\n\nA subsidiary of the center, the Jenna Welch Women's Center, opened in Midland, Texas, on August 10, 2010, to deliver expert medical care to women and their families. Operating in partnership with the Laura Bush Institute, the Jenna Welch Center, named for Bush's mother, strives for excellence in research, education and community outreach.\n\nBush wrote her first book with her daughter Jenna called \"Read All About It!\". It was published on April 23, 2008. Bush's memoir, \"Spoken from the Heart\", was published in 2010. The book received mixed review from critics but got positive responses from readers. The book earned \"Goodreads\" Choice Award Nominee for Memoir and Autobiography (2010). Her non-fictional book about oppressed women of Afghanistan named \"\", published on March 8, 2016. Again she wrote another children's book with her daughter Jenna, \"Our Great Big Backyard\". The book published on May 10, 2016.\n\nDuring and after her tenure as the First Lady, Laura Bush received a number of awards and honors. In October 2002, the Elie Wiesel Foundation for Humanity honored her in recognition of her efforts on behalf of education. Also in 2002, she was named Barbara Walters' Most Fascinating Person of the year.\n\nThe American Library Association honored her for her years of support to America's libraries and librarians in April 2005. The Progressive Librarians Guild opposed her being honored, because of her support of the USA PATRIOT Act, her cancellation of a poetry forum due to concern that some of the poets would express opposition to the war in Iraq, and the Guild's opposition to policies and spending priorities of her husband's administration.\n\nOn October 18, 2003, she was conferred by the former President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo the Order of Gabriela Silang, a single-class order which makes her the first U.S. First Lady recipient during the state visit of President George Bush to the Philippines.\n\nShe received an award in honor of her dedication to help improve the living conditions and education of children around the world, from the Kuwait-American Foundation in March 2006. She accepted The Nichols-Chancellor's Medal on behalf of disaster relief workers around the world in May 2006 from Vanderbilt University.\n\nFour learning facilities have been named for her: the Laura Welch Bush Elementary School of Pasadena ISD in Houston, Texas, the Laura W. Bush Elementary School in the Leander ISD in Travis County, Texas, just outside Austin, the Laura Bush Middle School (Lubbock-Cooper ISD) in Lubbock, Texas, and the Laura Bush Education Center at Camp Bondsteel, a U.S. military base in Kosovo. She was awarded the 2008 Christian Freedom International Freedom Award. Bush is on the Board of Selectors of Jefferson Awards for Public Service.\n\nIn 2012, Bush—along with Hector Ruiz, Charles Matthews, Melinda Perrin, Julius Glickman and Admiral William H. McRaven, the Navy Seal who oversaw the raid that killed Osama bin Laden—was named a Distinguished Alumnus of the University of Texas at Austin.\n\nIn October 2015, Bush was conferred an honorary Doctor of Letters degree from Wayland Baptist University in recognition of her longtime advocacy on behalf of education, health care and human rights following an address she gave on the university's campus. November, she received the 2015 Prevent Blindness Person of Vision Award.\n\nIn November 2016 Bush received 10 for 10 award from \"Women's Democracy Network\" in recognition of her years of work on behalf of Afghan women's rights.\n\nIn May 2017 Bush received an honor at the \"Women Making History Awards\" in Washington, D.C.\n\nLaura Bush is portrayed by Elizabeth Banks in Oliver Stone's film \"W.\"\nCurtis Sittenfeld's bestseller novel \"American Wife\" is based on much of her life. In 2005 her biography \"The Perfect Wife: The Life and Choices of Laura Bush\" by Ann Gerhart was published. In 2006 another biography was also published called \"Laura Bush: An Intimate Portrait of the First Lady\" by Ronald Kessler.\nFamily Guy did a small clip of her killing a 17-year male by a hit-and-run.\n\nBULLET::::- Gerhart, Ann. \"The Perfect Wife: The Life and Choices of Laura Bush\". A biography.\nBULLET::::- Gormley, Beatrice. \"Laura Bush: America's First Lady\". A biography.\nBULLET::::- Kelley, Kitty. \"\".\nBULLET::::- Kessler, Ronald. \"Laura Bush: An Intimate Portrait of the First Lady\". A biography.\nBULLET::::- Montgomery, Leslie. \"Were It Not For Grace: Stories From Women After God's Own Heart; Featuring Condoleezza Rice, First Lady Laura Bush, Beth Moore & Others\". Laura Bush shares her story about how God has had his hand on her life.\n\nBULLET::::- First Lady biography at Whitehouse.gov\nBULLET::::- \"The book on Laura Bush\" by Dennis B. Roddy, \"Pittsburgh Post-Gazette\"\nBULLET::::- \"A Laura Bush we don't know\" by Eugene Robinson, \"San Francisco Chronicle\"\nBULLET::::- Laura Bush at C-SPAN's \"\"\nBULLET::::- Jessie Hawkins and Jenna Welch Grandmother and Mother of Laura Bush Borderlands EPCC\n"}
{"id": "17530", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17530", "title": "Lattice", "text": "Lattice\n\nLattice may refer to:\nBULLET::::- Latticework, an ornamental criss-crossed framework, an arrangement of crossing laths or other thin strips of material\nBULLET::::- Lattice (music), an organized grid model of pitch ratios\nBULLET::::- Lattice (pastry), an ornamental pattern of crossing strips of pastry\n\nBULLET::::- Lattice Engines, a technology company specializing in business applications for marketing and sales\nBULLET::::- Lattice Group, a former British gas transmission business\nBULLET::::- Lattice Semiconductor, a US-based integrated circuit manufacturer\n\nBULLET::::- Lattice (group), a repeating arrangement of points\nBULLET::::- Lattice (discrete subgroup), a discrete subgroup of a topological group whose quotient carries an invariant finite Borel measure\nBULLET::::- Lattice (module), a module over a ring which is embedded in a vector space over a field\nBULLET::::- Lattice graph, a graph that can be drawn within a repeating arrangement of points\nBULLET::::- Lattice-based cryptography, encryption systems based on repeating arrangements of points\nBULLET::::- Lattice (order), a partially ordered set with unique least upper bounds and greatest lower bounds\nBULLET::::- Lattice-based access control, computer security systems based on partially ordered access privileges\nBULLET::::- Skew lattice, a non-commutative generalization of order-theoretic lattices\nBULLET::::- Lattice multiplication, a multiplication algorithm suitable for hand calculation\n\nBULLET::::- Bethe lattice, a regular infinite tree structure used in statistical mechanics\nBULLET::::- Crystal lattice or Bravais lattice, a repetitive arrangement of atoms\nBULLET::::- Lattice C, a compiler for the C programming language\nBULLET::::- Lattice mast, a type of observation mast common on major warships in the early 20th century\nBULLET::::- Lattice model (physics), a model defined not on a continuum, but on a grid\nBULLET::::- Lattice tower, or truss tower is a type of freestanding framework tower\nBULLET::::- Lattice truss bridge, a type of truss bridge that uses many closely spaced diagonal elements\n\nBULLET::::- Lattice model (finance), a method for evaluating stock options that divides time into discrete intervals\n\nBULLET::::- Grid (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Mesh (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Trellis (disambiguation)\n"}
{"id": "17532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17532", "title": "Lorisidae", "text": "Lorisidae\n\nLorisidae (or sometimes Loridae) is a family of strepsirrhine primates. The lorisids are all slim arboreal animals and comprise the lorises, pottos and angwantibos. Lorisids live in tropical, central Africa as well as in south and southeast Asia.\n\nLorisids have a close, woolly fur, which is usually grey or brown, darker on the top side. The eyes are large and face forward. The ears are small and often partially hidden in the fur. The thumbs are opposable and the index finger is short. The second toe of the hind legs has a fine claw for grooming, typical for strepsirrhines. Their tails are short or are missing completely. They grow to a length of 17 to 40 cm and a weight of between 0.3 and 2 kg, depending on the species. Their dental formula is similar to that of lemurs: \n\nLorisids are nocturnal and arboreal. Unlike the closely related galagos, lorisids never jump. Some have slow deliberate movements, whilst others can move with some speed across branches. It was previously thought that all lorisids moved slowly, but investigations using red light proved this to be wrong. Nonetheless, even the faster species freeze or move slowly if they hear or see any potential predator. This habit of remaining motionless whilst in danger is successful only because of the leafy environment of their jungle home, which helps to conceal their true position. With their strong hands they clasp at the branches and cannot be removed without significant force. Most lorisids are solitary or live in small family groups.\n\nSlow lorises from southeast Asia produce a secretion from their brachial gland (a scent gland on the upper arm, between the axilla and elbow), that is licked and mixed with their saliva to form a toxin which may be used for defense. The red slender loris (\"Loris tardigradus\") from India also possesses brachial glands, but it is uncertain whether they also synthesize the toxin. The potto (\"Perodicticus potto\") is thought to lack brachial glands, though it produces similar toxic excretions with its anal glands.\n\nLorisids consume insects, bird eggs and small vertebrates as well as fruits and gums.\n\nLorisids have a gestation period of four to six months and give birth to two young. These often clasp themselves to the belly of the mother or wait in nests, while the mother goes to search for food. After three to nine months - depending on the species - they are weaned and are fully mature within 10 to 18 months. The life expectancy of lorises can be to up to 20 years.\n\nThere are five genera and eleven species of lorisid.\n\nBULLET::::- Order Primates\nBULLET::::- Suborder Strepsirrhini: non-tarsier prosimians\nBULLET::::- Infraorder Lemuriformes\nBULLET::::- Superfamily Lemuroidea\nBULLET::::- Superfamily Lorisoidea\nBULLET::::- Family Lorisidae\nBULLET::::- Subfamily Perodicticinae\nBULLET::::- Genus \"Arctocebus\"\nBULLET::::- Calabar angwantibo, \"Arctocebus calabarensis\"\nBULLET::::- Golden angwantibo, \"Arctocebus aureus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus \"Perodicticus\"\nBULLET::::- Potto, \"Perodicticus potto\"\nBULLET::::- Genus \"Pseudopotto\"\nBULLET::::- False potto, \"Pseudopotto martini\"\nBULLET::::- Subfamily Lorisinae\nBULLET::::- Genus \"Loris\"\nBULLET::::- Red slender loris, \"Loris tardigradus\"\nBULLET::::- Gray slender loris, \"Loris lydekkerianus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus \"Nycticebus\"\nBULLET::::- Sunda slow loris, \"Nycticebus coucang\"\nBULLET::::- Javan slow loris, \"Nycticebus javanicus\"\nBULLET::::- Bengal slow loris, \"Nycticebus bengalensis\"\nBULLET::::- Pygmy slow loris, \"Nycticebus pygmaeus\"\nBULLET::::- Philippine slow loris, \"Nycticebus menagensis\"\nBULLET::::- Bangka slow loris, \"Nycticebus bancanus\"\nBULLET::::- Bornean slow loris, \"Nycticebus borneanus\"\nBULLET::::- Kayan River slow loris, \"Nycticebus kayan\"\nBULLET::::- †\"? Nycticebus linglom\"\nBULLET::::- Family Galagidae: galagos\nBULLET::::- Suborder Haplorrhini: tarsiers, monkeys and apes\n"}
{"id": "17537", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17537", "title": "Lysergic acid diethylamide", "text": "Lysergic acid diethylamide\n\nLysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), also known as acid, is a hallucinogenic drug. Effects typically include altered thoughts, feelings, and awareness of one's surroundings. Many users see or hear things that do not exist. Dilated pupils, increased blood pressure, and increased body temperature are typical. Effects typically begin within half an hour and can last for up to 12 hours. It is used mainly as a recreational drug and for spiritual reasons.\nLSD does not appear to be addictive, although tolerance may occur with use of increasing doses. Adverse psychiatric reactions are possible, such as anxiety, paranoia, and delusions. Distressing flashbacks might occur in spite of no further use, a condition called hallucinogen persisting perception disorder. Death is very rare as a result of LSD, though it occasionally occurs in accidents. The effects of LSD are believed to occur as a result of alterations in the serotonin system. As little as 20 micrograms can produce an effect. In pure form, LSD is clear or white in color, has no smell, and is crystalline. It breaks down with exposure to ultraviolet light.\nAbout 10 percent of people in the United States have used LSD at some point in their lives as of 2017, while 0.7 percent have used it in the last year. It was most popular in the 1960s to 1980s. LSD is typically either swallowed or held under the tongue. It is most often sold on blotter paper and less commonly as tablets or in gelatin squares. There are no known treatments for addiction, if it occurs.\nLSD was first made by Albert Hofmann in 1938 from lysergic acid, a chemical from the fungus ergot. Hofmann discovered its hallucinogenic properties in 1943. In the 1950s, the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) believed that the drug might be useful for mind control, so they tested it on people, some without their knowledge, in a program called MKUltra. LSD was sold as a medication for research purposes under the trade-name Delysid in the 1950s and 1960s. It was listed as a schedule 1 controlled substance by the United Nations in 1971. It currently has no approved medical use. In Europe, as of 2011, the typical cost of a dose was between 4.50 and 25.\n\nLSD is commonly used as a recreational drug.\n\nLSD is considered an entheogen because it can catalyze intense spiritual experiences, during which users may feel they have come into contact with a greater spiritual or cosmic order. Users sometimes report out of body experiences. In 1966, Timothy Leary established the League for Spiritual Discovery with LSD as its sacrament. Stanislav Grof has written that religious and mystical experiences observed during LSD sessions appear to be phenomenologically indistinguishable from similar descriptions in the sacred scriptures of the great religions of the world and the texts of ancient civilizations.\n\nLSD currently has no approved uses in medicine. A meta analysis concluded that a single dose was effective at reducing alcohol consumption in alcoholism. LSD has also been studied in depression, anxiety, and drug dependence, with positive preliminary results.\n\nLSD can cause pupil dilation, reduced appetite, and wakefulness. Other physical reactions to LSD are highly variable and nonspecific, some of which may be secondary to the psychological effects of LSD. Among the reported symptoms are numbness, weakness, nausea, hypothermia or hyperthermia, elevated blood sugar, goose bumps, heart rate increase, jaw clenching, perspiration, saliva production, mucus production, hyperreflexia, and tremors.\n\nThe most common immediate psychological effects of LSD are visual hallucinations and illusions (colloquially known as \"trips\"), which can vary greatly depending on how much is used and how the brain responds. Trips usually start within 20–30 minutes of taking LSD by mouth (less if snorted or taken intravenously), peak three to four hours after ingestion, and last up to 12 hours. Negative experiences, referred to as \"bad trips\", produce intense negative emotions, such as irrational fears and anxiety, panic attacks, paranoia, rapid mood swings, intrusive thoughts of hopelessness, wanting to harm others, and suicidal ideation. It is impossible to predict when a bad trip will occur. Good trips are stimulating and pleasurable, and typically involve feeling as if one is floating, disconnected from reality, feelings of joy or euphoria (sometimes called a \"rush\"), decreased inhibitions, and the belief that one has extreme mental clarity or superpowers.\n\nSome sensory effects may include an experience of radiant colors, objects and surfaces appearing to ripple or \"breathe\", colored patterns behind the closed eyelids (eidetic imagery), an altered sense of time (time seems to be stretching, repeating itself, changing speed or stopping), crawling geometric patterns overlaying walls and other objects, and morphing objects. Some users, including Albert Hofmann, report a strong metallic taste for the duration of the effects.\n\nLSD causes an animated sensory experience of senses, emotions, memories, time, and awareness for 6 to 14 hours, depending on dosage and tolerance. Generally beginning within 30 to 90 minutes after ingestion, the user may experience anything from subtle changes in perception to overwhelming cognitive shifts. Changes in auditory and visual perception are typical. Visual effects include the illusion of movement of static surfaces (\"walls breathing\"), after image-like trails of moving objects (\"tracers\"), the appearance of moving colored geometric patterns (especially with closed eyes), an intensification of colors and brightness (\"sparkling\"), new textures on objects, blurred vision, and shape suggestibility. Some users report that the inanimate world appears to animate in an inexplicable way; for instance, objects that are static in three dimensions can seem to be moving relative to one or more additional spatial dimensions. Many of the basic visual effects resemble the phosphenes seen after applying pressure to the eye and have also been studied under the name \"form constants\". The auditory effects of LSD may include echo-like distortions of sounds, changes in ability to discern concurrent auditory stimuli, and a general intensification of the experience of music. Higher doses often cause intense and fundamental distortions of sensory perception such as synaesthesia, the experience of additional spatial or temporal dimensions, and temporary dissociation.\n\nOf the 20 drugs ranked according to individual and societal harm by David Nutt, LSD was third to last, approximately 1/10th as harmful as alcohol. The most significant adverse effect was impairment of mental functioning while intoxicated.\n\nLSD may trigger panic attacks or feelings of extreme anxiety, known familiarly as a \"bad trip.\" Review studies suggest that LSD likely plays a role in precipitating the onset of acute psychosis in previously healthy individuals with an increased likelihood in individuals who have a family history of schizophrenia. There is evidence that people with severe mental illnesses like schizophrenia have a higher likelihood of experiencing adverse effects from taking LSD.\n\nWhile publicly available documents indicate that the CIA and Department of Defense have discontinued research into the use of LSD as a means of mind control, research from the 1960s suggests that both mentally ill and healthy people are more suggestible while under its influence.\n\n\"Flashbacks\" are a reported psychological phenomenon in which an individual experiences an episode of some of LSD's subjective effects after the drug has worn off, \"persisting for months or years after hallucinogen use\".\n\nA diagnosable condition called hallucinogen persisting perception disorder has been defined to describe intermittent or chronic flashbacks that cause distress or impairment in life and work, and are caused only by prior hallucinogen use and not some other condition.\n\nThe mutagenic potential of LSD is unclear. Overall, the evidence seems to point to limited or no effect at commonly used doses. Studies showed no evidence of teratogenic or mutagenic effects.\n\nTolerance to LSD builds up with consistent use and cross-tolerance has been demonstrated between LSD, mescaline\nand psilocybin.\nThis tolerance is probably caused by downregulation of 5-HT receptors in the brain and diminishes a few days after cessation of use.\n\nThe NIH comments that LSD is addictive, while other sources state it is not. A 2009 textbook states that it \"rarely produce[s] compulsive use\". A 2006 review states it is readily abused but does not result in addiction.\n\nAs of 2008 there were no documented fatalities attributed directly to an LSD overdose. Despite this several behavioral fatalities and suicides have occurred due to LSD. Eight individuals who accidentally consumed very high amounts by mistaking LSD for cocaine developed comatose states, hyperthermia, vomiting, gastric bleeding, and respiratory problems–however, all survived with supportive care.\n\nReassurance in a calm, safe environment is beneficial. Agitation can be safely addressed with benzodiazepines such as lorazepam or diazepam. Neuroleptics such as haloperidol are recommended against because they may have adverse effects. LSD is rapidly absorbed, so activated charcoal and emptying of the stomach is of little benefit, unless done within 30–60 minutes of ingesting an overdose of LSD. Sedation or physical restraint is rarely required, and excessive restraint may cause complications such as hyperthermia (over-heating) or rhabdomyolysis.\n\nResearch suggests that massive doses are not lethal, but do typically require supportive care, which may include endotracheal intubation or respiratory support. It is recommended that high blood pressure, tachycardia (rapid heart-beat), and hyperthermia, if present, are treated symptomatically, and that low blood pressure is treated initially with fluids and then with pressors if necessary. Intravenous administration of anticoagulants, vasodilators, and sympatholytics may be useful with massive doses.\n\nMost serotonergic psychedelics are not significantly dopaminergic, and LSD is therefore atypical in this regard. The agonism of the D receptor by LSD may contribute to its psychoactive effects in humans.\n\nLSD binds to most serotonin receptor subtypes except for the 5-HT and 5-HT receptors. However, most of these receptors are affected at too low affinity to be sufficiently activated by the brain concentration of approximately 10–20 nM. In humans, recreational doses of LSD can affect 5-HT (K=1.1nM), 5-HT (K=2.9nM), 5-HT (K=4.9nM), 5-HT (K=23nM), 5-HT (K=9nM [in cloned rat tissues]), and 5-HT receptors (K=2.3nM). 5-HT receptors, which are not present in humans, also have a high affinity for LSD. The psychedelic effects of LSD are attributed to cross-activation of 5-HT receptor heteromers. Many but not all 5-HT agonists are psychedelics and 5-HT antagonists block the psychedelic activity of LSD. LSD exhibits functional selectivity at the 5-HT and 5HT receptors in that it activates the signal transduction enzyme phospholipase A2 instead of activating the enzyme phospholipase C as the endogenous ligand serotonin does. Exactly how LSD produces its effects is unknown, but it is thought that it works by increasing glutamate release in the cerebral cortex and therefore excitation in this area, specifically in layers IV and V. LSD, like many other drugs of recreational use, has been shown to activate DARPP-32-related pathways. The drug enhances dopamine D receptor protomer recognition and signaling of D–5-HT receptor complexes, which may contribute to its psychotic effects.\n\nThe crystal structure of LSD bound in its active state to a serotonin receptor, specifically the 5-HT receptor, has recently (2017) been elucidated for the first time. The LSD-bound 5-HT receptor is regarded as an excellent model system for the 5-HT receptor and the structure of the LSD-bound 5-HT receptor was used in the study as a template to determine the structural features necessary for the activity of LSD at the 5-HT receptor. The diethylamide moiety of LSD was found to be a key component for its activity, which is in accordance with the fact that the related lysergamide lysergic acid amide (LSA) is far less hallucinogenic in comparison. LSD was found to stay bound to both the 5-HT and 5-HT receptors for an exceptionally long amount of time, which may be responsible for its long duration of action in spite of its relatively short terminal half-life. The extracellular loop 2 leucine 209 residue of the 5-HT receptor forms a 'lid' over LSD that appears to trap it in the receptor, and this was implicated in the potency and functional selectivity of LSD and its very slow dissociation rate from the 5-HT receptors.\n\nThe effects of LSD normally last between 6 and 12 hours depending on dosage, tolerance, body weight, and age. The Sandoz prospectus for \"Delysid\" warned: \"intermittent disturbances of affect may occasionally persist for several days.\" Contrary to early reports and common belief, LSD effects do not last longer than the amount of time significant levels of the drug are present in the blood. Aghajanian and Bing (1964) found LSD had an elimination half-life of only 175 minutes (about 3 hours). However, using more accurate techniques, Papac and Foltz (1990) reported that 1 µg/kg oral LSD given to a single male volunteer had an apparent plasma half-life of 5.1 hours, with a peak plasma concentration of 5 ng/mL at 3 hours post-dose.\n\nThe pharmacokinetics of LSD were not properly determined until 2015, which is not surprising for a drug with the kind of low-μg potency that LSD possesses. In a sample of 16 healthy subjects, a single mid-range 200 μg oral dose of LSD was found to produce mean maximal concentrations of 4.5 ng/mL at a median of 1.5 hours (range 0.5–4 hours) post-administration. After attainment of peak levels, concentrations of LSD decreased following first-order kinetics with a terminal half-life of 3.6 hours for up to 12 hours and then with slower elimination with a terminal half-life of 8.9 hours thereafter. The effects of the dose of LSD given lasted for up to 12 hours and were closely correlated with the concentrations of LSD present in circulation over time, with no acute tolerance observed. Only 1% of the drug was eliminated in urine unchanged whereas 13% was eliminated as the major metabolite 2-oxo-3-hydroxy-LSD (O-H-LSD) within 24 hours. O-H-LSD is formed by cytochrome P450 enzymes, although the specific enzymes involved are unknown, and it does not appear to be known whether O-H-LSD is pharmacologically active or not. The oral bioavailability of LSD was crudely estimated as approximately 71% using previous data on intravenous administration of LSD. The sample was equally divided between male and female subjects and there were no significant sex differences observed in the pharmacokinetics of LSD.\n\nLSD is a chiral compound with two stereocenters at the carbon atoms C-5 and C-8, so that theoretically four different optical isomers of LSD could exist. LSD, also called (+)--LSD, has the absolute configuration (5\"R\",8\"R\"). The C-5 isomers of lysergamides do not exist in nature and are not formed during the synthesis from \"d\"-lysergic acid. Retrosynthetically, the C-5 stereocenter could be analysed as having the same configuration of the alpha carbon of the naturally occurring amino acid L-tryptophan, the precursor to all biosynthetic ergoline compounds.\n\nHowever, LSD and iso-LSD, the two C-8 isomers, rapidly interconvert in the presence of bases, as the alpha proton is acidic and can be deprotonated and reprotonated. Non-psychoactive iso-LSD which has formed during the synthesis can be separated by chromatography and can be isomerized to LSD.\n\nPure salts of LSD are triboluminescent, emitting small flashes of white light when shaken in the dark. LSD is strongly fluorescent and will glow bluish-white under UV light.\n\nLSD is an ergoline derivative. It is commonly synthesized by reacting diethylamine with an activated form of lysergic acid. Activating reagents include phosphoryl chloride and peptide coupling reagents. Lysergic acid is made by alkaline hydrolysis of lysergamides like ergotamine, a substance usually derived from the ergot fungus on agar plate; or, theoretically possible, but impractical and uncommon, from ergine (lysergic acid amide, LSA) extracted from morning glory seeds. Lysergic acid can also be produced synthetically, eliminating the need for ergotamines.\n\nA single dose of LSD may be between 40 and 500 micrograms—an amount roughly equal to one-tenth the mass of a grain of sand. Threshold effects can be felt with as little as 25 micrograms of LSD. Dosages of LSD are measured in micrograms (µg), or millionths of a gram. By comparison, dosages of most drugs, both recreational and medicinal, are measured in milligrams (mg), or thousandths of a gram. For example, an active dose of mescaline, roughly , has effects comparable to 100 µg or less of LSD.\n\nIn the mid-1960s, the most important black market LSD manufacturer (Owsley Stanley) distributed acid at a standard concentration of 270 µg, while street samples of the 1970s contained 30 to 300 µg. By the 1980s, the amount had reduced to between 100 and 125 µg, dropping more in the 1990s to the 20–80 µg range, and even more in the 2000s (decade).\n\n\"LSD,\" writes the chemist Alexander Shulgin, \"is an unusually fragile molecule ... As a salt, in water, cold, and free from air and light exposure, it is stable indefinitely.\"\n\nLSD has two labile protons at the tertiary stereogenic C5 and C8 positions, rendering these centres prone to epimerisation. The C8 proton is more labile due to the electron-withdrawing carboxamide attachment, but removal of the chiral proton at the C5 position (which was once also an alpha proton of the parent molecule tryptophan) is assisted by the inductively withdrawing nitrogen and pi electron delocalisation with the indole ring.\n\nLSD also has enamine-type reactivity because of the electron-donating effects of the indole ring. Because of this, chlorine destroys LSD molecules on contact; even though chlorinated tap water contains only a slight amount of chlorine, the small quantity of compound typical to an LSD solution will likely be eliminated when dissolved in tap water. The double bond between the 8-position and the aromatic ring, being conjugated with the indole ring, is susceptible to nucleophilic attacks by water or alcohol, especially in the presence of light. LSD often converts to \"lumi-LSD\", which is inactive in human beings.\n\nA controlled study was undertaken to determine the stability of LSD in pooled urine samples.\nThe concentrations of LSD in urine samples were followed over time at various temperatures, in different types of storage containers, at various exposures to different wavelengths of light, and at varying pH values. These studies demonstrated no significant loss in LSD concentration at 25 °C for up to four weeks. After four weeks of incubation, a 30% loss in LSD concentration at 37 °C and up to a 40% at 45 °C were observed. Urine fortified with LSD and stored in amber glass or nontransparent polyethylene containers showed no change in concentration under any light conditions. Stability of LSD in transparent containers under light was dependent on the distance between the light source and the samples, the wavelength of light, exposure time, and the intensity of light. After prolonged exposure to heat in alkaline pH conditions, 10 to 15% of the parent LSD epimerized to iso-LSD. Under acidic conditions, less than 5% of the LSD was converted to iso-LSD. It was also demonstrated that trace amounts of metal ions in buffer or urine could catalyze the decomposition of LSD and that this process can be avoided by the addition of EDTA.\n\nLSD may be quantified in urine as part of a drug abuse testing program, in plasma or serum to confirm a diagnosis of poisoning in hospitalized victims or in whole blood to assist in a forensic investigation of a traffic or other criminal violation or a case of sudden death. Both the parent drug and its major metabolite are unstable in biofluids when exposed to light, heat or alkaline conditions and therefore specimens are protected from light, stored at the lowest possible temperature and analyzed quickly to minimize losses.\n\nThe apparent plasma half life of LSD is considered to be around 5.1 hours with peak plasma concentrations occurring 3 hours after administration.\n\nLSD was first synthesized on November 16, 1938 by Swiss chemist Albert Hofmann at the Sandoz Laboratories in Basel, Switzerland as part of a large research program searching for medically useful ergot alkaloid derivatives. LSD's psychedelic properties were discovered 5 years later when Hofmann himself accidentally ingested an unknown quantity of the chemical. The first intentional ingestion of LSD occurred on April 19, 1943, when Hofmann ingested 250 µg of LSD. He said this would be a threshold dose based on the dosages of other ergot alkaloids. Hofmann found the effects to be much stronger than he anticipated. Sandoz Laboratories introduced LSD as a psychiatric drug in 1947 and marketed LSD as a psychiatric panacea, hailing it \"as a cure for everything from schizophrenia to criminal behavior, 'sexual perversions,' and alcoholism.\" The abbreviation \"LSD\" is from the German \"LysergSäureDiethylamid\".\n\nBeginning in the 1950s, the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) began a research program code named Project MKULTRA. The CIA introduced LSD to the United States, purchasing the entire world's supply for $240,000 and propagating the LSD, through CIA front organizations to American hospitals, clinics, prisons and research centers. Experiments included administering LSD to CIA employees, military personnel, doctors, other government agents, prostitutes, mentally ill patients, and members of the general public in order to study their reactions, usually without the subjects' knowledge. The project was revealed in the US congressional Rockefeller Commission report in 1975.\n\nIn 1963, the Sandoz patents expired on LSD. Several figures, including Aldous Huxley, Timothy Leary, and Al Hubbard, began to advocate the consumption of LSD. LSD became central to the counterculture of the 1960s. In the early 1960s the use of LSD and other hallucinogens was advocated by new proponents of consciousness expansion such as Leary, Huxley, Alan Watts and Arthur Koestler, and according to L. R. Veysey they profoundly influenced the thinking of the new generation of youth.\n\nOn October 24, 1968, possession of LSD was made illegal in the United States. The last FDA approved study of LSD in patients ended in 1980, while a study in healthy volunteers was made in the late 1980s. Legally approved and regulated psychiatric use of LSD continued in Switzerland until 1993.\n\nBy the mid-1960s, the youth countercultures in California, particularly in San Francisco, had adopted the use of hallucinogenic drugs, with the first major underground LSD factory established by Owsley Stanley. From 1964, the Merry Pranksters, a loose group that developed around novelist Ken Kesey, sponsored the Acid Tests, a series of events primarily staged in or near San Francisco, involving the taking of LSD (supplied by Stanley), accompanied by light shows, film projection and discordant, improvised music known as the \"psychedelic symphony\". The Pranksters helped popularize LSD use, through their road trips across America in a psychedelically-decorated converted school bus, which involved distributing the drug and meeting with major figures of the beat movement, and through publications about their activities such as Tom Wolfe's \"The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test\" (1968).\n\nIn San Francisco's Haight-Ashbury neighborhood, brothers Ron and Jay Thelin opened the Psychedelic Shop in January 1966. The Thelins' store is regarded as the first ever head shop. The Thelins opened the store to promote safe use of LSD, which was then still legal in California. The Psychedelic Shop helped to further popularize LSD in the Haight and to make the neighborhood the unofficial capital of the hippie counterculture in the United States. Ron Thelin was also involved in organizing the Love Pageant rally, a protest held in Golden Gate park to protest California's newly adopted ban on LSD in October 1966. At the rally, hundreds of attendees took acid in unison. Although the Psychedelic Shop closed after barely a year-and-a-half in business, its role in popularizing LSD was considerable.\nA similar and connected nexus of LSD use in the creative arts developed around the same time in London. A key figure in this phenomenon in the UK was British academic Michael Hollingshead, who first tried LSD in America in 1961 while he was the Executive Secretary for the Institute of British-American Cultural Exchange. After being given a large quantity of pure Sandoz LSD (which was still legal at the time) and experiencing his first \"trip\", Hollingshead contacted Aldous Huxley, who suggested that he get in touch with Harvard academic Timothy Leary, and over the next few years, in concert with Leary and Richard Alpert, Hollingshead played a major role in their famous LSD research at Millbrook before moving to New York City, where he conducted his own LSD experiments. In 1965 Hollingshead returned to the UK and founded the World Psychedelic Center in Chelsea, London.\n\nIn both music and art, the influence of LSD was soon being more widely seen and heard thanks to the bands that participated in the Acid Tests and related events, including the Grateful Dead, Jefferson Airplane and Big Brother and the Holding Company, and through the inventive poster and album art of San Francisco-based artists like Rick Griffin, Victor Moscoso, Bonnie MacLean, Stanley Mouse & Alton Kelley, and Wes Wilson, meant to evoke the visual experience of an LSD trip. LSD had a strong influence on the Grateful Dead and the culture of \"Deadheads\".\n\nAmong the many famous people in the UK that Michael Hollingshead is reputed to have introduced to LSD are artist and Hipgnosis founder Storm Thorgerson, and musicians Donovan, Keith Richards, Paul McCartney, John Lennon, and George Harrison. Although establishment concern about the new drug led to it being declared an illegal drug by the Home Secretary in 1966, LSD was soon being used widely in the upper echelons of the British art and music scene, including members of the Beatles, the Rolling Stones, the Moody Blues, the Small Faces, Pink Floyd, Jimi Hendrix and others, and the products of these experiences were soon being both heard and seen by the public with singles like the Small Faces' \"Itchycoo Park\" and LPs like the Beatles' \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\" and Cream's \"Disraeli Gears\", which featured music that showed the obvious influence of the musicians' recent psychedelic excursions, and which were packaged in elaborately-designed album covers that featured vividly-coloured psychedelic artwork by artists like Peter Blake, Martin Sharp, Hapshash and the Coloured Coat (Nigel Waymouth and Michael English) and art/music collective The Fool.\n\nIn the 1960s, musicians from psychedelic music and psychedelic rock bands began to refer (at first indirectly, and later explicitly) to the drug and attempted to recreate or reflect the experience of taking LSD in their music. A number of features are often included in psychedelic music. Exotic instrumentation, with a particular fondness for the sitar and tabla are common. Electric guitars are used to create feedback, and are played through wah wah and fuzzbox effect pedals. Elaborate studio effects are often used, such as backwards tapes, panning, phasing, long delay loops, and extreme reverb. In the 1960s there was a use of primitive electronic instruments such as early synthesizers and the theremin. Later forms of electronic psychedelia also employed repetitive computer-generated beats. Songs allegedly referring to LSD include John Prine's \"Illegal Smile\" and the Beatles' song \"Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds\", although the authors of the latter song repeatedly denied this claim.\n\nIn modern times, LSD has had a prominent influence on artists such as Keith Haring, electronic dance music, and the jam band Phish.\n\nThe United Nations Convention on Psychotropic Substances (adopted in 1971) requires the signing parties to prohibit LSD. Hence, it is illegal in all countries that were parties to the convention, including the United States, Australia, New Zealand, and most of Europe. However, enforcement of those laws varies from country to country. Medical and scientific research with LSD in humans is permitted under the 1971 UN Convention.\n\nLSD is a Schedule 9 prohibited substance in Australia under the Poisons Standard (February 2017). A Schedule 9 substance is defined as a substance which may be abused or misused, the manufacture, possession, sale or use of which should be prohibited by law except when required for medical or scientific research, or for analytical, teaching or training purposes with approval of Commonwealth and/or State or Territory Health Authorities.\n\nIn Western Australia section 9 of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1981 provides for summary trial before a magistrate for possession of less than 0.004g; section 11 provides rebuttable presumptions of intent to sell or supply if the quantity is 0.002g or more, or of possession for the purpose of trafficking if 0.01g.\n\nIn Canada, LSD is a controlled substance under Schedule III of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act. Every person who seeks to obtain the substance, without disclosing authorization to obtain such substances 30 days before obtaining another prescription from a practitioner, is guilty of an indictable offense and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 years. Possession for purpose of trafficking is an indictable offense punishable by imprisonment for 10 years.\n\nIn the United Kingdom, LSD is a Schedule 1 Class 'A' drug. This means it has no recognized legitimate uses and possession of the drug without a license is punishable with 7 years' imprisonment and/or an unlimited fine, and trafficking is punishable with life imprisonment and an unlimited fine (\"see main article on drug punishments Misuse of Drugs Act 1971).\"\n\nIn 2000, after consultation with members of the Royal College of Psychiatrists' Faculty of Substance Misuse, the UK Police Foundation issued the Runciman Report which recommended \"\"the transfer of LSD from Class A to Class B\"\".\n\nIn November 2009, the UK Transform Drug Policy Foundation released in the House of Commons a guidebook to the legal regulation of drugs, \"After the War on Drugs: Blueprint for Regulation\", which details options for regulated distribution and sale of LSD and other psychedelics.\n\nLSD is Schedule I in the United States, according to the Controlled Substances Act of 1970. This means LSD is illegal to manufacture, buy, possess, process, or distribute without a license from the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA). By classifying LSD as a Schedule I substance, the DEA holds that LSD meets the following three criteria: it is deemed to have a high potential for abuse; it has no legitimate medical use in treatment; and there is a lack of accepted safety for its use under medical supervision. There are no documented deaths from chemical toxicity; most LSD deaths are a result of behavioral toxicity.\n\nThere can also be substantial discrepancies between the amount of chemical LSD that one possesses and the amount of possession with which one can be charged in the US. This is because LSD is almost always present in a medium (e.g. blotter or neutral liquid), and in some contexts, the amount that can be considered with respect to sentencing is the total mass of the drug and its medium. This discrepancy was the subject of 1995 United States Supreme Court case, \"Neal v. United States\", which determined that for finding minimum sentence lengths, the total medium weight is used, while for determining the severity of the offense, an estimation of the chemical mass is used.\n\nLysergic acid and lysergic acid amide, LSD precursors, are both classified in Schedule III of the Controlled Substances Act. Ergotamine tartrate, a precursor to lysergic acid, is regulated under the Chemical Diversion and Trafficking Act.\n\nIn April 2009, the Mexican Congress approved changes in the General Health Law that decriminalized the possession of illegal drugs for immediate consumption and personal use, allowing a person to possess a moderate amount of LSD. The only restriction is that people in possession of drugs should not be within a 300-meter radius of schools, police departments, or correctional facilities. Marijuana, along with cocaine, opium, heroin, and other drugs were also decriminalized; their possession is not considered a crime as long as the dose does not exceed the limit established in the General Health Law. Many question this, as cocaine is as synthesised as heroin, and both are produced as extracts from plants. The law establishes very low amount thresholds and strictly defines personal dosage. For those arrested with more than the threshold allowed by the law this can result in heavy prison sentences, as they will be assumed to be small traffickers even if there are no other indications that the amount was meant for selling.\n\nIn the Czech Republic, until 31 December 1998 only drug possession \"\"for other person\"\" (i.e. intent to sell) was criminal (apart from production, importation, exportation, offering or mediation, which was and remains criminal) while possession for personal use remained legal.\n\nOn 1 January 1999, an amendment of the Criminal Code, which was necessitated in order to align the Czech drug rules with the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, became effective, criminalizing possession of \"\"amount larger than small\"\" also for personal use (Art. 187a of the Criminal Code) while possession of small amounts for personal use became a misdemeanor.\n\nThe judicial practice came to the conclusion that the \"\"amount larger than small\"\" must be five to ten times larger (depending on drug) than a usual single dose of an average consumer.\n\nUnder the Regulation No. 467/2009 Coll, possession of less than 5 doses of LSD was to be considered smaller than large for the purposes of the Criminal Code and was to be treated as a misdemeanor subject to a fine equal to a parking ticket.\n\nAccording to the 2008 Constitution of Ecuador, in its Article 364, the Ecuadorian state does not see drug consumption as a crime but only as a health concern. Since June 2013 the State drugs regulatory office CONSEP has published a table which establishes maximum quantities carried by persons so as to be considered in legal possession and that person as not a seller of drugs. The \"CONSEP established, at their latest general meeting, that the 0.020 milligrams of LSD shall be considered the maximum consumer amount.\n\nAn active dose of LSD is very minute, allowing a large number of doses to be synthesized from a comparatively small amount of raw material. Twenty five kilograms of precursor ergotamine tartrate can produce 5–6 kg of pure crystalline LSD; this corresponds to 100 million doses. Because the masses involved are so small, concealing and transporting illicit LSD is much easier than smuggling cocaine, cannabis, or other illegal drugs.\n\nManufacturing LSD requires laboratory equipment and experience in the field of organic chemistry. It takes two to three days to produce 30 to 100 grams of pure compound. It is believed that LSD is not usually produced in large quantities, but rather in a series of small batches. This technique minimizes the loss of precursor chemicals in case a step does not work as expected.\n\nLSD is produced in crystalline form and then mixed with excipients or redissolved for production in ingestible forms. Liquid solution is either distributed in small vials or, more commonly, sprayed onto or soaked into a distribution medium. Historically, LSD solutions were first sold on sugar cubes, but practical considerations forced a change to tablet form. Appearing in 1968 as an orange tablet measuring about 6 mm across, \"Orange Sunshine\" acid was the first largely available form of LSD after its possession was made illegal. Tim Scully, a prominent chemist, made some of these tablets, but said that most \"Sunshine\" in the USA came by way of Ronald Stark, who imported approximately thirty-five million doses from Europe.\n\nOver a period of time, tablet dimensions, weight, shape and concentration of LSD evolved from large (4.5–8.1 mm diameter), heavyweight (≥150 mg), round, high concentration (90–350 µg/tab) dosage units to small (2.0–3.5 mm diameter) lightweight (as low as 4.7 µg/tab), variously shaped, lower concentration (12–85 µg/tab, average range 30–40 µg/tab) dosage units. LSD tablet shapes have included cylinders, cones, stars, spacecraft, and heart shapes. The smallest tablets became known as \"Microdots\".\n\nAfter tablets came \"computer acid\" or \"blotter paper LSD\", typically made by dipping a preprinted sheet of blotting paper into an LSD/water/alcohol solution. More than 200 types of LSD tablets have been encountered since 1969 and more than 350 blotter paper designs have been observed since 1975. About the same time as blotter paper LSD came \"Windowpane\" (AKA \"Clearlight\"), which contained LSD inside a thin gelatin square a quarter of an inch (6 mm) across. LSD has been sold under a wide variety of often short-lived and regionally restricted street names including Acid, Trips, Uncle Sid, Blotter, Lucy, Alice and doses, as well as names that reflect the designs on the sheets of blotter paper. Authorities have encountered the drug in other forms—including powder or crystal, and capsule.\n\nLSD manufacturers and traffickers in the United States can be categorized into two groups: A few large-scale producers, and an equally limited number of small, clandestine chemists, consisting of independent producers who, operating on a comparatively limited scale, can be found throughout the country. As a group, independent producers are of less concern to the Drug Enforcement Administration than the large-scale groups because their product reaches only local markets.\n\nMany LSD dealers and chemists describe a religious or humanitarian purpose that motivates their illicit activity. Nicholas Schou's book \"Orange Sunshine: The Brotherhood of Eternal Love and Its Quest to Spread Peace, Love, and Acid to the World\" describes one such group, the Brotherhood of Eternal Love. The group was a major American LSD trafficking group in the late 1960s and early 1970s.\n\nIn the second half of the 20th century, dealers and chemists loosely associated with the Grateful Dead like Owsley Stanley, Nicholas Sand, Karen Horning, Sarah Maltzer, \"Dealer McDope,\" and Leonard Pickard played an essential role in distributing LSD.\n\nSince 2005, law enforcement in the United States and elsewhere has seized several chemicals and combinations of chemicals in blotter paper which were sold as LSD mimics, including DOB, a mixture of DOC and DOI, 25I-NBOMe, and a mixture of DOC and DOB. Street users of LSD are often under the impression that blotter paper which is actively hallucinogenic can only be LSD because that is the only chemical with low enough doses to fit on a small square of blotter paper. While it is true that LSD requires lower doses than most other hallucinogens, blotter paper is capable of absorbing a much larger amount of material. The DEA performed a chromatographic analysis of blotter paper containing 2C-C which showed that the paper contained a much greater concentration of the active chemical than typical LSD doses, although the exact quantity was not determined. Blotter LSD mimics can have relatively small dose squares; a sample of blotter paper containing DOC seized by Concord, California police had dose markings approximately 6 mm apart. Several deaths have been attributed to 25I-NBOMe.\n\nA number of organizations—including the Beckley Foundation, MAPS, Heffter Research Institute and the Albert Hofmann Foundation—exist to fund, encourage and coordinate research into the medicinal and spiritual uses of LSD and related psychedelics. New clinical LSD experiments in humans started in 2009 for the first time in 35 years. As it is illegal in many areas of the world, potential medical uses are difficult to study.\n\nIn 2001 the United States Drug Enforcement Administration stated that LSD \"produces no aphrodisiac effects, does not increase creativity, has no lasting positive effect in treating alcoholics or criminals, does not produce a 'model psychosis', and does not generate immediate personality change.\" More recently, experimental uses of LSD have included the treatment of alcoholism and pain and cluster headache relief.\n\nIn the 1950s and 1960s LSD was used in psychiatry to enhance psychotherapy known as psychedelic therapy. Some psychiatrists believed LSD was especially useful at helping patients to \"unblock\" repressed subconscious material through other psychotherapeutic methods, and also for treating alcoholism. One study concluded, \"The root of the therapeutic value of the LSD experience is its potential for producing self-acceptance and self-surrender,\" presumably by forcing the user to face issues and problems in that individual's psyche.\n\nTwo recent reviews concluded that conclusions drawn from most of these early trials are unreliable due to serious methodological flaws. These include the absence of adequate control groups, lack of followup, and vague criteria for therapeutic outcome. In many cases studies failed to convincingly demonstrate whether the drug or the therapeutic interaction was responsible for any beneficial effects.\n\nIn recent years organizations like the Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies have renewed clinical research of LSD.\n\nIn the 1950s and 1960s, some psychiatrists (e.g. Oscar Janiger) explored the potential effect of LSD on creativity. Experimental studies attempted to measure the effect of LSD on creative activity and aesthetic appreciation.\n\nSince 2008 there has been ongoing research into using LSD to alleviate anxiety for terminally ill cancer patients coping with their impending deaths.\n\nA 2012 meta-analysis found evidence that a single dose of LSD in conjunction with various alcoholism treatment programs was associated with a decrease in alcohol abuse, lasting for several months, but no effect was seen at one year. Adverse events included seizure, moderate confusion and agitation, nausea, vomiting, and acting in a bizarre fashion.\n\nLSD has been used as a treatment for cluster headaches with positive results in some small studies.\n\nSome notable individuals have commented publicly on their experiences with LSD. Some of these comments date from the era when it was legally available in the US and Europe for non-medical uses, and others pertain to psychiatric treatment in the 1950s and 1960s. Still others describe experiences with illegal LSD, obtained for philosophic, artistic, therapeutic, spiritual, or recreational purposes.\nBULLET::::- Richard Feynman, a notable physicist at California Institute of Technology, tried LSD during his professorship at Caltech. Feynman largely sidestepped the issue when dictating his anecdotes; he mentions it in passing in the \"O Americano, Outra Vez\" section.\nBULLET::::- Jerry Garcia stated in a July 3, 1989 interview for \"Relix Magazine\", in response to the question \"Have your feelings about LSD changed over the years?,\" \"They haven't changed much. My feelings about LSD are mixed. It's something that I both fear and that I love at the same time. I never take any psychedelic, have a psychedelic experience, without having that feeling of, \"I don't know what's going to happen.\" In that sense, it's still fundamentally an enigma and a mystery.\"\nBULLET::::- Bill Gates implied in an interview with \"Playboy\" that he tried LSD during his youth.\nBULLET::::- Aldous Huxley, author of \"Brave New World\", became a user of psychedelics after moving to Hollywood. He was at the forefront of the counterculture's experimentation with psychedelic drugs, which led to his 1954 work \"The Doors of Perception\". Dying from cancer, he asked his wife on 22 November 1963 to inject him with 100 µg of LSD. He died later that day.\nBULLET::::- Steve Jobs, co-founder and former CEO of Apple Inc., said, \"Taking LSD was a profound experience, one of the most important things in my life.\"\nBULLET::::- In a 2004 interview, Paul McCartney said that The Beatles' songs \"Day Tripper\" and \"Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds\" were inspired by LSD trips. Nonetheless, John Lennon consistently stated over the course of many years that the fact that the initials of \"Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds\" spelled out L-S-D was a coincidence (the title came from a picture drawn by his son Julian) and that the band members did not notice until after the song had been released, and Paul McCartney corroborated that story. John Lennon, George Harrison, and Ringo Starr also experimented with the drug, although McCartney cautioned that \"it's easy to overestimate the influence of drugs on the Beatles' music.\"\nBULLET::::- Michel Foucault had an LSD experience with Simeon Wade in the Death Valley and later wrote “it was the greatest experience of his life, and that it profoundly changed his life and his work.\"\nBULLET::::- Kary Mullis is reported to credit LSD with helping him develop DNA amplification technology, for which he received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1993.\nBULLET::::- Oliver Sacks, a neurologist famous for writing best-selling case histories about his patients' disorders and unusual experiences, talks about his own experiences with LSD and other perception altering chemicals, in his book, \"Hallucinations\".\n\nBULLET::::- LSD art\nBULLET::::- Psychedelic microdosing\nBULLET::::- Psychedelic therapy\nBULLET::::- Owsley Stanley\nBULLET::::- Urban legends about LSD\n\nBULLET::::- Drug Profiles: LSD European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction\nBULLET::::- InfoFacts – Hallucinogens NIDA\nBULLET::::- LSD-25 at Erowid\nBULLET::::- LSD entry in TiHKAL • info\nBULLET::::- U.S. National Library of Medicine: Drug Information Portal – Lysergic acid diethylamide\n\nBULLET::::- \"Hofmann's Potion\" a documentary on the origins of LSD\nBULLET::::- , documentary film directed by Aron Ranen, 2006\nBULLET::::- \"Inside LSD\" National Geographic Channel, 2009\n"}
{"id": "17539", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17539", "title": "Linnaean taxonomy", "text": "Linnaean taxonomy\n\nLinnaean taxonomy can mean either of two related concepts: \nBULLET::::1. the particular form of biological classification (taxonomy) set up by Carl Linnaeus, as set forth in his \"Systema Naturae\" (1735) and subsequent works. In the taxonomy of Linnaeus there are three kingdoms, divided into \"classes\", and they, in turn, into \"orders\", \"genera\" (singular: \"genus\"), and \"species\" (singular: \"species\"), with an additional rank lower than species.\nBULLET::::2. a term for rank-based classification of organisms, in general. That is, taxonomy in the traditional sense of the word: rank-based scientific classification. This term is especially used as opposed to cladistic systematics, which groups organisms into clades. It is attributed to Linnaeus, although he neither invented the concept of ranked classification (it goes back to Plato and Aristotle) nor gave it its present form. In fact, it does not have an exact present form, as \"Linnaean taxonomy\" as such does not really exist: it is a collective (abstracting) term for what actually are several separate fields, which use similar approaches.\n\nLinnaean name also has two meanings: depending on the context, it may either refer to a formal name given by Linnaeus (personally), such as \"Giraffa camelopardalis\" Linnaeus, 1758, or a formal name in the accepted nomenclature (as opposed to a modernistic clade name).\n\nIn his \"Imperium Naturae\", Linnaeus established three kingdoms, namely \"Regnum Animale\", \"Regnum Vegetabile\" and \"Regnum Lapideum\". This approach, the Animal, Vegetable and Mineral Kingdoms, survives today in the popular mind, notably in the form of the parlour game question: \"Is it animal, vegetable or mineral?\". The work of Linnaeus had a huge impact on science; it was indispensable as a foundation for biological nomenclature, now regulated by the nomenclature codes. Two of his works, the first edition of the \"Species Plantarum\" (1753) for plants and the tenth edition of the \"Systema Naturae\" (1758), are accepted as part of the starting points of nomenclature; his binomials (names for species) and generic names take priority over those of others. However, the impact he had on science was not because of the value of his taxonomy.\n\nHis classes and orders of plants, according to his \"Systema Sexuale\", were never intended to represent natural groups (as opposed to his \"ordines naturales\" in his \"Philosophia Botanica\") but only for use in identification. They were used for that purpose well into the nineteenth century. Within each class were several orders.\n\nThe Linnaean classes for plants, in the Sexual System, were: \nBULLET::::- Classis 1. Monandria: flowers with 1 stamen\nBULLET::::- Classis 2. Diandria: flowers with 2 stamens\nBULLET::::- Classis 3. Triandria: flowers with 3 stamens\nBULLET::::- Classis 4. Tetrandria: flowers with 4 stamens\nBULLET::::- Classis 5. Pentandria: flowers with 5 stamens\nBULLET::::- Classis 6. Hexandria: flowers with 6 stamens\nBULLET::::- Hexandria monogynia pp. 285–352\nBULLET::::- Hexandria polygynia pp. 342–343\nBULLET::::- Classis 7. Heptandria: flowers with 7 stamens\nBULLET::::- Classis 8. Octandria: flowers with 8 stamens\nBULLET::::- Classis 9. Enneandria: flowers with 9 stamens\nBULLET::::- Classis 10. Decandria: flowers with 10 stamens\nBULLET::::- Classis 11. Dodecandria: flowers with 12 stamens\nBULLET::::- Classis 12. Icosandria: flowers with 20 (or more) stamens, perigynous\nBULLET::::- Classis 13. Polyandria: flowers with many stamens, inserted on the receptacle\nBULLET::::- Classis 14. Didynamia: flowers with 4 stamens, 2 long and 2 short\nBULLET::::- Classis 15. Tetradynamia: flowers with 6 stamens, 4 long and 2 short\nBULLET::::- Classis 16. Monadelphia; flowers with the anthers separate, but the filaments united, at least at the base\nBULLET::::- Classis 17. Diadelphia; flowers with the stamens united in two separate groups\nBULLET::::- Classis 18. Polyadelphia; flowers with the stamens united in several separate groups\nBULLET::::- Classis 19. Syngenesia; flowers with stamens united by their anthers\nBULLET::::- Classis 20. Gynandria; flowers with the stamens united to the pistils\nBULLET::::- Classis 21. Monoecia: monoecious plants\nBULLET::::- Classis 22. Dioecia: dioecious plants\nBULLET::::- Classis 23. Polygamia: polygamodioecious plants\nBULLET::::- Classis 24. Cryptogamia: the \"flowerless\" plants, including ferns, fungi, algae, and bryophytes\n\nThe classes based on the number of stamens were then subdivided by the number of pistils, e.g. \"Hexandria monogynia\" with six stamens and one pistil.\n\nIndex to genera p. 1201\n\nOnly in the Animal Kingdom is the higher taxonomy of Linnaeus still more or less recognizable and some of these names are still in use, but usually not quite for the same groups. He divided the Animal Kingdom into six classes, in the tenth edition, of 1758, these were:\nBULLET::::- Classis 1. Mammalia (mammals)\nBULLET::::- Classis 2. Aves (birds)\nBULLET::::- Classis 3. Amphibia (amphibians)\nBULLET::::- Classis 4. Pisces\nBULLET::::- Classis 5. Insecta\nBULLET::::- Classis 6. Vermes\n\nHis taxonomy of minerals has long since dropped from use. In the tenth edition, 1758, of the \"Systema Naturae\", the Linnaean classes were:\n\nBULLET::::- Classis 1. Petræ\nBULLET::::- Classis 2. Mineræ\nBULLET::::- Classis 3. Fossilia\nBULLET::::- Classis 4. Vitamentra\n\nThis rank-based method of classifying living organisms was originally popularized by (and much later named for) Linnaeus, although it has changed considerably since his time. The greatest innovation of Linnaeus, and still the most important aspect of this system, is the general use of binomial nomenclature, the combination of a genus name and a second term, which together uniquely identify each species of organism within a kingdom. For example, the human species is uniquely identified within the animal kingdom by the name \"Homo sapiens\". No other species of animal can have this same binomen (the technical term for a binomial in the case of animals). Prior to Linnaean taxonomy, animals were classified according to their mode of movement.\n\nLinnaeus's use of binomial nomenclature was anticipated by the theory of definition used in Scholasticism. Scholastic logicians and philosophers of nature defined the species man, for example, as \"Animal rationalis\", where \"animal\" was considered a genus and \"rationalis\" (Latin for \"rational\") the characteristic distinguishing man from all other animals. Treating \"animal\" as the immediate genus of the species man, horse, etc. is of little practical use to the biological taxonomist, however. Accordingly, Linnaeus's classification treats \"animal\" as a class including many genera (subordinated to the animal \"kingdom\" via intermediary classes such as \"orders\"), and treats \"homo\" as the genus of a species \"Homo sapiens\", with \"sapiens\" (Latin for \"knowing\" or \"understanding\") playing a differentiating role analogous to that played, in the Scholastic system, by \"rationalis\" (the word \"homo\", Latin for \"human being\", was used by the Scholastics to denote a species, not a genus).\n\nA strength of Linnaean taxonomy is that it can be used to organize the different kinds of living organisms, simply and practically. Every species can be given a unique (and, one hopes, stable) name, as compared with common names that are often neither unique nor consistent from place to place and language to language. This uniqueness and stability are, of course, a result of the acceptance by working systematists (biologists specializing in taxonomy), not merely of the binomial names themselves, but of the rules governing the use of these names, which are laid down in formal nomenclature codes.\n\nSpecies can be placed in a ranked hierarchy, starting with either \"domains\" or \"kingdoms\". Domains are divided into kingdoms. Kingdoms are divided into \"phyla\" (singular: \"phylum\") — for animals; the term \"division\", used for plants and fungi, is equivalent to the rank of phylum (and the current International Code of Botanical Nomenclature allows the use of either term). Phyla (or divisions) are divided into \"classes\", and they, in turn, into \"orders\", \"families\", \"genera\" (singular: \"genus\"), and \"species\" (singular: \"species\"). There are ranks below species: in zoology, \"subspecies\" (but see \"form\" or \"morph\"); in botany, \"variety\" (varietas) and \"form\" (forma), etc.\n\nGroups of organisms at any of these ranks are called \"taxa\" (singular: \"taxon\") or \"taxonomic groups\".\n\nThe Linnaean system has proven robust and it remains the only extant working classification system at present that enjoys universal scientific acceptance. However, although the number of ranks is unlimited, in practice any classification becomes more cumbersome the more ranks are added. Among the later subdivisions that have arisen are such entities as phyla, families, and tribes, as well as any number of ranks with prefixes (superfamilies, subfamilies, etc.). The use of newer taxonomic tools such as cladistics and phylogenetic nomenclature has led to a different way of looking at evolution (expressed in many nested clades) and this sometimes leads to a desire for more ranks. An example of such complexity is the scheme for mammals proposed by McKenna and Bell.\n\nOver time, the understanding of the relationships between living things has changed. Linnaeus could only base his scheme on the structural similarities of the different organisms. The greatest change was the widespread acceptance of evolution as the mechanism of biological diversity and species formation, following the 1859 publication of Charles Darwin's \"On the Origin of Species\". It then became generally understood that classifications ought to reflect the phylogeny of organisms, their descent by evolution. This led to evolutionary taxonomy, where the various extant and extinct are linked together to construct a phylogeny. This is largely what is meant by the term 'Linnaean taxonomy' when used in a modern context.\nIn cladistics, originating in the work of Willi Hennig, 1950 onwards, each taxon is grouped so as to include the common ancestor of the group's members (and thus to avoid phylogeny). Such taxa may be either monophyletic (including all descendants) such as genus \"Homo\", or paraphyletic (excluding some descendants), such as genus \"Australopithecus\".\n\nOriginally, Linnaeus established three kingdoms in his scheme, namely for Plants, Animals and an additional group for minerals, which has long since been abandoned. Since then, various life forms have been moved into three new kingdoms: Monera, for prokaryotes (i.e., bacteria); Protista, for protozoans and most algae; and Fungi. This five kingdom scheme is still far from the phylogenetic ideal and has largely been supplanted in modern taxonomic work by a division into three domains: Bacteria and Archaea, which contain the prokaryotes, and Eukaryota, comprising the remaining forms. These arrangements should not be seen as definitive. They are based on the genomes of the organisms; as knowledge on this increases, classifications will change.\n\nRepresenting presumptive evolutionary relationships, especially given the wide acceptance of cladistic methodology and numerous molecular phylogenies that have challenged long-accepted classifications, within the framework of Linnaean taxonomy, is sometimes seen as problematic. Therefore, some systematists have proposed a PhyloCode to replace it.\n\nBULLET::::- History of plant systematics\nBULLET::::- Phylogenetic tree – a way to express insights into evolutionary relationships\nBULLET::::- Zoology mnemonic for a list of mnemonic sentences used to help people remember the list of Linnaean ranks.\n\nBULLET::::- Dawkins, Richard. 2004. \"The Ancestor's Tale: A Pilgrimage to the Dawn of Life\". Boston: Houghton Mifflin.\nBULLET::::- Ereshefsky, Marc. 2000. \"The Poverty of the Linnaean Hierarchy: A Philosophical Study of Biological Taxonomy\". Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.\nBULLET::::- Gould, Stephen Jay. 1989. \"Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the Nature of History\". W. W. Norton & Co.\nBULLET::::- Pavord, Anna. \"The Naming of Names: The Search for Order in the World of Plants\". Bloomsbury.\nBULLET::::- Wikispecies\nBULLET::::- International Code of Botanical Nomenclature (Saint Louis Code), Electronic version\nBULLET::::- International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants (Melbourne Code, 2011), Electronic version\nBULLET::::- ICZN website, for zoological nomenclature\nBULLET::::- Text of the ICZN, Electronic version\nBULLET::::- ZooBank: The World Register of Animal Names\nBULLET::::- International Committee on Systematics of Prokaryotes for bacteria\nBULLET::::- International Code of Zoological Nomenclature. 4th Edition. By the International Union of Biological Sciences\nBULLET::::- ICTVdB website, for virus nomenclature by the International Union of Microbiological Societies\nBULLET::::- Tree of Life\nBULLET::::- European Species Names in Linnaean, Czech, English, German and French\n"}
{"id": "17541", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17541", "title": "Lawyer", "text": "Lawyer\n\nA lawyer or attorney is a person who practices law, as an advocate, attorney, attorney at law, barrister, barrister-at-law, bar-at-law, canonist, canon lawyer, civil law notary, counsel, counselor, counsellor, solicitor, legal executive, or public servant preparing, interpreting and applying law, but not as a paralegal or charter executive secretary. Working as a lawyer involves the practical application of abstract legal theories and knowledge to solve specific individualized problems, or to advance the interests of those who hire lawyers to perform legal services. The role of the lawyer varies greatly across different legal jurisdictions.\n\nIn practice, legal jurisdictions exercise their right to determine who is recognized as being a lawyer. As a result, the meaning of the term \"lawyer\" may vary from place to place. Some jurisdictions have two types of lawyers, barrister and solicitors, whilst others fuse the two. A barrister is a lawyer who specializes in higher court appearances. A solicitor is a lawyer who is trained to prepare cases and give advice on legal subjects and can represent people in lower courts. Both barristers and solicitors have gone through law school, completed the requisite practical training. However, in jurisdictions where there is a split-profession, only barristers are admitted as members of their respective bar association.\n\nBULLET::::- In Australia, the word \"lawyer\" can be used to refer to both barristers and solicitors (whether in private practice or practicing as corporate in-house counsel), and whoever is admitted as a lawyer of the Supreme Court of a state or territory.\nBULLET::::- In Canada, the word \"lawyer\" only refers to individuals who have been called to the bar or, in Quebec, have qualified as civil law notaries. Common law lawyers in Canada are formally and properly called \"barristers and solicitors\", but should not be referred to as \"attorneys\", since that term has a different meaning in Canadian usage, being a person appointed under a power of attorney. However, in Quebec, civil law advocates (or \"avocats\" in French) often call themselves \"attorney\" and sometimes \"barrister and solicitor\" in English, and all lawyers in Quebec, or lawyers in the rest of Canada when practicing in French, are addressed with the honorific title, \"Me.\" or \"Maître\".\nBULLET::::- In England and Wales, \"lawyer\" is used to refer to persons who provide reserved and unreserved legal activities and includes practitioners such as barristers, attorneys, solicitors, registered foreign lawyers, patent attorneys, trade mark attorneys, licensed conveyancers, public notaries, commissioners for oaths, immigration advisers and claims management services. The Legal Services Act 2007 defines the \"\"legal activities\"\" that may only be performed by a person who is entitled to do so pursuant to the Act. 'Lawyer' is not a protected title.\nBULLET::::- In Pakistan, the term \"Advocate\" is used instead of lawyer in The Legal Practitioners and Bar Councils Act, 1973.\nBULLET::::- In India, the term \"lawyer\" is often commonly used, but the official term is \"advocate\" as prescribed under the Advocates Act, 1961.\nBULLET::::- In Scotland, the word \"lawyer\" refers to a more specific group of legally trained people. It specifically includes advocates and solicitors. In a generic sense, it may also include judges and law-trained support staff.\nBULLET::::- In the United States, the term generally refers to attorneys who may practice law. It is never used to refer to patent agents or paralegals. In fact, there are statutory and regulatory restrictions on non-lawyers like paralegals practicing law.\nBULLET::::- Other nations tend to have comparable terms for the analogous concept.\n\nIn most countries, particularly civil law countries, there has been a tradition of giving many legal tasks to a variety of civil law notaries, clerks, and scrivener. These countries do not have \"lawyers\" in the American sense, insofar as that term refers to a single type of general-purpose legal services provider; rather, their legal professions consist of a large number of different kinds of law-trained persons, known as jurists, some of whom are advocates who are licensed to practice in the courts. It is difficult to formulate accurate generalizations that cover all the countries with multiple legal professions, because each country has traditionally had its own peculiar method of dividing up legal work among all its different types of legal professionals.\n\nNotably, England, the mother of the common law jurisdictions, emerged from the Middle Ages with similar complexity in its legal professions, but then evolved by the 19th century to a single division between barristers and solicitors. An equivalent division developed between advocates and procurators in some civil law countries; these two types did not always monopolize the practice of law, in that they coexisted with civil law notaries.\n\nSeveral countries that originally had two or more legal professions have since \"fused\" or \"united\" their professions into a single type of lawyer. Most countries in this category are common law countries, though France, a civil law country, merged its jurists in 1990 and 1991 in response to Anglo-American competition. In countries with fused professions, a lawyer is usually permitted to carry out all or nearly all the responsibilities listed below.\n\nArguing a client's case before a judge or jury in a court of law is the traditional province of the barrister in England, and of advocates in some civil law jurisdictions. However, the boundary between barristers and solicitors has evolved. In England today, the barrister monopoly covers only appellate courts, and barristers must compete directly with solicitors in many trial courts. In countries like the United States, that have fused legal professions, there are trial lawyers who specialize in trying cases in court, but trial lawyers do not have a legal monopoly like barristers. In some countries, litigants have the option of arguing \"pro se\", or on their own behalf. It is common for litigants to appear unrepresented before certain courts like small claims courts; indeed, many such courts do not allow lawyers to speak for their clients, in an effort to save money for all participants in a small case. In other countries, like Venezuela, no one may appear before a judge unless represented by a lawyer. The advantage of the latter regime is that lawyers are familiar with the court's customs and procedures, and make the legal system more efficient for all involved. Unrepresented parties often damage their own credibility or slow the court down as a result of their inexperience.\n\nOften, lawyers brief a court in writing on the issues in a case before the issues can be orally argued. They may have to perform extensive research into relevant facts. Also, they are drafting legal papers and preparing for an oral argument.\n\nIn England, the usual division of labor is that a solicitor will obtain the facts of the case from the client and then brief a barrister (usually in writing). The barrister then researches and drafts the necessary court pleadings (which will be filed and served by the solicitor) and orally argues the case.\n\nIn Spain, the procurator merely signs and presents the papers to the court, but it is the advocate who drafts the papers and argues the case.\n\nIn some countries, like Japan, a scrivener or clerk may fill out court forms and draft simple papers for lay persons who cannot afford or do not need attorneys, and advise them on how to manage and argue their own cases.\n\nIn most developed countries, the legislature has granted original jurisdiction over highly technical matters to executive branch administrative agencies which oversee such things. As a result, some lawyers have become specialists in administrative law. In a few countries, there is a special category of jurists with a monopoly over this form of advocacy; for example, France formerly had \"conseils juridiques\" (who were merged into the main legal profession in 1991). In other countries, like the United States, lawyers have been effectively barred by statute from certain types of administrative hearings in order to preserve their informality.\n\nAn important aspect of a lawyer's job is developing and managing relationships with clients (or the client's employees, if the lawyer works in-house for a government or corporation). The client-lawyer relationship is explained in six steps. First, the relationship begins with an intake interview where the lawyer gets to know the client personally. Second step is discovering the facts of the client's case. Thirdly is clarifying what the client wants to accomplish. The fourth step is where the lawyer shapes the client's expectations as to what actually can be accomplished. The second to last step, begins to develop various claims or defenses for the client. Lastly, the lawyer explains her or his fees to the client.\n\nIn England, only solicitors were traditionally in direct contact with the client. The solicitor retained a barrister if one was necessary and acted as an intermediary between the barrister and the client. In most cases barristers were obliged, under what is known as the \"cab rank rule\", to accept instructions for a case in an area in which they held themselves out as practicing, at a court at which they normally appeared and at their usual rates.\n\nLegal advice is the application of abstract principles of law to the concrete facts of the client's case in order to advise the client about what they should do next. In many countries, only a properly licensed lawyer may provide legal advice to clients for good consideration, even if no lawsuit is contemplated or is in progress. Therefore, even conveyancer and corporate in-house counsel must first get a license to practice, though they may actually spend very little of their careers in court. Failure to obey such a rule is the crime of unauthorized practice of law.\n\nIn other countries, jurists who hold law degrees are allowed to provide legal advice to individuals or to corporations, and it is irrelevant if they lack a license and cannot appear in court. Some countries go further; in England and Wales, there is \"no\" general prohibition on the giving of legal advice. Singapore does not have any admission requirements for in-house counsel. Sometimes civil law notaries are allowed to give legal advice, as in Belgium.\n\nIn many countries, non-jurist accountants may provide what is technically legal advice in tax and accounting matters.\n\nIn virtually all countries, patents, trademarks, industrial designs and other forms of intellectual property must be formally registered with a government agency in order to receive maximum protection under the law. The division of such work among lawyers, licensed non-lawyer jurists/agents, and ordinary clerks or scriveners varies greatly from one country to the next.\n\nIn some countries, the negotiating and drafting of contracts is considered to be similar to the provision of legal advice, so that it is subject to the licensing requirement explained above. In others, jurists or notaries may negotiate or draft contracts.\n\nLawyers in some civil law countries traditionally deprecated \"transactional law\" or \"business law\" as beneath them. French law firms developed transactional departments only in the 1990s when they started to lose business to international firms based in the United States and the United Kingdom (where solicitors have always done transactional work).\n\nConveyancing is the drafting of the documents necessary for the transfer of real property, such as deeds and mortgages. In some jurisdictions, all real estate transactions must be carried out by a lawyer (or a solicitor where that distinction still exists). Such a monopoly is quite valuable from the lawyer's point of view; historically, conveyancing accounted for about half of English solicitors' income (though this has since changed), and a 1978 study showed that conveyancing \"accounts for as much as 80 percent of solicitor-client contact in New South Wales.\" In most common law jurisdictions outside of the United States, this monopoly arose from an 1804 law that was introduced by William Pitt the Younger as a \"quid pro quo\" for the raising of fees on the certification of legal professionals such as barristers, solicitors, attorneys and notaries.\n\nIn others, the use of a lawyer is optional and banks, title companies, or realtors may be used instead. In some civil law jurisdictions, real estate transactions are handled by civil law notaries. In England and Wales a special class of legal professional–the licensed conveyancer–is also allowed to carry out conveyancing services for reward.\n\nIn many countries, only lawyers have the legal authority to draft wills, trusts, and any other documents that ensure the efficient disposition of a person's property after death. In some civil law countries this responsibility is handled by civil law notaries.\n\nIn the United States, the estates of the deceased must generally be administered by a court through probate. American lawyers have a profitable monopoly on dispensing advice about probate law (which has been heavily criticized).\n\nIn many civil law countries, prosecutors are trained and employed as part of the judiciary; they are law-trained jurists, but may not necessarily be lawyers in the sense that the word is used in the common law world. In common law countries, prosecutors are usually lawyers holding regular licenses who simply happen to work for the government office that files criminal charges against suspects. Criminal defense lawyers specialize in the defense of those charged with any crimes.\n\nThe educational prerequisites for becoming a lawyer vary greatly from country to country. In some countries, law is taught by a faculty of law, which is a department of a university's general undergraduate college. Law students in those countries pursue a Master or Bachelor of Laws degree. In some countries it is common or even required for students to earn another bachelor's degree at the same time. It is often followed by a series of advanced examinations, apprenticeships, and additional coursework at special government institutes.\n\nIn other countries, particularly the UK and U.S.A., law is primarily taught at law schools. In America, the American Bar Association decides which law schools to approve and thereby which ones are deemed most respectable. In England and Wales, the Bar Professional Training Course (BPTC) must be taken to have the right to work and be named as a barrister. Students who decide to pursue a non-law subject at degree level can instead study the Graduate Diploma in Law (GDL) after their degrees, before beginning the Legal Practice Course (LPC) or BPTC. In the United States and countries following the American model, (such as Canada with the exception of the province of Quebec) law schools are graduate/professional schools where a bachelor's degree is a prerequisite for admission. Most law schools are part of universities but a few are independent institutions. Law schools in the United States and Canada (with the exception of McGill University) award graduating students a J.D. (Juris Doctor/Doctor of Jurisprudence) (as opposed to the Bachelor of Laws) as the practitioner's law degree. Many schools also offer post-doctoral law degrees such as the LL.M (Legum Magister/Master of Laws), or the S.J.D. (Scientiae Juridicae Doctor/Doctor of Juridical Science) for students interested in advancing their research knowledge and credentials in a specific area of law.\n\nThe methods and quality of legal education vary widely. Some countries require extensive clinical training in the form of apprenticeships or special clinical courses. Others, like Venezuela, do not. A few countries prefer to teach through assigned readings of judicial opinions (the casebook method) followed by intense in-class cross-examination by the professor (the Socratic method). Many others have only lectures on highly abstract legal doctrines, which forces young lawyers to figure out how to actually think and write like a lawyer at their first apprenticeship (or job). Depending upon the country, a typical class size could range from five students in a seminar to five hundred in a giant lecture room. In the United States, law schools maintain small class sizes, and as such, grant admissions on a more limited and competitive basis.\n\nSome countries, particularly industrialized ones, have a traditional preference for full-time law programs, while in developing countries, students often work full- or part-time to pay the tuition and fees of their part-time law programs.\n\nLaw schools in developing countries share several common problems, such as an over reliance on practicing judges and lawyers who treat teaching as a part-time hobby (and a concomitant scarcity of full-time law professors); incompetent faculty with questionable credentials; and textbooks that lag behind the current state of the law by two or three decades.\n\nSome jurisdictions grant a \"diploma privilege\" to certain institutions, so that merely earning a degree or credential from those institutions is the primary qualification for practicing law. Mexico allows anyone with a law degree to practice law. However, in a large number of countries, a law student must pass a bar examination (or a series of such examinations) before receiving a license to practice. In a handful of U.S. states, one may become an attorney (a so-called country lawyer) by simply \"reading law\" and passing the bar examination, without having to attend law school first (although very few people actually become lawyers that way).\n\nSome countries require a formal apprenticeship with an experienced practitioner, while others do not. For example, a few jurisdictions still allow an apprenticeship in place of any kind of formal legal education (though the number of persons who actually become lawyers that way is increasingly rare).\n\nSome countries, such as Singapore, do not have any admission requirements for in-house counsel.\n\nThe career structure of lawyers varies widely from one country to the next.\n\nIn most common law countries, especially those with fused professions, lawyers have many options over the course of their careers. Besides private practice, they can become a prosecutor, government counsel, corporate in-house counsel, administrative law judge, judge, arbitrator, or law professor. There are also many non-legal jobs for which legal training is good preparation, such as politician, corporate executive, government administrator, investment banker, entrepreneur, or journalist. In developing countries like India, a large majority of law students never actually practice, but simply use their law degree as a foundation for careers in other fields.\n\nIn most civil law countries, lawyers generally structure their legal education around their chosen specialty; the boundaries between different types of lawyers are carefully defined and hard to cross. After one earns a law degree, career mobility may be severely constrained. For example, unlike their American counterparts, it is difficult for German judges to leave the bench and become advocates in private practice. Another interesting example is France, where for much of the 20th century, all judiciary officials were graduates of an elite professional school for judges. Although the French judiciary has begun experimenting with the Anglo-American model of appointing judges from accomplished advocates, the few advocates who have actually joined the bench this way are looked down upon by their colleagues who have taken the traditional route to judicial office.\n\nIn a few civil law countries, such as Sweden, the legal profession is \"not\" rigorously bifurcated and everyone within it can easily change roles and arenas.\n\nIn many countries, lawyers are general practitioners who represent clients in a broad field of legal matters. In others, there has been a tendency since the start of the 20th century for lawyers to specialize early in their careers.\n\nIn countries where specialization is prevalent, many lawyers specialize in representing one side in one particular area of the law; thus, it is common in the United States to hear of plaintiffs' personal injury attorneys. Texas offers attorneys the opportunity to receive a board certification through the state's Texas Board of Legal Specialization. To be board certified, attorney applicants undergo a rigorous examination in one of 24 areas of practice offered by the Texas Board of Legal Specialization. Only those attorneys who are \"board certified\" are permitted to use the word \"specialize\" in any publicly accessible materials such as a website or television commercial. See Texas Rule 7.02(a)(6).\n\nLawyers in private practice generally work in specialized businesses known as law firms, with the exception of English barristers. The vast majority of law firms worldwide are small businesses that range in size from 1 to 10 lawyers. The United States, with its large number of firms with more than 50 lawyers, is an exception. The United Kingdom and Australia are also exceptions, as the UK, Australia and the U.S. are now home to several firms with more than 1,000 lawyers after a wave of mergers in the late 1990s.\n\nNotably, barristers in England, Wales, Northern Ireland and some states in Australia do \"not\" work in \"law firms\". Those who offer their services to members of the general public—as opposed to those working \"in-house\" — are required to be self-employed. Most work in groupings known as \"sets\" or \"chambers\", where some administrative and marketing costs are shared. An important effect of this different organizational structure is that there is no conflict of interest where barristers in the same chambers work for opposing sides in a case, and in some specialized chambers this is commonplace.\n\nIn some jurisdictions, either the judiciary or the Ministry of Justice directly supervises the admission, licensing, and regulation of lawyers.\n\nOther jurisdictions, by statute, tradition, or court order, have granted such powers to a professional association which all lawyers must belong to. In the U.S., such associations are known as mandatory, integrated, or unified bar associations. In the Commonwealth of Nations, similar organizations are known as Inns of Court, bar councils or law societies. In civil law countries, comparable organizations are known as Orders of Advocates, Chambers of Advocates, Colleges of Advocates, Faculties of Advocates, or similar names. Generally, a nonmember caught practicing law may be liable for the crime of unauthorized practice of law.\n\nIn common law countries with divided legal professions, barristers traditionally belong to the bar council (or an Inn of Court) and solicitors belong to the law society. In the English-speaking world, the largest mandatory professional association of lawyers is the State Bar of California, with 230,000 members.\n\nSome countries admit and regulate lawyers at the national level, so that a lawyer, once licensed, can argue cases in any court in the land. This is common in small countries like New Zealand, Japan, and Belgium. Others, especially those with federal governments, tend to regulate lawyers at the state or provincial level; this is the case in the United States, Canada, Australia, and Switzerland, to name a few. Brazil is the most well-known federal government that regulates lawyers at the national level.\n\nSome countries, like Italy, regulate lawyers at the regional level, and a few, like Belgium, even regulate them at the local level (that is, they are licensed and regulated by the local equivalent of bar associations but can advocate in courts nationwide). In Germany, lawyers are admitted to regional bars and may appear for clients before all courts nationwide with the exception of the Federal Court of Justice of Germany (\"Bundesgerichtshof\" or BGH); oddly, securing admission to the BGH's bar limits a lawyer's practice solely to the supreme federal courts and the Federal Constitutional Court of Germany.\n\nGenerally, geographic limitations can be troublesome for a lawyer who discovers that his client's cause requires him to litigate in a court beyond the normal geographic scope of his license. Although most courts have special \"pro hac vice\" rules for such occasions, the lawyer will still have to deal with a different set of professional responsibility rules, as well as the possibility of other differences in substantive and procedural law.\n\nSome countries grant licenses to non-resident lawyers, who may then appear regularly on behalf of foreign clients. Others require all lawyers to live in the jurisdiction or to even hold national citizenship as a prerequisite for receiving a license to practice. But the trend in industrialized countries since the 1970s has been to abolish citizenship and residency restrictions. For example, the Supreme Court of Canada struck down a citizenship requirement on equality rights grounds in 1989, and similarly, American citizenship and residency requirements were struck down as unconstitutional by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1973 and 1985, respectively. The European Court of Justice made similar decisions in 1974 and 1977 striking down citizenship restrictions in Belgium and France.\n\nA key difference among countries is whether lawyers should be regulated solely by an independent judiciary and its subordinate institutions (a self-regulating legal profession), or whether lawyers should be subject to supervision by the Ministry of Justice in the executive branch.\n\nIn most civil law countries, the government has traditionally exercised tight control over the legal profession in order to ensure a steady supply of loyal judges and bureaucrats. That is, lawyers were expected first and foremost to serve the state, and the availability of counsel for private litigants was an afterthought. Even in civil law countries like Norway which have partially self-regulating professions, the Ministry of Justice is the sole issuer of licenses, and makes its own independent re-evaluation of a lawyer's fitness to practice after a lawyer has been expelled from the Advocates' Association. Brazil is an unusual exception in that its national Order of Advocates has become a fully self-regulating institution (with direct control over licensing) and has successfully resisted government attempts to place it under the control of the Ministry of Labor.\n\nOf all the civil law countries, Communist countries historically went the farthest towards total state control, with all Communist lawyers forced to practice in collectives by the mid-1950s. China is a prime example: technically, the People's Republic of China did not have lawyers, and instead had only poorly trained, state-employed \"legal workers,\" prior to the enactment of a comprehensive reform package in 1996 by the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress.\n\nIn contrast, common law lawyers have traditionally regulated themselves through institutions where the influence of non-lawyers, if any, was weak and indirect (despite nominal state control). Such institutions have been traditionally dominated by private practitioners who opposed strong state control of the profession on the grounds that it would endanger the ability of lawyers to zealously and competently advocate their clients' causes in the adversarial system of justice.\n\nHowever, the concept of the self-regulating profession has been criticized as a sham which serves to legitimize the professional monopoly while protecting the profession from public scrutiny. Disciplinary mechanisms have been astonishingly ineffective, and penalties have been light or nonexistent.\n\nLawyers are always free to form voluntary associations of their own, apart from any licensing or mandatory membership that may be required by the laws of their jurisdiction. Like their mandatory counterparts, such organizations may exist at all geographic levels. In American English, such associations are known as voluntary bar associations. The largest voluntary professional association of lawyers in the English-speaking world is the American Bar Association.\n\nIn some countries, like France and Italy, lawyers have also formed trade unions.\n\nHostility towards the legal profession is a widespread phenomenon. The legal profession was abolished in Prussia in 1780 and in France in 1789, though both countries eventually realized that their judicial systems could not function efficiently without lawyers. Complaints about too many lawyers were common in both England and the United States in the 1840s, Germany in the 1910s, and in Australia, Canada, the United States, and Scotland in the 1980s.\n\nPublic distrust of lawyers reached record heights in the United States after the Watergate scandal. In the aftermath of Watergate, legal self-help books became popular among those who wished to solve their legal problems without having to deal with lawyers. Lawyer jokes (already a perennial favorite) also soared in popularity in English-speaking North America as a result of Watergate. In 1989, American legal self-help publisher Nolo Press published a 171-page compilation of negative anecdotes about lawyers from throughout human history.\n\nIn \"Adventures in Law and Justice\" (2003), legal researcher Bryan Horrigan dedicated a chapter to \"Myths, Fictions, and Realities\" about law and illustrated the perennial criticism of lawyers as \"amoral [...] guns for hire\" with a quote from Ambrose Bierce's satirical \"The Devil's Dictionary\" (1911) that summarized the noun as: \"LAWYER, n. One skilled in circumvention of the law.\"\n\nMore generally, in \"Legal Ethics: A Comparative Study\" (2004), law professor Geoffrey C. Hazard, Jr. with Angelo Dondi briefly examined the \"regulations attempting to suppress lawyer misconduct\" and noted that their similarity around the world was paralleled by a \"remarkable consistency\" in certain \"persistent grievances\" about lawyers that transcends both time and locale, from the Bible to medieval England to dynastic China. The authors then generalized these common complaints about lawyers as being classified into five \"general categories\" as follows:\n\nBULLET::::- abuse of litigation in various ways, including using dilatory tactics and false evidence and making frivolous arguments to the courts\nBULLET::::- preparation of false documentation, such as false deeds, contracts, or wills\nBULLET::::- deceiving clients and other persons and misappropriating property\nBULLET::::- procrastination in dealings with clients\nBULLET::::- charging excessive fees\n\nSome studies have shown that suicide rates among lawyers may be as much as six times higher than the average population, and commentators suggest that the low opinion the public has of lawyers, combined with their own high ideals of justice, which in practice they may see denied, increase the depression rates of those in this profession. Additionally, lawyers are twice as likely to suffer from addiction to alcohol and other drugs.\n\nIn the United States, lawyers typically earn between $45,000 and $160,000 per year, although earnings vary by age and experience, practice setting, sex, and race.\nSolo practitioners typically earn less than lawyers in corporate law firms but more than those working for state or local government.\n\nLawyers are paid for their work in a variety of ways. In private practice, they may work for an hourly fee according to a billable hour structure, a contingency fee (usually in cases involving personal injury), or a lump sum payment if the matter is straightforward. Normally, most lawyers negotiate a written fee agreement up front and may require a non-refundable retainer in advance. Recent studies suggest that when lawyers charge a fixed-fee rather than billing by the hour, they work less hard on behalf of clients and client get worse outcomes. In many countries there are fee-shifting arrangements by which the loser must pay the winner's fees and costs; the United States is the major exception, although in turn, its legislators have carved out many exceptions to the so-called \"American Rule\" of no fee shifting.\n\nLawyers working directly on the payroll of governments, nonprofits, and corporations usually earn a regular annual salary. In many countries, with the notable exception of Germany, lawyers can also volunteer their labor in the service of worthy causes through an arrangement called \"pro bono\" (short for \"pro bono publico\", \"for the common good\"). Traditionally such work was performed on behalf of the poor, but in some countries it has now expanded to many other causes such as the environment.\n\nIn some countries, there are legal aid lawyers who specialize in providing legal services to the indigent. France and Spain even have formal fee structures by which lawyers are compensated by the government for legal aid cases on a per-case basis. A similar system, though not as extensive or generous, operates in Australia, Canada, and South Africa.\n\nIn other countries, legal aid specialists are practically nonexistent. This may be because non-lawyers are allowed to provide such services; in both Italy and Belgium, trade unions and political parties provide what can be characterized as legal aid services. Some legal aid in Belgium is also provided by young lawyer apprentices subsidized by local bar associations (known as the \"pro deo\" system), as well as consumer protection nonprofit organizations and Public Assistance Agencies subsidized by local governments. In Germany, mandatory fee structures have enabled widespread implementation of affordable legal expense insurance.\n\nThe earliest people who could be described as \"lawyers\" were probably the orators of ancient Athens (see History of Athens). However, Athenian orators faced serious structural obstacles. First, there was a rule that individuals were supposed to plead their own cases, which was soon bypassed by the increasing tendency of individuals to ask a \"friend\" for assistance. However, around the middle of the fourth century, the Athenians disposed of the perfunctory request for a friend. Second, a more serious obstacle, which the Athenian orators never completely overcame, was the rule that no one could take a fee to plead the cause of another. This law was widely disregarded in practice, but was never abolished, which meant that orators could \"never\" present themselves as legal professionals or experts. They had to uphold the legal fiction that they were merely an ordinary citizen generously helping out a friend for free, and thus they could never organize into a real profession—with professional associations and titles and all the other pomp and circumstance—like their modern counterparts. Therefore, if one narrows the definition to those men who could practice the legal profession openly and legally, then the first lawyers would have to be the orators of ancient Rome.\n\nA law enacted in 204 BC barred Roman advocates from taking fees, but the law was widely ignored. The ban on fees was abolished by Emperor Claudius, who legalized advocacy as a profession and allowed the Roman advocates to become the first lawyers who could practice openly—but he also imposed a fee ceiling of 10,000 sesterces. This was apparently not much money; the Satires of Juvenal complained that there was no money in working as an advocate.\n\nLike their Greek contemporaries, early Roman advocates were trained in rhetoric, not law, and the judges before whom they argued were also not law-trained. But very early on, unlike Athens, Rome developed a class of specialists who were learned in the law, known as jurisconsults (\"iuris consulti\"). Jurisconsults were wealthy amateurs who dabbled in law as an intellectual hobby; they did not make their primary living from it. They gave legal opinions (\"responsa\") on legal issues to all comers (a practice known as \"publice respondere\"). Roman judges and governors would routinely consult with an advisory panel of jurisconsults before rendering a decision, and advocates and ordinary people also went to jurisconsults for legal opinions. Thus, the Romans were the first to have a class of people who spent their days thinking about legal problems, and this is why their law became so \"precise, detailed, and technical.\"\nDuring the Roman Republic and the early Roman Empire, jurisconsults and advocates were unregulated, since the former were amateurs and the latter were technically illegal. Any citizen could call himself an advocate or a legal expert, though whether people believed him would depend upon his personal reputation. This changed once Claudius legalized the legal profession. By the start of the Byzantine Empire, the legal profession had become well-established, heavily regulated, and highly stratified. The centralization and bureaucratization of the profession was apparently gradual at first, but accelerated during the reign of Emperor Hadrian. At the same time, the jurisconsults went into decline during the imperial period.\n\nIn the words of Fritz Schulz, \"by the fourth century things had changed in the eastern Empire: advocates now were really lawyers.\" For example, by the fourth century, advocates had to be enrolled on the bar of a court to argue before it, they could only be attached to one court at a time, and there were restrictions (which came and went depending upon who was emperor) on how many advocates could be enrolled at a particular court. By the 380s, advocates were studying law in addition to rhetoric (thus reducing the need for a separate class of jurisconsults); in 460, Emperor Leo imposed a requirement that new advocates seeking admission had to produce testimonials from their teachers; and by the sixth century, a regular course of legal study lasting about four years was required for admission. Claudius's fee ceiling lasted all the way into the Byzantine period, though by then it was measured at 100 solidi. It was widely evaded, either through demands for maintenance and expenses or a \"sub rosa\" barter transaction. The latter was cause for disbarment.\n\nThe notaries (\"tabelliones\") appeared in the late Roman Empire. Like their modern-day descendants, the civil law notaries, they were responsible for drafting wills, conveyances, and contracts. They were ubiquitous and most villages had one. In Roman times, notaries were widely considered to be inferior to advocates and jury consults.\n\nAfter the fall of the Western Roman Empire and the onset of the Early Middle Ages, the legal profession of Western Europe collapsed. As James Brundage has explained: \"[by 1140], no one in Western Europe could properly be described as a professional lawyer or a professional canonist in anything like the modern sense of the term 'professional.' \" However, from 1150 onward, a small but increasing number of men became experts in canon law but only in furtherance of other occupational goals, such as serving the Catholic Church as priests. From 1190 to 1230, however, there was a crucial shift in which some men began to practice canon law as a lifelong profession in itself.\n\nThe legal profession's return was marked by the renewed efforts of church and state to regulate it. In 1231, two French councils mandated that lawyers had to swear an oath of admission before practicing before the bishop's courts in their regions, and a similar oath was promulgated by the papal legate in London in 1237. During the same decade, the emperor of the Holy Roman Empire Frederick II, the king of the Kingdom of Sicily, imposed a similar oath in his civil courts. By 1250, the nucleus of a new legal profession had clearly formed. The new trend towards professionalization culminated in a controversial proposal at the Second Council of Lyon in 1275 that \"all\" ecclesiastical courts should require an oath of admission. Although not adopted by the council, it was highly influential in many such courts throughout Europe. The civil courts in England also joined the trend towards professionalization; in 1275 a statute was enacted that prescribed punishment for professional lawyers guilty of deceit, and in 1280 the mayor's court of the city of London promulgated regulations concerning admission procedures, including the administering of an oath. And in 1345, the French crown promulgated a royal ordinance which set forth 24 rules governing advocates, of which 12 were integrated into the oath to be taken by them.\n\nThe French medieval oaths were widely influential and of enduring importance; for example, they directly influenced the structure of the advocates' oath adopted by the Canton of Geneva in 1816. In turn, the 1816 Geneva oath served as the inspiration for the attorney's oath drafted by David Dudley Field as Section 511 of the proposed New York Code of Civil Procedure of 1848, which was the first attempt in the United States at a comprehensive statement of a lawyer's professional duties.\n\nGenerally speaking, the modern practice is for lawyers to avoid use of any title, although formal practice varies across the world.\n\nHistorically lawyers in most European countries were addressed with the title of doctor, and countries outside of Europe have generally followed the practice of the European country which had policy influence through colonization. The first university degrees, starting with the law school of the University of Bologna (or glossators) in the 11th century, were all law degrees and doctorates. Degrees in other fields did not start until the 13th century, but the doctor continued to be the only degree offered at many of the old universities until the 20th century. Therefore, in many of the southern European countries, including Portugal and Italy, lawyers have traditionally been addressed as “doctor,” a practice, which was transferred to many countries in South America and Macau. The term \"doctor\" has since fallen into disuse, although it is still a legal title in Italy and in use in many countries outside of Europe.\n\nIn French- (France, Quebec, Belgium, Luxembourg, French-speaking area of Switzerland) and Dutch-speaking countries (Netherlands, Belgium), legal professionals are addressed as \"Maître ...\", abbreviated to \"M ...\" (in French) or \"Meester ...\", abbreviated to \"mr. ...\" (in Dutch).\n\nThe title of doctor has never been used to address lawyers in England or other common law countries (with the exception of the United States). This is because until 1846 lawyers in England were not required to have a university degree and were trained by other attorneys by apprenticeship or in the Inns of Court. Since law degrees started to become a requirement for lawyers in England, the degree awarded has been the undergraduate LL.B. In South Africa holders of a law degree who have completed a year of pupillage and have been admitted to the bar may use the title \"Advocate\", abbreviated to \"Adv\" in written correspondence. Likewise, Italian law graduates who have qualified for the bar use the title \"Avvocato\", abbreviated in \"Avv.\"\n\nEven though most lawyers in the United States do not use any titles, the law degree in that country is the Juris Doctor, a professional doctorate degree, and some J.D. holders in the United States use the title of \"Doctor\" in professional and academic situations.\n\nIn countries where holders of the first law degree traditionally use the title of doctor (e.g. Peru, Brazil, Macau, Portugal, Argentina), J.D. holders who are attorneys will often use the title of doctor as well. It is common for English-language male lawyers to use the honorific suffix \"Esq.\" (for \"Esquire\"). In the United States the style is also used by female lawyers.\n\nIn many Asian countries, holders of the Juris Doctor degree are also called \"博士\" (doctor).\n\nIn the Philippines and Filipino communities overseas, lawyers who are either Filipino or naturalized-citizen expatriates at work there, especially those who also profess other jobs at the same time, are addressed and introduced as either \"Attorney\" or \"Counselor\" (especially in courts), rather than \"Sir/Madam\" in speech or \"Mr./Mrs./Ms.\" (\"G./Gng./Bb.\" in Filipino) before surnames. That word is used either in itself or before the given name or surname.\n\nBULLET::::- Ambulance chasing\nBULLET::::- Association of Pension Lawyers\nBULLET::::- Avocats Sans Frontières\nBULLET::::- Cause lawyer\nBULLET::::- Corporate lawyer\nBULLET::::- Court dress\nBULLET::::- Fiduciary\nBULLET::::- Ghost lawyer\nBULLET::::- Law broker\nBULLET::::- Lawyer supported mediation\nBULLET::::- Legalese\nBULLET::::- List of jurists\nBULLET::::- Notary public\nBULLET::::- Privilege of the predecessors\nBULLET::::- Public defender\nBULLET::::- Rules lawyer\nBULLET::::- Shyster\nBULLET::::- Sole Practitioner (lawyer)\nBULLET::::- St. Ivo of Kermartin (patron saint of lawyers)\nBULLET::::- Trainee solicitor\n"}
{"id": "17542", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17542", "title": "Logrolling", "text": "Logrolling\n\nLogrolling is the trading of favors, or \"quid pro quo\", such as vote trading by legislative members to obtain passage of actions of interest to each legislative member. In organizational analysis, it refers to a practice in which different organizations promote each other's agendas, each in the expectation that the other will reciprocate. In an academic context, the \"Nuttall Encyclopedia\" describes logrolling as \"mutual praise by authors of each other's work\". \n\nThere are three types of logrolling:\nBULLET::::- Logrolling in direct democracies: a few individuals vote openly, and votes are easy to trade, rearrange, and observe. Direct democracy is pervasive in representative assemblies and small-government units\nBULLET::::- Implicit logrolling: large bodies of voters decide complex issues and trade votes without a formal vote trade (Buchanan and Tullock 1962)\nBULLET::::- Distributive logrolling: enables policymakers to achieve their public goals. These policymakers logroll to ensure that their district policies and pork barrel packages are put into practice regardless of whether their policies are actually efficient (Evans 1994 and Buchanan and Tullock 1962).\n\nDistributive logrolling is the most prevalent kind of logrolling found in a democratic system of governance.\n\n\"Quid pro quo\" sums up the concept of logrolling in the United States' political process today. Logrolling is the process by which politicians trade support for one issue or piece of legislation in exchange for another politician's support, especially by means of legislative votes (Holcombe 2006). If a legislator logrolls, he initiates the trade of votes for one particular act or bill in order to secure votes on behalf of another act or bill. Logrolling means that two parties will pledge their mutual support, so both bills can attain a simple majority. For example, a vote on behalf of a tariff may be traded by a congressman for a vote from another congressman on behalf of an agricultural subsidy to ensure that both acts will gain a majority and pass through the legislature (Shughart 2008). Logrolling cannot occur during presidential elections, where a vast voting population necessitates that individual votes have little political power, or during secret-ballot votes (Buchanan and Tullock 1962). Because logrolling is pervasive in the political process, it is important to understand which external situations determine when, why, and how logrolling will occur, and whether it is beneficial, efficient, or neither.\n\nThe widest accepted origin is the old custom of neighbors assisting each other with the moving of logs. If two neighbors had cut a lot of timber which needed to be moved, it made more sense for them to work together to roll the logs. In this way, it is similar to a barn-raising where a neighbor comes and helps a family build their barn, and, in turn, that family goes and returns the favor, helping him build his.\n\nHere is an example of the term's original use:\n\nA family comes to sit in the forest,\" wrote an observer in 1835. \"Their neighbors lay down their employments, shoulder their axes, and come in to the log-rolling. They spend the day in hard labor, and then retire, leaving the newcomers their good wishes, and a habitation.American frontiersman Davy Crockett was one of the first to apply the term to legislation:\n\nThe first known use of the term was by Congressman Davy Crockett, who said on the floor (of the U.S. House of Representatives) in 1835, \"my people don't like me to log-roll in their business, and vote away pre-emption rights to fellows in other states that never kindle a fire on their own land.\"\n\nHuman beings, whether ignorant or informed, rational or irrational, logical or illogical, determine individual and group action through choices. Economics studies these choices, including the choice to logroll, and their particular influence within the market sector (Schwartz 1977). In America, political and economic decisions are usually made by politicians elected to legislative assemblies, and not directly by the citizenry (Buchanan and Tullock 1962). Although legislative votes are recorded and are available to the American public, legislators can exchange their votes on issues they do not care much about for votes on other issues that are more important to their personal agendas (Holcombe 2006). In \"The Calculus of Consent\", James M. Buchanan and Gordon Tullock explore the relationship between individual choice in the voting process and in the marketplace, specifically within logrolling. Logrolling vote trades, like any activity within the marketplace, must be mutually beneficial (Buchanan and Tullock 1962).\n\nA vote trade is like a legislative IOU. When a legislator needs a few more votes to acquire a simple majority, he will seek support through a vote exchange. He will promise a fellow legislator an IOU vote for another piece of legislation in return for a vote on his own act or bill. Legislators who logroll within a small body, for example, the U.S. House or Senate, have incentive to honor their IOU votes because they cannot have their reputations tainted if they wish to be effective politicians (Holcombe 2006).\n\nPeople have varying preferences, and make decisions at the margin to maximize their utility and improve their welfare. The same is true for legislators, who all enter office with different agendas, passions, and goals. Ideological diversity plays a significant role in the result of a vote and carries with it a significant cost. In addition, legislators will favor interests that offer them the most support. Legislative votes are determined by the intensity of personal preference, desires of constituents, and, ultimately, what will lead to the particular legislator's greatest utility. When people have ideologies at opposite ends of the political spectrum, it's difficult to ensure a simple majority, so buying a supermajority vote through logrolling may be the most cost effective (Buchanan and Tullock 1962).\n\nIn the General Possibility Theorem, Kenneth Arrow argues that if a legislative consensus can be reached through a simple majority, then minimum conditions must be satisfied, and these conditions must provide a superior ranking to any subset of alternative votes (Arrow 1963). A bill must be attractive to a legislator, or else he will not cast his vote for it. A vote, by the pure nature of the voting process, demonstrates explicit interest in whatever is voted upon. In logrolling, a superior ranking means that the marginal benefit of the vote is greater than any alternatives, so exchanging votes is worthwhile. The General Possibility Theorem necessitates that allocating one vote for another must constitute true utility and a sincere vote. Arrow's theory may place more restrictions and limitations on an individual voter's preferences than Buchanan and Tullock's; regardless, individuals will always choose the option they value most.\n\nDecisions reach an optimum only when they are unanimous, when votes are not coerced and everyone has veto power (Buchanan and Tullock 1962). Unanimous votes, however, are not required for the American voting process. This is why some logrolling advocates argue that logrolling must be allowed within a democracy—sometimes there may not be a \"best\" or \"most efficient\" option on a vote.\n\nLogrolling creates a market within which votes are exchanged as a sort of currency, and thus, facilitates the political process that produces the highest valued outcomes (Holcombe 2006). If individual participants recognize the value of their own vote, they are motivated to trade. When methods of trade do not conflict with given standards or ethical procedures, individuals naturally seek mutually advantageous vote trades. An individual may effectually, but imperfectly, \"sell\" his vote on a particular issue to, in return, secure votes from other individuals on behalf of legislation he prefers (Buchanan and Tullock 1962).\n\nLogrolling has one necessary condition: benefits from the public activity must be significantly more concentrated or localized than the costs. In economics, decisions are made at the margin. Logrolling depends on the reality that the marginal benefit (or utility) of at least some elected officials, or the citizenry, will increase when the legislation is passed (Buchanan and Tullock 1962). Any economist will consider the immediate opportunity cost of the logrolling procedure within the legislative body, as well as the external cost of the vote (the cost to enact and see the bill through to fruition).\n\nWhen transaction costs are low and parties involved are perfectly informed, a mutually beneficial agreement will occur: whoever values the property the highest will end up with it. This is what Ronald H. Coase proposed in his \"Theory of Property Rights\" in 1960. This theory holds true within the world of economics. In the American system of government, legislators have the incentive to logroll because transaction costs are low. When transaction costs are low, the Coase theorem says that the political marketplace (the decisions of the legislatures) will allocate resources to the highest valued point (Coase 1960).\n\nTypically, logrolling is a mechanism used to gain support for special interest and minority groups. However, because of the ideological mix that already exists within the legislature itself, minority views are often represented, even if only marginally. With low transaction costs, the Coase theorem will come into play. The highest valued outcome is chosen by the legislature, regardless the member's ideological stance or political affiliation (Holcombe 2006).\n\nThe problem of cyclical majorities may arise with the absence of logrolling. The cyclical majority problem occurs when voters are faced with multiple voting options but cannot choose the option they most prefer, since it is not available. Voters must consider whether the alternative option is closer to their original preference (Bara and Weale 2006). However, when logrolling is allowed, the highest valued outcome is secure without the threat of a cyclical majority. For example, suppose a country road in West Virginia is in disrepair. The local congressman proposes a bill to have the main road in his community resurfaced and paved. The road leads to a town of merely 600 residents. Thus, the other legislators will vote against the measure because the funding is not worthwhile to their constituents. In a logrolling system, the local legislator can use his vote to bargain with his fellow legislators. He will exchange his vote for his fellow legislators' bills to promote, for instance, the construction of new hospitals and the increase of veteran's benefits, in return for their votes to repair the road (Buchanan and Tullock 1962).\n\n+ Table 1-1 \n! !! Agriculture !! Tax !! Vote !! School !! Tax !! Vote !! Fire !! Tax!! Vote\n\nTable 1-1 explains another example of logrolling. In the example, we have three individuals: Tanya, Alvin, and Rebecca. Tanya favors subsidies for agriculture, Alvin favors school construction, and Rebecca favors the recruitment of more firefighters. It seems as if the proposals are doomed to fail because each is opposed by a majority of voters. Even so, this may not be the outcome. Tanya may visit Rebecca and tell her that she will vote for Rebecca's bill to recruit more firefighters so long as Rebecca votes for her policy, subsidies for agriculture, in return. Now both proposals will win because they have gained a simple majority (Table 1-2), even though in reality the subsidy is opposed by two of the three voters. It's easy to see the Coase theorem at work in examples like this. Here, transaction costs are low, so mutually beneficial agreements are found, and the person who values the service the most will hold it (Browning and Browning 1979). Still, outcomes may be inefficient.\n\n+ Table 1-2 \n! !! Agriculture !! Tax !! Vote !! School !! Tax !! Vote !! Fire !! Tax!! Vote\n\nIf the sum of the total benefit of the legislation for all the voters is less than the cost of the legislation itself, the legislation is inefficient. Despite its inefficiency, however, it still may pass if logrolling is permitted. If Tanya trades her vote to recruit more firemen to Rebecca in exchange for Rebecca's vote in favor of agriculture subsidies, a mutually beneficial agreement will be reached, even though the outcome is inefficient. On the other hand, if the sum of the total benefit of the legislation for all voters is greater than the cost of the legislation itself, the legislation is efficient. If Tanya trades her vote once again for Rebecca's vote, both parties will reach a mutually beneficial agreement and an efficient outcome.\n\nA minimum winning coalition is the smallest number of votes required to win the passage of a piece of legislation. Minimum winning coalitions demonstrate the importance of logrolling within a democracy, because the minimal winning coalition may be overthrown with the sway of a single vote. As previously mentioned, coalitions will buy a supermajority of votes if the support for the proposed legislation sways. If a legislator logrolls a few votes beyond the minimal winning coalition to his side, he will ensure that the final vote will be in favor of his legislation. In a way, vote trading does combine positions on distinct issues to form single legislative votes and packages (Stratmann 1992). Logrolled votes transcend affiliations and party lines and become feasible outcomes preferred by a majority or winning coalition (Schwartz 1977).\n\nA problem in research is that it is impossible to identify vote trading directly within the House of Representatives or the Senate because roll call votes on specific goods are not observed (Irwin and Kroszner 1996). However, examples of refurbished bills can shed some light on the working-out of logrolling within the legislature. For example, in 1930, the Smoot-Hawley tariff, the second-highest tariff in U.S. history, passed the House and Senate. Congress voted to increase tariffs exponentially, which worked to push the United States from a stagnant recession into a plummeting depression (Irwin and Kroszner 1996). Strict party line votes suggest that partisan polarization in 1929 prevented the Smoot-Hawley bill from passing through Congress. The bill, however, was revamped, and legislators used logrolling to pass it through both chambers in 1930.\n\nOmnibus bills can be an alternative market to logrolling. Various clauses are added to a bill to satisfy all involved parties sufficiently. However, large bills, like the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, require an in depth knowledge of 1,000 plus pages. Many sections of these types of bills are initially opposed but are later supported because of special benefit clauses (Evans 1994).\n\nBecause logrolling allows special-interest groups a voice in the political process, programs that benefit a minority group can get the approval of a majority. However, this may not be in the best interest of the majority. Special-interest groups typically do not represent the typical voter, but rather, small branches of minority ideologies (Holcombe 2006). Voting results with or without logrolling will differ only if the minority is more interested in an issue than the majority, enough to separate the marginal voters from the majority. Studies show that lobbying and political pressure exerted by special-interest groups are not atypical behavior in a modern democracy (Buchanan and Tullock 1962). Conditions imposed upon the social choice of the legislature imply a more severe restriction on the individual voter's preferences than the theory of logrolling presented by Buchanan and Tullock and presumed by Arrow's General Possibility Theory (Wilson 1969).\n\nCritics reproach members of Congress for protecting their own electoral interests at the expense of the general welfare. Congressmen tend to distribute specialized benefits at a great cost and ignore the particular costs the legislation bears upon the taxpayers (Evans 1994). Legislators, who seek their personal benefit via logrolling even though it may not benefit those who must pay for the measure, are known as maximizers. Maximizers only take into account their personal cost and electability, instead of the effects of their actions on other parties involved. In short, other taxpayers will pay for the policy even if it does not affect them (Buchanan and Tullock 1962). Initially, maximizers will encourage other legislators to have the same selfish behavior because significant gains can be accrued in the short run. Buchanan and Tullock state that within a system of maximizers, all individuals are worse off than if they had all adopted Kantian norms of behavior.\n\nLegislative bodies can expect higher government spending and taxation when logrolling is allowed to flourish. Logrolling does not imply excessive spending; members can trade tax reductions just as easily as they can trade pork barrel policies. The problem is that benefits of a vote only reach a particular portion of the population, while the tax costs that pay for the vote are spread throughout the entire populace, especially when the act depends on revenue from sales or income taxes. Benefits are concentrated in localities, and the costs are dispersed throughout the nation. Committee members can thus exploit pork barrel projects for electoral purposes. The citizenry is seen as a \"common pool,\" used to finance projects through taxes. Somehow the citizens end up paying higher taxes than those who are not in a logroll system (Dalenberg and Duffy-Deno 1991 and Gilligan and Matsusaka 1995). In a system where logrolling is permitted, a third party may bear the cost of the project, rather than those who receive the full benefit of the legislation. This is always inefficient.\n\nThe logic of collective action shows that votes for bills are motivated by politicians and are determined by a simple majority (Olson 1971). Politicians are in the game to win it. Collective effort explains why farms acquire government subsidies at the expense of millions of consumers and why those in the textile industry benefit at the expense of clothing buyers (Shughart 2008). Congressional committees ensure that each committee leader will create legislative coalitions to push his policies to fruition. Thus, ceteris paribus, members who receive such projects, are likely to vote in support of their leader's wishes (Evans 1994).\n\nPolicymakers and congressmen have goals of power, and making their own mark in public policy, not pure aims of reelection (Dodd 1977). Reelection does play a great part in the legislative process as a condition to achieving any other political goal. Thus, logrolling can be a powerful tool for committee chairs, who control the voting agendas (Evans 1994). While committee leaders create the supermajority, they try to achieve their personal goals and help a bare majority of members achieve theirs. Indeed, a skilled policy-oriented committee leader often seeks to exploit the goals of other members in order to construct legislation he or she will prefer (Arnold 1979 and Strahan 1989).\n\n\"Wafelijzerpolitiek\" (lit. waffle iron politics) is a form of logrolling used in Belgium. Until the split of the unitary Belgium in several parts, the unitary government decided on the funds given to big projects. As there were usually two opposing groups of about equal size in Belgium, this norm resulted in the approval of two equally sized projects in the two parts of the country, with the funds given to the two projects being equal. As a result, one project was always overfunded. Many see \"wafelijzerpolitiek\" as the source of Belgium's high debt.\n\nAfter the first state reformation in 1988, many big projects were decided regionally, so the number of \"wafelijzer\" projects went down. There are still some things that fall under the supervision of the federal government, where \"wafelijzerpolitiek\" still happens. One example is the Belgian railway network.\n\nAnother result of the \"wafelijzerpolitiek\" is the big useless works. As Flanders is a part of Belgium with many ports (e.g., big ports in Antwerp and Zeebrugge), for every investment in Flemish waterways there had to be an investment in Walloon waterways. Some results are the Ronquières inclined plane and the Strépy-Thieu boat lift.\n\nIn a referendum on a simple issue, the voter cannot easily trade his own vote for a vote on a reciprocal favor. This is because first, he is unsure as to when and how the other issues will be voted upon, and second, he and his immediate neighbors represent a fraction of the total electorate. Thus, trading may not be worthwhile (Buchanan and Tullock 1962).\n\nVote trading under a democratic, majority-rule institution is sometimes considered morally reprehensible behavior. However, the only perfect solution to rid the political system of distributive logrolling would be to develop a specific formula to weigh the costs and benefits of legislation perfectly and only allow efficient programs to be enacted (This is inconceivable. Therefore, logrolling must occur, but only by observing the constitutional rules that have been laid down as safeguards of democracy (Buchanan and Tullock 1962).\n\nThe reality is that transaction costs are high, and most voters, who are ignorant of political issues and the political process, see little incentive to attempt to influence their local legislator's political decisions (Holcombe 2006). It is also difficult for voters to be informed of their legislator's voting habits. Because of this, distributive logrolling will occur in democratic systems. Furthermore, it is the responsibility of the legislator to measure the costs and benefits of legislation and determine what is most efficient for his constituents. Logrolling will occur only if members of the legislature fail to gather enough votes for the passage of specific legislation. In essence, logrolling is a legal way to manipulate voter preference toward either an efficient or an inefficient outcome that would not otherwise be enacted (Browning 1979).\n\n\"Spy Magazine\" ran a feature entitled \"Logrolling in Our Time\" that cited suspicious or humorous examples of mutually admiring book jacket blurbs by pairs of authors. \"Private Eye\" magazine regularly draws attention to alleged logrolling by authors in \"books of the year\" features published by British newspapers and magazines.\n\nBULLET::::- Barn raising\nBULLET::::- Bee (gathering)\nBULLET::::- Blog roll\nBULLET::::- Vote trading\n"}
{"id": "17544", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17544", "title": "Playing by ear", "text": "Playing by ear\n\nPlaying or learning by ear is the ability of a performing musician to reproduce a piece of music they have heard, without having seen it notated in any form of sheet music. It is considered to be a desirable skill among musical performers.\n\nMany forms of classical music throughout the world are fundamentally rooted in the concept of playing by ear, where musical compositions are passed down from generation to generation. In this respect, playing by ear can be also seen as a music-specific example of oral tradition. However, there are some examples of musical traditions where greater importance is placed on a tradition of writing down the music, in some form of musical notation.\n\nThe concept of playing by ear has led to the development of the idiom, to play by ear or \"play \"it\" by ear.\"\n\nLearning music by ear is done by repeatedly listening to other musicians, either their live shows or sound recordings of their songs, and then attempting to recreate what one hears. Audiation involves hearing sounds mentally, although on a different level than just \"hearing a song in one's head\". The skill of reproducing those sounds involves the ability to mentally hear and recognize rhythms, tell the interval between a note and a reference note in a melody, play a specific interval between a melodic note and root note (typically 1, 3, or 5 intervals below the melodic note), and play the notes of a specific chord based on the a given root note (e.g., notes at 1, 3, and 5 intervals above the root note).\n\nIn most instances, those traditions where learning music from playing by ear is paramount do not use musical notation in any form. Some examples of this such as by early Blues guitarists and pianists, Romani fiddlers and folk music guitarists.\n\nOne particularly prominent example is of Indian classical music, where the teaching methods of its two major strands (\"Hindustani\" and \"Carnatic\") are almost exclusively oral.\n\nHistorically, the Western classical music tradition has been based on the process of learning new pieces from musical notation, and hence playing by ear has a lower importance in musical training.\n\nHowever, many teaching methods in this tradition incorporate playing by ear in some form. Examples include the \"ear training\" courses that are a standard part of conservatory or college music programs (including use of Solfège), and the Suzuki method, which incorporates a highly developed focus on playing by ear from a very young age.\n\nIn the West, learning by ear is also associated with the genres of folk music, blues, rock, and jazz.\n\nBULLET::::- Fiddle\nBULLET::::- Tonal memory\nBULLET::::- Ear training\nBULLET::::- Musical aptitude\nBULLET::::- Music education for young children\nBULLET::::- Absolute pitch\n\nBULLET::::- Description of Audiation from the Gordon Institute for Music Learning\nBULLET::::- Basic introduction to playing by ear by Allan Jeong Professor of Instructional Systems & Learning Technology\n"}
{"id": "17546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17546", "title": "Louvre", "text": "Louvre\n\nThe Louvre ( ), or the Louvre Museum ( ), is the world's largest art museum and a historic monument in Paris, France. A central landmark of the city, it is located on the Right Bank of the Seine in the city's 1st arrondissement (district or ward). Approximately 38,000 objects from prehistory to the 21st century are exhibited over an area of 72,735 square meters (782,910 square feet). In 2018, the Louvre was the world's most visited art museum, receiving 10.2 million visitors.\n\nThe museum is housed in the Louvre Palace, originally built as the Louvre castle in the late 12th to 13th century under Philip II. Remnants of the fortress are visible in the basement of the museum. Due to urban expansion, the fortress eventually lost its defensive function, and in 1546 Francis I converted it into the primary residence of the French Kings. The building was extended many times to form the present Louvre Palace. In 1682, Louis XIV chose the Palace of Versailles for his household, leaving the Louvre primarily as a place to display the royal collection, including, from 1692, a collection of ancient Greek and Roman sculpture. In 1692, the building was occupied by the Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres and the Académie Royale de Peinture et de Sculpture, which in 1699 held the first of a series of salons. The Académie remained at the Louvre for 100 years. During the French Revolution, the National Assembly decreed that the Louvre should be used as a museum to display the nation's masterpieces.\n\nThe museum opened on 10 August 1793 with an exhibition of 537 paintings, the majority of the works being royal and confiscated church property. Because of structural problems with the building, the museum was closed in 1796 until 1801. The collection was increased under Napoleon and the museum was renamed \"Musée Napoléon\", but after Napoleon's abdication, many works seized by his armies were returned to their original owners. The collection was further increased during the reigns of Louis XVIII and Charles X, and during the Second French Empire the museum gained 20,000 pieces. Holdings have grown steadily through donations and bequests since the Third Republic. The collection is divided among eight curatorial departments: Egyptian Antiquities; Near Eastern Antiquities; Greek, Etruscan and Roman Antiquities; Islamic Art; Sculpture; Decorative Arts; Paintings; Prints and Drawings.\n\nThe Louvre Palace, which houses the museum, was begun as a fortress by Philip II in the 12th century to protect the city from English soldiers which were in Normandy. Remnants of this castle are still visible in the crypt. Whether this was the first building on that spot is not known; it is possible that Philip modified an existing tower. According to the authoritative \"Grand Larousse encyclopédique\", the name derives from an association with wolf hunting den (via Latin: \"lupus\", lower Empire: \"lupara\"). In the 7th century, St. Fare, an abbess in Meaux, left part of her \"Villa called Luvra situated in the region of Paris\" to a monastery, this territory probably did not correspond exactly to the modern site, however.\n\nThe Louvre Palace was altered frequently throughout the Middle Ages. In the 14th century, Charles V converted the building into a residence and in 1546, Francis I renovated the site in French Renaissance style. Francis acquired what would become the nucleus of the Louvre's holdings, his acquisitions including Leonardo da Vinci's \"Mona Lisa\". After Louis XIV chose Versailles as his residence in 1682, constructions slowed; however, the move permitted the Louvre to be used as a residence for artists, under Royal patronage. Four generations of Boulle were granted Royal patronage and resided in the Louvre in the following order: Pierre Boulle, Jean Boulle, Andre-Charles Boulle and his four sons (Jean-Philippe, Pierre-Benoît (c. 1683–1741), Charles-André (1685–1749) and Charles-Joseph (1688–1754)), after him. André-Charles Boulle (1642–1732) is the most famous French cabinetmaker and the preeminent artist in the field of marquetry, also known as \"Inlay\". Boulle was \"the most remarkable of all French cabinetmakers\". He was commended to Louis XIV of France, the \"Sun King\", by Jean-Baptiste Colbert (1619–1683) as being \"the most skilled craftsman in his profession\". Before the fire of 1720 destroyed them, André-Charles Boulle held priceless works of art in the Louvre, including forty-eight drawings by Raphael\"\".\n\nBy the mid-18th century there were an increasing number of proposals to create a public gallery, with the art critic La Font de Saint-Yenne publishing, in 1747, a call for a display of the royal collection. On 14 October 1750, Louis XV agreed and sanctioned a display of 96 pieces from the royal collection, mounted in the Galerie royale de peinture of the Luxembourg Palace. A hall was opened by Le Normant de Tournehem and the Marquis de Marigny for public viewing of the \"Tableaux du Roy\" on Wednesdays and Saturdays, and contained Andrea del Sarto's \"Charity\" and works by Raphael; Titian; Veronese; Rembrandt; Poussin or Van Dyck, until its closing in 1780 as a result of the gift of the palace to the Count of Provence (the future king, Louis XVIII) by the king in 1778. Under Louis XVI, the royal museum idea became policy. The comte d'Angiviller broadened the collection and in 1776 proposed conversion of the Grande Galerie of the Louvre – which contained maps – into the \"French Museum\". Many proposals were offered for the Louvre's renovation into a museum; however, none was agreed on. Hence the museum remained incomplete until the French Revolution.\n\nDuring the French Revolution the Louvre was transformed into a public museum. In May 1791, the Assembly declared that the Louvre would be \"a place for bringing together monuments of all the sciences and arts\". On 10 August 1792, Louis XVI was imprisoned and the royal collection in the Louvre became national property. Because of fear of vandalism or theft, on 19 August, the National Assembly pronounced the museum's preparation as urgent. In October, a committee to \"preserve the national memory\" began assembling the collection for display.\n\nThe museum opened on 10 August 1793, the first anniversary of the monarchy's demise. The public was given free accessibility on three days per week, which was \"perceived as a major accomplishment and was generally appreciated\". The collection showcased 537 paintings and 184 objects of art. Three quarters were derived from the royal collections, the remainder from confiscated émigrés and Church property (\"biens nationaux\"). To expand and organize the collection, the Republic dedicated 100,000 livres per year. In 1794, France's revolutionary armies began bringing pieces from Northern Europe, augmented after the Treaty of Tolentino (1797) by works from the Vatican, such as \"Laocoön and His Sons\" and the \"Apollo Belvedere\", to establish the Louvre as a museum and as a \"sign of popular sovereignty\".\n\nThe early days were hectic; privileged artists continued to live in residence, and the unlabelled paintings hung \"frame to frame from floor to ceiling\". The structure itself closed in May 1796 due to structural deficiencies. It reopened on 14 July 1801, arranged chronologically and with new lighting and columns.\n\nUnder Napoleon I, a northern wing paralleling the Grande Galerie was begun, and the collection grew through successful military campaigns. Following the Egyptian campaign of 1798–1801, Napoléon appointed the museum's first director, Dominique Vivant Denon. In tribute, the museum was renamed the \"Musée Napoléon\" in 1803, and acquisitions were made of Spanish, Austrian, Dutch, and Italian works, either as spoils or through treaties such as the Treaty of Tolentino. At the end of Napoleon's First Italian Campaign in 1797, the Treaty of Campo Formio was signed with Count Philipp von Cobenzl of the Austrian Monarchy. This treaty not only marked the completion of Napoleon's conquest of Italy, but also the end of the first phases of the French Revolutionary Wars. Under this treaty, Italian cities were required to contribute pieces of art and patrimony to take part in Napoleon's \"parades of booty\" through Paris before being put into the Louvre Museum. One of the most famous pieces taken under this program was the Horses of Saint Mark. The four antique bronze horses, which had adorned the basilica of San Marco in Venice after the sack of Constantinople in 1204, were brought to Paris to reside atop Napoleon's Arc du Carrousel in Paris in 1797.\n\nSeveral churches and palaces, including Saint Mark's Basilica, were looted by the French, which outraged the Italians and their artistic and cultural sensibilities. In 1797, the Treaty of Tolentino was signed by Napoleon, and two statues, the \"Nile\" and \"Tiber\", were taken to Paris. These statues had previously been in the Vatican, and both were housed in the Louvre until 1815. After the defeat of Napoleon, the \"Nile\" was returned to Italy. However, the \"Tiber\" remained in the Louvre Museum and can be seen in the collections today.\n\nThe Italian Peninsula was not the only region from which Napoleon took art. Under the Directory government of the 1790s, Napoleon (then a General) led an expedition to Egypt. The campaign was an expansionist effort on the part of the government, but the Directory had another goal to make Paris the center of art, science, and culture. The Directory wanted France to assume responsibility for liberating the works of art they deemed in danger in order to protect and nationalize the heritage and culture of their subjects. As a result, there were teams of artists and scientists who accompanied the armies into battle equipped with lists of paintings, sculptures, and other pieces of patrimony that would be collected, crated, and shipped back to France.\n\nDominique Vivant Denon was Napoleon's art advisor, and accompanied him on the expedition to Egypt. Through his initiative, the Valley of the Kings in Egypt was discovered and studied extensively. As a result, he was later installed by Napoleon as the director of Musée Napoléon, formerly the Louvre, cementing the status of the museum as a center for global patrimony and storehouse for cultural heritage.\n\nOne of the most important discoveries made during Napoleon's campaign in Egypt was the Rosetta Stone. It was discovered in 1799, and eventually led to the ability to decipher ancient hieroglyphs. Although the Rosetta Stone was discovered by the French, it actually never made it to the Louvre Museum. It was seized by British Forces following the defeat of Napoleon in Egypt and the subsequent signing of the Treaty of Alexandria in 1801. It is now on display at the British Museum.\n\nAfter the French defeat at Waterloo, the works' former owners sought their return. The Louvre's administrators were loath to comply and hid many works in their private collections. In response, foreign states sent emissaries to London to seek help, and many pieces were returned, even some that had been restored by the Louvre. In 1815 Louis XVIII finally concluded agreements with the Austrian government for the keeping of pieces such as Veronese's \"Wedding at Cana\" which was exchanged for a large Le Brun or the repurchase of the Albani collection.\n\nDuring the Restoration (1814–1830), Louis XVIII and Charles X between them added 135 pieces at a cost of 720,000 francs and created the department of Egyptian antiquities curated by Champollion, increased by more than 7,000 works with the acquisition of antiquities in the Edme-Antoine Durand, the Egyptian collection of Henry Salt or the second collection former by Bernardino Drovetti. This was less than the amount given for rehabilitation of Versailles, and the Louvre suffered relative to the rest of Paris. After the creation of the French Second Republic in 1848, the new government allocated two million francs for repair work and ordered the completion of the Galerie d'Apollon, the Salon Carré, and the Grande Galérie. In 1861, Napoleon III bought 11,835 artworks including 641 paintings, Greek gold and other antiquities of the Campana collection. Between 1852 and 1870, under Napoleon III, the museum added 20,000 new pieces to its collections, and the Pavillon de Flore and the Grande Galérie were remodelled under architects Louis Visconti and Hector Lefuel.\n\nThe Louvre was damaged during the suppression of the Paris Commune. On 23 May 1871, as the French Army advanced into Paris, a force of Communards led by Jules Bergeret set fire to the adjoining Tuileries Palace. The fire burned for forty-eight hours, entirely destroying the interior of the palace and spreading to the museum next to it. The library of the museum and some of the adjoining halls were destroyed, but the museum was saved by the efforts of Paris firemen and museum employees.\n\nDuring the Third Republic (1870–1940) the Louvre acquired new pieces mainly via donations and gifts. The \"Société des Amis du Louvre\" (established in 1897) donated the \"Pietà of Villeneuve-lès-Avignon\", and in 1863 an expedition uncovered the sculpture \"Winged Victory of Samothrace\" in the Aegean Sea. This piece, though heavily damaged, has been prominently displayed since 1884. The 583-item \"Collection La Caze\" donated in 1869, included works by Chardin; Fragonard; Rembrandt – such as \"Bathsheba at Her Bath\" – and \"Gilles\" by Watteau.\n\nMuseum expansion slowed after World War I, and the collection did not acquire many significant new works; exceptions were Georges de La Tour's \"Saint Thomas\" and Baron Edmond de Rothschild's (1845–1934) 1935 donation of 4,000 prints, 3,000 drawings, and 500 illustrated books.\nAt the beginning of World War II the museum removed most of the art and hid valuable pieces. When Germany occupied the Sudetenland, many important artworks such as the \"Mona Lisa\" were temporarily moved to the Château de Chambord. When war was formally declared a year later, most of the museum's paintings were sent there as well. Select sculptures such as \"Winged Victory of Samothrace\" and the \"Venus de Milo\" were sent to the Château de Valençay. On 27 August 1939, after two days of packing, truck convoys began to leave Paris. By 28 December, the museum was cleared of most works, except those that were too heavy and \"unimportant paintings [that] were left in the basement\". In early 1945, after the liberation of France, art began returning to the Louvre.\n\nBy 1874, the Louvre Palace had achieved its present form of an almost rectangular structure with the Sully Wing to the east containing the Cour Carrée (Square Court) and the oldest parts of the Louvre; and two wings which wrap the Cour Napoléon, the Richelieu Wing to the north and the Denon Wing, which borders the Seine to the south. In 1983, French President François Mitterrand proposed, as one of his Grands Projets, the Grand Louvre plan to renovate the building and relocate the Finance Ministry, allowing displays throughout the building. Architect I. M. Pei was awarded the project and proposed a glass pyramid to stand over a new entrance in the main court, the Cour Napoléon. The pyramid and its underground lobby were inaugurated on 15 October 1988 and the Louvre Pyramid was completed in 1989. The second phase of the Grand Louvre plan, the Pyramide Inversée (Inverted Pyramid), was completed in 1993. As of 2002, attendance had doubled since completion.\n\nThe Musée du Louvre contains more than 380,000 objects and displays 35,000 works of art in eight curatorial departments with more than dedicated to the permanent collection. The Louvre exhibits sculptures, objets d'art, paintings, drawings, and archaeological finds. It is the world's most visited museum, averaging 15,000 visitors per day, 65 percent of whom are foreign tourists.\n\nAfter architects Mario Bellini and Rudy Ricciotti had won an international competition to create its new galleries for Islamic art, the new 3,000 sq m pavilion eventually opened in 2012, consisting of ground- and lower-ground-level interior spaces topped by a golden, undulating roof (fashioned from almost 9,000 steel tubes that form an interior web) that seems to float within the neo-Classical Visconti Courtyard in the middle of the Louvre's south wing. The galleries, which the museum had initially hoped to open by 2009, represent the first major architectural intervention at the Louvre since the addition of I.M. Pei's glass pyramid in 1989.\n\nOn 5 February 2015, about one hundred archaeologists, protesting against commercial private involvement to protect France's heritage, blocked Louvre's ticket desks to facilitate free access to the museum. At least one announcement reading \"Free entrance offered by the archeologists\" has been attached to the ticket desk and a number of people visited the museum free of charge.\n\nThe Louvre is owned by the French government; however, since the 1990s it has become more independent. Since 2003, the museum has been required to generate funds for projects. By 2006, government funds had dipped from 75 percent of the total budget to 62 percent. Every year, the Louvre now raises as much as it gets from the state, about €122 million. The government pays for operating costs (salaries, safety and maintenance), while the rest – new wings, refurbishments, acquisitions – is up to the museum to finance. A further €3 million to €5 million a year is raised by the Louvre from exhibitions that it curates for other museums, while the host museum keeps the ticket money. As the Louvre became a point of interest in the book \"The Da Vinci Code\" and the 2006 film based on the book, the museum earned $2.5 million by allowing filming in its galleries. In 2008, the French government provided $180 million of the Louvre's yearly $350 million budget; the remainder came from private contributions and ticket sales.\n\nThe Louvre employs a staff of 2,000 led by Director Jean-Luc Martinez, who reports to the French Ministry of Culture and Communications. Martinez replaced Henri Loyrette in April 2013. Under Loyrette, who replaced Pierre Rosenberg in 2001, the Louvre has undergone policy changes that allow it to lend and borrow more works than before. In 2006, it loaned 1,300 works, which enabled it to borrow more foreign works. From 2006 to 2009, the Louvre lent artwork to the High Museum of Art in Atlanta, Georgia, and received a $6.9 million payment to be used for renovations.\n\nIn 2012, the Louvre and the Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco announced a five-year collaboration on exhibitions, publications, art conservation and educational programming. The €98.5 million expansion of the Islamic Art galleries in 2012 received state funding of €31 million, as well as €17 million from the Alwaleed Bin Talal Foundation founded by the eponymous Saudi prince. The republic of Azerbaijan, the Emir of Kuwait, the Sultan of Oman and King Mohammed VI of Morocco donated in total €26 million. In addition, the opening of the Louvre Abu Dhabi is supposed to provide €400 million over the course of 30 years for its use of the museum's brand. Loyrette has tried to improve weak parts of the collection through income generated from loans of art and by guaranteeing that \"20% of admissions receipts will be taken annually for acquisitions\". He has more administrative independence for the museum and achieved 90 percent of galleries to be open daily, as opposed to 80 percent previously. He oversaw the creation of extended hours and free admission on Friday nights and an increase in the acquisition budget to $36 million from $4.5 million.\n\nOn the 500th anniversary of Leonardo Da Vinci's death, the Louvre held the largest ever single exhibit of his work, from 24 October 2019 to 24 February 2020. The event included over a hundred items: paintings, drawings and notebooks. A full 11 of the fewer than 20 paintings that Da Vinci completed in his lifetime were displayed. Five of them are owned by the Louvre, but the Mona Lisa was not included because it is in such great demand among visitors to the Louvre museum; the work remained on display in its gallery. Salvator Mundi was also not included since the Saudi owner did not agree to move the work from its hiding place. Vitruvian Man, however, was on display, after a successful legal battle with its owner, the Galleria dell'Accademia in Venice.\n\nIn 2004, French officials decided to build a satellite museum on the site of an abandoned coal pit in the former mining town of Lens to relieve the crowded Paris Louvre, increase total museum visits, and improve the industrial north's economy. Six cities were considered for the project: Amiens, Arras, Boulogne-sur-Mer, Calais, Lens, and Valenciennes. In 2004, French Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin chose Lens to be the site of the new building, the Louvre-Lens. Japanese architects SANAA were selected to design the Lens project in 2005. Museum officials predicted that the new building, capable of receiving about 600 works of art, would attract up to 500,000 visitors a year when it opened in 2012.\n\nOn 8 November 2017, a direct extension of the Louvre, Louvre Abu Dhabi, opened its doors to the public in the city of Abu Dhabi. A 30-year agreement, signed by French Culture Minister Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres and Sheik Sultan bin Tahnoon Al Nahyan, established the museum on Saadiyat Island in Abu Dhabi in exchange for €832,000,000 (US$1.3 billion). The Louvre Abu Dhabi, designed by the French architect Jean Nouvel and the engineering firm of Buro Happold, occupy and is covered by an iconic metallic roof designed to cast rays of light mimicking sunlight passing through date palm fronds in an oasis. France agreed to rotate between 200 and 300 artworks during a 10-year period; to provide management expertise; and to provide four temporary exhibitions a year for 15 years. The art will come from multiple museums, including the Louvre, the Georges Pompidou Centre, the Musée d'Orsay, Versailles, the Musée Guimet, the Musée Rodin, and the Musée du quai Branly.\n\nIn March 2018 an exhibition of dozens of artworks and relics belonging to France's Louvre Museum was opened to visitors in Tehran, as a result of an agreement between Iranian and French presidents in 2016. In the Louvre, two departments were allocated to the antiquities of the Iranian civilization, and the managers of the two departments visited Tehran. Relics belonging to Ancient Egypt, Rome and Mesopotamia as well as French royal items were showcased at the Tehran exhibition.\n\nIran's National Museum building was designed and constructed by French architect André Godard. Following its time in Tehran, the exhibition is set to be held in the Khorasan Grand Museum in Mashhad, northeastern Iran in June 2018.\n\nIn 2009, Minister of Culture Frédéric Mitterrand approved a plan that would have created a storage facility northwest of Paris to hold objects from the Louvre and two other national museums in Paris's flood zone, the Musée du Quai Branly and the Musée d'Orsay; the plan was later scrapped. In 2013, his successor Aurélie Filippetti announced that the Louvre would move more than 250,000 works of art held in a basement storage area in Liévin; the cost of the project, estimated at €60 million, will be split between the region (49%) and the Louvre (51%). The Louvre will be the sole owner and manager of the store. In July 2015, a team led by British firm Rogers Stirk Harbour + Partners was selected to design the complex, which will have light-filled work spaces under one vast, green roof.\n\nThe Louvre is involved in controversies that surround cultural property seized under Napoleon I, as well as during World War II by the Nazis. During Nazi occupation, thousands of artworks were stolen. But after the war, 61,233 articles of more than 150,000 seized artworks returned to France and were assigned to the Louvre's Office des Biens Privés. In 1949, it entrusted 2,130 unclaimed pieces (including 1,001 paintings) to the Direction des Musées de France in order to keep them under appropriate conditions of conservation until their restitution and meanwhile classified them as MNRs (Musées Nationaux Recuperation or, in English, the National Museums of Recovered Artwork). Some 10% to 35% of the pieces are believed to come from Jewish spoliations and until the identification of their rightful owners, which declined at the end of the 1960s, they are registered indefinitely on separate inventories from the museum's collections.\n\nThey were exhibited in 1946 and shown all together to the public during four years (1950–1954) in order to allow rightful claimants to identify their properties, then stored or displayed, according to their interest, in several French museums including the Louvre. From 1951 to 1965, about 37 pieces were restituted. Since November 1996, the partly illustrated catalogue of 1947–1949 has been accessible online and completed. In 1997, Prime Minister Alain Juppé initiated the Mattéoli Commission, headed by Jean Mattéoli, to investigate the matter and according to the government, the Louvre is in charge of 678 pieces of artwork still unclaimed by their rightful owners. During the late 1990s, the comparison of the American war archives, which had not been done before, with the French and German ones as well as two court cases which finally settled some of the heirs' rights (Gentili di Giuseppe and Rosenberg families) allowed more accurate investigations. Since 1996, the restitutions, according sometimes to less formal criteria, concerned 47 more pieces (26 paintings, with 6 from the Louvre including a then displayed Tiepolo), until the last claims of French owners and their heirs ended again in 2006.\n\nAccording to Serge Klarsfeld, since the now complete and constant publicity which the artworks got in 1996, the majority of the French Jewish community is nevertheless in favour of the return to the normal French civil rule of \"prescription acquisitive\" of any unclaimed good after another long period of time and consequently to their ultimate integration into the common French heritage instead of their transfer to foreign institutions like during World War II.\n\nNapoleon's campaigns acquired Italian pieces by treaties, as war reparations, and Northern European pieces as spoils as well as some antiquities excavated in Egypt, though the vast majority of the latter were seized as war reparations by the British army and are now part of collections of the British Museum. On the other hand, the Dendera zodiac is, like the Rosetta Stone, claimed by Egypt even though it was acquired in 1821, before the Egyptian Anti-export legislation of 1835. The Louvre administration has thus argued in favor of retaining this item despite requests by Egypt for its return. The museum participates too in arbitration sessions held via UNESCO's Committee for Promoting the Return of Cultural Property to Its Countries of Origin. The museum consequently returned in 2009 five Egyptian fragments of frescoes (30 cm x 15 cm each) whose existence of the tomb of origin had only been brought to the authorities attention in 2008, eight to five years after their good-faith acquisition by the museum from two private collections and after the necessary respect of the procedure of \"déclassement\" from French public collections before the Commission scientifique nationale des collections des musées de France.\n\nThe Musée du Louvre contains about 460,000 objects and displays 35,000 works of art in eight curatorial departments.\n\nThe department, comprising over 50,000 pieces, includes artifacts from the Nile civilizations which date from 4,000 BC to the 4th century AD. The collection, among the world's largest, overviews Egyptian life spanning Ancient Egypt, the Middle Kingdom, the New Kingdom, Coptic art, and the Roman, Ptolemaic, and Byzantine periods.\nThe department's origins lie in the royal collection, but it was augmented by Napoleon's 1798 expeditionary trip with Dominique Vivant, the future director of the Louvre. After Jean-François Champollion translated the Rosetta Stone, Charles X decreed that an Egyptian Antiquities department be created. Champollion advised the purchase of three collections, formed by Edmé-Antoine Durand, Henry Salt and Bernardino Drovet; these additions added 7,000 works. Growth continued via acquisitions by Auguste Mariette, founder of the Egyptian Museum in Cairo. Mariette, after excavations at Memphis, sent back crates of archaeological finds including \"The Seated Scribe\".\n\nGuarded by the \"Large Sphinx\" (c. 2000 BC), the collection is housed in more than 20 rooms. Holdings include art, papyrus scrolls, mummies, tools, clothing, jewelry, games, musical instruments, and weapons. Pieces from the ancient period include the \"Gebel el-Arak Knife\" from 3400 BC, \"The Seated Scribe\", and the \"Head of King Djedefre\". Middle Kingdom art, \"known for its gold work and statues\", moved from realism to idealization; this is exemplified by the schist statue of Amenemhatankh and the wooden \"Offering Bearer\". The New Kingdom and Coptic Egyptian sections are deep, but the statue of the goddess Nephthys and the limestone depiction of the goddess Hathor demonstrate New Kingdom sentiment and wealth.\n\nNear Eastern antiquities, the second newest department, dates from 1881 and presents an overview of early Near Eastern civilization and \"first settlements\", before the arrival of Islam. The department is divided into three geographic areas: the Levant, Mesopotamia (Iraq), and Persia (Iran). The collection's development corresponds to archaeological work such as Paul-Émile Botta's 1843 expedition to Khorsabad and the discovery of Sargon II's palace. These finds formed the basis of the Assyrian museum, the precursor to today's department.\n\nThe museum contains exhibits from Sumer and the city of Akkad, with monuments such as the Prince of Lagash's \"Stele of the Vultures\" from 2450 BC and the stele erected by Naram-Sin, King of Akkad, to celebrate a victory over barbarians in the Zagros Mountains. The Code of Hammurabi, discovered in 1901, displays Babylonian Laws prominently, so that no man could plead their ignorance. The 18th-century BC mural of the \"Investiture of Zimrilim\" and the 25th-century BC \"Statue of Ebih-Il\" found in the ancient city-state of Mari are also on display at the museum.\n\nThe Persian portion of Louvre contains work from the archaic period, like the \"Funerary Head\" and the Persian \"Archers of Darius I\". This section also contains rare objects from Persepolis which were also lent to the British Museum for its Ancient Persia exhibition in 2005.\n\nThe Greek, Etruscan, and Roman department displays pieces from the Mediterranean Basin dating from the Neolithic to the 6th century. The collection spans from the Cycladic period to the decline of the Roman Empire. This department is one of the museum's oldest; it began with appropriated royal art, some of which was acquired under Francis I. Initially, the collection focused on marble sculptures, such as the \"Venus de Milo\". Works such as the \"Apollo Belvedere\" arrived during the Napoleonic Wars, but these pieces were returned after Napoleon I's fall in 1815. In the 19th century, the Louvre acquired works including vases from the Durand collection, bronzes such as the \"Borghese Vase\" from the Bibliothèque nationale.\n\nThe archaic is demonstrated by jewellery and pieces such as the limestone \"Lady of Auxerre\", from 640 BC; and the cylindrical \"Hera of Samos\", c. 570–560 BC. After the 4th century BC, focus on the human form increased, exemplified by the \"Borghese Gladiator\". The Louvre holds masterpieces from the Hellenistic era, including The \"Winged Victory of Samothrace\" (190 BC) and the \"Venus de Milo\", symbolic of classical art. The long \"Galerie Campana\" displays an outstanding collection of more than one thousand Greek potteries. In the galleries paralleling the Seine, much of the museum's Roman sculpture is displayed. The Roman portraiture is representative of that genre; examples include the portraits of Agrippa and Annius Verus; among the bronzes is the Greek \"Apollo of Piombino\".\n\nThe Islamic art collection, the museum's newest, spans \"thirteen centuries and three continents\". These exhibits, comprising ceramics, glass, metalware, wood, ivory, carpet, textiles, and miniatures, include more than 5,000 works and 1,000 shards. Originally part of the decorative arts department, the holdings became separate in 2003. Among the works are the \"Pyxide d'al-Mughira\", a 10th century ivory box from Andalusia; the \"Baptistery of Saint-Louis\", an engraved brass basin from the 13th or 14th century Mamluk period; and the 10th century \"Shroud of Saint-Josse\" from Iran. The collection contains three pages of the \"Shahnameh\", an epic book of poems by Ferdowsi in Persian, and a Syrian metalwork named the \"Barberini Vase\". In September 2019, a new and improved Islamic art department was opened by Princess Lamia bint Majed Al-Saud. The new department exhibits 3,000 pieces were collected from Spain to India via the Arabian peninsula dating from the 7th to the 19th centuries.\n\nThe sculpture department comprises work created before 1850 that does not belong in the Etruscan, Greek, and Roman department. The Louvre has been a repository of sculpted material since its time as a palace; however, only ancient architecture was displayed until 1824, except for Michelangelo's \"Dying Slave\" and \"Rebellious Slave\". Initially the collection included only 100 pieces, the rest of the royal sculpture collection being at Versailles. It remained small until 1847, when Léon Laborde was given control of the department. Laborde developed the medieval section and purchased the first such statues and sculptures in the collection, \"King Childebert\" and \"stanga door\", respectively. The collection was part of the Department of Antiquities but was given autonomy in 1871 under Louis Courajod, a director who organized a wider representation of French works. In 1986, all post-1850 works were relocated to the new Musée d'Orsay. The Grand Louvre project separated the department into two exhibition spaces; the French collection is displayed in the Richelieu wing, and foreign works in the Denon wing.\n\nThe collection's overview of French sculpture contains Romanesque works such as the 11th-century \"Daniel in the Lions' Den\" and the 12th-century \"Virgin of Auvergne\". In the 16th century, Renaissance influence caused French sculpture to become more restrained, as seen in Jean Goujon's bas-reliefs, and Germain Pilon's \"Descent from the Cross\" and \"Resurrection of Christ\". The 17th and 18th centuries are represented by Gian Lorenzo Bernini's 1640–1 Bust of Cardinal Richelieu, Étienne Maurice Falconet's \"Woman Bathing\" and \"Amour menaçant\", and François Anguier's obelisks. Neoclassical works includes Antonio Canova's \"Psyche Revived by Cupid's Kiss\" (1787). The 18th and 19th centuries are represented by the French sculptor Alfred Barye.\n\nThe Objets d'art collection spans the time from the Middle Ages to the mid-19th century. The department began as a subset of the sculpture department, based on royal property and the transfer of work from the Basilique Saint-Denis, the burial ground of French monarchs that held the \"Coronation Sword of the Kings of France\". Among the budding collection's most prized works were pietre dure vases and bronzes. The Durand collection's 1825 acquisition added \"ceramics, enamels, and stained glass\", and 800 pieces were given by Pierre Révoil. The onset of Romanticism rekindled interest in Renaissance and Medieval artwork, and the Sauvageot donation expanded the department with 1,500 middle-age and faïence works. In 1862, the Campana collection added gold jewelry and maiolicas, mainly from the 15th and 16th centuries.\n\nThe works are displayed on the Richelieu Wing's first floor and in the Apollo Gallery, named by the painter Charles Le Brun, who was commissioned by Louis XIV (the Sun King) to decorate the space in a solar theme. The medieval collection contains the coronation crown of Louis XIV, Charles V's sceptre, and the 12th century \"porphyry vase\". The Renaissance art holdings include Giambologna's bronze \"Nessus and Deianira\" and the tapestry \"Maximillian's Hunt\". From later periods, highlights include Madame de Pompadour's Sèvres vase collection and Napoleon III's apartments.\n\nIn September 2000, the Louvre Museum dedicated the Gilbert Chagoury and Rose-Marie Chagoury Gallery to display tapestries donated by the Chagourys, including a 16th-century six-part tapestry suite, sewn with gold and silver threads representing sea divinities, which was commissioned in Paris for Colbert de Seignelay, Secretary of State for the Navy.\n\nThe painting collection has more than 7,500 works from the 13th century to 1848 and is managed by 12 curators who oversee the collection's display. Nearly two-thirds are by French artists, and more than 1,200 are Northern European. The Italian paintings compose most of the remnants of Francis I and Louis XIV's collections, others are unreturned artwork from the Napoleon era, and some were bought. The collection began with Francis, who acquired works from Italian masters such as Raphael and Michelangelo and brought Leonardo da Vinci to his court. After the French Revolution, the Royal Collection formed the nucleus of the Louvre. When the \"d'Orsay\" train station was converted into the Musée d'Orsay in 1986, the collection was split, and pieces completed after the 1848 Revolution were moved to the new museum. French and Northern European works are in the Richelieu wing and \"Cour Carrée\"; Spanish and Italian paintings are on the first floor of the Denon wing.\n\nExemplifying the French School are the early \"Avignon Pietà\" of Enguerrand Quarton; the anonymous painting of \"King Jean le Bon\" (c. 1360), possibly the oldest independent portrait in Western painting to survive from the postclassical era; Hyacinthe Rigaud's \"Louis XIV\"; Jacques-Louis David's \"The Coronation of Napoleon\"; Théodore Géricault's \"The Raft of the Medusa\"; and Eugène Delacroix's \"Liberty Leading the People\". Nicolas Poussin, the Le Nain brothers, Philippe de Champaigne, Le Brun, La Tour, Watteau, Fragonard, Ingres, Corot, and Delacroix are well represented.\n\nNorthern European works include Johannes Vermeer's \"The Lacemaker\" and \"The Astronomer\"; Caspar David Friedrich's \"The Tree of Crows\"; Rembrandt's \"The Supper at Emmaus\", \"Bathsheba at Her Bath\", and \"The Slaughtered Ox\".\n\nThe Italian holdings are notable, particularly the Renaissance collection. The works include Andrea Mantegna and Giovanni Bellini's \"Calvary\"s, which reflect realism and detail \"meant to depict the significant events of a greater spiritual world\". The High Renaissance collection includes Leonardo da Vinci's \"Mona Lisa\", \"Virgin and Child with St. Anne\", \"St. John the Baptist\", and \"Madonna of the Rocks\". Caravaggio is represented by \"The Fortune Teller\" and \"Death of the Virgin\". From 16th century Venice, the Louvre displays Titian's \"Le Concert Champetre\", \"The Entombment\" and \"The Crowning with Thorns\".\nThe La Caze Collection, a bequest to the Musée du Louvre in 1869 by Louis La Caze, was the largest contribution of a person in the history of the Louvre. La Caze gave 584 paintings of his personal collection to the museum. The bequest included Antoine Watteau's Commedia dell'arte player of Pierrot (\"Gilles\"). In 2007, this bequest was the topic of the exhibition \"1869: Watteau, Chardin... entrent au Louvre. La collection La Caze\".\n\nSome of the best known paintings of the museum have been digitized by the French Center for Research and Restoration of the Museums of France.\n\nThe prints and drawings department encompasses works on paper. The origins of the collection were the 8,600 works in the Royal Collection (\"Cabinet du Roi\"), which were increased via state appropriation, purchases such as the 1,200 works from Fillipo Baldinucci's collection in 1806, and donations. The department opened on 5 August 1797, with 415 pieces displayed in the Galerie d'Apollon. The collection is organized into three sections: the core \"Cabinet du Roi\", 14,000 royal copper printing-plates, and the donations of Edmond de Rothschild, which include 40,000 prints, 3,000 drawings, and 5,000 illustrated books. The holdings are displayed in the Pavillon de Flore; due to the fragility of the paper medium, only a portion are displayed at one time.\n\nThe museum lies in the center of Paris on the Right Bank, in the 1st arrondissement. It was home to the former Tuileries Palace, which closed off the western end of the Louvre entrance courtyard, but was heavily damaged by fire during the Paris Commune of 1871 and later demolished. The adjacent Tuileries Gardens, created in 1564 by Catherine de' Medici, was designed in 1664 by André Le Nôtre. The gardens house the Galerie nationale du Jeu de Paume, a contemporary art exhibition space which was used to store confiscated Jewish cultural property during the 1940 to 1944 German occupation of France. Parallel to the Jeu de Paume is the Orangerie, home to the famous \"Water Lilies\" paintings by Claude Monet.\n\nThe Louvre is slightly askew of the Historic Axis (\"Axe historique\"), a roughly eight-kilometre (five-mile) architectural line bisecting the city. It begins on the east in the Louvre courtyard and runs west along the Champs-Élysées. In 1871, the burning of the Tuileries Palace by the Paris Commune revealed that the Louvre was slightly askew of the \"Axe\" despite past appearances to the contrary. The Louvre can be reached by the Palais Royal – Musée du Louvre Métro or the Louvre-Rivoli stations.\n\nThe Louvre has three entrances: the main entrance at the pyramid, an entrance from the Carrousel du Louvre underground shopping mall, and an entrance at the Porte des Lions (near the western end of the Denon wing).\n\nUnder the main entrance to the museum is the Carrousel du Louvre, a shopping mall operated by Unibail-Rodamco. Among other stores, it has the first Apple Store in France, and a McDonald's restaurant, the presence of which has created controversy.\n\nThe use of cameras and video recorders is permitted inside, but flash photography is forbidden.\n\nBULLET::::- List of most visited art museums\nBULLET::::- List of museums in Paris\nBULLET::::- Center for Research and Restoration of Museums of France\nBULLET::::- Musée de la mode et du textile\n\n"}
{"id": "17547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17547", "title": "Love", "text": "Love\n\nLove encompasses a range of strong and positive emotional and mental states, from the most sublime virtue or good habit, the deepest interpersonal affection and to the simplest pleasure. An example of this range of meanings is that the love of a mother differs from the love of a spouse, which differs from the love of food. Most commonly, love refers to a feeling of strong attraction and emotional attachment.\n\nLove is considered to be a positive and negative: with its virtue representing human kindness, compassion, and affection, as \"the unselfish loyal and benevolent concern for the good of another\"; and its vice representing human moral flaw, akin to vanity, selfishness, amour-propre, and egotism, as it potentially leads people into a type of mania, obsessiveness or codependency. It may also describe compassionate and affectionate actions towards other humans, one's self or animals. In its various forms, love acts as a major facilitator of interpersonal relationships and, owing to its central psychological importance, is one of the most common themes in the creative arts. Love has been postulated to be a function to keep human beings together against menaces and to facilitate the continuation of the species.\n\nAncient Greek philosophers identified five forms of love: essentially, familial love (in Greek, '), friendly love or platonic love ('), romantic love (), guest love () and divine love (). Modern authors have distinguished further varieties of love: unrequited love, empty love, companionate love, consummate love, infatuated love, self-love, and courtly love. Numerous cultures have also distinguished ', ', ', ', ', ', ', ', ', ', ', ' (and other variants or symbioses of these states), as culturally unique words, definitions, or expressions of love in regards to a specified \"moments\" currently lacking in the english language.\n\nScientific research on emotion has increased significantly over the past two decades. The color wheel theory of love defines three primary, three secondary and nine tertiary love styles, describing them in terms of the traditional color wheel. The triangular theory of love suggests \"intimacy, passion and commitment\" are core components of love. Love has additional religious or spiritual meaning. This diversity of uses and meanings combined with the complexity of the feelings involved makes love unusually difficult to consistently define, compared to other emotional states.\n\nThe word \"love\" can have a variety of related but distinct meanings in different contexts. Many other languages use multiple words to express some of the different concepts that in English are denoted as \"love\"; one example is the plurality of Greek words for \"love\" which includes \"agape\" and \"eros\". Cultural differences in conceptualizing love thus doubly impede the establishment of a universal definition.\n\nAlthough the nature or essence of love is a subject of frequent debate, different aspects of the word can be clarified by determining what \"isn't\" love (antonyms of \"love\"). Love as a general expression of positive sentiment (a stronger form of \"like\") is commonly contrasted with hate (or neutral apathy). As a less-sexual and more-emotionally intimate form of romantic attachment, love is commonly contrasted with lust. As an interpersonal relationship with romantic overtones, love is sometimes contrasted with friendship, although the word \"love\" is often applied to close friendships or platonic love. (Further possible ambiguities come with usages \"girlfriend\", \"boyfriend\", \"just good friends\").\n\nThe complex and abstract nature of love often reduces discourse of love to a thought-terminating cliché. Several common proverbs regard love, from Virgil's \"Love conquers all\" to The Beatles' \"All You Need Is Love\". St. Thomas Aquinas, following Aristotle, defines love as \"to will the good of another.\" Bertrand Russell describes love as a condition of \"absolute value,\" as opposed to relative value. Philosopher Gottfried Leibniz said that love is \"to be delighted by the happiness of another.\" Meher Baba stated that in love there is a \"feeling of unity\" and an \"active appreciation of the intrinsic worth of the object of love.\" Biologist Jeremy Griffith defines love as \"unconditional selflessness\".\n\nPeople can be said to love an object, principle, or goal to which they are deeply committed and greatly value. For example, compassionate outreach and volunteer workers' \"love\" of their cause may sometimes be born not of interpersonal love but impersonal love, altruism, and strong spiritual or political convictions. People can also \"love\" material objects, animals, or activities if they invest themselves in bonding or otherwise identifying with those things. If sexual passion is also involved, then this feeling is called paraphilia. A common principle that people say they love is life itself.\n\nInterpersonal love refers to love between human beings. It is a much more potent sentiment than a simple \"liking\" for a person. Unrequited love refers to those feelings of love that are not reciprocated. Interpersonal love is most closely associated with interpersonal relationships. Such love might exist between family members, friends, and couples. There are also a number of psychological disorders related to love, such as erotomania.\nThroughout history, philosophy and religion have done the most speculation on the phenomenon of love. In the 20th century, the science of psychology has written a great deal on the subject. In recent years, the sciences of psychology, anthropology, neuroscience, and biology have added to the understanding the concept of love.\n\nBiological models of sex tend to view love as a mammalian drive, much like hunger or thirst. Helen Fisher, an anthropologist and human behavior researcher, divides the experience of love into three partly overlapping stages: lust, attraction, and attachment. Lust is the feeling of sexual desire; romantic attraction determines what partners mates find attractive and pursue, conserving time and energy by choosing; and attachment involves sharing a home, parental duties, mutual defense, and in humans involves feelings of safety and security. Three distinct neural circuitries, including neurotransmitters, and three behavioral patterns, are associated with these three romantic styles.\nLust is the initial passionate sexual desire that promotes mating, and involves the increased release of chemicals such as testosterone and estrogen. These effects rarely last more than a few weeks or months. Attraction is the more individualized and romantic desire for a specific candidate for mating, which develops out of lust as commitment to an individual mate forms. Recent studies in neuroscience have indicated that as people fall in love, the brain consistently releases a certain set of chemicals, including the neurotransmitter hormones, dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin, the same compounds released by amphetamine, stimulating the brain's pleasure center and leading to side effects such as increased heart rate, loss of appetite and sleep, and an intense feeling of excitement. Research has indicated that this stage generally lasts from one and a half to three years.\n\nSince the lust and attraction stages are both considered temporary, a third stage is needed to account for long-term relationships. Attachment is the bonding that promotes relationships lasting for many years and even decades. Attachment is generally based on commitments such as marriage and children, or on mutual friendship based on things like shared interests. It has been linked to higher levels of the chemicals oxytocin and vasopressin to a greater degree than short-term relationships have. Enzo Emanuele and coworkers reported the protein molecule known as the nerve growth factor (NGF) has high levels when people first fall in love, but these return to previous levels after one year.\nPsychology depicts love as a cognitive and social phenomenon. Psychologist Robert Sternberg formulated a triangular theory of love and argued that love has three different components: intimacy, commitment, and passion. Intimacy is a form in which two people share confidences and various details of their personal lives, and is usually shown in friendships and romantic love affairs. Commitment, on the other hand, is the expectation that the relationship is permanent. The last form of love is sexual attraction and passion. Passionate love is shown in infatuation as well as romantic love. All forms of love are viewed as varying combinations of these three components. Non-love does not include any of these components. Liking only includes intimacy. Infatuated love only includes passion. Empty love only includes commitment. Romantic love includes both intimacy and passion. Companionate love includes intimacy and commitment. Fatuous love includes passion and commitment. Lastly, consummate love includes all three components. American psychologist Zick Rubin sought to define \"love\" by psychometrics in the 1970s. His work states that three factors constitute love: attachment, caring, and intimacy.\n\nFollowing developments in electrical theories such as Coulomb's law, which showed that positive and negative charges attract, analogs in human life were developed, such as \"opposites attract\". Over the last century, research on the nature of human mating has generally found this not to be true when it comes to character and personality—people tend to like people similar to themselves. However, in a few unusual and specific domains, such as immune systems, it seems that humans prefer others who are unlike themselves (e.g., with an orthogonal immune system), since this will lead to a baby that has the best of both worlds. In recent years, various human bonding theories have been developed, described in terms of attachments, ties, bonds, and affinities.\nSome Western authorities disaggregate into two main components, the altruistic and the narcissistic. This view is represented in the works of Scott Peck, whose work in the field of applied psychology explored the definitions of love and evil. Peck maintains that love is a combination of the \"concern for the spiritual growth of another,\" and simple narcissism. In combination, love is an \"activity\", not simply a feeling.\n\nPsychologist Erich Fromm maintained in his book \"The Art of Loving\" that love is not merely a feeling but is also actions, and that in fact, the \"feeling\" of love is superficial in comparison to one's commitment to love via a series of loving actions over time. In this sense, Fromm held that love is ultimately not a feeling at all, but rather is a commitment to, and adherence to, loving actions towards another, oneself, or many others, over a sustained duration. Fromm also described love as a conscious choice that in its early stages might originate as an involuntary feeling, but which then later no longer depends on those feelings, but rather depends only on conscious commitment.\n\nEvolutionary psychology has attempted to provide various reasons for love as a survival tool. Humans are dependent on parental help for a large portion of their lifespans compared to other mammals. Love has therefore been seen as a mechanism to promote parental support of children for this extended time period. Furthermore, researchers as early as Charles Darwin himself identified unique features of human love compared to other mammals and credit love as a major factor for creating social support systems that enabled the development and expansion of the human species. Another factor may be that sexually transmitted diseases can cause, among other effects, permanently reduced fertility, injury to the fetus, and increase complications during childbirth. This would favor monogamous relationships over polygamy.\n\nBiological models of love tend to see it as a mammalian drive, similar to hunger or thirst. Psychology sees love as more of a social and cultural phenomenon. Certainly love is influenced by hormones (such as oxytocin), neurotrophins (such as NGF), and pheromones, and how people think and behave in love is influenced by their conceptions of love. The conventional view in biology is that there are two major drives in love: sexual attraction and attachment. Attachment between adults is presumed to work on the same principles that lead an infant to become attached to its mother. The traditional psychological view sees love as being a combination of companionate love and passionate love. Passionate love is intense longing, and is often accompanied by physiological arousal (shortness of breath, rapid heart rate); companionate love is affection and a feeling of intimacy not accompanied by physiological arousal.\n\nGreek distinguishes several different senses in which the word \"love\" is used. Ancient Greeks identified four forms of love: kinship or familiarity (in Greek, \"storge\"), friendship and/or platonic desire (\"philia\"), sexual and/or romantic desire (\"eros\"), and self-emptying or divine love (\"agape\"). Modern authors have distinguished further varieties of romantic love. However, with Greek (as with many other languages), it has been historically difficult to separate the meanings of these words totally. At the same time, the Ancient Greek text of the Bible has examples of the verb \"agapo\" having the same meaning as \"phileo\".\n\n\"Agape\" ( \"agápē\") means \"love\" in modern-day Greek. The term \"s'agapo\" means \"I love you\" in Greek. The word \"agapo\" is the verb \"I love\". It generally refers to a \"pure,\" ideal type of love, rather than the physical attraction suggested by \"eros\". However, there are some examples of \"agape\" used to mean the same as \"eros\". It has also been translated as \"love of the soul.\"\n\n\"Eros\" ( \"érōs\") (from the Greek deity Eros) is passionate love, with sensual desire and longing. The Greek word \"erota\" means \"in love\". Plato refined his own definition. Although eros is initially felt for a person, with contemplation it becomes an appreciation of the beauty within that person, or even becomes appreciation of beauty itself. Eros helps the soul recall knowledge of beauty and contributes to an understanding of spiritual truth. Lovers and philosophers are all inspired to seek truth by eros. Some translations list it as \"love of the body\".\n\n\"Philia\" ( \"philía\"), a dispassionate virtuous love, was a concept addressed and developed by Aristotle in his Nicomachean Ethics Book VIII. It includes loyalty to friends, family, and community, and requires virtue, equality, and familiarity. Philia is motivated by practical reasons; one or both of the parties benefit from the relationship. It can also mean \"love of the mind.\"\n\n\"Storge\" ( \"storgē\") is natural affection, like that felt by parents for offspring.\n\n\"Xenia\" (ξενία \"xenía\"), hospitality, was an extremely important practice in ancient Greece. It was an almost ritualized friendship formed between a host and his guest, who could previously have been strangers. The host fed and provided quarters for the guest, who was expected to repay only with gratitude. The importance of this can be seen throughout Greek mythology—in particular, Homer's \"Iliad\" and \"Odyssey\".\n\nThe Latin language has several different verbs corresponding to the English word \"love.\" \"amō\" is the basic verb meaning \"I love\", with the infinitive \"amare\" (“to love”) as it still is in Italian today. The Romans used it both in an affectionate sense as well as in a romantic or sexual sense. From this verb come \"amans\"—a lover, amator, \"professional lover,\" often with the accessory notion of lechery—and \"amica\", \"girlfriend\" in the English sense, often being applied euphemistically to a prostitute. The corresponding noun is \"amor\" (the significance of this term for the Romans is well illustrated in the fact, that the name of the City, Rome—in Latin: \"Roma\"—can be viewed as an anagram for \"amor\", which was used as the secret name of the City in wide circles in ancient times), which is also used in the plural form to indicate love affairs or sexual adventures. This same root also produces \"amicus\"—\"friend\"—and \"amicitia\", \"friendship\" (often based to mutual advantage, and corresponding sometimes more closely to \"indebtedness\" or \"influence\"). Cicero wrote a treatise called \"On Friendship\" (\"de Amicitia\"), which discusses the notion at some length. Ovid wrote a guide to dating called \"Ars Amatoria\" (\"The Art of Love\"), which addresses, in depth, everything from extramarital affairs to overprotective parents.\n\nLatin sometimes uses \"amāre\" where English would simply say \"to like\". This notion, however, is much more generally expressed in Latin by the terms \"placere\" or \"delectāre\", which are used more colloquially, the latter used frequently in the love poetry of Catullus. \"Diligere\" often has the notion \"to be affectionate for,\" \"to esteem,\" and rarely if ever is used for romantic love. This word would be appropriate to describe the friendship of two men. The corresponding noun \"diligentia\", however, has the meaning of \"diligence\" or \"carefulness,\" and has little semantic overlap with the verb. \"Observare\" is a synonym for \"diligere\"; despite the cognate with English, this verb and its corresponding noun, \"observantia\", often denote \"esteem\" or \"affection.\" \"Caritas\" is used in Latin translations of the Christian Bible to mean \"charitable love\"; this meaning, however, is not found in Classical pagan Roman literature. As it arises from a conflation with a Greek word, there is no corresponding verb.\n\nTwo philosophical underpinnings of love exist in the Chinese tradition, one from Confucianism which emphasized actions and duty while the other came from Mohism which championed a universal love. A core concept to Confucianism is (\"Ren\", \"benevolent love\"), which focuses on duty, action and attitude in a relationship rather than love itself. In Confucianism, one displays benevolent love by performing actions such as filial piety from children, kindness from parents, loyalty to the king and so forth.\n\nThe concept of (Mandarin: \"ài\") was developed by the Chinese philosopher Mozi in the 4th century BC in reaction to Confucianism's benevolent love. Mozi tried to replace what he considered to be the long-entrenched Chinese over-attachment to family and clan structures with the concept of \"universal love\" (, \"jiān'ài\"). In this, he argued directly against Confucians who believed that it was natural and correct for people to care about different people in different degrees. Mozi, by contrast, believed people in principle should care for all people equally. Mohism stressed that rather than adopting different attitudes towards different people, love should be unconditional and offered to everyone without regard to reciprocation; not just to friends, family and other Confucian relations. Later in Chinese Buddhism, the term \"Ai\" () was adopted to refer to a passionate, caring love and was considered a fundamental desire. In Buddhism, \"Ai\" was seen as capable of being either selfish or selfless, the latter being a key element towards enlightenment.\n\nIn Mandarin Chinese, (\"ài\") is often used as the equivalent of the Western concept of love. (\"ài\") is used as both a verb (e.g. , \"Wǒ ài nǐ\" , or \"I love you\") and a noun (such as \"àiqíng\", or \"romantic love\"). However, due to the influence of Confucian (\"rén\"), the phrase (\"Wǒ ài nǐ\", I love you) carries with it a very specific sense of responsibility, commitment and loyalty. Instead of frequently saying \"I love you\" as in some Western societies, the Chinese are more likely to express feelings of affection in a more casual way. Consequently, \"I like you\" (, \"Wǒ xǐhuan nǐ\") is a more common way of expressing affection in Chinese; it is more playful and less serious. This is also true in Japanese (\"suki da\", ).\n\nThe Japanese language uses three words to convey the English equivalent of \"love\". Because \"love\" covers a wide range of emotions and behavioral phenomena, there are nuances distinguishing the three terms. The term , which is often associated with maternal love or selfless love, originally referred to beauty and was often used in religious context. Following the Meiji Restoration 1868, the term became associated with \"love\" in order to translate Western literature. Prior to Western influence, the term generally represented romantic love, and was often the subject of the popular Man'yōshū Japanese poetry collection. \"Koi\" describes a longing for a member of the opposite sex and is typically interpreted as selfish and wanting. The term's origins come from the concept of lonely solitude as a result of separation from a loved one. Though modern usage of \"koi\" focuses on sexual love and infatuation, the Manyō used the term to cover a wider range of situations, including tenderness, benevolence, and material desire. The third term, , is a more modern construction that combines the kanji characters for both \"ai\" and \"koi\", though its usage more closely resembles that of \"koi\" in the form of romantic love.\n\nIn contemporary literature, kama refers usually to sexual desire. However, the term also refers to any sensory enjoyment, emotional attraction and aesthetic pleasure such as from arts, dance, music, painting, sculpture and nature.\n\nThe concept kama is found in some of the earliest known verses in Vedas. For example, Book 10 of Rig Veda describes the creation of the universe from nothing by the great heat. There in hymn 129, it states:\n\nRumi, Hafiz and Sa'di are icons of the passion and love that the Persian culture and language present. The Persian word for love is \"Ishq\", which is derived from Arabic language, however it is considered by most to be too stalwart a term for interpersonal love and is more commonly substituted for \"doost dashtan\" (\"liking\"). In the Persian culture, everything is encompassed by love and all is for love, starting from loving friends and family, husbands and wives, and eventually reaching the divine love that is the ultimate goal in life.\n\nIn Hebrew, (\"ahava\") is the most commonly used term for both interpersonal love and love between God and God's creations. Chesed, often translated as loving-kindness, is used to describe many forms of love between human beings.\n\nThe commandment to love other people is given in the Torah, which states, \"Love your neighbor like yourself\" (Leviticus 19:18). The Torah's commandment to love God \"with all your heart, with all your soul and with all your might\" (Deuteronomy 6:5) is taken by the Mishnah (a central text of the Jewish oral law) to refer to good deeds, willingness to sacrifice one's life rather than commit certain serious transgressions, willingness to sacrifice all of one's possessions, and being grateful to the Lord despite adversity (tractate Berachoth 9:5). Rabbinic literature differs as to how this love can be developed, e.g., by contemplating divine deeds or witnessing the marvels of nature.\n\nAs for love between marital partners, this is deemed an essential ingredient to life: \"See life with the wife you love\" (Ecclesiastes 9:9). Rabbi David Wolpe writes that \"...love is not only about the feelings of the lover...It is when one person believes in another person and shows it.\" He further states that \"...love...is a feeling that expresses itself in action. What we really feel is reflected in what we do.\" The biblical book Song of Solomon is considered a romantically phrased metaphor of love between God and his people, but in its plain reading, reads like a love song. The 20th-century Rabbi Eliyahu Eliezer Dessler is frequently quoted as defining love from the Jewish point of view as \"giving without expecting to take\" (from his \"Michtav me-Eliyahu\", Vol. 1).\n\nThe Christian understanding is that love comes from God. The love of man and woman—\"eros\" in Greek—and the unselfish love of others (\"agape\"), are often contrasted as \"descending\" and \"ascending\" love, respectively, but are ultimately the same thing.\n\nThere are several Greek words for \"love\" that are regularly referred to in Christian circles.\nBULLET::::- \"Agape\": In the New Testament, \"agapē\" is charitable, selfless, altruistic, and unconditional. It is parental love, seen as creating goodness in the world; it is the way God is seen to love humanity, and it is seen as the kind of love that Christians aspire to have for one another.\nBULLET::::- \"Phileo\": Also used in the New Testament, \"phileo\" is a human response to something that is found to be delightful. Also known as \"brotherly love.\"\nBULLET::::- Two other words for love in the Greek language, \"eros\" (sexual love) and \"storge\" (child-to-parent love), were never used in the New Testament.\n\nChristians believe that to \"Love God with all your heart, mind, and strength\" and \"Love your neighbor as yourself\" are the two most important things in life (the greatest commandment of the Jewish Torah, according to Jesus; cf. Gospel of Mark chapter 12, verses 28–34). Saint Augustine summarized this when he wrote \"Love God, and do as thou wilt.\"\n\nThe Apostle Paul glorified love as the most important virtue of all. Describing love in the famous poetic interpretation in 1 Corinthians, he wrote, \"Love is patient, love is kind. It does not envy, it does not boast, it is not proud. It is not rude, it is not self-seeking, it is not easily angered, it keeps no record of wrongs. Love does not delight in evil but rejoices with the truth. It always protects, always trusts, always hopes, and always perseveres.\" (1 Cor. 13:4–7, NIV)\n\nThe Apostle John wrote, \"For God so loved the world that he gave his one and only Son, that whoever believes in him shall not perish but have eternal life. For God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world, but to save the world through him.\" (John 3:16–17, NIV) John also wrote, \"Dear friends, let us love one another for love comes from God. Everyone who loves has been born of God and knows God. Whoever does not love does not know God, because God is love.\" (1 John 4:7–8, NIV)\n\nSaint Augustine says that one must be able to decipher the difference between love and lust. Lust, according to Saint Augustine, is an overindulgence, but to love and be loved is what he has sought for his entire life. He even says, “I was in love with love.” Finally, he does fall in love and is loved back, by God. Saint Augustine says the only one who can love you truly and fully is God, because love with a human only allows for flaws such as \"jealousy, suspicion, fear, anger, and contention.\" According to Saint Augustine, to love God is \"to attain the peace which is yours.\" (Saint Augustine's \"Confessions\")\n\nAugustine regards the duplex commandment of love in Matthew 22 as the heart of Christian faith and the interpretation of the Bible. After the review of Christian doctrine, Augustine treats the problem of love in terms of use and enjoyment until the end of Book I of \"De Doctrina Christiana\" (1.22.21–1.40.44;).\n\nChristian theologians see God as the source of love, which is mirrored in humans and their own loving relationships. Influential Christian theologian C.S. Lewis wrote a book called \"The Four Loves\". Benedict XVI named his first encyclical \"God is love\". He said that a human being, created in the image of God, who is love, is able to practice love; to give himself to God and others (agape) and by receiving and experiencing God's love in contemplation (eros). This life of love, according to him, is the life of the saints such as Teresa of Calcutta and the Blessed Virgin Mary and is the direction Christians take when they believe that God loves them.\n\nPope Francis taught that \"True love is both loving and letting oneself be loved...what is important in love is not our loving, but allowing ourselves to be loved by God.\" And so, in the analysis of a Catholic theologian, for Pope Francis, \"the key to love...is not our activity. It is the activity of the greatest, and the source, of all the powers in the universe: God's.\"\n\nIn Christianity the practical definition of love is summarised by St. Thomas Aquinas, who defined love as \"to will the good of another,\" or to desire for another to succeed. This is an explanation of the Christian need to love others, including their enemies. As Thomas Aquinas explains, Christian love is motivated by the need to see others succeed in life, to be good people.\n\nRegarding love for enemies, Jesus is quoted in the Gospel of Matthew chapter five:\n\n\"You have heard that it was said, ‘Love your neighbor and hate your enemy.’ But I tell you, love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you, that you may be children of your Father in heaven. He causes his sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the righteous and the unrighteous. If you love those who love you, what reward will you get? Are not even the tax collectors doing that? And if you greet only your own people, what are you doing more than others? Do not even pagans do that? Be perfect, therefore, as your heavenly Father is perfect.\"\n– Matthew 5: 43–48\".\n\nDo not forget to love with forgiveness, Christ saved an adulterous women from those who would stone her. A world of wronged hypocrites needs forgiving love. Mosaic Law would hold Deuteronomy 22:22-24 \"If a man is found lying with a woman married to a husband, then both of them shall die — the man that lay with the woman, and the woman; so you shall put away the evil from Israel. If a young woman who is a virgin is betrothed to a husband, and a man finds her in the city and lies with her, then you shall bring them both out to the gate of that city, and you shall stone them to death with stones, the young woman because she did not cry out in the city, and the man because he humbled his neighbor's wife; so you shall put away the evil from among you.\"\n\nTertullian wrote regarding love for enemies: \"Our individual, extraordinary, and perfect goodness consists in loving our enemies. To love one's friends is common practice, to love one's enemies only among Christians.\"\n\nLove encompasses the Islamic view of life as universal brotherhood that applies to all who hold faith. Amongst the 99 names of God (Allah), there is the name \"Al-Wadud\", or \"the Loving One,\" which is found in Surah as well as Surah . God is also referenced at the beginning of every chapter in the Qur'an as \"Ar-Rahman\" and \"Ar-Rahim\", or the \"Most Compassionate\" and the \"Most Merciful\", indicating that nobody is more loving, compassionate and benevolent than God. The Qur'an refers to God as being \"full of loving kindness.\"\n\nThe Qur'an exhorts Muslim believers to treat all people, those who have not persecuted them, with \"birr\" or \"deep kindness\" as stated in Surah . \"Birr\" is also used by the Qur'an in describing the love and kindness that children must show to their parents.\n\n\"Ishq\", or divine love, is the emphasis of Sufism in the Islamic tradition. Practitioners of Sufism believe that love is a projection of the essence of God to the universe. God desires to recognize beauty, and as if one looks at a mirror to see oneself, God \"looks\" at himself within the dynamics of nature. Since everything is a reflection of God, the school of Sufism practices to see the beauty inside the apparently ugly. Sufism is often referred to as the religion of love. God in Sufism is referred to in three main terms, which are the Lover, Loved, and Beloved, with the last of these terms being often seen in Sufi poetry. A common viewpoint of Sufism is that through love, humankind can get back to its inherent purity and grace. The saints of Sufism are infamous for being \"drunk\" due to their love of God; hence, the constant reference to wine in Sufi poetry and music.\n\nIn his Paris Talks, `Abdu'l-Bahá described four types of love: the love that flows from God to human beings; the love that flows from human beings to God; the love of God towards the Self or Identity of God; and the love of human beings for human beings.\n\nIn Buddhism, \"Kāma\" is sensuous, sexual love. It is an obstacle on the path to enlightenment, since it is selfish. \"Karuṇā\" is compassion and mercy, which reduces the suffering of others. It is complementary to wisdom and is necessary for enlightenment. \"Adveṣa\" and \"mettā\" are benevolent love. This love is unconditional and requires considerable self-acceptance. This is quite different from ordinary love, which is usually about attachment and sex and which rarely occurs without self-interest. Instead, in Buddhism it refers to detachment and unselfish interest in others' welfare.\n\nThe Bodhisattva ideal in Mahayana Buddhism involves the complete renunciation of oneself in order to take on the burden of a suffering world. The strongest motivation one has in order to take the path of the Bodhisattva is the idea of salvation within unselfish, altruistic love for all sentient beings.\n\nIn Hinduism, \"kāma\" is pleasurable, sexual love, personified by the god Kamadeva. For many Hindu schools, it is the third end (\"Kama\") in life. Kamadeva is often pictured holding a bow of sugar cane and an arrow of flowers; he may ride upon a great parrot. He is usually accompanied by his consort Rati and his companion Vasanta, lord of the spring season. Stone images of Kamadeva and Rati can be seen on the door of the Chennakeshava temple at Belur, in Karnataka, India. \"Maara\" is another name for \"kāma\".\n\nIn contrast to \"kāma\", \"prema\"or \"prem\"refers to elevated love. \"Karuna\" is compassion and mercy, which impels one to help reduce the suffering of others. \"Bhakti\" is a Sanskrit term, meaning \"loving devotion to the supreme God.\" A person who practices \"bhakti\" is called a \"bhakta\". Hindu writers, theologians, and philosophers have distinguished nine forms of \"bhakti\", which can be found in the \"Bhagavata Purana\" and works by Tulsidas. The philosophical work \"Narada Bhakti Sutras\", written by an unknown author (presumed to be Narada), distinguishes eleven forms of love.\n\nIn certain Vaishnava sects within Hinduism, attaining unadulterated, unconditional and incessant love for Godhead is considered the foremost goal of life. Gaudiya Vaishnavas who worship Krishna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the cause of all causes consider Love for Godhead (Prema) to act in two ways: sambhoga and vipralambha (union and separation)—two opposites .\n\nIn the condition of separation, there is an acute yearning for being with the beloved and in the condition of union there is supreme happiness and nectarean. Gaudiya Vaishnavas consider that Krishna-prema (Love for Godhead) is not fire but that it still burns away one's material desires. They consider that Kṛṣṇa-prema is not a weapon, but it still pierces the heart. It is not water, but it washes away everything—one's pride, religious rules, and one's shyness. Krishna-prema is considered to make one drown in the ocean of transcendental ecstasy and pleasure. The love of Radha, a cowherd girl, for Krishna is often cited as the supreme example of love for Godhead by Gaudiya Vaishnavas. Radha is considered to be the internal potency of Krishna, and is the supreme lover of Godhead. Her example of love is considered to be beyond the understanding of material realm as it surpasses any form of selfish love or lust that is visible in the material world. The reciprocal love between Radha (the supreme lover) and Krishna (God as the Supremely Loved) is the subject of many poetic compositions in India such as the \"Gita Govinda\" and \"Hari Bhakti Shuddhodhaya.\"\n\nIn the Bhakti tradition within Hinduism, it is believed that execution of devotional service to God leads to the development of Love for God \"(taiche bhakti-phale krsne prema upajaya)\", and as love for God increases in the heart, the more one becomes free from material contamination \"(krishna-prema asvada haile, bhava nasa paya)\". Being perfectly in love with God or Krishna makes one perfectly free from material contamination. and this is the ultimate way of salvation or liberation. In this tradition, salvation or liberation is considered inferior to love, and just an incidental by-product. Being absorbed in Love for God is considered to be the perfection of life.\n\nThe term \"free love\" has been used to describe a social movement that rejects marriage, which is seen as a form of social bondage. The Free Love movement's initial goal was to separate the state from sexual matters such as marriage, birth control, and adultery. It claimed that such issues were the concern of the people involved, and no one else.\n\nMany people in the early 19th century believed that marriage was an important aspect of life to \"fulfill earthly human happiness.\" Middle-class Americans wanted the home to be a place of stability in an uncertain world. This mentality created a vision of strongly defined gender roles, which provoked the advancement of the free love movement as a contrast.\n\nThe term \"sex radical\" has been used interchangeably with the term \"free lover\". By whatever name, advocates had two strong beliefs: opposition to the idea of forceful sexual activity in a relationship and advocacy for a woman to use her body in any way that she pleases. These are also beliefs of Feminism.\n\nThe philosophy of love is a field of social philosophy and ethics that attempts to explain the nature of love. The philosophical investigation of love includes the tasks of distinguishing between the various kinds of personal love, asking if and how love is or can be justified, asking what the value of love is, and what impact love has on the autonomy of both the lover and the beloved.\n\nMany different theories attempt to explain the nature and function of love. Explaining love to a hypothetical person who had not himself or herself experienced love or being loved would be very difficult because to such a person love would appear to be quite strange if not outright irrational behavior. Among the prevailing types of theories that attempt to account for the existence of love are: psychological theories, the vast majority of which consider love to be very healthy behavior; evolutionary theories which hold that love is part of the process of natural selection; spiritual theories which may, for instance consider love to be a gift from a god; and theories that consider love to be an unexplainable mystery, very much like a mystical experience.\n\nBULLET::::- Color wheel theory of love\nBULLET::::- Human bonding\nBULLET::::- Love at first sight\nBULLET::::- Polyamory\nBULLET::::- Romance (love)\nBULLET::::- Self-love\nBULLET::::- Social connection\nBULLET::::- Traditional forms, Agape, Philia, Philautia, Storge, Eros: Greek terms for love\n\nBULLET::::- History of Love, \"Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy\"\n"}
{"id": "17549", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17549", "title": "Forever Changes", "text": "Forever Changes\n\nForever Changes is the third studio album by the American psychedelic rock band Love. It was released by Elektra Records in November 1967 and would be the final album by the original band, as subsequent albums featured leader Arthur Lee backed by a variety of new players.\n\n\"Forever Changes\" failed to achieve commercial success when it was first released in 1967, but it has since become recognized as one of the greatest albums ever made, ranking 40th on \"Rolling Stone\" magazine's 2003 list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time, being inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame in 2008, and being added to the National Recording Registry in 2011. The album was also included in Robert Christgau's \"Basic Record Library\" of 1950s and 1960s recordings, published in \"\" (1981). It was voted number 12 in Colin Larkin's All Time Top 1000 Albums 3rd Edition (2000). \n\nIn 1966, Love had released two albums in relatively rapid succession, including their second LP \"Da Capo\", which spawned their only Top 40 hit, \"7 and 7 Is\". However, the group's opportunity for major national success dwindled as a consequence of frontman Arthur Lee's unwillingness to tour, Lee's deteriorating relationship with Love's other songwriter Bryan MacLean, and the overshadowing presence of label-mates The Doors. In a 1992 interview, MacLean spoke of him and Lee \"competing a bit like Lennon and McCartney to see who would come up with the better song. It was part of our charm. Everybody had different behaviour patterns. Eventually, the others couldn't cut it\". Throughout this period the band – reduced to a quintet with the departures of Alban \"Snoopy\" Pfisterer and Tjay Cantrelli – were known to retreat to Bela Lugosi's mansion in Hollywood, nicknamed \"The Castle\", where the group became further stagnated by their use of LSD and heroin.\n\nRather than base his writings on Los Angeles's burgeoning hippie scene, Lee's material for \"Forever Changes\" was drawn from his lifestyle and environment. The songs reflected upon grim but blissful themes and Lee's skepticism with the flower power movement.\nWriter Andrew Hultkrans explained Lee's frame of mind at the time: \"Arthur Lee was one member of the '60s counterculture who didn't buy flower-power wholesale, who intuitively understood that letting the sunshine in wouldn't instantly vaporize the world's (or his own) dark stuff\". Love's third studio album also brought about a sense of urgency for Lee. With his band in disarray and growing concerns over his own mortality, Lee envisioned \"Forever Changes\" as a lament to his memory.\n\nAt this juncture, Elektra Records founder Jac Holzman suggested to Love to \"advance backwards\" by embracing the more subtle approach of folk music. While typically independent in his musical directions, Lee accepted Holzman's proposal, setting the foundational approach to the \"Forever Changes\" recording sessions. Having already produced the group's first two albums, Bruce Botnick was enlisted in overseeing the production of the third album along with Lee. Botnick, who had just finished working on Buffalo Springfield's \"Buffalo Springfield Again\", invited Neil Young to co-produce the upcoming Love album, but Young, after initially agreeing, excused himself from the project. As Botnick recalled \"Neil really had the burning desire to go solo and realize his dream without being involved in another band\". According to the liner notes in the compilation album \"Love Story\", Young was involved in \"Forever Changes\" long enough to arrange the track \"The Daily Planet.\" Young, however, has denied such involvement.\n\nThe title of the album came from a story that Lee had heard about a friend-of-a-friend who had broken up with his girlfriend. She exclaimed, \"You said you would love me forever!\" and he replied, \"Well, forever changes.\" Lee also noted that since the name of the band was Love, the full title was actually \"Love Forever Changes\".\n\nLove started recording \"Forever Changes\" in June 1967 at Sunset Sound Recorders. However, beginning with the early recording sessions, the band, except Lee, was plagued by internal conflicts and lack of preparation for Lee's intricate arrangements. Through Holzman's perspective, Botnick was an \"album savior\", guiding and motivating Lee's bandmates out of their trying period. In order to compel the band to participate, Botnick enlisted top session musicians, the Wrecking Crew's Billy Strange (guitar), Don Randi (piano), Hal Blaine (drums), and Carol Kaye (bass guitar) to work with Lee, completing the sessions. Shocked by the implications of losing their role in the album's development, Botnick's plan succeeded in motivating the Love members in recording the other nine tracks appearing on \"Forever Changes\".\n\nBotnick recalls that the use of session musicians \"sparked\" the band, and they \"realized they had blown it, got their act together and recorded the rest of the album.\" After much rehearsal, the group returned to the studio in August and continued through September, quickly laying down the remaining nine tracks, at a total estimated cost of $2,257.\n\nLee spent three weeks with David Angel, the arranger of the strings and horns, playing and singing the orchestral parts to him. Lee envisioned the horns and strings from the beginning, and they were not added as an afterthought. A September 25 recording session finished the album, adding the horns and strings, as well as some additional piano from Randi, who played all the keyboard parts on the album as the band now had no keyboard player.\n\nUpon its release in late 1967, \"Forever Changes\" was largely unsuccessful commercially. It spent 10 weeks on the Billboard 200 album chart, according to Joel Whitburn's \"Top Pop Albums\", peaking at No. 154 in 1968, by far the worst showing among Love's first three albums. \"Forever Changes\" had a much stronger showing in Great Britain, where it reached No. 24 on the UK album chart in 1968. It peaked at No. 63 when it re-entered the chart in 2001.\n\nInitial reviews were positive. Writing for \"Rolling Stone\" in 1968, Jim Bickhart regarded \"Forever Changes\" as Love's \"most sophisticated album yet\", applauding the orchestral arrangements and recording quality. In \"Esquire\", Robert Christgau said it is an elaboration on Love's original musical style and \"a vast improvement\" over their previous recordings, because \"Lee has stopped trying to imitate Mick Jagger with his soft voice, and the lyrics, while still obscure, now have an interesting surface as well.\" Pete Johnson of the \"Los Angeles Times\" believed the album \"can survive endless listening with no diminishing either of power or of freshness\", adding that \"parts of the album are beautiful; others are disturbingly ugly, reflections of the pop movement towards realism\". Gene Youngblood of \"LA Free Express\" also praised the album, calling it \"melancholy iconoclasm and tasteful romanticism.\"\n\nMusic critics and writers have described \"Forever Changes\" as folk rock, psychedelic folk, baroque pop, psychedelic pop and psychedelic rock.\n\nThe 1979 edition of \"The Rolling Stone Record Guide\" gave the album a rating of five stars (out of five). It also received five stars in the 1983 edition of the guide and in the 1992 guide four.In a special issue of \"Mojo\" magazine, \"Forever Changes\" was ranked the second greatest psychedelic album of all time. In the January 1996 issue, \"Mojo\" readers selected \"Forever Changes\" as #11 of the \"100 Greatest Albums Ever Made.\" \"Forever Changes\" was praised by a group of members of the British Parliament in 2002 as being one of the greatest albums of all time. \"Rolling Stone\" ranked the album 40th in its list of the 500 greatest albums of all time in the December 11, 2003 issue, maintaining the rating in a 2012 revised list. In 2013, \"NME\" ranked the album number 37 on their list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time. Publishers such as AllMusic, Slant Magazine and Sputnikmusic have praised the album as well. In a 2005 survey held by British television's Channel 4, the album was ranked 83rd in the 100 greatest albums of all time. The album was included in the 2005 book \"1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die\".\nAccording to the \"New Musical Express\", The Stone Roses' relationship with their future producer John Leckie was settled when they all agreed that \"Forever Changes\" was the \"best record ever\".\n\n\"Forever Changes\" was included in its entirety on the 2-CD retrospective Love compilation \"Love Story 1966–1972\", released by Rhino Records in 1995. The album was re-released in an expanded single-CD version by Rhino in 2001, featuring alternate mixes, outtakes and the group's 1968 single, \"Your Mind and We Belong Together\"/\"Laughing Stock\", the final tracks ever to feature the \"Forever Changes\" line-up of Arthur Lee, Johnny Echols, Ken Forssi, Michael Stuart-Ware and Bryan MacLean (Forssi and MacLean both died in 1998).\n\n\"The Forever Changes Concert\" was released on DVD in 2003 and marked the first time many of the songs had been performed live. The set features the entire album performed in its original running order, recorded in early 2003 during Lee's tour of England, in which he was backed by the band Baby Lemonade and members of the Stockholm Strings 'n' Horns ensemble. The DVD features the album concert, five bonus performances, documentary footage and an interview with Lee.\n\nA double-CD \"Collector's Edition\" of the album was issued by Rhino Records on April 22, 2008. The first disc consists of a remastered version of the original 1967 album. The second disc contains a previously unissued alternate stereo mix of the album, plus ten bonus tracks.\n\nA Super High Material CD (SHM-CD) version of \"Forever Changes\" was released by Warner Music Japan in 2009.\n\nA 24 bit 192 kHz High Resolution version of the album was released by HDTracks in 2014, and in the same year a hybrid Super Audio CD (SACD) version of the album was released by Mobile Fidelity Sound Lab.\n\nAnother 24 bit 192 kHz High Resolution remaster of the album was released through Pono in 2015, remastered by original engineer Bruce Botnick.\n\nA 50th anniversary deluxe edition box set was released by Rhino on April 6, 2018, featuring four CDs, a DVD and an LP. It contains remastered versions of the stereo, mono and alternate stereo mixes of the album, a disc of demos, outtakes, alternate mixes and non album tracks, a DVD containing a 24/96 stereo mix of the album and a bonus music video, and a new LP remaster of the album, remastered by Bruce Botnick and cut from high resolution audio by Bernie Grundman.\n\n2001 Rhino bonus tracks\n<br>\nA single disc collection, presenting the original stereo album, remastered, plus the following bonus tracks:\n\n2008 Rhino \"Collector's Edition\" bonus tracks\n<br>\nA two-disc collection. Disc 1 presents the original stereo album, remastered, while disc 2 is a previously unreleased alternate stereo mix of the album, featuring the following bonus tracks:\n\n2018 \"50th Anniversary Edition\" bonus discs\n<br>\nA box set comprising four CDs, one LP and one DVD: disc 2 presents the original mono album, remastered; disc 3 is the alternate stereo mix; disc 4 is outtakes, single versions, demos, session highlights and non album tracks from the era; disc 5 is the original stereo album on vinyl, remastered and cut from high resolution audio; and disc 6 is a 24/96 stereo mix on DVD, featuring a bonus music video.\n\nAccording to the liner notes of the 2008 \"Collector's Edition\".\n<br><br>\nLove\nBULLET::::- Arthur Lee: lead vocals, guitar\nBULLET::::- Bryan MacLean: rhythm guitar, vocals, lead vocals on \"Old Man\", co-lead vocals on \"Alone Again Or\"\nBULLET::::- Johnny Echols: lead guitar\nBULLET::::- Ken Forssi: bass guitar\nBULLET::::- Michael Stuart-Ware: drums, percussion\n\nAdditional musicians\nBULLET::::- Carol Kaye: bass guitar on \"Andmoreagain\" and \"The Daily Planet\"\nBULLET::::- Don Randi: keyboards on \"Andmoreagain\" and \"The Daily Planet\"; piano on \"Old Man\" and \"Bummer in the Summer\"; harpsichord on \"The Red Telephone\"\nBULLET::::- Billy Strange: electric rhythm guitar on \"Andmoreagain\" and \"The Daily Planet\"\nBULLET::::- Hal Blaine: drums on \"Andmoreagain\" and \"The Daily Planet\"\nBULLET::::- Neil Young: arranger on \"The Daily Planet\"\nBULLET::::- David Angel: arranger, orchestrations\nBULLET::::- Strings: Robert Barene, Arnold Belnick, James Getzoff, Marshall Sosson, Darrel Terwilliger (violins); Norman Botnick (viola); Jesse Ehrlich (cello); Chuck Berghofer (string bass)\nBULLET::::- Horns: Bud Brisbois, Roy Caton, Ollie Mitchell (trumpets); Richard Leith (trombone)\n\nBULLET::::- Inside the National Recording Registry segment\n"}
{"id": "17553", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17553", "title": "Kepler's laws of planetary motion", "text": "Kepler's laws of planetary motion\n\nIn astronomy, Kepler's laws of planetary motion are three scientific laws describing the motion of planets around the Sun, published by Johannes Kepler between 1609 and 1619. These improved the heliocentric theory of Nicolaus Copernicus, replacing its circular orbits with epicycles with elliptical trajectories, and explaining how planetary velocities vary. The laws state that:\n\nBULLET::::1. The orbit of a planet is an ellipse with the Sun at one of the two foci.\nBULLET::::2. A line segment joining a planet and the Sun sweeps out equal areas during equal intervals of time.\nBULLET::::3. The square of the orbital period of a planet is directly proportional to the cube of the semi-major axis of its orbit.\n\nThe elliptical orbits of planets were indicated by calculations of the orbit of Mars. From this, Kepler inferred that other bodies in the Solar System, including those farther away from the Sun, also have elliptical orbits. The second law helps to establish that when a planet is closer to the Sun, it travels faster. The third law expresses that the farther a planet is from the Sun, the longer its orbit, and vice versa.\n\nIsaac Newton showed in 1687 that relationships like Kepler's would apply in the Solar System to a good approximation, as a consequence of his own laws of motion and law of universal gravitation.\n\nKepler's laws improved the model of Copernicus. If the eccentricities of the planetary orbits are taken as zero, then Kepler basically agreed with Copernicus:\nBULLET::::1. The planetary orbit is a circle.\nBULLET::::2. The Sun is at the center of the orbit.\nBULLET::::3. The speed of the planet in the orbit is constant.\n\nThe eccentricities of the orbits of those planets known to Copernicus and Kepler are small, so the foregoing rules give fair approximations of planetary motion, but Kepler's laws fit the observations better than does the model proposed by Copernicus.\n\nKepler's corrections are not at all obvious:\nBULLET::::1. The planetary orbit is \"not\" a circle, but an \"ellipse\".\nBULLET::::2. The Sun is \"not\" at the center but at a \"focal point\" of the elliptical orbit.\nBULLET::::3. Neither the linear speed nor the angular speed of the planet in the orbit is constant, but the \"area speed\" (closely linked historically with the concept of angular momentum) is constant.\n\nThe eccentricity of the orbit of the Earth makes the time from the March equinox to the September equinox, around 186 days, unequal to the time from the September equinox to the March equinox, around 179 days. A diameter would cut the orbit into equal parts, but the plane through the Sun parallel to the equator of the Earth cuts the orbit into two parts with areas in a 186 to 179 ratio, so the eccentricity of the orbit of the Earth is approximately\n\nwhich is close to the correct value (0.016710218) (see Earth's orbit).\n\nThe calculation is correct when perihelion, the date the Earth is closest to the Sun, falls on a solstice. The current perihelion, near January 4, is fairly close to the solstice of December 21 or 22.\n\nIt took nearly two centuries for current formulation of Kepler's work to take on its settled form. Voltaire's \"Eléments de la philosophie de Newton\" (Elements of Newton's Philosophy) of 1738 was the first publication to use the terminology of \"laws\". The \"Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers\" in its article on Kepler (p. 620) states that the terminology of scientific laws for these discoveries was current at least from the time of Joseph de Lalande. It was the exposition of Robert Small, in \"An account of the astronomical discoveries of Kepler\" (1814) that made up the set of three laws, by adding in the third. Small also claimed, against the history, that these were empirical laws, based on inductive reasoning.\n\nFurther, the current usage of \"Kepler's Second Law\" is something of a misnomer. Kepler had two versions, related in a qualitative sense: the \"distance law\" and the \"area law\". The \"area law\" is what became the Second Law in the set of three; but Kepler did himself not privilege it in that way.\n\nJohannes Kepler published his first two laws about planetary motion in 1609, having found them by analyzing the astronomical observations of Tycho Brahe. Kepler's third law was published in 1619. Kepler had believed in the Copernican model of the solar system, which called for circular orbits, but he could not reconcile Brahe's highly precise observations with a circular fit to Mars' orbit – Mars coincidentally having the highest eccentricity of all planets except Mercury. His first law reflected this discovery.\n\nKepler in 1621 and Godefroy Wendelin in 1643 noted that Kepler's third law applies to the four brightest moons of Jupiter. The second law, in the \"area law\" form, was contested by Nicolaus Mercator in a book from 1664, but by 1670 his \"Philosophical Transactions\" were in its favour. As the century proceeded it became more widely accepted. The reception in Germany changed noticeably between 1688, the year in which Newton's \"Principia\" was published and was taken to be basically Copernican, and 1690, by which time work of Gottfried Leibniz on Kepler had been published.\n\nNewton was credited with understanding that the second law is not special to the inverse square law of gravitation, being a consequence just of the radial nature of that law; while the other laws do depend on the inverse square form of the attraction. Carl Runge and Wilhelm Lenz much later identified a symmetry principle in the phase space of planetary motion (the orthogonal group O(4) acting) which accounts for the first and third laws in the case of Newtonian gravitation, as conservation of angular momentum does via rotational symmetry for the second law.\n\nThe mathematical model of the kinematics of a planet subject to the laws allows a large range of further calculations.\n\nMathematically, an ellipse can be represented by the formula:\n\nwhere formula_3 is the semi-latus rectum, \"ε\" is the eccentricity of the ellipse, \"r\" is the distance from the Sun to the planet, and \"θ\" is the angle to the planet's current position from its closest approach, as seen from the Sun. So (\"r\", \"θ\") are polar coordinates.\n\nFor an ellipse 0 < \"ε\" < 1 ; in the limiting case \"ε\" = 0, the orbit is a circle with the Sun at the centre (i.e. where there is zero eccentricity).\n\nAt \"θ\" = 0°, perihelion, the distance is minimum\n\nAt \"θ\" = 90° and at \"θ\" = 270° the distance is equal to formula_3.\n\nAt \"θ\" = 180°, aphelion, the distance is maximum (by definition, aphelion is – invariably – perihelion plus 180°)\n\nThe semi-major axis \"a\" is the arithmetic mean between \"r\" and \"r\":\n\nThe semi-minor axis \"b\" is the geometric mean between \"r\" and \"r\":\n\nThe semi-latus rectum \"p\" is the harmonic mean between \"r\" and \"r\":\n\nThe eccentricity \"ε\" is the coefficient of variation between \"r\" and \"r\":\n\nThe area of the ellipse is\n\nThe special case of a circle is \"ε\" = 0, resulting in \"r\" = \"p\" = \"r\" = \"r\" = \"a\" = \"b\" and \"A\" = \"πr\".\n\nThe orbital radius and angular velocity of the planet in the elliptical orbit will vary. This is shown in the animation: the planet travels faster when closer to the Sun, then slower when farther from the Sun. Kepler's second law states that the blue sector has constant area.\n\nIn a small time formula_12 the planet sweeps out a small triangle having base line formula_13 and height formula_14 and area formula_15, so the constant areal velocity is formula_16\n\nThe area enclosed by the elliptical orbit is formula_17 So the period formula_18 satisfies\n\nand the mean motion of the planet around the Sun\n\nsatisfies\n\nThis captures the relationship between the distance of planets from the Sun, and their orbital periods.\n\nKepler enunciated in 1619 this third law in a laborious attempt to determine what he viewed as the \"music of the spheres\" according to precise laws, and express it in terms of musical notation.\nSo it was known as the \"harmonic law\".\n\nUsing Newton's Law of gravitation (published 1687), this relation can be found in the case of a circular orbit by setting the centripetal force equal to the gravitational force:\n\nThen, expressing the angular velocity in terms of the orbital period and then rearranging, we find Kepler's Third Law:\n\nA more detailed derivation can be done with general elliptical orbits, instead of circles, as well as orbiting the center of mass, instead of just the large mass. This results in replacing a circular radius, formula_13, with the elliptical semi-major axis, formula_25, as well as replacing the large mass formula_26 with formula_27. However, with planet masses being so much smaller than the Sun, this correction is often ignored. The full corresponding formula is:\n\nwhere formula_26 is the mass of the Sun, formula_30 is the mass of the planet, and formula_31 is the gravitational constant, formula_32 is the orbital period and formula_25 is the elliptical semi-major axis.\n\nThe following table shows the data used by Kepler to empirically derive his law:\n+ Data used by Kepler (1618)\n! Planet\n! Mean distance to sun (AU)\n! Period (days)\n! formula_34(10AU/day)\nMercury\n0.389\n87.77\n7.64\nVenus\n0.724\n224.70\n7.52\nEarth\n1\n365.25\n7.50\nMars\n1.524\n686.95\n7.50\nJupiter\n5.2\n4332.62\n7.49\nSaturn\n9.510\n10759.2\n7.43\n\nUpon finding this pattern Kepler wrote:\n\nFor comparison, here are modern estimates:\n+ Modern data (Wolfram Alpha Knowledgebase 2018)\n! Planet\n! Semi-major axis (AU)\n! Period (days)\n! formula_34(10AU/day)\nMercury\n0.38710\n87.9693\n7.496\nVenus\n0.72333\n224.7008\n7.496\nEarth\n1\n365.2564\n7.496\nMars\n1.52366\n686.9796\n7.495\nJupiter\n5.20336\n4332.8201\n7.504\nSaturn\n9.53707\n10775.599\n7.498\nUranus\n19.1913\n30687.153\n7.506\nNeptune\n30.0690\n60190.03\n7.504\n\nIsaac Newton computed in his \"Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica\" the acceleration of a planet moving according to Kepler's first and second law.\nBULLET::::1. The \"direction\" of the acceleration is towards the Sun.\nBULLET::::2. The \"magnitude\" of the acceleration is inversely proportional to the square of the planet's distance from the Sun (the \"inverse square law\").\n\nThis implies that the Sun may be the physical cause of the acceleration of planets. However, Newton states in his \"Principia\" that he considers forces from a mathematical point of view, not a physical, thereby taking an instrumentalist view. Moreover, he does not assign a cause to gravity.\n\nNewton defined the force acting on a planet to be the product of its mass and the acceleration (see Newton's laws of motion). So:\nBULLET::::1. Every planet is attracted towards the Sun.\nBULLET::::2. The force acting on a planet is directly proportional to the mass of the planet and is inversely proportional to the square of its distance from the Sun.\n\nThe Sun plays an unsymmetrical part, which is unjustified. So he assumed, in Newton's law of universal gravitation:\nBULLET::::1. All bodies in the Solar System attract one another.\nBULLET::::2. The force between two bodies is in direct proportion to the product of their masses and in inverse proportion to the square of the distance between them.\n\nAs the planets have small masses compared to that of the Sun, the orbits conform approximately to Kepler's laws. Newton's model improves upon Kepler's model, and fits actual observations more accurately (see two-body problem).\n\nBelow comes the detailed calculation of the acceleration of a planet moving according to Kepler's first and second laws.\n\nFrom the heliocentric point of view consider the vector to the planet formula_36 where formula_37 is the distance to the planet and formula_38 is a unit vector pointing towards the planet.\n\nwhere formula_40 is the unit vector whose direction is 90 degrees counterclockwise of formula_38, and formula_42 is the polar angle, and where a dot on top of the variable signifies differentiation with respect to time.\n\nDifferentiate the position vector twice to obtain the velocity vector and the acceleration vector:\n\nSo\n\nwhere the radial acceleration is\n\nand the transversal acceleration is\n\nKepler's second law says that\n\nis constant.\n\nThe transversal acceleration formula_48 is zero:\n\nSo the acceleration of a planet obeying Kepler's second law is directed towards the Sun.\n\nThe radial acceleration formula_50 is\n\nKepler's first law states that the orbit is described by the equation:\n\nDifferentiating with respect to time\n\nor\n\nDifferentiating once more\n\nThe radial acceleration formula_50 satisfies\n\nSubstituting the equation of the ellipse gives\n\nThe relation formula_59 gives the simple final result\n\nThis means that the acceleration vector formula_61 of any planet obeying Kepler's first and second law satisfies the inverse square law\n\nwhere\n\nis a constant, and formula_38 is the unit vector pointing from the Sun towards the planet, and formula_65 is the distance between the planet and the Sun.\n\nSince mean motion formula_66 where formula_32 is the period, according to Kepler's third law, formula_68 has the same value for all the planets. So the inverse square law for planetary accelerations applies throughout the entire Solar System.\n\nThe inverse square law is a differential equation. The solutions to this differential equation include the Keplerian motions, as shown, but they also include motions where the orbit is a hyperbola or parabola or a straight line. See Kepler orbit.\n\nBy Newton's second law, the gravitational force that acts on the planet is:\n\nwhere formula_70 is the mass of the planet and formula_68 has the same value for all planets in the Solar System. According to Newton's Third Law, the Sun is attracted to the planet by a force of the same magnitude. Since the force is proportional to the mass of the planet, under the symmetric consideration, it should also be proportional to the mass of the Sun, formula_72. So\n\nwhere formula_31 is the gravitational constant.\n\nThe acceleration of solar system body number \"i\" is, according to Newton's laws:\n\nwhere formula_76 is the mass of body \"j\", formula_77 is the distance between body \"i\" and body \"j\", formula_78 is the unit vector from body \"i\" towards body \"j\", and the vector summation is over all bodies in the Solar System, besides \"i\" itself.\n\nIn the special case where there are only two bodies in the Solar System, Earth and Sun, the acceleration becomes\n\nwhich is the acceleration of the Kepler motion. So this Earth moves around the Sun according to Kepler's laws.\n\nIf the two bodies in the Solar System are Moon and Earth the acceleration of the Moon becomes\n\nSo in this approximation, the Moon moves around the Earth according to Kepler's laws.\n\nIn the three-body case the accelerations are\n\nThese accelerations are not those of Kepler orbits, and the three-body problem is complicated. But Keplerian approximation is the basis for perturbation calculations. See Lunar theory.\n\nKepler used his two first laws to compute the position of a planet as a function of time. His method involves the solution of a transcendental equation called Kepler's equation.\n\nThe procedure for calculating the heliocentric polar coordinates (\"r\",\"θ\") of a planet as a function of the time \"t\" since perihelion, is the following four steps:\n\nBULLET::::1. Compute the mean anomaly \"M\" = \"nt\" where \"n\" is the mean motion.\nBULLET::::- formula_82 radians where \"P\" is the period.\nBULLET::::2. Compute the eccentric anomaly \"E\" by solving Kepler's equation:\nBULLET::::- formula_83\nBULLET::::3. Compute the true anomaly \"θ\" by the equation:\nBULLET::::- formula_84\nBULLET::::4. Compute the heliocentric distance\nBULLET::::- formula_85\n\nThe Cartesian velocity vector can be trivially calculated as formula_86.\n\nThe important special case of circular orbit, \"ε\" = 0, gives \"θ\" = \"E\" = \"M\". Because the uniform circular motion was considered to be \"normal\", a deviation from this motion was considered an anomaly.\n\nThe proof of this procedure is shown below.\n\nThe Keplerian problem assumes an elliptical orbit and the four points:\nand\n\nThe problem is to compute the polar coordinates (\"r\",\"θ\") of the planet from the time since perihelion, \"t\".\n\nIt is solved in steps. Kepler considered the circle with the major axis as a diameter, and\n\nThe sector areas are related by formula_95\n\nThe circular sector area formula_96\n\nThe area swept since perihelion,\n\nis by Kepler's second law proportional to time since perihelion. So the mean anomaly, \"M\", is proportional to time since perihelion, \"t\".\n\nwhere \"n\" is the mean motion.\n\nWhen the mean anomaly \"M\" is computed, the goal is to compute the true anomaly \"θ\". The function \"θ\" = \"f\"(\"M\") is, however, not elementary. Kepler's solution is to use\nas an intermediate variable, and first compute \"E\" as a function of \"M\" by solving Kepler's equation below, and then compute the true anomaly \"θ\" from the eccentric anomaly \"E\". Here are the details.\n\nDivision by \"a\"/2 gives Kepler's equation\n\nThis equation gives \"M\" as a function of \"E\". Determining \"E\" for a given \"M\" is the inverse problem. Iterative numerical algorithms are commonly used.\n\nHaving computed the eccentric anomaly \"E\", the next step is to calculate the true anomaly \"θ\".\n\nBut note: Cartesian position coordinates reference the center of ellipse are (\"a\" cos \"E\", \"b\" sin \"E\")\n\nReference the Sun (with coordinates (\"c\",0) = (\"ae\",0) ), \"r\" = (\"a\" cos \"E\" – \"ae\", \"b\" sin \"E\")\n\nTrue anomaly would be arctan(\"r\"\"x\"), magnitude of \"r\" would be .\n\nNote from the figure that\n\nso that\n\nDividing by formula_25 and inserting from Kepler's first law\n\nto get\n\nThe result is a usable relationship between the eccentric anomaly \"E\" and the true anomaly \"θ\".\n\nA computationally more convenient form follows by substituting into the trigonometric identity:\n\nGet\n\nMultiplying by 1 + \"ε\" gives the result\n\nThis is the third step in the connection between time and position in the orbit.\n\nThe fourth step is to compute the heliocentric distance \"r\" from the true anomaly \"θ\" by Kepler's first law:\n\nUsing the relation above between \"θ\" and \"E\" the final equation for the distance \"r\" is:\n\nBULLET::::- Circular motion\nBULLET::::- Free-fall time\nBULLET::::- Gravity\nBULLET::::- Kepler orbit\nBULLET::::- Kepler problem\nBULLET::::- Kepler's equation\nBULLET::::- Laplace–Runge–Lenz vector\nBULLET::::- Specific relative angular momentum, relatively easy derivation of Kepler's laws starting with conservation of angular momentum\n\nBULLET::::- Kepler's life is summarized on pages 523–627 and Book Five of his \"magnum opus\", \"Harmonice Mundi\" (\"harmonies of the world\"), is reprinted on pages 635–732 of \"On the Shoulders of Giants\": The Great Works of Physics and Astronomy (works by Copernicus, Kepler, Galileo, Newton, and Einstein). Stephen Hawking, ed. 2002\nBULLET::::- A derivation of Kepler's third law of planetary motion is a standard topic in engineering mechanics classes. See, for example, pages 161–164 of .\nBULLET::::- Murray and Dermott, Solar System Dynamics, Cambridge University Press 1999,\nBULLET::::- V.I. Arnold, Mathematical Methods of Classical Mechanics, Chapter 2. Springer 1989,\n\nBULLET::::- B.Surendranath Reddy; animation of Kepler's laws: applet\nBULLET::::- \"Derivation of Kepler's Laws\" (from Newton's laws) at \"Physics Stack Exchange\".\nBULLET::::- Crowell, Benjamin, Light and Matter, an online book that gives a proof of the first law without the use of calculus (see section 15.7)\nBULLET::::- David McNamara and Gianfranco Vidali, \"Kepler's Second Law – Java Interactive Tutorial\", https://web.archive.org/web/20060910225253/http://www.phy.syr.edu/courses/java/mc_html/kepler.html, an interactive Java applet that aids in the understanding of Kepler's Second Law.\nBULLET::::- Audio – Cain/Gay (2010) Astronomy Cast Johannes Kepler and His Laws of Planetary Motion\nBULLET::::- University of Tennessee's Dept. Physics & Astronomy: Astronomy 161 page on Johannes Kepler: The Laws of Planetary Motion\nBULLET::::- Equant compared to Kepler: interactive model\nBULLET::::- Kepler's Third Law:interactive model\nBULLET::::- Solar System Simulator (Interactive Applet)\nBULLET::::- Kepler and His Laws, educational web pages by David P. Stern\n"}
{"id": "17556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17556", "title": "Laser", "text": "Laser\n\nA laser is a device that emits light through a process of optical amplification based on the stimulated emission of electromagnetic radiation. The term \"laser\" originated as an acronym for \"light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation\". The first laser was built in 1960 by Theodore H. Maiman at Hughes Research Laboratories, based on theoretical work by Charles Hard Townes and Arthur Leonard Schawlow.\n\nA laser differs from other sources of light in that it emits light which is \"coherent\". Spatial coherence allows a laser to be focused to a tight spot, enabling applications such as laser cutting and lithography. Spatial coherence also allows a laser beam to stay narrow over great distances (collimation), enabling applications such as laser pointers and lidar. Lasers can also have high temporal coherence, which allows them to emit light with a very narrow spectrum, i.e., they can emit a single color of light. Alternatively, temporal coherence can be used to produce pulses of light with a broad spectrum but durations as short as a femtosecond (\"ultrashort pulses\").\n\nLasers are used in optical disk drives, laser printers, barcode scanners, DNA sequencing instruments, fiber-optic and free-space optical communication, laser surgery and skin treatments, cutting and welding materials, military and law enforcement devices for marking targets and measuring range and speed, and in laser lighting displays for entertainment. They have been used for car headlamps on luxury cars, by using a blue laser and a phosphor to produce highly directional white light.\n\nLasers are distinguished from other light sources by their coherence. Spatial coherence is typically expressed through the output being a narrow beam, which is diffraction-limited. Laser beams can be focused to very tiny spots, achieving a very high irradiance, or they can have very low divergence in order to concentrate their power at a great distance. Temporal (or longitudinal) coherence implies a polarized wave at a single frequency, whose phase is correlated over a relatively great distance (the coherence length) along the beam. A beam produced by a thermal or other incoherent light source has an instantaneous amplitude and phase that vary randomly with respect to time and position, thus having a short coherence length.\n\nLasers are characterized according to their wavelength in a vacuum. Most \"single wavelength\" lasers actually produce radiation in several \"modes\" with slightly different wavelengths. Although temporal coherence implies monochromaticity, there are lasers that emit a broad spectrum of light or emit different wavelengths of light simultaneously. Some lasers are not single spatial mode and have light beams that diverge more than is required by the diffraction limit. All such devices are classified as \"lasers\" based on their method of producing light, i.e., stimulated emission. Lasers are employed where light of the required spatial or temporal coherence can not be produced using simpler technologies.\n\nThe word \"laser\" started as an acronym for \"light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation\". In this usage, the term \"light\" includes electromagnetic radiation of any frequency, not only visible light, hence the terms \"infrared laser\", \"ultraviolet laser\", \"X-ray laser\" and \"gamma-ray laser\". Because the microwave predecessor of the laser, the maser, was developed first, devices of this sort operating at microwave and radio frequencies are referred to as \"masers\" rather than \"microwave lasers\" or \"radio lasers\". In the early technical literature, especially at Bell Telephone Laboratories, the laser was called an optical maser; this term is now obsolete.\n\nA laser that produces light by itself is technically an optical oscillator rather than an optical amplifier as suggested by the acronym. It has been humorously noted that the acronym LOSER, for \"light oscillation by stimulated emission of radiation\", would have been more correct. With the widespread use of the original acronym as a common noun, optical amplifiers have come to be referred to as \"laser amplifiers\", notwithstanding the apparent redundancy in that designation.\n\nThe back-formed verb \"to lase\" is frequently used in the field, meaning \"to produce laser light,\" especially in reference to the gain medium of a laser; when a laser is operating it is said to be \"lasing.\" Further use of the words \"laser\" and \"maser\" in an extended sense, not referring to laser technology or devices, can be seen in usages such as \"astrophysical maser\" and \"atom laser\".\n\nA laser consists of a gain medium, a mechanism to energize it, and something to provide optical feedback. The gain medium is a material with properties that allow it to amplify light by way of stimulated emission. Light of a specific wavelength that passes through the gain medium is amplified (increases in power).\n\nFor the gain medium to amplify light, it needs to be supplied with energy in a process called pumping. The energy is typically supplied as an electric current or as light at a different wavelength. Pump light may be provided by a flash lamp or by another laser.\n\nThe most common type of laser uses feedback from an optical cavity—a pair of mirrors on either end of the gain medium. Light bounces back and forth between the mirrors, passing through the gain medium and being amplified each time. Typically one of the two mirrors, the output coupler, is partially transparent. Some of the light escapes through this mirror. Depending on the design of the cavity (whether the mirrors are flat or curved), the light coming out of the laser may spread out or form a narrow beam. In analogy to electronic oscillators, this device is sometimes called a \"laser oscillator\".\n\nMost practical lasers contain additional elements that affect properties of the emitted light, such as the polarization, wavelength, and shape of the beam.\n\nElectrons and how they interact with electromagnetic fields are important in our understanding of chemistry and physics.\n\nIn the classical view, the energy of an electron orbiting an atomic nucleus is larger for orbits further from the nucleus of an atom. However, quantum mechanical effects force electrons to take on discrete positions in orbitals. Thus, electrons are found in specific energy levels of an atom, two of which are shown below:\n\nAn electron in an atom can absorb energy from light (photons) or heat (phonons) only if there is a transition between energy levels that matches the energy carried by the photon or phonon. For light, this means that any given transition will only absorb one particular wavelength of light. Photons with the correct wavelength can cause an electron to jump from the lower to the higher energy level. The photon is consumed in this process.\n\nWhen an electron is excited to a higher energy level, it will not stay that way forever. Eventually, the electron decays to a lower energy level which is not occupied, with transitions to different levels having different time constants. When such an electron decays without external influence, it emits a photon. This process is called \"spontaneous emission\". The emitted photon has random phase and direction, but its wavelength matches the absorption wavelength of the transitiion. This is the mechanism of fluorescence and thermal emission.\n\nA photon with the correct wavelength to be absorbed by a transition can also cause an electron to drop from the higher to the lower level, emitting a new photon. The emitted photon exactly matches the original photon in wavelength, phase, and direction. This process is called stimulated emission.\n\nThe gain medium is put into an excited state by an external source of energy. In most lasers this medium consists of a population of atoms which have been excited into such a state by means of an outside light source, or an electrical field which supplies energy for atoms to absorb and be transformed into their excited states.\n\nThe gain medium of a laser is normally a material of controlled purity, size, concentration, and shape, which amplifies the beam by the process of stimulated emission described above. This material can be of any state: gas, liquid, solid, or plasma. The gain medium absorbs pump energy, which raises some electrons into higher-energy (\"excited\") quantum states. Particles can interact with light by either absorbing or emitting photons. Emission can be spontaneous or stimulated. In the latter case, the photon is emitted in the same direction as the light that is passing by. When the number of particles in one excited state exceeds the number of particles in some lower-energy state, population inversion is achieved. In this state, the rate of stimulated emission is larger than the rate of absorption of light in the medium, and therefore the light is amplified. A system with this property is called an optical amplifier. When an optical amplifier is placed inside a resonant optical cavity, one obtains a laser.\n\nIn a few situations it is possible to obtain lasing with only a single pass of EM radiation through the gain medium, and this produces a laser beam without any need for a resonant or reflective cavity (see for example nitrogen laser). Thus, reflection in a resonant cavity is usually required for a laser, but is not absolutely necessary.\n\nThe optical resonator is sometimes referred to as an \"optical cavity\", but this is a misnomer: lasers use open resonators as opposed to the literal cavity that would be employed at microwave frequencies in a maser.\nThe resonator typically consists of two mirrors between which a coherent beam of light travels in both directions, reflecting back on itself so that an average photon will pass through the gain medium repeatedly before it is emitted from the output aperture or lost to diffraction or absorption.\nIf the gain (amplification) in the medium is larger than the resonator losses, then the power of the recirculating light can rise exponentially. But each stimulated emission event returns an atom from its excited state to the ground state, reducing the gain of the medium. With increasing beam power the net gain (gain minus loss) reduces to unity and the gain medium is said to be saturated. In a continuous wave (CW) laser, the balance of pump power against gain saturation and cavity losses produces an equilibrium value of the laser power inside the cavity; this equilibrium determines the operating point of the laser. If the applied pump power is too small, the gain will never be sufficient to overcome the cavity losses, and laser light will not be produced. The minimum pump power needed to begin laser action is called the \"lasing threshold\". The gain medium will amplify any photons passing through it, regardless of direction; but only the photons in a spatial mode supported by the resonator will pass more than once through the medium and receive substantial amplification.\n\nIn most lasers, lasing begins with stimulated emission amplifying random spontaneously emitted photons present in the gain medium. Stimulated emission produces light that matches the input signal in wavelength, phase, and polarization. This, combined with the filtering effect of the optical resonator gives laser light its characteristic coherence, and may give it uniform polarization and monochromaticity, depending on the resonator's design. Some lasers use a separate injection seeder to start the process off with a beam that is already highly coherent. This can produce beams with a narrower spectrum than would otherwise be possible.\n\nMany lasers produce a beam that can be approximated as a Gaussian beam; such beams have the minimum divergence possible for a given beam diameter. Some lasers, particularly high-power ones, produce multimode beams, with the transverse modes often approximated using Hermite–Gaussian or Laguerre-Gaussian functions. Some high power lasers use a flat-topped profile known as a \"tophat beam\". Unstable laser resonators (not used in most lasers) produce fractal-shaped beams. Specialized optical systems can produce more complex beam geometries, such as Bessel beams and optical vortexes.\n\nNear the \"waist\" (or focal region) of a laser beam, it is highly \"collimated\": the wavefronts are planar, normal to the direction of propagation, with no beam divergence at that point. However, due to diffraction, that can only remain true well within the Rayleigh range. The beam of a single transverse mode (gaussian beam) laser eventually diverges at an angle which varies inversely with the beam diameter, as required by diffraction theory. Thus, the \"pencil beam\" directly generated by a common helium–neon laser would spread out to a size of perhaps 500 kilometers when shone on the Moon (from the distance of the earth). On the other hand, the light from a semiconductor laser typically exits the tiny crystal with a large divergence: up to 50°. However even such a divergent beam can be transformed into a similarly collimated beam by means of a lens system, as is always included, for instance, in a laser pointer whose light originates from a laser diode. That is possible due to the light being of a single spatial mode. This unique property of laser light, spatial coherence, cannot be replicated using standard light sources (except by discarding most of the light) as can be appreciated by comparing the beam from a flashlight (torch) or spotlight to that of almost any laser.\n\nA laser beam profiler is used to measure the intensity profile, width, and divergence of laser beams.\n\nDiffuse reflection of a laser beam from a matte surface produces a speckle pattern with interesting properties.\n\nThe mechanism of producing radiation in a laser relies on stimulated emission, where energy is extracted from a transition in an atom or molecule. This is a quantum phenomenon discovered by Einstein who derived the relationship between the A coefficient describing spontaneous emission and the B coefficient which applies to absorption and stimulated emission. However, in the case of the free electron laser, atomic energy levels are not involved; it appears that the operation of this rather exotic device can be explained without reference to quantum mechanics.\n\nA laser can be classified as operating in either continuous or pulsed mode, depending on whether the power output is essentially continuous over time or whether its output takes the form of pulses of light on one or another time scale. Of course even a laser whose output is normally continuous can be intentionally turned on and off at some rate in order to create pulses of light. When the modulation rate is on time scales much slower than the cavity lifetime and the time period over which energy can be stored in the lasing medium or pumping mechanism, then it is still classified as a \"modulated\" or \"pulsed\" continuous wave laser. Most laser diodes used in communication systems fall in that category.\n\nSome applications of lasers depend on a beam whose output power is constant over time. Such a laser is known as \"continuous wave\" (\"CW\"). Many types of lasers can be made to operate in continuous wave mode to satisfy such an application. Many of these lasers actually lase in several longitudinal modes at the same time, and beats between the slightly different optical frequencies of those oscillations will, in fact, produce amplitude variations on time scales shorter than the round-trip time (the reciprocal of the frequency spacing between modes), typically a few nanoseconds or less. In most cases, these lasers are still termed \"continuous wave\" as their output power is steady when averaged over any longer time periods, with the very high-frequency power variations having little or no impact in the intended application. (However, the term is not applied to mode-locked lasers, where the \"intention\" is to create very short pulses at the rate of the round-trip time.)\n\nFor continuous wave operation, it is required for the population inversion of the gain medium to be continually replenished by a steady pump source. In some lasing media, this is impossible. In some other lasers, it would require pumping the laser at a very high continuous power level which would be impractical or destroy the laser by producing excessive heat. Such lasers cannot be run in CW mode.\n\nPulsed operation of lasers refers to any laser not classified as continuous wave, so that the optical power appears in pulses of some duration at some repetition rate. This encompasses a wide range of technologies addressing a number of different motivations. Some lasers are pulsed simply because they cannot be run in continuous mode.\n\nIn other cases, the application requires the production of pulses having as large an energy as possible. Since the pulse energy is equal to the average power divided by the repetition rate, this goal can sometimes be satisfied by lowering the rate of pulses so that more energy can be built up in between pulses. In laser ablation, for example, a small volume of material at the surface of a work piece can be evaporated if it is heated in a very short time, while supplying the energy gradually would allow for the heat to be absorbed into the bulk of the piece, never attaining a sufficiently high temperature at a particular point.\n\nOther applications rely on the peak pulse power (rather than the energy in the pulse), especially in order to obtain nonlinear optical effects. For a given pulse energy, this requires creating pulses of the shortest possible duration utilizing techniques such as Q-switching.\n\nThe optical bandwidth of a pulse cannot be narrower than the reciprocal of the pulse width. In the case of extremely short pulses, that implies lasing over a considerable bandwidth, quite contrary to the very narrow bandwidths typical of CW lasers. The lasing medium in some \"dye lasers\" and \"vibronic solid-state lasers\" produces optical gain over a wide bandwidth, making a laser possible which can thus generate pulses of light as short as a few femtoseconds (10 s).\n\nIn a Q-switched laser, the population inversion is allowed to build up by introducing loss inside the resonator which exceeds the gain of the medium; this can also be described as a reduction of the quality factor or 'Q' of the cavity. Then, after the pump energy stored in the laser medium has approached the maximum possible level, the introduced loss mechanism (often an electro- or acousto-optical element) is rapidly removed (or that occurs by itself in a passive device), allowing lasing to begin which rapidly obtains the stored energy in the gain medium. This results in a short pulse incorporating that energy, and thus a high peak power.\n\nA mode-locked laser is capable of emitting extremely short pulses on the order of tens of picoseconds down to less than 10 femtoseconds. These pulses will repeat at the round trip time, that is, the time that it takes light to complete one round trip between the mirrors comprising the resonator. Due to the Fourier limit (also known as energy-time uncertainty), a pulse of such short temporal length has a spectrum spread over a considerable bandwidth. Thus such a gain medium must have a gain bandwidth sufficiently broad to amplify those frequencies. An example of a suitable material is titanium-doped, artificially grown sapphire (Ti:sapphire) which has a very wide gain bandwidth and can thus produce pulses of only a few femtoseconds duration.\n\nSuch mode-locked lasers are a most versatile tool for researching processes occurring on extremely short time scales (known as femtosecond physics, femtosecond chemistry and ultrafast science), for maximizing the effect of nonlinearity in optical materials (e.g. in second-harmonic generation, parametric down-conversion, optical parametric oscillators and the like). Due to the large peak power and the ability to generate phase-stabilized trains of ultrafast laser pulses, mode-locking ultrafast lasers underpin precision metrology and spectroscopy applications.\n\nAnother method of achieving pulsed laser operation is to pump the laser material with a source that is itself pulsed, either through electronic charging in the case of flash lamps, or another laser which is already pulsed. Pulsed pumping was historically used with dye lasers where the inverted population lifetime of a dye molecule was so short that a high energy, fast pump was needed. The way to overcome this problem was to charge up large capacitors which are then switched to discharge through flashlamps, producing an intense flash. Pulsed pumping is also required for three-level lasers in which the lower energy level rapidly becomes highly populated preventing further lasing until those atoms relax to the ground state. These lasers, such as the excimer laser and the copper vapor laser, can never be operated in CW mode.\n\nIn 1917, Albert Einstein established the theoretical foundations for the laser and the maser in the paper \"Zur Quantentheorie der Strahlung\" (On the Quantum Theory of Radiation) via a re-derivation of Max Planck's law of radiation, conceptually based upon probability coefficients (Einstein coefficients) for the absorption, spontaneous emission, and stimulated emission of electromagnetic radiation. In 1928, Rudolf W. Ladenburg confirmed the existence of the phenomena of stimulated emission and negative absorption. In 1939, Valentin A. Fabrikant predicted the use of stimulated emission to amplify \"short\" waves. In 1947, Willis E. Lamb and R.C. Retherford found apparent stimulated emission in hydrogen spectra and effected the first demonstration of stimulated emission. In 1950, Alfred Kastler (Nobel Prize for Physics 1966) proposed the method of optical pumping, experimentally confirmed, two years later, by Brossel, Kastler, and Winter.\n\nIn 1951, Joseph Weber submitted a paper on using stimulated emissions to make a microwave amplifier to the June 1952 Institute of Radio Engineers Vacuum Tube Research Conference at Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. After this presentation, RCA asked Weber to give a seminar on this idea, and Charles Hard Townes asked him for a copy of the paper.\n\nIn 1953, Charles Hard Townes and graduate students James P. Gordon and Herbert J. Zeiger produced the first microwave amplifier, a device operating on similar principles to the laser, but amplifying microwave radiation rather than infrared or visible radiation. Townes's maser was incapable of continuous output. Meanwhile, in the Soviet Union, Nikolay Basov and Aleksandr Prokhorov were independently working on the quantum oscillator and solved the problem of continuous-output systems by using more than two energy levels. These gain media could release stimulated emissions between an excited state and a lower excited state, not the ground state, facilitating the maintenance of a population inversion. In 1955, Prokhorov and Basov suggested optical pumping of a multi-level system as a method for obtaining the population inversion, later a main method of laser pumping.\n\nTownes reports that several eminent physicists—among them Niels Bohr, John von Neumann, and Llewellyn Thomas—argued the maser violated Heisenberg's uncertainty principle and hence could not work. Others such as Isidor Rabi and Polykarp Kusch expected that it would be impractical and not worth the effort. In 1964 Charles H. Townes, Nikolay Basov, and Aleksandr Prokhorov shared the Nobel Prize in Physics, \"for fundamental work in the field of quantum electronics, which has led to the construction of oscillators and amplifiers based on the maser–laser principle\".\n\nIn 1957, Charles Hard Townes and Arthur Leonard Schawlow, then at Bell Labs, began a serious study of the infrared laser. As ideas developed, they abandoned infrared radiation to instead concentrate upon visible light. The concept originally was called an \"optical maser\". In 1958, Bell Labs filed a patent application for their proposed optical maser; and Schawlow and Townes submitted a manuscript of their theoretical calculations to the \"Physical Review\", published that year in Volume 112, Issue No. 6.\n\nSimultaneously, at Columbia University, graduate student Gordon Gould was working on a doctoral thesis about the energy levels of excited thallium. When Gould and Townes met, they spoke of radiation emission, as a general subject; afterwards, in November 1957, Gould noted his ideas for a \"laser\", including using an open resonator (later an essential laser-device component). Moreover, in 1958, Prokhorov independently proposed using an open resonator, the first published appearance (in the USSR) of this idea. Elsewhere, in the U.S., Schawlow and Townes had agreed to an open-resonator laser design – apparently unaware of Prokhorov's publications and Gould's unpublished laser work.\n\nAt a conference in 1959, Gordon Gould published the term LASER in the paper \"The LASER, Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation\". Gould's linguistic intention was using the \"-aser\" word particle as a suffix – to accurately denote the spectrum of the light emitted by the LASER device; thus x-rays: \"xaser\", ultraviolet: \"uvaser\", et cetera; none established itself as a discrete term, although \"raser\" was briefly popular for denoting radio-frequency-emitting devices.\n\nGould's notes included possible applications for a laser, such as spectrometry, interferometry, radar, and nuclear fusion. He continued developing the idea, and filed a patent application in April 1959. The U.S. Patent Office denied his application, and awarded a patent to Bell Labs, in 1960. That provoked a twenty-eight-year lawsuit, featuring scientific prestige and money as the stakes. Gould won his first minor patent in 1977, yet it was not until 1987 that he won the first significant patent lawsuit victory, when a Federal judge ordered the U.S. Patent Office to issue patents to Gould for the optically pumped and the gas discharge laser devices. The question of just how to assign credit for inventing the laser remains unresolved by historians.\n\nOn May 16, 1960, Theodore H. Maiman operated the first functioning laser at Hughes Research Laboratories, Malibu, California, ahead of several research teams, including those of Townes, at Columbia University, Arthur Schawlow, at Bell Labs, and Gould, at the TRG (Technical Research Group) company. Maiman's functional laser used a flashlamp-pumped synthetic ruby crystal to produce red laser light at 694 nanometers wavelength. The device was only capable of pulsed operation, due to its three-level pumping design scheme. Later that year, the Iranian physicist Ali Javan, and William R. Bennett, and Donald Herriott, constructed the first gas laser, using helium and neon that was capable of continuous operation in the infrared (U.S. Patent 3,149,290); later, Javan received the Albert Einstein Award in 1993. Basov and Javan proposed the semiconductor laser diode concept. In 1962, Robert N. Hall demonstrated the first \"laser diode\" device, which was made of gallium arsenide and emitted in the near-infrared band of the spectrum at 850 nm. Later that year, Nick Holonyak, Jr. demonstrated the first semiconductor laser with a visible emission. This first semiconductor laser could only be used in pulsed-beam operation, and when cooled to liquid nitrogen temperatures (77 K). In 1970, Zhores Alferov, in the USSR, and Izuo Hayashi and Morton Panish of Bell Telephone Laboratories also independently developed room-temperature, continual-operation diode lasers, using the heterojunction structure.\n\nSince the early period of laser history, laser research has produced a variety of improved and specialized laser types, optimized for different performance goals, including:\nBULLET::::- new wavelength bands\nBULLET::::- maximum average output power\nBULLET::::- maximum peak pulse energy\nBULLET::::- maximum peak pulse power\nBULLET::::- minimum output pulse duration\nBULLET::::- minimum linewidth\nBULLET::::- maximum power efficiency\nBULLET::::- minimum cost\nand this research continues to this day.\n\nIn 2015, researchers made a white laser, whose light is modulated by a synthetic nanosheet made out of zinc, cadmium, sulfur, and selenium that can emit red, green, and blue light in varying proportions, with each wavelength spanning 191 nm.\n\nIn 2017, researchers at TU Delft demonstrated an AC Josephson junction microwave laser. Since the laser operates in the superconducting regime, it is more stable than other semiconductor-based lasers. The device has potential for applications in quantum computing. In 2017, researchers at TU Munich demonstrated the smallest mode locking laser capable of emitting pairs of phase-locked picosecond laser pulses with a repetition frequency up to 200 GHz.\n\nIn 2017, researchers from the Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt (PTB), together with US researchers from JILA, a joint institute of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and the University of Colorado Boulder, established a new world record by developing an erbium-doped fiber laser with a linewidth of only 10 millihertz.\n\nFollowing the invention of the HeNe gas laser, many other gas discharges have been found to amplify light coherently.\nGas lasers using many different gases have been built and used for many purposes. The helium–neon laser (HeNe) is able to operate at a number of different wavelengths, however the vast majority are engineered to lase at 633 nm; these relatively low cost but highly coherent lasers are extremely common in optical research and educational laboratories. Commercial carbon dioxide (CO) lasers can emit many hundreds of watts in a single spatial mode which can be concentrated into a tiny spot. This emission is in the thermal infrared at 10.6 µm; such lasers are regularly used in industry for cutting and welding. The efficiency of a CO laser is unusually high: over 30%. Argon-ion lasers can operate at a number of lasing transitions between 351 and 528.7 nm. Depending on the optical design one or more of these transitions can be lasing simultaneously; the most commonly used lines are 458 nm, 488 nm and 514.5 nm. A nitrogen transverse electrical discharge in gas at atmospheric pressure (TEA) laser is an inexpensive gas laser, often home-built by hobbyists, which produces rather incoherent UV light at 337.1 nm. Metal ion lasers are gas lasers that generate deep ultraviolet wavelengths. Helium-silver (HeAg) 224 nm and neon-copper (NeCu) 248 nm are two examples. Like all low-pressure gas lasers, the gain media of these lasers have quite narrow oscillation linewidths, less than 3 GHz (0.5 picometers), making them candidates for use in fluorescence suppressed Raman spectroscopy.\n\nChemical lasers are powered by a chemical reaction permitting a large amount of energy to be released quickly. Such very high power lasers are especially of interest to the military, however continuous wave chemical lasers at very high power levels, fed by streams of gasses, have been developed and have some industrial applications. As examples, in the hydrogen fluoride laser (2700–2900 nm) and the deuterium fluoride laser (3800 nm) the reaction is the combination of hydrogen or deuterium gas with combustion products of ethylene in nitrogen trifluoride.\n\nExcimer lasers are a special sort of gas laser powered by an electric discharge in which the lasing medium is an excimer, or more precisely an exciplex in existing designs. These are molecules which can only exist with one atom in an excited electronic state. Once the molecule transfers its excitation energy to a photon, its atoms are no longer bound to each other and the molecule disintegrates. This drastically reduces the population of the lower energy state thus greatly facilitating a population inversion. Excimers currently used are all ; noble gasses are chemically inert and can only form compounds while in an excited state. Excimer lasers typically operate at ultraviolet wavelengths with major applications including semiconductor photolithography and LASIK eye surgery. Commonly used excimer molecules include ArF (emission at 193 nm), KrCl (222 nm), KrF (248 nm), XeCl (308 nm), and XeF (351 nm).\nThe molecular fluorine laser, emitting at 157 nm in the vacuum ultraviolet is sometimes referred to as an excimer laser, however this appears to be a misnomer inasmuch as F is a stable compound.\n\nSolid-state lasers use a crystalline or glass rod which is \"doped\" with ions that provide the required energy states. For example, the first working laser was a ruby laser, made from ruby (chromium-doped corundum). The population inversion is actually maintained in the dopant. These materials are pumped optically using a shorter wavelength than the lasing wavelength, often from a flashtube or from another laser. The usage of the term \"solid-state\" in laser physics is narrower than in typical use. Semiconductor lasers (laser diodes) are typically \"not\" referred to as solid-state lasers.\n\nNeodymium is a common dopant in various solid-state laser crystals, including yttrium orthovanadate (Nd:YVO), yttrium lithium fluoride () and yttrium aluminium garnet (). All these lasers can produce high powers in the infrared spectrum at 1064 nm. They are used for cutting, welding and marking of metals and other materials, and also in spectroscopy and for pumping dye lasers. These lasers are also commonly frequency doubled, tripled or quadrupled to produce 532 nm (green, visible), 355 nm and 266 nm (UV) beams, respectively. Frequency-doubled diode-pumped solid-state (DPSS) lasers are used to make bright green laser pointers.\n\nYtterbium, holmium, thulium, and erbium are other common \"dopants\" in solid-state lasers. Ytterbium is used in crystals such as Yb:YAG, Yb:KGW, Yb:KYW, Yb:SYS, Yb:BOYS, Yb:CaF, typically operating around 1020–1050 nm. They are potentially very efficient and high powered due to a small quantum defect. Extremely high powers in ultrashort pulses can be achieved with Yb:YAG. Holmium-doped YAG crystals emit at 2097 nm and form an efficient laser operating at infrared wavelengths strongly absorbed by water-bearing tissues. The Ho-YAG is usually operated in a pulsed mode, and passed through optical fiber surgical devices to resurface joints, remove rot from teeth, vaporize cancers, and pulverize kidney and gall stones.\n\nTitanium-doped sapphire (Ti:sapphire) produces a highly tunable infrared laser, commonly used for spectroscopy. It is also notable for use as a mode-locked laser producing ultrashort pulses of extremely high peak power.\n\nThermal limitations in solid-state lasers arise from unconverted pump power that heats the medium. This heat, when coupled with a high thermo-optic coefficient (d\"n\"/d\"T\") can cause thermal lensing and reduce the quantum efficiency. Diode-pumped thin disk lasers overcome these issues by having a gain medium that is much thinner than the diameter of the pump beam. This allows for a more uniform temperature in the material. Thin disk lasers have been shown to produce beams of up to one kilowatt.\n\nSolid-state lasers or laser amplifiers where the light is guided due to the total internal reflection in a single mode optical fiber are instead called fiber lasers. Guiding of light allows extremely long gain regions providing good cooling conditions; fibers have high surface area to volume ratio which allows efficient cooling. In addition, the fiber's waveguiding properties tend to reduce thermal distortion of the beam. Erbium and ytterbium ions are common active species in such lasers.\n\nQuite often, the fiber laser is designed as a double-clad fiber. This type of fiber consists of a fiber core, an inner cladding and an outer cladding. The index of the three concentric layers is chosen so that the fiber core acts as a single-mode fiber for the laser emission while the outer cladding acts as a highly multimode core for the pump laser. This lets the pump propagate a large amount of power into and through the active inner core region, while still having a high numerical aperture (NA) to have easy launching conditions.\n\nPump light can be used more efficiently by creating a fiber disk laser, or a stack of such lasers.\n\nFiber lasers have a fundamental limit in that the intensity of the light in the fiber cannot be so high that optical nonlinearities induced by the local electric field strength can become dominant and prevent laser operation and/or lead to the material destruction of the fiber. This effect is called photodarkening. In bulk laser materials, the cooling is not so efficient, and it is difficult to separate the effects of photodarkening from the thermal effects, but the experiments in fibers show that the photodarkening can be attributed to the formation of long-living color centers.\n\nPhotonic crystal lasers are lasers based on nano-structures that provide the mode confinement and the density of optical states (DOS) structure required for the feedback to take place. They are typical micrometer-sized and tunable on the bands of the photonic crystals.\n\nSemiconductor lasers are diodes which are electrically pumped. Recombination of electrons and holes created by the applied current introduces optical gain. Reflection from the ends of the crystal form an optical resonator, although the resonator can be external to the semiconductor in some designs.\n\nCommercial laser diodes emit at wavelengths from 375 nm to 3500 nm. Low to medium power laser diodes are used in laser pointers, laser printers and CD/DVD players. Laser diodes are also frequently used to optically pump other lasers with high efficiency. The highest power industrial laser diodes, with power up to 20 kW, are used in industry for cutting and welding. External-cavity semiconductor lasers have a semiconductor active medium in a larger cavity. These devices can generate high power outputs with good beam quality, wavelength-tunable narrow-linewidth radiation, or ultrashort laser pulses.\n\nIn 2012, Nichia and OSRAM developed and manufactured commercial high-power green laser diodes (515/520 nm), which compete with traditional diode-pumped solid-state lasers.\n\nVertical cavity surface-emitting lasers (VCSELs) are semiconductor lasers whose emission direction is perpendicular to the surface of the wafer. VCSEL devices typically have a more circular output beam than conventional laser diodes. As of 2005, only 850 nm VCSELs are widely available, with 1300 nm VCSELs beginning to be commercialized, and 1550 nm devices an area of research. VECSELs are external-cavity VCSELs. Quantum cascade lasers are semiconductor lasers that have an active transition between energy \"sub-bands\" of an electron in a structure containing several quantum wells.\n\nThe development of a silicon laser is important in the field of optical computing. Silicon is the material of choice for integrated circuits, and so electronic and silicon photonic components (such as optical interconnects) could be fabricated on the same chip. Unfortunately, silicon is a difficult lasing material to deal with, since it has certain properties which block lasing. However, recently teams have produced silicon lasers through methods such as fabricating the lasing material from silicon and other semiconductor materials, such as indium(III) phosphide or gallium(III) arsenide, materials which allow coherent light to be produced from silicon. These are called hybrid silicon laser. Recent developments have also shown the use of monolithically integrated nanowire lasers directly on silicon for optical interconnects, paving the way for chip level applications. These heterostructure nanowire lasers capable of optical interconnects in silicon are also capable of emitting pairs of phase-locked picosecond pulses with a repetition frequency up to 200 GHz, allowing for on-chip optical signal processing. Another type is a Raman laser, which takes advantage of Raman scattering to produce a laser from materials such as silicon.\n\nLasing without maintaining the medium excited into a population inversion was demonstrated in 1992 in sodium gas and again in 1995 in rubidium gas by various international teams. This was accomplished by using an external maser to induce \"optical transparency\" in the medium by introducing and destructively interfering the ground electron transitions between two paths, so that the likelihood for the ground electrons to absorb any energy has been cancelled.\n\nDye lasers use an organic dye as the gain medium. The wide gain spectrum of available dyes, or mixtures of dyes, allows these lasers to be highly tunable, or to produce very short-duration pulses (on the order of a few femtoseconds). Although these tunable lasers are mainly known in their liquid form, researchers have also demonstrated narrow-linewidth tunable emission in dispersive oscillator configurations incorporating solid-state dye gain media. In their most prevalent form these solid state dye lasers use dye-doped polymers as laser media.\n\nFree-electron lasers, or FELs, generate coherent, high power radiation that is widely tunable, currently ranging in wavelength from microwaves through terahertz radiation and infrared to the visible spectrum, to soft X-rays. They have the widest frequency range of any laser type. While FEL beams share the same optical traits as other lasers, such as coherent radiation, FEL operation is quite different. Unlike gas, liquid, or solid-state lasers, which rely on bound atomic or molecular states, FELs use a relativistic electron beam as the lasing medium, hence the term \"free-electron\".\n\nThe pursuit of a high-quantum-energy laser using transitions between isomeric states of an atomic nucleus has been the subject of wide-ranging academic research since the early 1970s. Much of this is summarized in three review articles. This research has been international in scope, but mainly based in the former Soviet Union and the United States. While many scientists remain optimistic that a breakthrough is near, an operational gamma-ray laser is yet to be realized.\n\nSome of the early studies were directed toward short pulses of neutrons exciting the upper isomer state in a solid so the gamma-ray transition could benefit from the line-narrowing of Mössbauer effect. In conjunction, several advantages were expected from two-stage pumping of a three-level system. It was conjectured that the nucleus of an atom, embedded in the near field of a laser-driven coherently-oscillating electron cloud would experience a larger dipole field than that of the driving laser. Furthermore, nonlinearity of the oscillating cloud would produce both spatial and temporal harmonics, so nuclear transitions of higher multipolarity could also be driven at multiples of the laser frequency.\n\nIn September 2007, the BBC News reported that there was speculation about the possibility of using positronium annihilation to drive a very powerful gamma ray laser. Dr. David Cassidy of the University of California, Riverside proposed that a single such laser could be used to ignite a nuclear fusion reaction, replacing the banks of hundreds of lasers currently employed in inertial confinement fusion experiments.\n\nSpace-based X-ray lasers pumped by a nuclear explosion have also been proposed as antimissile weapons. Such devices would be one-shot weapons.\n\nLiving cells have been used to produce laser light. The cells were genetically engineered to produce green fluorescent protein (GFP). The GFP is used as the laser's \"gain medium\", where light amplification takes place. The cells were then placed between two tiny mirrors, just 20 millionths of a meter across, which acted as the \"laser cavity\" in which light could bounce many times through the cell. Upon bathing the cell with blue light, it could be seen to emit directed and intense green laser light.\n\nWhen lasers were invented in 1960, they were called \"a solution looking for a problem\". Since then, they have become ubiquitous, finding utility in thousands of highly varied applications in every section of modern society, including consumer electronics, information technology, science, medicine, industry, law enforcement, entertainment, and the military. Fiber-optic communication using lasers is a key technology in modern communications, allowing services such as the Internet.\n\nThe first widely noticeable use of lasers was the supermarket barcode scanner, introduced in 1974. The laserdisc player, introduced in 1978, was the first successful consumer product to include a laser but the compact disc player was the first laser-equipped device to become common, beginning in 1982 followed shortly by laser printers.\n\nSome other uses are:\nBULLET::::- Communications: besides fiber-optic communication, lasers are used for free-space optical communication, including laser communication in space.\nBULLET::::- Medicine: see below.\nBULLET::::- Industry: cutting including converting thin materials, welding, material heat treatment, marking parts (engraving and bonding), additive manufacturing or 3D printing processes such as selective laser sintering and selective laser melting, non-contact measurement of parts and 3D scanning, and Laser cleaning.\nBULLET::::- Military: marking targets, guiding munitions, missile defense, electro-optical countermeasures (EOCM), lidar, blinding troops. See below\nBULLET::::- Law enforcement: LIDAR traffic enforcement. Lasers are used for latent fingerprint detection in the forensic identification field\nBULLET::::- Research: spectroscopy, laser ablation, laser annealing, laser scattering, laser interferometry, lidar, laser capture microdissection, fluorescence microscopy, metrology, laser cooling.\nBULLET::::- Commercial products: laser printers, barcode scanners, thermometers, laser pointers, holograms, bubblegrams.\nBULLET::::- Entertainment: optical discs, laser lighting displays, laser turntables\n\nIn 2004, excluding diode lasers, approximately 131,000 lasers were sold with a value of US$2.19 billion. In the same year, approximately 733 million diode lasers, valued at $3.20 billion, were sold.\n\nLasers have many uses in medicine, including laser surgery (particularly eye surgery), laser healing, kidney stone treatment, ophthalmoscopy, and cosmetic skin treatments such as acne treatment, cellulite and striae reduction, and hair removal.\n\nLasers are used to treat cancer by shrinking or destroying tumors or precancerous growths. They are most commonly used to treat superficial cancers that are on the surface of the body or the lining of internal organs. They are used to treat basal cell skin cancer and the very early stages of others like cervical, penile, vaginal, vulvar, and non-small cell lung cancer. Laser therapy is often combined with other treatments, such as surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation therapy. Laser-induced interstitial thermotherapy (LITT), or interstitial laser photocoagulation, uses lasers to treat some cancers using hyperthermia, which uses heat to shrink tumors by damaging or killing cancer cells. Lasers are more precise than traditional surgery methods and cause less damage, pain, bleeding, swelling, and scarring. A disadvantage is that surgeons must have specialized training. It may be more expensive than other treatments.\n\nA laser weapon is a laser that is used as a directed-energy weapon.\nIn recent years, some hobbyists have taken interests in lasers. Lasers used by hobbyists are generally of class IIIa or IIIb (see Safety), although some have made their own class IV types. However, compared to other hobbyists, laser hobbyists are far less common, due to the cost and potential dangers involved. Due to the cost of lasers, some hobbyists use inexpensive means to obtain lasers, such as salvaging laser diodes from broken DVD players (red), Blu-ray players (violet), or even higher power laser diodes from CD or DVD burners.\n\nHobbyists also have been taking surplus pulsed lasers from retired military applications and modifying them for pulsed holography. Pulsed Ruby and pulsed YAG lasers have been used.\n\nDifferent applications need lasers with different output powers. Lasers that produce a continuous beam or a series of short pulses can be compared on the basis of their average power. Lasers that produce pulses can also be characterized based on the \"peak\" power of each pulse. The peak power of a pulsed laser is many orders of magnitude greater than its average power. The average output power is always less than the power consumed.\n\n+ The continuous or average power required for some uses:\n! Power !! Use\nalign=right  Laser pointers\nalign=right  CD-ROM drive\nalign=right  DVD player or DVD-ROM drive\nalign=right  High-speed CD-RW burner\nalign=right  Consumer 16× DVD-R burner\nalign=right  Green laser in Holographic Versatile Disc prototype development\nalign=right  Output of the majority of commercially available solid-state lasers used for micro machining\nalign=right  Typical sealed CO surgical lasers\nalign=right  Typical sealed CO lasers used in industrial laser cutting\n\nExamples of pulsed systems with high peak power:\nBULLET::::- 700 TW (700×10 W) – National Ignition Facility, a 192-beam, 1.8-megajoule laser system adjoining a 10-meter-diameter target chamber\nBULLET::::- 1.3 PW (1.3×10 W) – world's most powerful laser as of 1998, located at the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory\n\nEven the first laser was recognized as being potentially dangerous. Theodore Maiman characterized the first laser as having a power of one \"Gillette\" as it could burn through one Gillette razor blade. Today, it is accepted that even low-power lasers with only a few milliwatts of output power can be hazardous to human eyesight when the beam hits the eye directly or after reflection from a shiny surface. At wavelengths which the cornea and the lens can focus well, the coherence and low divergence of laser light means that it can be focused by the eye into an extremely small spot on the retina, resulting in localized burning and permanent damage in seconds or even less time.\n\nLasers are usually labeled with a safety class number, which identifies how dangerous the laser is:\nBULLET::::- Class 1 is inherently safe, usually because the light is contained in an enclosure, for example in CD players.\nBULLET::::- Class 2 is safe during normal use; the blink reflex of the eye will prevent damage. Usually up to 1 mW power, for example laser pointers.\nBULLET::::- Class 3R (formerly IIIa) lasers are usually up to 5 mW and involve a small risk of eye damage within the time of the blink reflex. Staring into such a beam for several seconds is likely to cause damage to a spot on the retina.\nBULLET::::- Class 3B can cause immediate eye damage upon exposure.\nBULLET::::- Class 4 lasers can burn skin, and in some cases, even scattered light can cause eye and/or skin damage. Many industrial and scientific lasers are in this class.\nThe indicated powers are for visible-light, continuous-wave lasers. For pulsed lasers and invisible wavelengths, other power limits apply. People working with class 3B and class 4 lasers can protect their eyes with safety goggles which are designed to absorb light of a particular wavelength.\n\nInfrared lasers with wavelengths longer than about 1.4 micrometers are often referred to as \"eye-safe\", because the cornea tends to absorb light at these wavelengths, protecting the retina from damage. The label \"eye-safe\" can be misleading, however, as it applies only to relatively low power continuous wave beams; a high power or Q-switched laser at these wavelengths can burn the cornea, causing severe eye damage, and even moderate power lasers can injure the eye.\n\nLasers can be a hazard to both civil and military aviation, due to the potential to temporarily distract or blind pilots. See Lasers and aviation safety for more on this topic.\n\nCameras based on charge-coupled devices may actually be more sensitive to laser damage than biological eyes.\n\nBULLET::::- List of laser articles\nBULLET::::- List of light sources\nBULLET::::- Anti-laser\nBULLET::::- Coherent perfect absorber\nBULLET::::- Homogeneous broadening\nBULLET::::- Nanolaser\nBULLET::::- Sound amplification by stimulated emission of radiation\nBULLET::::- Spaser\nBULLET::::- Bertolotti, Mario (1999, trans. 2004). \"The History of the Laser\". Institute of Physics. .\nBULLET::::- Bromberg, Joan Lisa (1991). \"The Laser in America, 1950–1970\". MIT Press. .\nBULLET::::- Csele, Mark (2004). \"Fundamentals of Light Sources and Lasers\". Wiley. .\nBULLET::::- Koechner, Walter (1992). \"Solid-State Laser Engineering\". 3rd ed. Springer-Verlag. .\nBULLET::::- Siegman, Anthony E. (1986). \"Lasers\". University Science Books. .\nBULLET::::- Silfvast, William T. (1996). \"Laser Fundamentals\". Cambridge University Press. .\nBULLET::::- Svelto, Orazio (1998). \"Principles of Lasers\". 4th ed. Trans. David Hanna. Springer. .\nBULLET::::- Wilson, J. & Hawkes, J.F.B. (1987). \"Lasers: Principles and Applications\". Prentice Hall International Series in Optoelectronics, Prentice Hall. .\nBULLET::::- Yariv, Amnon (1989). \"Quantum Electronics\". 3rd ed. Wiley. .\n\nBULLET::::- \"IEEE Journal of Lightwave Technology\" ()\nBULLET::::- \"IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics\" ()\nBULLET::::- \"IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics\" ()\nBULLET::::- \"IEEE Photonics Technology Letters\" ()\nBULLET::::- \"Laser Focus World\" ()\nBULLET::::- \"Optics Letters\" ()\nBULLET::::- \"Photonics Spectra\" ()\n\nBULLET::::- Encyclopedia of laser physics and technology by Dr. Rüdiger Paschotta\nBULLET::::- A Practical Guide to Lasers for Experimenters and Hobbyists by Samuel M. Goldwasser\nBULLET::::- Homebuilt Lasers Page by Professor Mark Csele\nBULLET::::- Powerful laser is 'brightest light in the universe' – The world's most powerful laser as of 2008 might create supernova-like shock waves and possibly even antimatter (\"New Scientist\", April 9, 2008)\nBULLET::::- \"Laser Fundamentals\" an online course by Prof. F. Balembois and Dr. S. Forget. \"Instrumentation for Optics\", 2008, (accessed January 17, 2014)\nBULLET::::- Northrop Grumman's Press Release on the Firestrike 15 kW tactical laser product.\nBULLET::::- Website on Lasers 50th anniversary by APS, OSA, SPIE\nBULLET::::- Advancing the Laser anniversary site by SPIE: Video interviews, open-access articles, posters, DVDs\nBULLET::::- Bright Idea: The First Lasers history of the invention, with audio interview clips.\nBULLET::::- Free software for Simulation of random laser dynamics\nBULLET::::- Video Demonstrations in Lasers and Optics Produced by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Real-time effects are demonstrated in a way that would be difficult to see in a classroom setting.\nBULLET::::- MIT Video Lecture: Understanding Lasers and Fiberoptics\nBULLET::::- Virtual Museum of Laser History, from the touring exhibit by SPIE\nBULLET::::- website with animations, applications and research about laser and other quantum based phenomena Universite Paris Sud\n"}
{"id": "17560", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17560", "title": "Live action role-playing game", "text": "Live action role-playing game\n\nA live action role-playing game (LARP) is a form of role-playing game where the participants physically portray their characters. The players pursue goals within a fictional setting represented by the real world while interacting with each other in character. The outcome of player actions may be mediated by game rules or determined by consensus among players. Event arrangers called gamemasters decide the setting and rules to be used and facilitate play.\n\nThe first LARPs were run in the late 1970s, inspired by tabletop role-playing games and genre fiction. The activity spread internationally during the 1980s and has diversified into a wide variety of styles. Play may be very game-like or may be more concerned with dramatic or artistic expression. Events can also be designed to achieve educational or political goals. The fictional genres used vary greatly, from realistic modern or historical settings to fantastic or futuristic eras. Production values are sometimes minimal, but can involve elaborate venues and costumes. LARPs range in size from small private events lasting a few hours to large public events with thousands of players lasting for days.\n\nLARP has also been referred to as \"live role-playing\" (\"LRP\"), \"interactive literature\", and \"free form role-playing\". Some of these terms are still in common use; however, LARP has become the most commonly accepted term. It is sometimes written in lowercase, as \"larp\". The \"live action\" in LARP is analogous to the term \"live action\" used in film and video to differentiate works with human actors from animation. Playing a LARP is often called \"larping\", and one who does it is a \"larper\".\n\nThe participants in a LARP physically portray characters in a fictional setting, improvising their characters' speech and movements somewhat like actors in improvisational theatre. This is distinct from tabletop role-playing games, where character actions are described verbally. LARPs may be played in a public or private area and may last for hours or days. There is usually no audience. Players may dress as their character and carry appropriate equipment, and the environment is sometimes decorated to resemble the setting. LARPs can be one-off events or a series of events in the same setting, and events can vary in size from a handful of players to several thousand.\n\nEvents are put on for the benefit of the \"players\", who take on roles called \"player characters\" (\"PCs\") that the players may create themselves or be given by the gamemasters. Players sometimes play the same character repeatedly at separate events, progressively developing the character and its relations with other characters and the setting.\n\nArrangers called \"gamemasters\" (\"GMs\") determine the rules and setting of a LARP, and may also influence an event and act as referees while it is taking place. The GMs may also do the logistical work, or there may be other arrangers who handle details such as advertising the event, booking a venue, and financial management. Unlike the GM in a tabletop role-playing game, a LARP GM seldom has an overview of everything that is happening during play because numerous participants may be interacting at once. For this reason, a LARP GM's role is often less concerned with tightly maintaining a narrative or directly entertaining the players, and more with arranging the structure of the LARP before play begins and facilitating the players and crew to maintain the fictional environment during play.\n\nParticipants sometimes known as the \"crew\" may help the GMs to set up and maintain the environment of the LARP during play by acting as stagehands or playing \"non-player characters\" (\"NPCs\") who fill out the setting. Crew typically receive more information about the setting and more direction from the GMs than players do. In a tabletop role-playing game, a GM usually plays all the NPCs, whereas in a LARP, each NPC is typically played by a separate crew member. Sometimes players are asked to play NPCs for periods of an event.\n\nMuch of play consists of interactions between characters. Some LARP scenarios primarily feature interaction between PCs. Other scenarios focus on interaction between PCs and aspects of the setting, including NPCs, that are under the direction of the GMs.\n\nLARP does not have a single point of origin, but was invented independently by groups in North America, Europe, and Australia. These groups shared an experience with genre fiction or tabletop role-playing games, and a desire to physically experience such settings. In addition to tabletop role-playing, LARP is rooted in childhood games of make believe, play fighting, costume parties, roleplay simulations, Commedia dell'arte, improvisational theatre, psychodrama, military simulations, and historical reenactment groups such as the Society for Creative Anachronism.\n\nThe earliest recorded LARP group is \"Dagorhir\", which was founded in 1977 in the United States and focuses on fantasy battles. Soon after the release of the movie \"Logan's Run\" in 1976, rudimentary live role-playing games based on the movie were run at US science fiction conventions. In 1981, the \"International Fantasy Gaming Society\" (IFGS) started, with rules influenced by \"Dungeons & Dragons\". IFGS was named after a fictional group in the 1981 novel \"Dream Park\", which described futuristic LARPs. In 1982, the \"Society for Interactive Literature\", a predecessor of the \"Live Action Roleplayers Association\" (LARPA), formed as the first recorded theatre-style LARP group in the US.\n\n\"Treasure Trap\", formed in 1982 at Peckforton Castle, was the first recorded LARP game in the UK and influenced the fantasy LARPs that followed there. The first recorded LARP in Australia was run in 1983, using the science fiction \"Traveller\" setting. In 1993, White Wolf Publishing released \"Mind's Eye Theatre,\" which is still played internationally and is probably the most commercially successful published LARP. The first German events were in the early 1990s, with fantasy LARP in particular growing quickly there, so that since 2001, two major German events have been run annually that have between 3000 and 7000 players each and attract players from around Europe.\n\nToday, LARP is a widespread activity internationally. Games with thousands of participants are run by for-profit companies, and a small industry exists to sell costume, armour and foam weapons intended primarily for LARP.\n\nMost LARPs are intended as games for entertainment. Enjoyable aspects can include the collaborative creation of a story, the attempt to overcome challenges in pursuit of a character's objectives, and a sense of immersion in a fictional setting. LARPs may also include other game-like aspects such as intellectual puzzles, and sport-like aspects such as fighting with simulated weapons.\n\nSome LARPs stress artistic considerations such as dramatic interaction or challenging subject matter. Avant-garde or \"arthaus\" events have especially experimental approaches and high culture aspirations and are occasionally held in fine art contexts such as festivals or art museums. The themes of avant-garde events often include politics, culture, religion, sexuality and the human condition. Such LARPs are common in the Nordic countries but also present elsewhere.\n\nIn addition to entertainment and artistic merit, LARP events may be designed for educational or political purposes. For example, the Danish secondary school \"Østerskov Efterskole\" uses LARP to teach most of its classes. Language classes can be taught by immersing students in a role-playing scenario in which they are forced to improvise speech or writing in the language they are learning. Politically themed LARP events may attempt to awaken or shape political thinking within a culture.\n\nBecause LARP involves a controlled artificial environment within which people interact, it has sometimes been used as a research tool to test theories in social fields such as economics or law. For example, LARP has been used to study the application of game theory to the development of criminal law.\n\nDuring a LARP, player actions in the real world represent character actions in an imaginary setting. Game rules, physical symbols and theatrical improvisation are used to bridge differences between the real world and the setting. For example, a rope could signify an imaginary wall. Realistic-looking weapon props and risky physical activity are sometimes discouraged or forbidden for safety reasons. While the fictional timeline in a tabletop RPG often progresses in \"game-time\", which may be much faster or slower than the time passing for players, LARPs are different in that they usually run in real-time, with game-time only being used in special circumstances.\n\nThere is a distinction between when a player is \"in character\", meaning they are actively representing their character, and when the player is \"out-of-character\", meaning they are being themselves. Some LARPs encourage players to stay consistently in character except in emergencies, while others accept players being out-of-character at times. In a LARP, it is usually assumed that players are speaking and acting in character unless otherwise noted, which is the opposite of normal practice in tabletop role-playing games. Character knowledge is usually considered to be separate from player knowledge, and acting upon information a character would not know may be viewed as cheating.\n\nWhile most LARPs maintain a clear distinction between the real world and the fictional setting, \"pervasive\" LARPs mingle fiction with modern reality in a fashion similar to alternate reality games. Bystanders who are unaware that a game is taking place may be treated as part of the fictional setting, and in-character materials may be incorporated into the real world.\n\nMany LARPs have game rules that determine how characters can affect each other and the setting. The rules may be defined in a publication or created by the gamemasters. These rules may define characters' capabilities, what can be done with various objects that exist in the setting, and what characters can do during the \"downtime\" between LARP events. Because referees are often not available to mediate all character actions, players are relied upon to be honest in their application of the rules.\n\nSome LARP rules call for the use of simulated weapons such as foam weapons or airsoft guns to determine whether characters succeed in hitting one another in combat situations. In Russian LARP events, weapons made of hard plastic, metal or wood are used. The alternative to using simulated weapons is to pause role-play and determine the outcome of an action symbolically, for example by rolling dice, playing rock paper scissors or comparing character attributes.\n\nThere are also LARPs that do without rules, instead relying on players to use their common sense or feel for dramatic appropriateness to cooperatively decide what the outcome of their actions will be.\n\nLARPs can have any genre, although many use themes and settings derived from genre fiction. Some LARPs borrow a setting from an established work in another medium (e.g., \"The Lord of the Rings\" or the \"World of Darkness\"), while others use settings based on the real world or designed specifically for the LARP. Proprietary campaign settings, together with rulesets, are often the principal creative asset of LARP groups and LARP publishers.\n\nLARPs set in the modern day may explore everyday concerns, or special interests such as espionage or military activity. Such LARPs sometimes resemble an Alternate Reality Game, an \"Assassin\" game, or a military simulation using live combat with airsoft, laser tag, or paintball markers. LARPs can also be set in historical eras or have semi-historical settings with mythological or fantastical aspects incorporated.\n\nFantasy is one of the most common LARP genres internationally and is the genre that the largest events use. Fantasy LARPs are set in pseudo-historical worlds inspired by fantasy literature and fantasy role-playing games such as \"Dungeons & Dragons\". These settings typically have magic, fantasy races, and limited technology. Many fantasy LARPs focus on adventure or on competition between character factions. In contrast, science fiction LARPs take place in futuristic settings with high technology and sometimes with extraterrestrial life. This describes a broad array of LARPs, including politically themed LARPs depicting dystopian or utopian societies and settings inspired by cyberpunk, space opera and post-apocalyptic fiction.\n\nHorror LARPs are inspired by horror fiction. Popular subgenres include zombie apocalypse and Cthulhu Mythos, sometimes using the published \"Cthulhu Live\" rules. The World of Darkness, published by White Wolf Publishing, is a widely used goth–punk horror setting in which players usually portray secretive supernatural creatures such as vampires and werewolves. This setting can be played using \"Mind's Eye Theatre\", which is a set of LARP rules also published by White Wolf. World of Darkness LARPs are usually played in a \"chronicle\", a series of short events held at regular intervals, and are also popular at conventions. An international chronicle is run by White Wolf's official fan club, the \"Camarilla\".\n\nLARP events have a wide variety of styles that often overlap. Simple distinctions can be made regarding the genre used, the presence of simulated weapons or abstract rules, and whether players create their own characters or have them assigned by gamemasters. There is also a distinction between scenarios that are only run once and those that are designed to be repeatable. A number of other common classifications follow.\n\nTheatre-style, or freeform, LARP is characterised by a focus on interaction between characters that are written by the gamemasters, not using simulated weapons for combat, and an eclectic approach to genre and setting. Events in this style typically only last a few hours and require relatively little preparation by players and are sometimes played at gaming conventions. Some murder mystery games where players are assigned characters and encouraged to roleplay freely also resemble theatre-style LARP.\n\nSome very large events known as fests (short for \"festival\") have hundreds or thousands of participants who are usually split into competing character factions camped separately around a large venue. There are only a few fests in the world, all based in Europe and Canada; however, their size means that they have a significant influence on local LARP culture and design. At the other end of the size scale, some small events known as \"linear\" or \"line-course\" LARPs feature a small group of PCs facing a series of challenges from NPCs and are often more tightly planned and controlled by GMs than other styles of LARP.\n\nWhile some LARPs are open to participants of all ages, others have a minimum age requirement. There are also youth LARPs, specifically intended for children and young people. Some are run through institutions such as schools, churches, or the Scouts. Denmark has an especially high number of youth LARPs.\n\nRoleplaying may be seen as part of a movement in Western culture towards participatory arts, as opposed to traditional spectator arts. Participants in a LARP cast off the role of passive observer and take on new roles that are often outside of their daily life and contrary to their culture. The arrangers of a LARP and the other participants act as co-creators of the game. This collaborative process of creating shared fictional worlds may be associated with a broader burgeoning \"geek\" culture in developed societies that is in turn associated with prolonged education, high uptake of information technology and increased leisure time. In comparison to the mainstream video-game industry, which is highly commercialized and often marketed towards a male audience, LARP is less commoditized, and women actively contribute as authors and participants.\n\nLARP is not well known in most countries and is sometimes confused with other role-playing, reenactment, costuming, or dramatic activities. While fan and gamer culture in general has become increasingly mainstream in developed countries, LARP has often not achieved the same degree of cultural acceptability. This may be due to intolerance of the resemblance to childhood games of pretend, a perceived risk of over-identification with the characters, and the absence of mass marketing. In US films such as the 2006 documentary \"Darkon\", the 2007 documentary \"Monster Camp\", and the 2008 comedy \"Role Models\", fantasy LARP is depicted as somewhat ridiculous and escapist, but also treated affectionately as a \"constructive social outlet\". In the Nordic countries, LARP has achieved a high level of public recognition and popularity. It is often shown in a positive light in mainstream media, with an emphasis on the dramatic and creative aspects. However, even in Norway, where LARP has greater recognition than in most other countries, it has still not achieved full recognition as a cultural activity by government bodies.\n\nCommunities have formed around the creation, play and discussion of LARP. These communities have developed a subculture that crosses over with role-playing, fan, reenactment, and drama subcultures. Early LARP subculture focused on Tolkien-like fantasy, but it later broadened to include appreciation of other genres, especially the horror genre with the rapid uptake of the \"World of Darkness\" setting in the 1990s. Like many subcultures, LARP groups often have a common context of shared experience, language, humour, and clothing that can be regarded by some as a lifestyle.\n\nLARP has been a subject of academic research and theory. Much of this research originates from role-players, especially from the publications of the Nordic Knutepunkt role-playing conventions. The broader academic community has recently begun to study LARP as well, both to compare it to other media and other varieties of interactive gaming, and also to evaluate it in its own right. In 2010, William Bainbridge speculated that LARP may one day evolve into a major industry in the form of location-based games using ubiquitous computing.\n\nIn Denmark, Østerskov Efterskole uses LARP as an educational method of teaching subjects to high school boarding students through interactivity and simulation. LARP groups are also using simulations of current and historical events and topics like refugees and the AIDS crisis to roleplay and explore these subjects. \n\nFilms\nBULLET::::- \"Mazes and Monsters\" (1982)\nBULLET::::- \"Role Models\" (2008)\nBULLET::::- \"The Wild Hunt\" (2009)\nBULLET::::- \"Lloyd the Conqueror\" (2011)\nBULLET::::- \"Knights of Badassdom\" (2014)\n\nLiterature\nBULLET::::- \"Dream Park\" (1981)\n\nDocumentaries\nBULLET::::- \"Darkon\" (2006)\nBULLET::::- \"Monster Camp\" (2007)\n\nTheater\nBULLET::::- \"Friends Like These\" (2009)\n\nBULLET::::- List of live action role-playing groups\nBULLET::::- Battle gaming\nBULLET::::- Cosplay\nNotes\n\nBibliography\n"}
{"id": "17561", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17561", "title": "Lithium", "text": "Lithium\n\nLithium (from ) is a chemical element with the symbol Li and atomic number 3. It is a soft, silvery-white alkali metal. Under standard conditions, it is the lightest metal and the lightest solid element. Like all alkali metals, lithium is highly reactive and flammable, and must be stored in mineral oil. When cut, it exhibits a metallic luster, but moist air corrodes it quickly to a dull silvery gray, then black tarnish. It never occurs freely in nature, but only in (usually ionic) compounds, such as pegmatitic minerals, which were once the main source of lithium. Due to its solubility as an ion, it is present in ocean water and is commonly obtained from brines. Lithium metal is isolated electrolytically from a mixture of lithium chloride and potassium chloride.\n\nThe nucleus of the lithium atom verges on instability, since the two stable lithium isotopes found in nature have among the lowest binding energies per nucleon of all stable nuclides. Because of its relative nuclear instability, lithium is less common in the solar system than 25 of the first 32 chemical elements even though its nuclei are very light: it is an exception to the trend that heavier nuclei are less common. For related reasons, lithium has important uses in nuclear physics. The transmutation of lithium atoms to helium in 1932 was the first fully man-made nuclear reaction, and lithium deuteride serves as a fusion fuel in staged thermonuclear weapons.\n\nLithium and its compounds have several industrial applications, including heat-resistant glass and ceramics, lithium grease lubricants, flux additives for iron, steel and aluminium production, lithium batteries, and lithium-ion batteries. These uses consume more than three quarters of lithium production.\n\nLithium is present in biological systems in trace amounts; its functions are uncertain. Lithium salts have proven to be useful as a mood-stabilizing drug in the treatment of bipolar disorder in humans.\n\nLike the other alkali metals, lithium has a single valence electron that is easily given up to form a cation. Because of this, lithium is a good conductor of heat and electricity as well as a highly reactive element, though it is the least reactive of the alkali metals. Lithium's low reactivity is due to the proximity of its valence electron to its nucleus (the remaining two electrons are in the 1s orbital, much lower in energy, and do not participate in chemical bonds). However, molten lithium is significantly more reactive than its solid form.\n\nLithium metal is soft enough to be cut with a knife. When cut, it possesses a silvery-white color that quickly changes to gray as it oxidizes to lithium oxide. While it has one of the lowest melting points among all metals (), it has the highest melting and boiling points of the alkali metals.\n\nLithium has a very low density (0.534 g/cm), comparable with pine wood. It is the least dense of all elements that are solids at room temperature; the next lightest solid element (potassium, at 0.862 g/cm) is more than 60% denser. Furthermore, apart from helium and hydrogen, as a solid it is less dense than any other element as a liquid, being only two thirds as dense as liquid nitrogen (0.808 g/cm). Lithium can float on the lightest hydrocarbon oils and is one of only three metals that can float on water, the other two being sodium and potassium.\n\nLithium's coefficient of thermal expansion is twice that of aluminium and almost four times that of iron. Lithium is superconductive below 400 μK at standard pressure and at higher temperatures (more than 9 K) at very high pressures (>20 GPa). At temperatures below 70 K, lithium, like sodium, undergoes diffusionless phase change transformations. At 4.2 K it has a rhombohedral crystal system (with a nine-layer repeat spacing); at higher temperatures it transforms to face-centered cubic and then body-centered cubic. At liquid-helium temperatures (4 K) the rhombohedral structure is prevalent. Multiple allotropic forms have been identified for lithium at high pressures.\n\nLithium has a mass specific heat capacity of 3.58 kilojoules per kilogram-kelvin, the highest of all solids. Because of this, lithium metal is often used in coolants for heat transfer applications.\n\nLithium reacts with water easily, but with noticeably less vigor than other alkali metals. The reaction forms hydrogen gas and lithium hydroxide in aqueous solution. Because of its reactivity with water, lithium is usually stored in a hydrocarbon sealant, often petroleum jelly. Though the heavier alkali metals can be stored in more dense substances, such as mineral oil, lithium is not dense enough to be fully submerged in these liquids. In moist air, lithium rapidly tarnishes to form a black coating of lithium hydroxide (LiOH and LiOH·HO), lithium nitride (LiN) and lithium carbonate (LiCO, the result of a secondary reaction between LiOH and CO).\nWhen placed over a flame, lithium compounds give off a striking crimson color, but when it burns strongly the flame becomes a brilliant silver. Lithium will ignite and burn in oxygen when exposed to water or water vapors. Lithium is flammable, and it is potentially explosive when exposed to air and especially to water, though less so than the other alkali metals. The lithium-water reaction at normal temperatures is brisk but nonviolent because the hydrogen produced does not ignite on its own. As with all alkali metals, lithium fires are difficult to extinguish, requiring dry powder fire extinguishers (Class D type). Lithium is one of the few metals that react with nitrogen under normal conditions.\n\nLithium has a diagonal relationship with magnesium, an element of similar atomic and ionic radius. Chemical resemblances between the two metals include the formation of a nitride by reaction with N, the formation of an oxide () and peroxide () when burnt in O, salts with similar solubilities, and thermal instability of the carbonates and nitrides. The metal reacts with hydrogen gas at high temperatures to produce lithium hydride (LiH).\n\nOther known binary compounds include halides (LiF, LiCl, LiBr, LiI), sulfide (), superoxide (), and carbide (). Many other inorganic compounds are known in which lithium combines with anions to form salts: borates, amides, carbonate, nitrate, or borohydride (). Lithium aluminium hydride () is commonly used as a reducing agent in organic synthesis.\n\nLiHe, a very weakly interacting van der Waals compound, has been detected at very low temperatures.\n\nUnlike other elements in group 1, inorganic compounds of lithium follow the duet rule, rather than the octet rule.\n\nOrganolithium reagents are known in which there is a direct bond between carbon and lithium atoms. These compounds feature covalent metal–carbon bonds that are strongly polarized towards the carbon, allowing them to effectively serve as a metal-stabilized carbanions, although their solution and solid-state structures are more complex than this simplistic view suggests due to the formation of oligomeric clusters. Thus, these are extremely powerful bases and nucleophiles. They have also been applied in asymmetric synthesis in the pharmaceutical industry. For laboratory organic synthesis, many organolithium reagents are commercially available in solution form. These reagents are highly reactive, and are sometimes pyrophoric.\n\nLike its inorganic compounds, almost all organic compounds of lithium formally follow the duet rule (e.g., BuLi, MeLi). However, it is important to note that in the absence of coordinating solvents or ligands, organolithium compounds form dimeric, tetrameric, and hexameric clusters (e.g., BuLi is actually [BuLi] and MeLi is actually [MeLi]) which feature multi-center bonding and increase the coordination number around lithium. These cluster are broken down into smaller or monomeric units in the presence of solvents like dimethoxyethane (DME) or ligands like tetramethylethylenediamine (TMEDA). As an exception to the duet rule, a two-coordinate lithate complex with four electrons around lithium, [Li(thf)][((MeSi)C)Li], has been characterized crystallographically.\n\nNaturally occurring lithium is composed of two stable isotopes, Li and Li, the latter being the more abundant (92.5% natural abundance). Both natural isotopes have anomalously low nuclear binding energy per nucleon (compared to the neighboring elements on the periodic table, helium and beryllium); lithium is the only low numbered element that can produce net energy through nuclear fission. The two lithium nuclei have lower binding energies per nucleon than any other stable nuclides other than deuterium and helium-3. As a result of this, though very light in atomic weight, lithium is less common in the Solar System than 25 of the first 32 chemical elements. Seven radioisotopes have been characterized, the most stable being Li with a half-life of 838 ms and Li with a half-life of 178 ms. All of the remaining radioactive isotopes have half-lives that are shorter than 8.6 ms. The shortest-lived isotope of lithium is Li, which decays through proton emission and has a half-life of 7.6 × 10 s.\n\nLi is one of the primordial elements (or, more properly, primordial nuclides) produced in Big Bang nucleosynthesis. A small amount of both Li and Li are produced in stars, but are thought to be \"burned\" as fast as produced. Additional small amounts of lithium of both Li and Li may be generated from solar wind, cosmic rays hitting heavier atoms, and from early solar system Be and Be radioactive decay. While lithium is created in stars during stellar nucleosynthesis, it is further burned. Li can also be generated in carbon stars.\n\nLithium isotopes fractionate substantially during a wide variety of natural processes, including mineral formation (chemical precipitation), metabolism, and ion exchange. Lithium ions substitute for magnesium and iron in octahedral sites in clay minerals, where Li is preferred to Li, resulting in enrichment of the light isotope in processes of hyperfiltration and rock alteration. The exotic Li is known to exhibit a nuclear halo. The process known as laser isotope separation can be used to separate lithium isotopes, in particular Li from Li.\n\nNuclear weapons manufacture and other nuclear physics applications are a major source of artificial lithium fractionation, with the light isotope Li being retained by industry and military stockpiles to such an extent that it has caused slight but measurable change in the Li to Li ratios in natural sources, such as rivers. This has led to unusual uncertainty in the standardized atomic weight of lithium, since this quantity depends on the natural abundance ratios of these naturally-occurring stable lithium isotopes, as they are available in commercial lithium mineral sources.\n\nBoth stable isotopes of lithium can be laser cooled and were used to produce the first quantum degenerate Bose-Fermi mixture.\n\nThough it was synthesized in the Big Bang, lithium (together with beryllium and boron) is markedly less abundant in the universe than other elements. This is a result of the comparatively low stellar temperatures necessary to destroy lithium, along with a lack of common processes to produce it.\n\nAccording to modern cosmological theory, lithium—in both stable isotopes (lithium-6 and lithium-7)—was one of the three elements synthesized in the Big Bang. Though the amount of lithium generated in Big Bang nucleosynthesis is dependent upon the number of photons per baryon, for accepted values the lithium abundance can be calculated, and there is a \"cosmological lithium discrepancy\" in the universe: older stars seem to have less lithium than they should, and some younger stars have much more. The lack of lithium in older stars is apparently caused by the \"mixing\" of lithium into the interior of stars, where it is destroyed, while lithium is produced in younger stars. Though it transmutes into two atoms of helium due to collision with a proton at temperatures above 2.4 million degrees Celsius (most stars easily attain this temperature in their interiors), lithium is more abundant than current computations would predict in later-generation stars.\nLithium is also found in brown dwarf substellar objects and certain anomalous orange stars. Because lithium is present in cooler, less-massive brown dwarfs, but is destroyed in hotter red dwarf stars, its presence in the stars' spectra can be used in the \"lithium test\" to differentiate the two, as both are smaller than the Sun. Certain orange stars can also contain a high concentration of lithium. Those orange stars found to have a higher than usual concentration of lithium (such as Centaurus X-4) orbit massive objects—neutron stars or black holes—whose gravity evidently pulls heavier lithium to the surface of a hydrogen-helium star, causing more lithium to be observed.\n\nAlthough lithium is widely distributed on Earth, it does not naturally occur in elemental form due to its high reactivity. The total lithium content of seawater is very large and is estimated as 230 billion tonnes, where the element exists at a relatively constant concentration of 0.14 to 0.25 parts per million (ppm), or 25 micromolar; higher concentrations approaching 7 ppm are found near hydrothermal vents.\n\nEstimates for the Earth's crustal content range from 20 to 70 ppm by weight. In keeping with its name, lithium forms a minor part of igneous rocks, with the largest concentrations in granites. Granitic pegmatites also provide the greatest abundance of lithium-containing minerals, with spodumene and petalite being the most commercially viable sources. Another significant mineral of lithium is lepidolite which is now an obsolete name for a series formed by polylithionite and trilithionite. A newer source for lithium is hectorite clay, the only active development of which is through the Western Lithium Corporation in the United States. At 20 mg lithium per kg of Earth's crust, lithium is the 25th most abundant element.\n\nAccording to the \"Handbook of Lithium and Natural Calcium\", \"Lithium is a comparatively rare element, although it is found in many rocks and some brines, but always in very low concentrations. There are a fairly large number of both lithium mineral and brine deposits but only comparatively few of them are of actual or potential commercial value. Many are very small, others are too low in grade.\"\n\nThe US Geological Survey estimates that in 2010, Chile had the largest reserves by far (7.5 million tonnes) and the highest annual production (8,800 tonnes). One of the largest \"reserve bases\" of lithium is in the Salar de Uyuni area of Bolivia, which has 5.4 million tonnes. Other major suppliers include Australia, Argentina and China. As of 2015, the Czech Geological Survey considered the entire Ore Mountains in the Czech Republic as lithium province. Five deposits are registered, one near is considered as a potentially economical deposit, with 160 000 tonnes of lithium.. In December 2019, Finnish mining company Keliber Oy reported its Rapasaari lithium deposit has estimated proven and probable ore reserves of 5.280 million tonnes.\n\nIn June 2010, \"The New York Times\" reported that American geologists were conducting ground surveys on dry salt lakes in western Afghanistan believing that large deposits of lithium are located there. \"Pentagon officials said that their initial analysis at one location in Ghazni Province showed the potential for lithium deposits as large as those of Bolivia, which now has the world's largest known lithium reserves.\" These estimates are \"based principally on old data, which was gathered mainly by the Soviets during their occupation of Afghanistan from 1979–1989\". Stephen Peters, the head of the USGS's Afghanistan Minerals Project, said that he was unaware of USGS involvement in any new surveying for minerals in Afghanistan in the past two years. 'We are not aware of any discoveries of lithium,' he said.\"\n\nLithia (\"lithium brine\") is associated with tin mining areas in Cornwall, England and an evaluation project from 400-meter deep test boreholes is under consideration. If successful the hot brines will also provide geothermal energy to power the lithium extraction and refining process.\n\nLithium is found in trace amount in numerous plants, plankton, and invertebrates, at concentrations of 69 to 5,760 parts per billion (ppb). In vertebrates the concentration is slightly lower, and nearly all vertebrate tissue and body fluids contain lithium ranging from 21 to 763 ppb. Marine organisms tend to bioaccumulate lithium more than terrestrial organisms. Whether lithium has a physiological role in any of these organisms is unknown.\n\nPetalite (LiAlSiO) was discovered in 1800 by the Brazilian chemist and statesman José Bonifácio de Andrada e Silva in a mine on the island of Utö, Sweden. However, it was not until 1817 that Johan August Arfwedson, then working in the laboratory of the chemist Jöns Jakob Berzelius, detected the presence of a new element while analyzing petalite ore. This element formed compounds similar to those of sodium and potassium, though its carbonate and hydroxide were less soluble in water and less alkaline. Berzelius gave the alkaline material the name \"\"lithion\"/\"lithina\"\", from the Greek word \"λιθoς\" (transliterated as \"lithos\", meaning \"stone\"), to reflect its discovery in a solid mineral, as opposed to potassium, which had been discovered in plant ashes, and sodium, which was known partly for its high abundance in animal blood. He named the metal inside the material \"lithium\".\n\nArfwedson later showed that this same element was present in the minerals spodumene and lepidolite. In 1818, Christian Gmelin was the first to observe that lithium salts give a bright red color to flame. However, both Arfwedson and Gmelin tried and failed to isolate the pure element from its salts. It was not isolated until 1821, when William Thomas Brande obtained it by electrolysis of lithium oxide, a process that had previously been employed by the chemist Sir Humphry Davy to isolate the alkali metals potassium and sodium. Brande also described some pure salts of lithium, such as the chloride, and, estimating that lithia (lithium oxide) contained about 55% metal, estimated the atomic weight of lithium to be around 9.8 g/mol (modern value ~6.94 g/mol). In 1855, larger quantities of lithium were produced through the electrolysis of lithium chloride by Robert Bunsen and Augustus Matthiessen. The discovery of this procedure led to commercial production of lithium in 1923 by the German company Metallgesellschaft AG, which performed an electrolysis of a liquid mixture of lithium chloride and potassium chloride.\n\nThe production and use of lithium underwent several drastic changes in history. The first major application of lithium was in high-temperature lithium greases for aircraft engines and similar applications in World War II and shortly after. This use was supported by the fact that lithium-based soaps have a higher melting point than other alkali soaps, and are less corrosive than calcium based soaps. The small demand for lithium soaps and lubricating greases was supported by several small mining operations, mostly in the US.\n\nThe demand for lithium increased dramatically during the Cold War with the production of nuclear fusion weapons. Both lithium-6 and lithium-7 produce tritium when irradiated by neutrons, and are thus useful for the production of tritium by itself, as well as a form of solid fusion fuel used inside hydrogen bombs in the form of lithium deuteride. The US became the prime producer of lithium between the late 1950s and the mid 1980s. At the end, the stockpile of lithium was roughly 42,000 tonnes of lithium hydroxide. The stockpiled lithium was depleted in lithium-6 by 75%, which was enough to affect the measured atomic weight of lithium in many standardized chemicals, and even the atomic weight of lithium in some \"natural sources\" of lithium ion which had been \"contaminated\" by lithium salts discharged from isotope separation facilities, which had found its way into ground water. \n\nLithium was used to decrease the melting temperature of glass and to improve the melting behavior of aluminium oxide when using the Hall-Héroult process. These two uses dominated the market until the middle of the 1990s. After the end of the nuclear arms race, the demand for lithium decreased and the sale of department of energy stockpiles on the open market further reduced prices. In the mid 1990s, several companies started to extract lithium from brine which proved to be a less expensive option than underground or open-pit mining. Most of the mines closed or shifted their focus to other materials because only the ore from zoned pegmatites could be mined for a competitive price. For example, the US mines near Kings Mountain, North Carolina closed before the beginning of the 21st century.\n\nThe development of lithium ion batteries increased the demand for lithium and became the dominant use in 2007. With the surge of lithium demand in batteries in the 2000s, new companies have expanded brine extraction efforts to meet the rising demand.\n\nIt has been argued that lithium will be one of the main objects of geopolitical competition in a world running on renewable energy and dependent on batteries, but this perspective has also been criticised for underestimating the power of economic incentives for expanded production.\n\nLithium production has greatly increased since the end of World War II. The metal is separated from other elements in igneous minerals. The metal is produced through electrolysis from a mixture of fused 55% lithium chloride and 45% potassium chloride at about 450 °C.\n\nAs of 2015, most of the world's lithium production is in South America, where lithium-containing brine is extracted from underground pools and concentrated by solar evaporation. The standard extraction technique is to evaporate water from brine. Each batch takes from 18 to 24 months.\n\nIn 1998, the price of lithium was about (or US$43/lb).\n\nWorldwide identified reserves in 2018 are estimated by the US Geological Survey (USGS) to be 16 million tonnes, though an accurate estimate of world lithium reserves is difficult. One reason for this is that most lithium classification schemes are developed for solid ore deposits, whereas brine is a fluid that is problematic to treat with the same classification scheme due to varying concentrations and pumping effects. The world has been estimated to contain about 15 million tonnes of lithium reserves, while 65 million tonnes of known resources are reasonable. A total of 75% of everything can typically be found in the ten largest deposits of the world. Another study noted that 83% of the geological resources of lithium are located in six brine, two pegmatite, and two sedimentary deposits.\n\nThe world's top 3 lithium-producing countries from 2016, as reported by the US Geological Survey are Australia, Chile and Argentina. The intersection of Chile, Bolivia, and Argentina make up the region known as the Lithium Triangle. The Lithium Triangle is known for its high quality salt flats including Bolivia's Salar de Uyuni, Chile's Salar de Atacama, and Argentina's Salar de Arizaro. The Lithium Triangle is believed to contain over 75% of existing known lithium reserves. Deposits are found in South America throughout the Andes mountain chain. Chile is the leading producer, followed by Argentina. Both countries recover lithium from brine pools. According to USGS, Bolivia's Uyuni Desert has 5.4 million tonnes of lithium. Half the world's known reserves are located in Bolivia along the central eastern slope of the Andes. In 2009, Bolivia negotiated with Japanese, French, and Korean firms to begin extraction.\n+Lithium mine production (2018), reserves and resources in tonnes according to USGS\n! Country\n! data-sort-type=\"number\"  Production\n! data-sort-type=\"number\"  Reserves\n! data-sort-type=\"number\"  Resources\n\n40,000\n\n180,000\n\n40,000\n\n500\n9,000\n\n130,000\n\nIn the US, lithium is recovered from brine pools in Nevada. A deposit discovered in 2013 in Wyoming's Rock Springs Uplift is estimated to contain 228,000 tons. Additional deposits in the same formation were estimated to be as much as 18 million tons.\n\nOpinions differ about potential growth. A 2008 study concluded that \"realistically achievable lithium carbonate production will be sufficient for only a small fraction of future PHEV and EV global market requirements\", that \"demand from the portable electronics sector will absorb much of the planned production increases in the next decade\", and that \"mass production of lithium carbonate is not environmentally sound, it will cause irreparable ecological damage to ecosystems that should be protected and that LiIon propulsion is incompatible with the notion of the 'Green Car'\".\n\nAccording to a 2011 study by Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and the University of California, Berkeley, the currently estimated reserve base of lithium should not be a limiting factor for large-scale battery production for electric vehicles because an estimated 1 billion 40 kWh Li-based batteries could be built with current reserves - about 10 kg of lithium per car. Another 2011 study at the University of Michigan and Ford Motor Company found enough resources to support global demand until 2100, including the lithium required for the potential widespread transportation use. The study estimated global reserves at 39 million tons, and total demand for lithium during the 90-year period annualized at 12–20 million tons, depending on the scenarios regarding economic growth and recycling rates.\n\nOn 9 June 2014, the \"Financialist\" stated that demand for lithium was growing at more than 12% a year. According to Credit Suisse, this rate exceeds projected availability by 25%. The publication compared the 2014 lithium situation with oil, whereby \"higher oil prices spurred investment in expensive deepwater and oil sands production techniques\"; that is, the price of lithium will continue to rise until more expensive production methods that can boost total output receive the attention of investors.\n\nOn 16 July 2018 2.5 million tonnes of high-grade lithium resources and 124 million pounds of uranium resources were found in the Falchani hard rock deposit in the region Puno, Peru.\n\nAfter the 2007 financial crisis, major suppliers, such as Sociedad Química y Minera (SQM), dropped lithium carbonate pricing by 20%. Prices rose in 2012. A 2012 Business Week article outlined the oligopoly in the lithium space: \"SQM, controlled by billionaire Julio Ponce, is the second-largest, followed by Rockwood, which is backed by Henry Kravis’s KKR & Co., and Philadelphia-based FMC\", with Talison mentioned as the biggest producer. Global consumption may jump to 300,000 metric tons a year by 2020 from about 150,000 tons in 2012, to match the demand for lithium batteries that has been growing at about 25% a year, outpacing the 4% to 5% overall gain in lithium production.\n\nLithium salts are extracted from water in mineral springs, brine pools, and brine deposits. Brine excavation is probably the only lithium extraction technology widely used today, as actual mining of lithium ores is much more expensive and has been priced out of the market.\n\nLithium is present in seawater, but commercially viable methods of extraction have yet to be developed.\n\nAnother potential source of lithium is the leachates of geothermal wells, which are carried to the surface. Recovery of lithium has been demonstrated in the field; the lithium is separated by simple filtration. The process and environmental costs are primarily those of the already-operating well; net environmental impacts may thus be positive.\n\nCurrently, there are a number of options available in the marketplace to invest in the metal. While buying physical stock of lithium is hardly possible, investors can buy shares of companies engaged in lithium mining and producing. Also, investors can purchase a dedicated lithium ETF offering exposure to a group of commodity producers.\n\nLithium oxide is widely used as a flux for processing silica, reducing the melting point and viscosity of the material and leading to glazes with improved physical properties including low coefficients of thermal expansion. Worldwide, this is one of the largest use for lithium compounds. Glazes containing lithium oxides are used for ovenware. Lithium carbonate (LiCO) is generally used in this application because it converts to the oxide upon heating.\n\nLate in the 20th century, lithium became an important component of battery electrolytes and electrodes, because of its high electrode potential. Because of its low atomic mass, it has a high charge- and power-to-weight ratio. A typical lithium-ion battery can generate approximately 3 volts per cell, compared with 2.1 volts for lead-acid and 1.5 volts for zinc-carbon. Lithium-ion batteries, which are rechargeable and have a high energy density, differ from lithium batteries, which are disposable (primary) batteries with lithium or its compounds as the anode. Other rechargeable batteries that use lithium include the lithium-ion polymer battery, lithium iron phosphate battery, and the nanowire battery.\n\nThe third most common use of lithium is in greases. Lithium hydroxide is a strong base and, when heated with a fat, produces a soap made of lithium stearate. Lithium soap has the ability to thicken oils, and it is used to manufacture all-purpose, high-temperature lubricating greases.\n\nLithium (e.g. as lithium carbonate) is used as an additive to continuous casting mould flux slags where it increases fluidity, a use which accounts for 5% of global lithium use (2011). Lithium compounds are also used as additives (fluxes) to foundry sand for iron casting to reduce veining.\n\nLithium (as lithium fluoride) is used as an additive to aluminium smelters (Hall–Héroult process), reducing melting temperature and increasing electrical resistance, a use which accounts for 3% of production (2011).\n\nWhen used as a flux for welding or soldering, metallic lithium promotes the fusing of metals during the process and eliminates the forming of oxides by absorbing impurities. Alloys of the metal with aluminium, cadmium, copper and manganese are used to make high-performance aircraft parts (see also Lithium-aluminium alloys).\n\nLithium has been found effective in assisting the perfection of silicon nano-welds in electronic components for electric batteries and other devices.\n\nLithium compounds are used as pyrotechnic colorants and oxidizers in red fireworks and flares.\n\nLithium chloride and lithium bromide are hygroscopic and are used as desiccants for gas streams. Lithium hydroxide and lithium peroxide are the salts most used in confined areas, such as aboard spacecraft and submarines, for carbon dioxide removal and air purification. Lithium hydroxide absorbs carbon dioxide from the air by forming lithium carbonate, and is preferred over other alkaline hydroxides for its low weight.\n\nLithium peroxide (LiO) in presence of moisture not only reacts with carbon dioxide to form lithium carbonate, but also releases oxygen. The reaction is as follows:\nSome of the aforementioned compounds, as well as lithium perchlorate, are used in oxygen candles that supply submarines with oxygen. These can also include small amounts of boron, magnesium, aluminum, silicon, titanium, manganese, and iron.\n\nLithium fluoride, artificially grown as crystal, is clear and transparent and often used in specialist optics for IR, UV and VUV (vacuum UV) applications. It has one of the lowest refractive indexes and the furthest transmission range in the deep UV of most common materials. Finely divided lithium fluoride powder has been used for thermoluminescent radiation dosimetry (TLD): when a sample of such is exposed to radiation, it accumulates crystal defects which, when heated, resolve via a release of bluish light whose intensity is proportional to the absorbed dose, thus allowing this to be quantified. Lithium fluoride is sometimes used in focal lenses of telescopes.\n\nThe high non-linearity of lithium niobate also makes it useful in non-linear optics applications. It is used extensively in telecommunication products such as mobile phones and optical modulators, for such components as resonant crystals. Lithium applications are used in more than 60% of mobile phones.\n\nOrganolithium compounds are widely used in the production of polymer and fine-chemicals. In the polymer industry, which is the dominant consumer of these reagents, alkyl lithium compounds are catalysts/initiators. in anionic polymerization of unfunctionalized olefins. For the production of fine chemicals, organolithium compounds function as strong bases and as reagents for the formation of carbon-carbon bonds. Organolithium compounds are prepared from lithium metal and alkyl halides.\n\nMany other lithium compounds are used as reagents to prepare organic compounds. Some popular compounds include lithium aluminium hydride (LiAlH), lithium triethylborohydride, n-butyllithium and tert-butyllithium are commonly used as extremely strong bases called superbases.\n\nMetallic lithium and its complex hydrides, such as Li[AlH], are used as high-energy additives to rocket propellants. Lithium aluminum hydride can also be used by itself as a solid fuel.\n\nThe Mark 50 torpedo stored chemical energy propulsion system (SCEPS) uses a small tank of sulfur hexafluoride gas, which is sprayed over a block of solid lithium. The reaction generates heat, creating steam to propel the torpedo in a closed Rankine cycle.\n\nLithium hydride containing lithium-6 is used in thermonuclear weapons, where it serves as fuel for the fusion stage of the bomb.\n\nLithium-6 is valued as a source material for tritium production and as a neutron absorber in nuclear fusion. Natural lithium contains about 7.5% lithium-6 from which large amounts of lithium-6 have been produced by isotope separation for use in nuclear weapons. Lithium-7 gained interest for use in nuclear reactor coolants.\nLithium deuteride was the fusion fuel of choice in early versions of the hydrogen bomb. When bombarded by neutrons, both Li and Li produce tritium — this reaction, which was not fully understood when hydrogen bombs were first tested, was responsible for the runaway yield of the Castle Bravo nuclear test. Tritium fuses with deuterium in a fusion reaction that is relatively easy to achieve. Although details remain secret, lithium-6 deuteride apparently still plays a role in modern nuclear weapons as a fusion material.\n\nLithium fluoride, when highly enriched in the lithium-7 isotope, forms the basic constituent of the fluoride salt mixture LiF-BeF used in liquid fluoride nuclear reactors. Lithium fluoride is exceptionally chemically stable and LiF-BeF mixtures have low melting points. In addition, Li, Be, and F are among the few nuclides with low enough thermal neutron capture cross-sections not to poison the fission reactions inside a nuclear fission reactor.\n\nIn conceptualized (hypothetical) nuclear fusion power plants, lithium will be used to produce tritium in magnetically confined reactors using deuterium and tritium as the fuel. Naturally occurring tritium is extremely rare, and must be synthetically produced by surrounding the reacting plasma with a 'blanket' containing lithium where neutrons from the deuterium-tritium reaction in the plasma will fission the lithium to produce more tritium:\n\nLithium is also used as a source for alpha particles, or helium nuclei. When Li is bombarded by accelerated protons Be is formed, which undergoes fission to form two alpha particles. This feat, called \"splitting the atom\" at the time, was the first fully man-made nuclear reaction. It was produced by Cockroft and Walton in 1932.\n\nIn 2013, the US Government Accountability Office said a shortage of lithium-7 critical to the operation of 65 out of 100 American nuclear reactors “places their ability to continue to provide electricity at some risk”. Castle Bravo first used Lithium-7, in the \"Shrimp\", its first device, which weighed only 10 tons, and generated massive nuclear atmospheric contamination of Bikini Atoll. This perhaps accounts for the decline of US nuclear infrastructure. The equipment needed to separate lithium-6 from lithium-7 is mostly a cold war leftover. The US shut down most of this machinery in 1963, when it had a huge surplus of separated lithium, mostly consumed during the twentieth century. The report said it would take five years and $10 million to $12 million to reestablish the ability to separate lithium-6 from lithium-7.\n\nReactors that use lithium-7 heat water under high pressure and transfer heat through heat exchangers that are prone to corrosion. The reactors use lithium to counteract the corrosive effects of boric acid, which is added to the water to absorb excess neutrons.\n\nLithium is useful in the treatment of bipolar disorder. Lithium salts may also be helpful for related diagnoses, such as schizoaffective disorder and cyclic major depression. The active part of these salts is the lithium ion Li. They may increase the risk of developing Ebstein's cardiac anomaly in infants born to women who take lithium during the first trimester of pregnancy.\n\nLithium has also been researched as a possible treatment for cluster headaches.\n\nPrimary food sources of lithium are grains and vegetables, and, in some areas, drinking water also contains significant amounts. Human intake varies depending on location and diet.\n\nLithium was first detected in human organs and fetal tissues in the late 19th century. In humans there are no defined lithium deficiency diseases, but low lithium intakes from water supplies were associated with increased rates of suicides, homicides and the arrest rates for drug use and other crimes. The biochemical mechanisms of action of lithium appear to be multifactorial and are intercorrelated with the functions of several enzymes, hormones and vitamins, as well as with growth and transforming factors.\n\nLithium is corrosive and requires special handling to avoid skin contact. Breathing lithium dust or lithium compounds (which are often alkaline) initially irritate the nose and throat, while higher exposure can cause a buildup of fluid in the lungs, leading to pulmonary edema. The metal itself is a handling hazard because contact with moisture produces the caustic lithium hydroxide. Lithium is safely stored in non-reactive compounds such as naphtha.\n\nSome jurisdictions limit the sale of lithium batteries, which are the most readily available source of lithium for ordinary consumers. Lithium can be used to reduce pseudoephedrine and ephedrine to methamphetamine in the Birch reduction method, which employs solutions of alkali metals dissolved in anhydrous ammonia.\n\nCarriage and shipment of some kinds of lithium batteries may be prohibited aboard certain types of transportation (particularly aircraft) because of the ability of most types of lithium batteries to fully discharge very rapidly when short-circuited, leading to overheating and possible explosion in a process called thermal runaway. Most consumer lithium batteries have built-in thermal overload protection to prevent this type of incident, or are otherwise designed to limit short-circuit currents. Internal shorts from manufacturing defect or physical damage can lead to spontaneous thermal runaway.\n\nBULLET::::- List of countries by lithium production\nBULLET::::- Lithium as an investment\nBULLET::::- Lithium–air battery\nBULLET::::- Organolithium reagent\n\nBULLET::::- Lithium at \"The Periodic Table of Videos\" (University of Nottingham)\nBULLET::::- International Lithium Alliance\nBULLET::::- USGS: Lithium Statistics and Information\nBULLET::::- Lithium Supply & Markets 2009 IM Conference 2009 Sustainable lithium supplies through 2020 in the face of sustainable market growth\nBULLET::::- University of Southampton, Mountbatten Centre for International Studies, Nuclear History Working Paper No5.\nBULLET::::- Lithium preserves by Country at investingnews.com\n"}
{"id": "17562", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17562", "title": "Leni Riefenstahl", "text": "Leni Riefenstahl\n\nHelene Bertha Amalie \"Leni\" Riefenstahl (; 22 August 1902 – 8 September 2003) was a German film director and actress.\n\nA talented swimmer and artist, she also became interested in dancing during her childhood, taking dancing lessons and performing across Europe. After seeing a promotional poster for the 1924 film \"Der Berg des Schicksals\" (\"The Mountain of Destiny\"), Riefenstahl was inspired to move into acting. Between 1925 and 1929, she starred in five successful motion pictures. Riefenstahl became one of the few women in Germany to direct a film during the Weimar Period when, in 1932, she decided to try directing with her own film called \"Das Blaue Licht\" (\"The Blue Light\").\n\nIn the 1930s, she directed the Nazi propaganda films \"Triumph des Willens\" (\"Triumph of the Will\") and \"Olympia\", resulting in worldwide attention and acclaim. The movies are widely considered two of the most effective, and technically innovative, Nazi propaganda films ever made. Her involvement in \"Triumph des Willens\", however, significantly damaged her career and reputation after the war. Hitler was in close collaboration with Riefenstahl during the production of at least three important Nazi films, and they formed a friendly relationship. Some have argued that Riefenstahl's visions were essential to the carrying out of the mission of the Holocaust. After the war, Riefenstahl was arrested, but classified as being a \"fellow traveler\" or \"Nazi sympathizer\" only and was not associated with war crimes. Throughout her life, she denied having known about the Holocaust. Besides directing, Riefenstahl released an autobiography and wrote several books on the Nuba people.\n\nRiefenstahl died of cancer on 8 September 2003 at the age of 101 and was buried at Munich Waldfriedhof.\n\nHelene Bertha Amalie Riefenstahl was born in Berlin on 22 August 1902. Her father, Alfred Theodor Paul Riefenstahl, owned a successful heating and ventilation company and wanted his daughter to follow him into the business world. Since Riefenstahl was the only child for several years, Alfred wanted her to carry on the family name and secure the family fortune. However, her mother, Bertha Ida (Scherlach), who had been a part-time seamstress before her marriage, had faith in Riefenstahl and believed that her daughter's future was in show business. Riefenstahl had a younger brother, Heinz, who was killed at the age of 39 on the Eastern Front in Nazi Germany's war against the Soviet Union.\n\nRiefenstahl fell in love with the arts in her childhood. She began to paint and write poetry at the age of four. She was also athletic, and at the age of twelve joined a gymnastics and swimming club. Her mother was confident her daughter would grow up to be successful in the field of art and therefore gave her full support, unlike Riefenstahl's father, who was not interested in his daughter's artistic inclinations. In 1918, when she was 16, Riefenstahl attended a presentation of Snow White which interested her deeply; it led her to want to be a dancer. Her father instead wanted to provide his daughter with an education that could lead to a more dignified occupation. His wife, however, continued to support her daughter's passion. Without her father's knowledge, she enrolled Riefenstahl in dance and ballet classes at the Grimm-Reiter Dance School in Berlin, where she quickly became a star pupil.\n\nIn the post-war years she was subject of four denazification proceedings, which finally declared her a Nazi sympathizer but she was never prosecuted. She was never an official member of the Nazi party but was always seen in association with the propaganda films she made during the Nazi period.\n\nRiefenstahl attended dancing academies and became well known for her self-styled interpretive dancing skills, traveling across Europe with Max Reinhardt in a show funded by Jewish producer Harry Sokal. Riefenstahl often made almost 700 \"Reichmarks\" for each performance and was so dedicated to dancing that she gave filmmaking no thought. She began to suffer a series of foot injuries that led to knee surgery that threatened her dancing career. It was while going to a doctor's appointment that she first saw a poster for the 1924 film \"Der Berg des Schicksals\" (\"The Mountain of Destiny\"). She became inspired to go into movie making, and began visiting the cinema to see films and also attended film shows.\n\nOn one of her adventures, Riefenstahl met Luis Trenker, who was an actor from \"Der Berg des Schicksals\". At a meeting arranged by her friend Gunther Rahn, she met Arnold Fanck, the director of \"Der Berg des Schicksals\" and a pioneer of the mountain film genre. Fanck was working on a film in Berlin. After Riefenstahl told him how much she admired his work, she also convinced him of her acting skill. She persuaded him to feature her in one of his movies. Riefenstahl later received a package from Fanck containing the script of the 1926 film \"Der Heilige Berg\" (\"The Holy Mountain\"). She made a series of films for Fanck, where she learned from him acting and film editing techniques. One of Fanck's films that brought Riefenstahl into the limelight was \"Die weiße Hölle vom Piz Palü\" (\"The White Hell of Piz Palü\") of 1929, co-directed by G. W. Pabst. Her fame spread to countries outside Germany.\n\nRiefenstahl produced and directed her own work called \"Das Blaue Licht\" (\"The Blue Light\") in 1932, co-written by Carl Mayer and Béla Balázs. This film won the Silver Medal at the Venice Film Festival, but was not universally well-received, for which Riefenstahl blamed the critics, many of whom were Jewish. Upon its 1938 re-release, the names of Balázs and Sokal, both Jewish, were removed from the credits; some reports claim this was at Riefenstahl's behest. In the film, Riefenstahl played an innocent peasant girl who is hated by the villagers because they think she is diabolic and cast out. She is protected by a glowing mountain grotto. According to herself, Riefenstahl received invitations to travel to Hollywood to create films, but she refused them in favour of remaining in Germany with a boyfriend. The film attracted the attention of Hitler, who believed she epitomized the perfect German female. He saw talent in Riefenstahl and arranged a meeting.\n\nIn 1933, Riefenstahl appeared in the U.S.-German co-productions of the Arnold Fanck-directed, German-language \"SOS Eisberg\" and the Tay Garnett-directed, English-language \"S.O.S. Iceberg\". The movies were filmed simultaneously in English and German and produced and distributed by Universal Studios. Her role as an actress in \"S.O.S. Iceberg\" was her only English language role in film.\n\nRiefenstahl heard Nazi Party (NSDAP) leader Adolf Hitler speak at a rally in 1932 and was mesmerized by his talent as a public speaker. Describing the experience in her memoir, Riefenstahl wrote, \"I had an almost apocalyptic vision that I was never able to forget. It seemed as if the Earth's surface were spreading out in front of me, like a hemisphere that suddenly splits apart in the middle, spewing out an enormous jet of water, so powerful that it touched the sky and shook the earth\".\n\nRiefenstahl eventually came to the notice of Hitler who was immediately captivated by her work. She is described as fitting in with Hitler’s ideal of Aryan womanhood, a feature he had noted when he saw her starring performance in \"Das Blaue Licht.\" After meeting Hitler, Riefenstahl was offered the opportunity to direct \"Der Sieg des Glaubens\" (\"The Victory of Faith\"), an hour-long propaganda film about the fifth Nuremberg Rally in 1933. The opportunity that was offered was a huge surprise to Riefenstahl. Hitler had ordered Goebbels Propaganda Ministry to give the film commission to Riefenstahl, but the Ministry had never informed her. Riefenstahl agreed to direct the movie even though she was only given a few days before the rally to prepare. She and Hitler got on well, forming a friendly relationship. The propaganda film was funded entirely by the NSDAP.\n\nDuring the filming of \"Victory of Faith,\" Hitler had stood side by side with the leader of the Sturmabteilung (SA) Ernst Röhm, a man with whom he clearly had a close working relationship. Röhm was ruthlessly murdered on Hitler's orders a short time later during the purge of the SA referred to as the Night of the Long Knives. It has gone on record that, immediately following the killings, Hitler ordered all copies of the film to be destroyed, although Riefenstahl disputes that this ever happened. It was considered lost until a copy turned up in the 1990s in the United Kingdom.\nStill impressed with Riefenstahl's work, Hitler asked her to film \"Triumph des Willens\" (\"Triumph of the Will\"), a new propaganda film about the 1934 party rally in Nuremberg. More than one million Germans participated in the rally. The film is sometimes considered the greatest propaganda film ever made. Initially, according to Riefenstahl, she resisted and did not want to create further Nazi Party films, instead wanting to direct a feature film based on Eugen d'Albert's \"Tiefland\" (\"Lowlands\"), an opera that was extremely popular in Berlin in the 1920s. Riefenstahl received private funding for the production of \"Tiefland\", but the filming in Spain was derailed and the project was cancelled. \"Tiefland\" was shot in black and white, and was the third most expensive film produced during the Third Reich. During the filming of \"Tiefland,\" she utilized gypsies from internment camps for extras, who were severely mistreated on set, and when the filming completed they were sent to Auschwitz. Hitler was able to convince her to film \"Triumph des Willens\" on the condition that she would not be required to make further films for the party, according to Riefenstahl. The motion picture was generally recognized as an epic, innovative work of propaganda filmmaking. The film took Riefenstahl's career to a new level and gave her further international recognition.\n\nIn interviews for the 1993 documentary \"The Wonderful, Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl\", Riefenstahl adamantly denied any deliberate attempt to create Nazi propaganda and said she was disgusted that \"Triumph des Willens\" was used in such a way.\n\nDespite allegedly vowing not to make any more films about the Nazi Party, Riefenstahl made the 28-minute \"\" (\"Day of Freedom: Our Armed Forces\") about the German Army in 1935. Like \"Der Sieg des Glaubens\" and \"Triumph des Willens\", this was filmed at the annual Nazi Party rally at Nuremberg. Riefenstahl said this film was a sub-set of \"Der Sieg des Glaubens\", added to mollify the German Army which felt it was not represented well in \"Triumph des Willens\".\n\nHitler invited Riefenstahl to film the 1936 Summer Olympics scheduled to be held in Berlin, a film which Riefenstahl claimed had been commissioned by the International Olympic Committee. She visited Greece to take footage of the route of the inaugural torch relay and the games' original site at \"Olympia\", where she was aided by Greek photographer Nelly's. This material became \"Olympia\", a hugely successful film which has since been widely noted for its technical and aesthetic achievements. \"Olympia\" was secretly funded by the Third Reich. She was one of the first filmmakers to use tracking shots in a documentary, placing a camera on rails to follow the athletes' movement. The film is also noted for its slow motion shots. Riefenstahl played with the idea of slow motion, underwater diving shots, extremely high and low shooting angles, panoramic aerial shots, and tracking system shots for allowing fast action. Many of these shots were relatively unheard of at the time, but Leni’s use and augmentation of them set a standard, and is the reason they are still used to this day. Riefenstahl's work on \"Olympia\" has been cited as a major influence in modern sports photography. Riefenstahl filmed competitors of all races, including African-American Jesse Owens in what later became famous footage.\n\"Olympia\" premiered for Hitler's 49th birthday in 1938. Its international debut led Riefenstahl to embark on an American publicity tour in an attempt to secure commercial release. In February 1937, Riefenstahl enthusiastically told a reporter for the \"Detroit News\", \"To me, Hitler is the greatest man who ever lived. He truly is without fault, so simple and at the same time possessed of masculine strength\". She arrived in New York City on 4 November 1938, five days before \"Kristallnacht\" (the \"Night of the Broken Glass\"). When news of the event reached the United States, Riefenstahl publicly defended Hitler. On 18 November, she was received by Henry Ford in Detroit. \"Olympia\" was shown at the Chicago Engineers Club two days later. Avery Brundage, President of the International Olympic Committee, praised the film and held Riefenstahl in the highest regard. She negotiated with Louis B. Mayer, and on 8 December, Walt Disney brought her on a three-hour tour showing her the ongoing production of \"Fantasia\".\n\nFrom the \"Goebbels Diaries\", researchers learned that Riefenstahl had been friendly with Joseph Goebbels and his wife Magda, attending the opera with them and going to his parties. Riefenstahl maintained that Goebbels was upset when she rejected his advances and was jealous of her influence on Hitler, seeing her as an internal threat. She therefore insisted his diary entries could not be trusted. By later accounts, Goebbels thought highly of Riefenstahl's filmmaking but was angered with what he saw as her overspending on the Nazi-provided filmmaking budgets.\n\nIn \"Triumph of the Will,\" Tom Saunders argues that Hitler serves as the object of the camera's gaze. Saunders writes, \"Without denying that “rampant masculinity” (the “sexiness” of Hitler and the SS) serves as the object of the gaze, I would suggest that desire is also directed toward the feminine. This occurs not in the familiar sequences of adoring women greeting Hitler’s arrival and cavalcade through Nuremberg. In these Hitler clearly remains the focus of attraction, as more generally in the visual treatment of his mass following. Rather, it is encoded in representation of flags and banners, which were shot in such a way as to make them visually desirable as well as potent political symbols\" (\"Filming the Nazi Flag: Leni Riefenstahl and the Cinema of National Arousal,\" 25). The flag serves as a symbol of masculinity, equated with national pride and dominance, that channels men's sexual and masculine energy. Riefenstahl's cinematic framing of the flags encapsulated its iconography. Saunders continues, \"The effect is a significant double transformation: the images mechanize human beings and breathe life into flags. Even when the carriers are not mostly submerged under the sea of colored cloth, and when facial features are visible in profile, they attain neither character nor distinctiveness. The men remain ants in a vast enterprise. By contrast and paradoxically, the flags, whether a few or hundreds peopling the frame, assume distinct identities\" (29).\n\nRiefenstahl distorts the diegetic sound in \"Triumph of the Will.\" Her distortion of sound suggests she was influenced by German art cinema. Influenced by Classical Hollywood cinema's style, German art film employed music to enhance the narrative, establish a sense of grandeur, and to heighten the emotions in a scene. In \"Triumph of the Will,\" Riefenstahl used traditional folk music to accompany and intensify her shots. Ben Morgan comments on Riefenstahl's distortion of sound, “In \"Triumph of the Will\", the material world leaves no aural impression beyond the music. Where the film does combine diegetic noise with the music, the effects used are human (laughter or cheering) and offer a rhythmic extension to the music rather than a contrast to it. By replacing diegetic sound, Riefenstahl’s film employs music to combine the documentary with the fantastic,” (\"Music in Nazi Film: How Different is \"Triumph of the Will?\"\" The music substitutes for the live sound of the event and functions to convey the meaning of her shots. The accompanied music conveys the meaning behind the images, that of national pride.\n\nWhen Germany invaded Poland on 1 September 1939, Riefenstahl was photographed in Poland wearing a military uniform and a pistol on her belt in the company of German soldiers; she had gone to Poland as a war correspondent. On 12 September, she was in the town of Końskie when 30 civilians were executed in retaliation for an alleged attack on German soldiers. According to her memoir, Riefenstahl tried to intervene but a furious German soldier held her at gunpoint and threatened to shoot her on the spot. She claimed she did not realize the victims were Jews. Photographs of a potentially distraught Riefenstahl survive from that day. Nevertheless, by 5 October 1939, Riefenstahl was back in occupied Poland filming Hitler's victory parade in Warsaw. Afterwards, she left Poland and chose not to make any more Nazi-related movies.\nOn 14 June 1940, the day Paris was declared an open city by the French and occupied by German troops, Riefenstahl wrote to Hitler in a telegram, \"With indescribable joy, deeply moved and filled with burning gratitude, we share with you, my Führer, your and Germany's greatest victory, the entry of German troops into Paris. You exceed anything human imagination has the power to conceive, achieving deeds without parallel in the history of mankind. How can we ever thank you?\" She later explained, \"Everyone thought the war was over, and in that spirit I sent the cable to Hitler\". Riefenstahl was friends with Hitler for 12 years. Her relationship with Hitler severely declined in 1944 after her brother died on the Russian Front.\n\nAfter the Nuremberg rallies trilogy and \"Olympia\", Riefenstahl began work on the movie she had tried and failed to direct once before, namely \"Tiefland\". On Hitler's direct order, the German government paid her seven million \"Reichsmarks\" in compensation. From 23 September until 13 November 1940, she filmed in Krün near Mittenwald. The extras playing Spanish women and farmers were drawn from gypsies detained in a camp at Salzburg-Maxglan who were forced to work with her. Filming at the Babelsberg Studios near Berlin began 18 months later in April 1942. This time Sinti and Roma people from the Marzahn detention camp near Berlin were compelled to work as extras. Almost to the end of her life, despite overwhelming evidence that the concentration camp occupants had been forced to work on the movie unpaid, Riefenstahl continued to maintain all the film extras survived and that she had met several of them after the war. Riefenstahl sued filmmaker Nina Gladitz, who said Riefenstahl personally chose the extras at their holding camp; Gladitz had found one of the Gypsy survivors and matched his memory with stills of the movie for a documentary Gladitz was filming. The German court ruled largely in favour of Gladitz, declaring that Riefenstahl had known the extras were from a concentration camp, but they also agreed that Riefenstahl had not been informed the Gypsies would be sent to Auschwitz after filming was completed.\nThis issue came up again in 2002, when Riefenstahl was one hundred years old and she was taken to court by a Roma group for denying the Nazis had exterminated gypsies. Riefenstahl apologized and said, \"I regret that Sinti and Roma [people] had to suffer during the period of National Socialism. It is known today that many of them were murdered in concentration camps\".\n\nIn October 1944 the production of \"Tiefland\" moved to Barrandov Studios in Prague for interior filming. Lavish sets made these shots some of the most costly of the film. The film was not edited and released until almost ten years later.\n\nThe last time Riefenstahl saw Hitler was when she married Peter Jacob on 21 March 1944. Riefenstahl and Jacob divorced in 1946. As Germany's military situation became impossible by early 1945, Riefenstahl left Berlin and was hitchhiking with a group of men, trying to reach her mother, when she was taken into custody by American troops. She walked out of a holding camp, beginning a series of escapes and arrests across the chaotic landscape. At last making it back home on a bicycle, she found that American troops had seized her house. She was surprised by how kindly they treated her.\n\nMost of Riefenstahl's unfinished projects were lost towards the end of the war. The French government confiscated all of her editing equipment, along with the production reels of \"Tiefland\". After years of legal wrangling, these were returned to her, but the French government had reportedly damaged some of the film stock whilst trying to develop and edit it, with a few key scenes being missing (although Riefenstahl was surprised to find the original negatives for \"Olympia\" in the same shipment). During the filming of \"Olympia\", Riefenstahl was funded by the state to create her own production company in her own name, Riefenstahl-Film GmbH, which was uninvolved with her most influential works. She edited and dubbed the remaining material and \"Tiefland\" premiered on 11 February 1954 in Stuttgart. However, it was denied entry into the Cannes Film Festival. Although Riefenstahl lived for almost another half century, \"Tiefland\" was her last feature film.\nRiefenstahl tried many times to make more films during the 1950s and 1960s, but was met with resistance, public protests and sharp criticism. Many of her filmmaking peers in Hollywood had fled Nazi Germany and were unsympathetic to her. Although both film professionals and investors were willing to support her work, most of the projects she attempted were stopped owing to ever-renewed and highly negative publicity about her past work for the Third Reich.\n\nIn 1954, Jean Cocteau, who greatly admired the film, insisted on \"Tiefland\" being shown at the Cannes Film Festival, which he was running that year. In 1960, Riefenstahl attempted to prevent filmmaker Erwin Leiser from juxtaposing scenes from \"Triumph des Willens\" with footage from concentration camps in his film \"Mein Kampf\". Riefenstahl had high hopes for a collaboration with Cocteau called \"Friedrich und Voltaire\" (\"Friedrich and Voltaire\"), wherein Cocteau was to play two roles. They thought the film might symbolize the love-hate relationship between Germany and France. Cocteau's illness and 1963 death put an end to the project. A musical remake of \"Das Blaue Licht\" (\"The Blue Light\") with an English production company also fell apart.\n\nIn the 1960s, Riefenstahl became interested in Africa from Ernest Hemingway's \"Green Hills of Africa\" and from the photographs of George Rodger. She visited Kenya for the first time in 1956 and later Sudan, where she photographed Nuba tribes with whom she sporadically lived, learning about their culture so she could photograph them more easily. Even though her film project about modern slavery entitled \"Die Schwarze Fracht\" (\"The Black Cargo\") was never completed, Riefenstahl was able to sell the stills from the expedition to magazines in various parts of the world. While scouting shooting locations, she almost died from injuries received in a truck accident. After waking up from a coma in a Nairobi hospital, she finished writing the script, but was soon thoroughly thwarted by uncooperative locals, the Suez Canal crisis and bad weather. In the end, the film project was called off. Even so, Riefenstahl was granted Sudanese citizenship for her services to the country, becoming the first foreigner to receive a Sudanese passport.\n\nNovelist and sports writer Budd Schulberg, assigned by the U.S. Navy to the OSS for intelligence work while attached to John Ford's documentary unit, was ordered to arrest Riefenstahl at her chalet in Kitzbühel, ostensibly to have her identify Nazi war criminals in German film footage captured by the Allied troops shortly after the war. Riefenstahl claimed she was not aware of the nature of the internment camps. According to Schulberg, \"She gave me the usual song and dance. She said, 'Of course, you know, I'm really so misunderstood. I'm not political'\".\n\nRiefenstahl claimed she was fascinated by the Nazis, but also politically naive, remaining ignorant about war crimes. Throughout 1945 to 1948, she was held by various Allied-controlled prison camps across Germany. She was also under house arrest for a period of time. She was tried four times by postwar authorities for denazification and eventually found to be a \"fellow traveller\" (\"Mitläufer\") who sympathised with the Nazis. She won more than fifty libel cases against people accusing her of having previous knowledge regarding the Nazi party.\n\nRiefenstahl said that her biggest regret in life was meeting Hitler, declaring, \"It was the biggest catastrophe of my life. Until the day I die people will keep saying, 'Leni is a Nazi', and I'll keep saying, 'But what did she do?'\" Even though she went on to win up to 50 libel cases, details about her relation to the Nazi party generally remain unclear.\n\nShortly before she died, Riefenstahl voiced her final words on the subject of her connection to Adolf Hitler in a BBC interview: \"I was one of millions who thought Hitler had all the answers. We saw only the good things; we didn’t know bad things were to come.\"\n\nRiefenstahl began a lifelong companionship with her cameraman Horst Kettner, who was 40 years her junior and assisted her with the photographs; they were together from the time she was 60 and he was 20.\n\nRiefenstahl traveled to Africa, inspired by the works of George Rodger that celebrated the ceremonial wrestling matches of the Nuba. Riefenstahl's books with photographs of the Nuba tribes were published in 1974 and republished in 1976 as \"Die Nuba\" (translated as \"The Last of the Nuba\") and \"Die Nuba von Kau\" (\"The Nuba People of Kau\"). While heralded by many as outstanding colour photographs, they were harshly criticized by Susan Sontag, who claimed in a review that they were further evidence of Riefenstahl's \"fascist aesthetics\". The Art Director's Club of Germany awarded Riefenstahl a gold medal for the best photographic achievement of 1975. She also sold some of the pictures to German magazines. She photographed the 1972 Olympic Games in Munich, and rock star Mick Jagger along with his wife Bianca for \"The Sunday Times\". Years later, Riefenstahl photographed Las Vegas entertainers Siegfried & Roy. She was guest of honour at the 1976 Olympic Games in Montreal, Quebec, Canada.\n\nIn 1978, Riefenstahl published a book of her sub-aquatic photographs called \"Korallengärten\" (\"Coral Gardens\"), followed by the 1990 book \"Wunder unter Wasser\" (\"Wonder under Water\"). In her 90s, Riefenstahl was still photographing marine life and gained the distinction of being one of the world's oldest scuba divers. On 22 August 2002, her 100th birthday, she released the film \"Impressionen unter Wasser\" (\"Underwater Impressions\"), an idealized documentary of life in the oceans and her first film in over 25 years. Riefenstahl was a member of Greenpeace for eight years. When filming \"Impressionen unter Wasser\", Riefenstahl lied about her age in order to be certified for scuba diving.\n\nRiefenstahl survived a helicopter crash in Sudan in 2000 while trying to learn the fates of her Nuba friends during the Second Sudanese Civil War and was airlifted to a Munich hospital where she received treatment for two broken ribs.\n\nRiefenstahl celebrated her 101st birthday on 22 August 2003 at a hotel in Feldafing, on Lake Starnberg, Bavaria, near her home. The day after her birthday celebration, she became ill.\n\nRiefenstahl had been suffering from cancer for some time, and her health rapidly deteriorated during the last weeks of her life. Kettner said in an interview in 2002, \"Ms. Riefenstahl is in great pain and she has become very weak and is taking painkillers\". Leni Riefenstahl died in her sleep at around 10:00 pm on 8 September 2003 at her home in Pöcking, Germany. After her death, there was a varied response in the obituary pages of leading publications, although most recognized her technical breakthroughs in film making.\n\nFilm scholar Mark Cousins notes in his book \"The Story of Film\" that, \"Next to Orson Welles and Alfred Hitchcock, Leni Riefenstahl was the most technically talented Western film maker of her era\".\n\nWhen traveling to Hollywood, Riefenstahl was criticized by the Anti-Nazi League very harshly when wanting to showcase her film \"Olympia\" soon after its release.\n\nReviewer Gary Morris called Riefenstahl, \"An artist of unparalleled gifts, a woman in an industry dominated by men, one of the great formalists of the cinema on a par with Eisenstein or Welles\".\nFilm critic Hal Erickson of \"The New York Times\" states that the \"Jewish Question\" is mainly unmentioned in \"Triumph des Willens\"; \"filmmaker Leni Riefenstahl prefers to concentrate on cheering crowds, precision marching, military bands, and Hitler's climactic speech, all orchestrated, choreographed and illuminated on a scale that makes Griffith and DeMille look like poverty-row directors\".\n\nCharles Moore of \"The Daily Telegraph\" wrote, \"She was perhaps the most talented female cinema director of the 20th century; her celebration of Nazi Germany in film ensured that she was certainly the most infamous\".\n\nFilm journalist Sandra Smith from \"The Independent\" remarked, \"Opinions will be divided between those who see her as a young, talented and ambitious woman caught up in the tide of events which she did not fully understand, and those who believe her to be a cold and opportunist propagandist and a Nazi by association.\"\n\nCritic Judith Thurman said in \"The New Yorker\" that, \"Riefenstahl's genius has rarely been questioned, even by critics who despise the service to which she lent it. Riefenstahl was a consummate stylist obsessed with bodies in motion, particularly those of dancers and athletes. Riefenstahl relies heavily for her transitions on portentous cutaways to clouds, mist, statuary, foliage, and rooftops. Her reaction shots have a tedious sameness: shining, ecstatic faces—nearly all young and Aryan, except for Hitler's\".\n\nPauline Kael, also a film reviewer employed for \"The New Yorker\", called \"Triumph des Willens\" and \"Olympia\", \"the two greatest films ever directed by a woman\".\n\nWriter Richard Corliss wrote in \"Time\" that he was \"impressed by Riefenstahl's standing as a total auteur: producer, writer, director, editor and, in the fiction films, actress. The issues her films and her career raise are as complex and they are important, and her vilifiers tend to reduce the argument to one of a director's complicity in atrocity or her criminal ignorance\".\n\nIn 1993, Riefenstahl was the subject of the award-winning German documentary film \"The Wonderful, Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl\", directed by Ray Müller. Riefenstahl appeared in the film and answered several questions and detailed the production of her films. The biofilm was nominated for seven Emmy Awards, winning in one category. Riefenstahl, who for some time had been working on her memoirs, decided to cooperate in the production of this documentary to tell her life story about the struggles she had gone through in her personal life, her film-making career and what people thought of her. She was also the subject of Müller's 2000 documentary film \"\", about her return to Sudan to visit the Nuba people. In 1987 an autobiography about Riefenstahl was released, Leni Riefenstahl Memoiren regarding her life as a film maker and her post-war life.\n\nIn 2000, Jodie Foster was planning a biographical drama on Riefenstahl, then seen as the last surviving member of Hitler's \"inner circle\", causing protests, with the Simon Wiesenthal Centre's dean Marvin Hier warning against a revisionist view that glorified the director, observing that Riefenstahl had seemed \"quite infatuated\" with Hitler. In 2007 British screenwriter Rupert Walters was reported to be writing a script for the movie. The project did not receive Riefenstahl's approval prior to her death, as Riefenstahl asked for a veto on any scenes to which she did not agree. Riefenstahl reportedly wanted Sharon Stone to play her rather than Foster. \n\nIn 2011, director Steven Soderbergh revealed that he had also been working on a biopic of Riefenstahl for about six months. He eventually abandoned the project over concerns of its commercial prospects.\n\nRiefenstahl's filming merits are discussed between characters in the 2009 Quentin Tarantino film \"Inglourious Basterds\".\n\nRiefenstahl was portrayed by Zdena Studenková in \"Leni\", a 2014 Slovak drama play about her fictional participation in \"The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson\".\n\nRiefenstahl was portrayed by Dutch actress Carice van Houten in \"Race\", a sports drama film directed by Stephen Hopkins about Jesse Owens. It was released in North America on February 19, 2016. To make her sympathetic portrayal acceptable to an American audience, the film dramatizes her quarrels with Goebbels over her direction of the film, \"Olympia\", especially about filming the African American star who is proving to be a politically embarrassing refutation of Nazi Germany's claims of Aryan athletic supremacy.\n\nIn 1998 Neue Deutsche Härte band Rammstein released a cover of the Depeche Mode song \"Stripped\", accompanied by a video incorporating footage from the Leni Riefenstahl Nazi propaganda film \"Olympia\". Members of Rammstein praised Riefenstahl's filmmaking abilities and aesthetic choices in a 2011 documentary of the making of the video, particularly the imagery of the athletes, while simultaneously disassociating themselves from Riefenstahl's politics.\n\nRiefenstahl was referred to in the series finale of the television show \"Weeds\" when Nancy questions Andy for naming his daughter after a Nazi to which he replied \"she was a pioneer in film-making, I don't believe in holding grudges.\"\n\nIn the 2004 play \"Leni, by\" playwright Sarah Greenman, we meet two Leni Riefenstahls, one in the passionate prime of her youth and the other at the end of her life looking back. Greenman's \"Leni\" revolves around the making of the1934 film, “Triumph of the Will” and has seen productions all over the United States.\n\nIn the 2016 short film \"Leni. Leni.\", based on the play by Tom McNab and directed by Adrian Vitoria, Hildegard Neil portrays Riefenstahl preparing to give an interview in 1993. In her dressing room she is \"visited\" by herself as a young woman portrayed by Valeria Kozhevnikova at three stages/turning points in her life: as a dancer (1924), an actress (1929) and a director (1940).\n\nThe 2017 video game \"\" (which takes place in an alternate 1961 where the Nazis won World War 2) features a supporting character heavily implied to be Leni Riefenstahl. Named Lady Helena, this female director is responsible for making the vast majority of the propaganda movies said to be playing (most notably a big budget movie detailing how America was \"liberated\" by Nazis). Lady Helena is later met face to face and she is seen to closely resemble Riefenstahl. It also revealed that her mysterious \"producer\" is an aging, delusional Adolf Hitler and that the two share a close working relationship.\n\nRiefenstahl appears in the 2019 film Hellboy portrayed by Kristina Klebe.\n\nRiefenstahl is one of the protagonists of the story \"Parachute\", from the collection \"Even This Wildest Hope\" (2019) by Seyward Goodhand. \n\nBULLET::::- 1925: \"Wege zu Kraft und Schönheit\" (\"Ways to Strength and Beauty\")\nBULLET::::- 1926: \"Der Heilige Berg\" (\"The Holy Mountain\")\nBULLET::::- 1927: \"Der Große Sprung\" (\"The Great Leap\")\nBULLET::::- 1928: \"Das Schicksal derer von Habsburg\" (\"Fate of the House of Habsburg\")\nBULLET::::- 1929: \"Die weiße Hölle vom Piz Palü\" (\"The White Hell of Pitz Palu\")\nBULLET::::- 1930: \"Stürme über dem Mont Blanc\" (\"Storm Over Mont Blanc\")\nBULLET::::- 1931: \"Der Weisse Rausch\" (\"The White Ecstasy\")\nBULLET::::- 1932: \"Das Blaue Licht\" (\"The Blue Light\")\nBULLET::::- 1933: \"S.O.S. Eisberg\" (\"S.O.S. Iceberg\")\nBULLET::::- 1954: \"Tiefland\" (\"Lowlands\")\n\nBULLET::::- 1932: \"Das Blaue Licht\" (\"The Blue Light\")\nBULLET::::- 1933: \"Der Sieg des Glaubens\" (\"The Victory of Faith\")\nBULLET::::- 1935: \"Triumph des Willens\" (\"Triumph of the Will\")\nBULLET::::- 1935: \"\" (\"Day of Freedom: Our Armed Forces\")\nBULLET::::- 1937: \"Wilde Wasser\" (\"Wild Water\")\nBULLET::::- 1938: \"Olympia\"\nBULLET::::- 1954: \"Tiefland\" (\"Lowlands\")\nBULLET::::- 1965: \"Allein unter den Nuba\" (\"Alone Among the Nuba\") (Unreleased)\nBULLET::::- 2002: \"Impressionen unter Wasser\" (\"Impressions under Water\")\n\n\nNotes\nBibliography\n\nBULLET::::- Official website\nBULLET::::- Leni Riefenstahl at Jewish Virtual Library\nBULLET::::- Leni Riefenstahl's Triumph of the Will on MoMA Learning\n"}
{"id": "17565", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17565", "title": "Labatt Brewing Company", "text": "Labatt Brewing Company\n\nLabatt Brewing Company Limited () is a Belgian-owned brewery in Canada, founded by John Kinder Labatt in 1847 in London, Ontario. Labatt is the largest brewer in Canada.\n\nIn 1995, it was purchased by Belgian brewer Interbrew. In 2004, Interbrew merged with Brazilian brewer AmBev to form InBev. In 2008, InBev merged with American brewer Anheuser-Busch to form Anheuser-Busch InBev (abbreviated as AB InBev), making Labatt part of Anheuser-Busch InBev. On October 10, 2016, an over $100 billion merger between Anheuser-Busch InBev and SABMiller closed. Labatt is now part of the new company, Anheuser-Busch InBev SA/NV, which is trading as BUD on the New York Stock Exchange (ABI:BB in Brussels).\n\nIn the United States, Labatt brand beers are sold under license by Labatt USA, which since 2009 has been fully independent of the Canadian firm and a subsidiary of the privately held FIFCO USA of Rochester, New York.\n\nIn 1901, Prohibition in Canada began through a provincial legislation in Prince Edward Island. In 1916, prohibition was instituted in Ontario as well, affecting all 64 breweries in the province. Although some provinces totally banned alcohol manufacture, some permitted production for export to the United States. Labatt survived by producing full strength beer for export south of the border and by introducing two \"temperance ales\" with less than two per cent alcohol for sale in Ontario. However, the Canadian beer industry suffered a second blow when Prohibition in the United States began in 1919. When Prohibition was repealed in Ontario in 1926, just 15 breweries remained, and only Labatt retained its original management. This resulted in a strengthened industry position. In 1945, Labatt became a publicly traded company with the issuance of 900,000 shares.\n\nJohn and Hugh Labatt, grandsons of founder John K. Labatt, launched Labatt 50 in 1950 to commemorate 50 years of partnership. The first light ale introduced in Canada, Labatt 50 was Canada's best-selling beer until 1979.\n\nIn 1951, Labatt launched its Pilsener Lager; when it was introduced in Manitoba, the beer was nicknamed \"Blue\" for the colour of its label and the company's support of Winnipeg's Canadian Football League (CFL) franchise, the Blue Bombers. The brew-master at the time was Robert Frank Lewarne (b. 1921 Toronto, Ont. Canada—R.F. Lewarne also headed the team that produced the famous Labatt 50—mainly for the Quebec market). The nickname \"Blue\" stuck and in 1979, Labatt Blue claimed the top spot in the Canadian beer market. It lost this status in the late eighties to Molson Canadian, but over the next decade, it periodically regained the top spot as consumer preferences fluctuated. In 2004, Budweiser took the top spot, pushing Blue to third for the first time in twenty-five years. However, since Labatt has brewed Budweiser (and other Anheuser-Busch products) in Canada under licence since the 1980s, Labatt likely did not suffer from this shift. Moreover, Labatt Blue remains the best selling Canadian beer in the world, based upon worldwide sales.\n\nLabatt was also the majority owner of the Toronto Blue Jays from their inception in 1976 until 1995, when Interbrew purchased Labatt.\n\nLabatt's innovations include the introduction of the first twist-off cap on a refillable bottle in 1984. In 1989, Labatt's had the opportunity to hire Canadian model Pamela Anderson as a Labatt's Blue Zone Girl after she was picked out of the crowd by a TV camera man at a BC Lions football game wearing a Blue Zone crop-top. Photographer and boyfriend Dann Ilicic produced the Blue Zone Girl poster on his own after Labatt's refused to have anything to do with it. Later, Labatt's did buy 1000 posters to deal with consumer demand.\n\nIn 1995, Labatt was acquired by the large Belgian multinational brewer Interbrew (now InBev), the world market leader. Labatt is part-owner of Brewers Retail Inc., operator of The Beer Store retail chain, which—protected by legislation—has over 90% market share of Ontario off-premises beer sales. In early 2007, Labatt also acquired Lakeport Brewing Company of Hamilton, Ontario.\n\nIn 2009, the company sold Labatt USA, including the American rights to its core Labatt products (such as Blue, Blue Light, and Labatt 50) to FIFCO USA, and agreed to brew those brands on Labatt USA's behalf until 2012. This sale was mandated by the U.S. Department of Justice for competitive reasons following InBev's merger with Anheuser-Busch, since Budweiser and Labatt Blue were both among the top brands in upstate New York, despite the latter having less than 1% market share in the U.S. overall.\n\nThe sale did not include U.S. rights to Labatt products not carrying the \"Labatt\" label, such as Kokanee or Alexander Keith's, which are now distributed in the U.S. by Anheuser-Busch. Moreover, the underlying intellectual property (such as the Labatt trademarks) remains the property of the Canadian firm. Finally, the sale did not affect Labatt's Canadian operations in any way, however Anheuser-Busch InBev retains full control of the Labatt brand portfolio within Canada.\n\n\"Canada\"\nBULLET::::- London, Ontario\nBULLET::::- St. John's, Newfoundland and Labrador\nBULLET::::- Montreal, Quebec\nBULLET::::- Halifax, Nova Scotia\nBULLET::::- Creston, British Columbia\nBULLET::::- Edmonton, Alberta\n\"United States\" (previous to sale)\nBULLET::::- Buffalo, New York (Original and current United States Headquarters)\nBULLET::::- Norwalk, Connecticut (One time US headquarters)\n\nLabatt's US headquarters were originally located in Buffalo for some years. Labatt then decided to relocate their headquarters to Norwalk, Connecticut for a time. In 2007 Labatt decided to relocate their US operations back to Buffalo due to strong sales in the city and closer proximity to their Ontario operations. Labatt USA is now owned by FIFCO USA of Rochester, New York.\n\nLabatt's Toronto (Rexdale) brewery was built in 1970 and ceased operations in 2005 and was demolished by 2007, thus ending the brewery's ties to the city.\n\n\"Labatt 50\" is a 5% abv ale launched in 1950 to commemorate 50 years of partnership between the grandsons of the brewer's founder. The first light-tasting ale introduced in Canada, Labatt 50 was Canada's best-selling beer until 1979 when, with the increasing popularity of lagers, it was surpassed by \"Labatt Blue\". Labatt 50 is fermented using a special ale yeast, in use at Labatt since 1933.\n\n\"Labatt Blue\" is a 5% abv pale lager. There are of beer in a bottle of \"Labatt Blue\". There are 355 mL of beer in a standard can of Labatt Blue/Bleue in Canada with other volumes available in specific regions of the country.\n\nIn Quebec, Labatt also produces a stronger larger, \"Labatt Bleue Dry\", at 6.1%.\n\nBlue, the company's flagship brand, has entered a number of international beer ratings competitions and has always performed notably well. In 2003, \"Labatt Blue\" received a Gold Quality Award at the World Quality Selections, organized yearly by Monde Selection.\n\nLabatt had patented a specific method for making ice beer in 1997, 1998 and 2000: \"A process for chill-treating, which is exemplified by a process for preparing a fermented malt beverage wherein brewing materials are mashed with water and the resulting mash is heated and wort separated therefrom. The wort is boiled cooled and fermented and the beer is subjected to a finishing stage, which includes aging, to produce the final beverage. The improvement comprises subjecting the beer to a cold stage comprising rapidly cooling the beer to a temperature of about its freezing point in such a manner that ice crystals are formed therein in only minimal amounts. The resulting cooled beer is then mixed for a short period of time with a beer slurry containing ice crystals, without any appreciable collateral increase in the amount of ice crystals in the resulting mixture. Finally, the so-treated beer is extracted from the mixture.\" The company provides the following explanation about \"Labatt Ice\" and \"Maximum Ice\" for the layman: \"During this unique process, the temperature is reduced until fine ice crystals form in the beer. Then using an exclusive process, the crystals are removed. The result is a full flavoured balanced beer.\"\n\nLabatt has sponsored the construction of many buildings in London, including Labatt Park, the John Labatt Centre, and the John Labatt Visual Arts Centre at the University of Western Ontario (UWO). Bessie Labatt's son Arthur Labatt was the 19th chancellor of UWO (2004–2008). In 1998 Labatt announced a 20-year sponsorship agreement with the now defunct Montreal Expos (now the Washington Nationals), which included naming rights for a downtown Montreal ballpark that was never built. From 1992 to 1997 they sponsored the English football team Nottingham Forest F.C.. They also are the official beer and corporate sponsor of the OHL hockey franchise Plymouth Whalers. In the 1950s, the company sponsored a PGA Tour golf tournament, the Labatt Open. Labatt was a sponsor of the Williams F1 racing team in the early 1990s.\n\nIn 1983–86, Labatt sponsored Ken Westerfield, Canadian Frisbee champion and world record holder, to perform Frisbee shows throughout Ontario, as well as sponsor the World Guts (Frisbee) Championships on Toronto Islands in 1986.\n\nLabatt is a beer partner of the NFL's Buffalo Bills, as well as the NHL's Buffalo Sabres, Carolina Hurricanes, Columbus Blue Jackets, Detroit Red Wings, New York Islanders, Pittsburgh Penguins, and Philadelphia Flyers.\n\nLabatt sponsors the annual Labatt Blue Buffalo Pond Hockey Tournament. The outdoor amateur hockey tournament features more than 800 players.\n\nIn May 2009, Labatt gave their support to a seventh NHL team in Canada, which was pursued by Jim Balsillie.\n\nIn November 2018, Labatt USA opened Labatt Brew House, a 3,000 square foot (278 square meter) innovation brewery and tasting room in Buffalo, NY. Visitors may sample experimental beers or choose from a variety of established brews.\n\nLabatt Blue is sold in all provinces of Canada (most of the United States sells Labatt with sales particularly strong in the Midwest and Northeast along the Canada–United States border), although in Quebec it is sold under the French name Labatt Bleue, with a fleur-de-lis logo. Aside from the name, and containing 4.9% alcohol/volume instead of 5.0%, the red maple leaf on the logo has also been changed to a stylized red sheaf of wheat, which Labatt calls its symbol of \"brewing quality.\" The business sponsored Nottingham Forest F.C. from 1992 (interchanging with Shipstones Brewery until 1994) to 1997.\n\nBULLET::::- Beer in Canada\nBULLET::::- Ice beer\nBULLET::::- Ken Westerfield Labatt Schooner Frisbee Team 1983-86\n\nBULLET::::- Official website\nBULLET::::- 1970s Labatt's Beer Commercial - From the Internet Archive.\nBULLET::::- Article on the streamliner trucks\n\nBULLET::::- CBC Archives CBC Radio reports on Interbrew's takeover of Labatt (From 1995).\n"}
{"id": "17568", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17568", "title": "Local color", "text": "Local color\n\nLocal color/colour may refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- \"Local Color\" (book), a 1950 note and sketch study by Truman Capote\nBULLET::::- \"Local Color\" (Mose Allison album), 1958\nBULLET::::- \"Local Color\" (University of Northern Iowa Jazz Band One album), 2015\nBULLET::::- \"Local Color\" (film), a 2006 film starring Trevor Morgan\nBULLET::::- Local color (visual art), the natural color of an object\nBULLET::::- \"\", a 1994 book by Bill Bachman and Tim Winton\nBULLET::::- \"Local Color\", European travel essays by Truman Capote published in 1950\nBULLET::::- \"Local Color\", a short-story collection by John Andrew Rice\nBULLET::::- Local Color, an art exhibition by Tullio DeSantis\n\nBULLET::::- Regionalism (disambiguation)\n"}
{"id": "17570", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17570", "title": "Linear equation", "text": "Linear equation\n\nIn mathematics, a linear equation is an equation that may be put in the form\nwhere formula_2 are the variables (or unknowns or indeterminates), and formula_3 are the coefficients, which are often real numbers. The coefficients may be considered as parameters of the equation, and may be arbitrary expressions, provided they do not contain any of the variables. To yield a meaningful equation, the coefficients formula_4 are required to not be all zero.\n\nIn other words, a linear equation is obtained by equating to zero a linear polynomial over some field, from which the coefficients are taken (the symbols used for the variables are supposed to not denote any element of the field).\n\nThe solutions of such an equation are the values that, when substituted for the unknowns, make the equality true.\n\nIn the case of just one variable, there is exactly one solution (provided that formula_5). Often, the term \"linear equation\" refers implicitly to this particular case, in which the variable is sensibly called the \"unknown\".\n\nIn the case of two variables, each solution may be interpreted as the Cartesian coordinates of a point of the Euclidean plane. The solutions of a linear equation form a line in the Euclidean plane, and, conversely, every line can be viewed as the set of all solutions of a linear equation in two variables. This is the origin of the term \"linear\" for describing this type of equations. More generally, the solutions of a linear equation in variables form a hyperplane (a subspace of dimension ) in the Euclidean space of dimension .\n\nLinear equations occur frequently in all mathematics and their applications in physics and engineering, partly because non-linear systems are often well approximated by linear equations.\nThis article considers the case of a single equation with coefficients from the field of real numbers, for which one studies the real solutions. All of its content applies to complex solutions and, more generally, for linear equations with coefficients and solutions in any field. For the case of several simultaneous linear equations, see system of linear equations.\n\nFrequently the term \"linear equation\" refers implicitly to the case of just one variable.\n\nIn this case, the equation can be put in the form\nand it has a unique solution \nin the general case where .\nIn this case, the name \"unknown\" is sensibly given to the variable .\n\nIf , there are two cases. Either equals also 0, and every number is a solution. Otherwise , and there is no solution. In this latter case, the equation is said to be inconsistent.\n\nIn the case of two variables, any linear equation can be put in the form\nwhere the variables are and , and the coefficients are , and .\n\nAn equivalent equation (that is an equation with exactly the same solutions) is \nwith , and \n\nThese equivalent variants are sometimes given generic names, such as \"general form\" or \"standard form\".\n\nThere are other forms for a linear equation (see below), which can all be transformed in the standard form with simple algebraic manipulations, such as adding the same quantity to both members of the equation, or multiplying both members by the same nonzero constant.\n\nIf , the equation \nis a linear equation in the single variable for every value of . It has therefore a unique solution for , which is given by \n\nThis defines a function. The graph of this function is a line with slope formula_12 and -intercept formula_13 The functions whose graph is a line are generally called \"linear functions\" in the context of calculus. However, in linear algebra, a linear function is a function that maps a sum to the sum of the images of the summands. So, for this definition, the above function is linear only when , that is when the line passes through the origin. For avoiding confusion, the functions whose graph is an arbitrary line are often called \"affine functions\".\n\nEach solution of a linear equation\nmay be viewed as the Cartesian coordinates of a point in the Euclidean plane. With this interpretation, all solutions of the equation form a line, provided that and are not both zero. Conversely, every line is the set of all solutions of a linear equation.\n\nThe phrase \"linear equation\" takes its origin in this correspondence between lines and equations: a \"linear equation\" in two variables is an equation whose solutions form a line.\n\nIf , the line is the graph of the function of that has been defined in the preceding section. If , the line is a \"vertical line\" (that is a line parallel to the -axis) of equation formula_15 which is not the graph of a function of .\n\nSimilarly, if , the line is the graph of a function of , and, if , one has a horizontal line of equation formula_16\n\nThere are various ways of defining a line. In the following subsections, a linear equation of the line is given in each case.\nA non-vertical line can be defined by its slope (mathematics) , and its -intercept (the coordinate of its intersection with the -axis). In this case its \"linear equation\" can be written \n\nIf, moreover, the line is not horizontal, it can be defined by its slope and its -intercept . In this case, its equation can be written\nor, equivalently,\n\nThese forms rely on the habit of considering a non vertical line as the graph of a function. For a line given by an equation \nthese forms can be easily deduced from the relations \n\nA non-vertical line can be defined by its slope (mathematics) , and the coordinates formula_22 of any point of the line. In this case, a linear equation of the line is\nor \n\nThis equation can also be written\nfor emphasizing that the slope of a line can be computed from the coordinates of any two points.\n\nA line that is not parallel to an axis and does not pass through the origin cuts the axes in two different points. The intercept values and of these two points are nonzero, and an equation of the line is\n(It easy to verify that the line defined by this equation has and as intercept values).\n\nGiven two different points and , there is exactly one line that passes through them. There are several ways to write a linear equation of is line.\n\nIf , the slope of the line is formula_27 Thus, a point-slope form is\n\nBy clearing denominators, one gets the equation \nwhich is valid also when (for verifying this, it suffices to verify that the two given points satisfy the equation).\n\nThis form is not symmetric in the two given points, but a symmetric form can be obtained by regrouping the constant terms:\n(exchanging the two points changes the sign of the left-hand side of the equation).\n\nThe two-point form of the equation of a line can be expressed simply in terms of a determinant. There are two common ways for that.\n\nThe equation formula_31 is the result of expanding the determinant in the equation\n\nThe equation formula_33 can be obtained be expanding with respect to its first row the determinant in the equation\n\nBeside being very simple and mnemonic, this form has the advantage of being a special case of the more general equation of a hyperplane passing through points in a space of dimension . These equations rely on the condition of linear dependence of points in a projective space.\n\nA linear equation with more than two variables may always be assumed to have the form\n\nThe coefficient , often denoted is called the \"constant term\", sometimes the \"absolute term\". Depending on the context, the term \"coefficient\" can be reserved for the with .\n\nWhen dealing with formula_36 variables, it is common to use formula_37 and formula_38 instead of indexed variables.\n\nA solution of such an equation is a -tuples such that substituting each element of the tuple for the corresponding variable transforms the equation into a true equality.\n\nFor an equation to be meaningful, the coefficient of at least one variable must be non-zero. In fact, if every variable has a zero coefficient, then, as mentioned for one variable, the equation is either \"inconsistent\" (for ) as having no solution, or all are solutions.\n\nThe -tuples that are solutions of a linear equation in are the Cartesian coordinates of the points of an -dimensional hyperplane in an Euclidean space (or affine space if the coefficients are complex numbers or belong to any field). In the case of three variable, this hyperplane is a plane.\n\nIf a linear equation is given with , then the equation can be solved for , yielding \nIf the coefficients are real numbers, this defines a real-valued function of real variables.\n\nBULLET::::- Linear equation over a ring\nBULLET::::- Algebraic equation\nBULLET::::- Linear inequality\n\n"}
{"id": "17573", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17573", "title": "LMS", "text": "LMS\n\nLMS may refer to:\nBULLET::::- Labeled magnitude scale, a scaling technique\nBULLET::::- Learning management system, software used in education\nBULLET::::- Least mean squares filter, producing least mean square error\nBULLET::::- Leiomyosarcoma, a rare form of cancer\nBULLET::::- Lenz microphthalmia syndrome\nBULLET::::- Library management system, an integrated library system\nBULLET::::- Licentiate in Medicine and Surgery, a medical degree in India\nBULLET::::- LMS color space\nBULLET::::- Laboratory information management system\n\nBULLET::::- Latin Mass Society\nBULLET::::- List of Marjan Šarec, a Slovenian political party\nBULLET::::- London Mathematical Society\nBULLET::::- London, Midland and Scottish Railway\nBULLET::::- London Missionary Society\nBULLET::::- \"League of Legends\" Master Series, a Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan sports league\n\nBULLET::::- Last man standing (gaming), a type of video game\nBULLET::::- LMS, a hip hop band of children of Denroy Morgan\n\nBULLET::::- Leamington Spa railway station (station code), England\nBULLET::::- Local Mitigation Strategy\nBULLET::::- Local Management of Schools, in the Education Reform Act 1988, removing schools from local financial control\nBULLET::::- Lawrence Mark \"Larry\" Sanger, one of the founders of Wikipedia\n"}
{"id": "17575", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17575", "title": "Limousine liberal", "text": "Limousine liberal\n\nLimousine liberal and latte liberal are pejorative American political terms used to illustrate purported hypocritical behavior by political liberals of upper class or upper middle class status; for example, calling for the use of mass transit while frequently using privately-owned luxury transportation, especially by limousines or private jets in the case of the extremely affluent, claiming environmental consciousness but driving fuel inefficient sports cars or SUVs, or ostensibly supporting public education while actually sending their children to private schools.\n\nDemocratic New York City mayoral hopeful Mario Procaccino coined the term \"limousine liberal\" to describe incumbent Mayor John Lindsay and his wealthy Manhattan backers during a heated 1969 campaign. Historian David Callahan says that Procaccino:\n\nIt was a populist and producerist epithet, carrying an implicit accusation that the people it described were insulated from all negative consequences of their programs purported to benefit the poor, and that the costs and consequences of such programs would be borne in the main by working class or lower middle class people who were not so poor as to be beneficiaries themselves. In particular, Procaccino criticized Lindsay for favoring unemployed minorities, ex. blacks and Hispanics, over working-class white ethnics.\n\nOne Procaccino campaign memo attacked \"rich super-assimilated people who live on Fifth Avenue and maintain some choice mansions outside the city and have no feeling for the small middle class shopkeeper, home owner, etc. They preach the politics of confrontation and condone violent upheaval in society because they are not touched by it and are protected by their courtiers\". \"The Independent\" later stated that \"Lindsay came across as all style and no substance, a 'limousine liberal' who knew nothing of the concerns of the same 'Silent Majority' that was carrying Richard Nixon to the White House at the very same time.\"\n\nIn the 1970s, the term was applied to wealthy liberal supporters of open-housing and forced school busing who didn't make use of public schooling. Jimmy Carter's presidential visits to New York City's then devastated South Bronx in 1977 followed by his next year's visit to Los Angeles's Watts neighborhood's Labor Action Committee's Senior Citizens Nutrition Center in 1978, both with promises of better lives for these neighborhoods' residents, were both seen by at least some people as more examples of limousine liberalism as those neighborhoods got worse afterwards until the mayoral administrations of mid 1990's Republican successors, respective Rudolph Giuliani and Richard Riordan. In Boston, Massachusetts, supporters of busing, such as Senator Ted Kennedy, sent their children to private schools and lived in affluent suburbs. To some South Boston residents, Kennedy's support of a plan that \"integrated\" their children with blacks and his apparent unwillingness to do the same with his own children, was hypocrisy.\n\nBy the late 1990s and early 21st century, the term has also come to be applied to those who support environmentalist or \"green\" goals, such as mass transit, yet drive large SUVs or literally have a limousine and driver. Sam Dealey, writing in \"The Weekly Standard\" applied the term to Sheila Jackson-Lee for being \"routinely chauffeured the one short block to work--in a government car, by a member of her staff, at the taxpayers' expense.\" The term was also used disparagingly in a 2004 episode of \"Law & Order\" by Fred Thompson's character, Arthur Branch, to criticize the politics and beliefs of his more liberal colleague, Serena Southerlyn. \"South Park\"'s creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone poked fun at the tendency of some liberals to be more concerned with image than actually helping the earth in the episode \"Smug Alert!\"\n\nThe \"New York Observer\" applied the term to 2008 Democratic presidential candidate John Edwards for paying $400 for a haircut and, according to the newspaper, \"lectures about poverty while living in gated opulence\".\n\nIn 2009, the term was applied by some commentators to former Senate Majority Leader and then-Obama cabinet appointee Tom Daschle for failing to pay back taxes and interest on the use of a limousine service.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Bobos in Paradise\"\nBULLET::::- Champagne socialist (or Chardonnay socialist)\nBULLET::::- Chattering class\nBULLET::::- Gauche caviar\nBULLET::::- Liberal elite\nBULLET::::- Radical chic\n\nBULLET::::- Francia, Peter L., et al. \"Limousine liberals and corporate conservatives: The financial constituencies of the democratic and republican parties.\" \"Social Science Quarterly\" 86.4 (2005): 761-778.\nBULLET::::- Fraser, Steve. \"The Limousine Liberal: How an Incendiary Image United the Right and Fractured America\" (Basic, 2016). viii, 291 pp.\nBULLET::::- Stark, Andrew. \"Limousine liberals, welfare conservatives: On belief, interest, and inconsistency in democratic discourse.\" \"Political Theory\" 25.4 (1997): 475-501.\n"}
{"id": "17615", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17615", "title": "Lewis and Clark Expedition", "text": "Lewis and Clark Expedition\n\nThe Lewis and Clark Expedition from May 1804 to September 1806, also known as the Corps of Discovery Expedition, was the first American expedition to cross the western portion of the United States. It began in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, made its way westward, and passed through the Continental Divide of the Americas to reach the Pacific coast. The Corps of Discovery was a selected group of US Army volunteers under the command of Captain Meriwether Lewis and his close friend Second Lieutenant William Clark.\n\nPresident Thomas Jefferson commissioned the expedition shortly after the Louisiana Purchase in 1803 to explore and to map the newly acquired territory, to find a practical route across the western half of the continent, and to establish an American presence in this territory before Britain and other European powers tried to claim it. The campaign's secondary objectives were scientific and economic: to study the area's plants, animal life, and geography, and to establish trade with local American Indian tribes. The expedition returned to St. Louis to report its findings to Jefferson, with maps, sketches, and journals in hand.\n\nOne of Thomas Jefferson's goals was to find \"the most direct and practicable water communication across this continent, for the purposes of commerce.\" He also placed special importance on declaring US sovereignty over the land occupied by the many different Indian tribes along the Missouri River, and getting an accurate sense of the resources in the recently completed Louisiana Purchase. The expedition made notable contributions to science, but scientific research was not the main goal of the mission.\n\nDuring the 19th century, references to Lewis and Clark \"scarcely appeared\" in history books, even during the United States Centennial in 1876, and the expedition was largely forgotten. Lewis and Clark began to gain attention around the start of the 20th century. Both the 1904 Louisiana Purchase Exposition in St. Louis and the 1905 Lewis and Clark Centennial Exposition in Portland, Oregon showcased them as American pioneers. However, the story remained relatively shallow until mid-century as a celebration of US conquest and personal adventures, but more recently the expedition has been more thoroughly researched.\n\nIn 2004, a complete and reliable set of the expedition's journals was compiled by Gary E. Moulton. In the 2000s, the bicentennial of the expedition further elevated popular interest in Lewis and Clark. As of 1984, no US exploration party was more famous, and no American expedition leaders are more recognizable by name.\n\nFor years, Thomas Jefferson had heard of and read accounts about the ventures of various explorers in the western frontier, and consequently had a long-held interest in further exploring this mostly unknown region of the continent. In the 1780s, while Minister to France, Jefferson met John Ledyard in Paris in the 1780s, and they discussed a possible trip to the Pacific Northwest. Jefferson had also read Captain James Cook's \"A Voyage to the Pacific Ocean\" (London, 1784), an account of Cook's third voyage, and Le Page du Pratz's \"The History of Louisiana\" (London, 1763), all of which greatly influenced his decision to send an expedition. Like Captain Cook, he wished to discover a practical route through the Northwest to the Pacific coast. Alexander Mackenzie had already charted a route in his quest for the Pacific, following the Mackenzie River to the Arctic Ocean in 1789. Mackenzie and his party were the first to cross America north of Mexico to the Pacific when he arrived near Bella Coola, British Columbia in 1793–a dozen years before Lewis and Clark. Mackenzie's accounts in \"Voyages from Montreal\" (1801) informed Jefferson of Britain's intent to control the lucrative fur trade of the Columbia River and convinced him of the importance of securing the territory as soon as possible.\n\nTwo years into his presidency, Jefferson asked Congress to fund an expedition through the Louisiana territory to the Pacific Ocean. He did not attempt to make a secret of the Lewis and Clark expedition from Spanish, French, and British officials, but rather claimed different reasons for the venture. He used a secret message to ask for funding due to poor relations with the opposition Federalist Party in Congress. Congress subsequently appropriated $2,324 for supplies and food, the appropriation of which was left in Lewis's charge.\n\nIn 1803, Jefferson commissioned the Corps of Discovery and named Army Captain Meriwether Lewis its leader, who then selected William Clark as second in command. Lewis demonstrated remarkable skills and potential as a frontiersman, and Jefferson made efforts to prepare him for the long journey ahead as the expedition was gaining approval and funding. Jefferson explained his choice of Lewis:\n\nIt was impossible to find a character who to a complete science in botany, natural history, mineralogy & astronomy, joined the firmness of constitution & character, prudence, habits adapted to the woods & a familiarity with the Indian manners and character, requisite for this undertaking. All the latter qualifications Capt. Lewis has.\n\nIn 1803, Jefferson sent Lewis to Philadelphia to study medicinal cures under Benjamin Rush, a physician and humanitarian. He also arranged for Lewis to be further educated by Andrew Ellicott, an astronomer who instructed him in the use of the sextant and other navigational instruments. Lewis, however, was not ignorant of science and had demonstrated a marked capacity to learn, especially with Jefferson as his teacher. At Monticello, Jefferson possessed an enormous library on the subject of the geography of the North American continent, and Lewis had full access to it. He spent time consulting maps and books and conferring with Jefferson.\n\nThe keelboat used for the first year of the journey was built near Pittsburgh PA July 1803 at Lewis' specifications and much of the equipment and provisions were loaded into it when built. Lewis and crew sailed down the Ohio River and met up with Clark near Louisville, Kentucky in October 1803 at the Falls of the Ohio and the core \"Nine Young Men\" were enlisted into the Corps of Discovery. Their goals were to explore the vast territory acquired by the Louisiana Purchase and to establish trade and US sovereignty over the Indians along the Missouri River. Jefferson also wanted to establish a US claim of \"discovery\" to the Pacific Northwest and Oregon territory by documenting an American presence there before European nations could claim the land. According to some historians, Jefferson understood that he would have a better claim of ownership to the Pacific Northwest if the team gathered scientific data on animals and plants. However, his main objectives were centered around finding an all-water route to the Pacific coast and commerce. His instructions to the expedition stated:\n\nThe US mint prepared special silver medals with a portrait of Jefferson and inscribed with a message of friendship and peace, called Indian Peace Medals. The soldiers were to distribute them to the tribes that they met. The expedition also prepared advanced weapons to display their military firepower. Among these was an Austrian-made .46 caliber Girandoni air rifle, a repeating rifle with a 20-round tubular magazine that was powerful enough to kill a deer. The expedition was prepared with flintlock firearms, knives, blacksmithing supplies, and cartography equipment. They also carried flags, gift bundles, medicine, and other items that they would need for their journey.\n\nThe route of Lewis and Clark's expedition took them up the Missouri River to its headwaters, then on to the Pacific Ocean via the Columbia River, and it may have been influenced by the purported transcontinental journey of Moncacht-Apé by the same route about a century before. Jefferson had a copy of Le Page's book in his library detailing Moncacht-Apé's itinerary, and Lewis carried a copy with him during the expedition. Le Page's description of Moncacht-Apé's route across the continent neglects to mention the need to cross the Rocky Mountains, and it might be the source of Lewis and Clark's mistaken belief that they could easily carry boats from the Missouri's headwaters to the westward-flowing Columbia.\nThe Corps of Discovery departed from Camp Dubois at 4pm on May 14, 1804, and met up with Lewis in St. Charles, Missouri, a short time later, marking the beginning of the voyage to the Pacific coast. As of May 16, 1804, the expedition had 31 members, mostly US Army personnel including captains, sergeants, and privates. The Corps followed the Missouri River westward. Soon, they passed La Charrette, the last Euro-American settlement on the Missouri River.\n\nThe expedition followed the Missouri through what is now Kansas City, Missouri, and Omaha, Nebraska. On August 20, 1804, Sergeant Charles Floyd died, apparently from acute appendicitis. He had been among the first to sign up with the Corps of Discovery and was the only member to die during the expedition. He was buried at a bluff by the river, now named after him, in what is now Sioux City, Iowa. His burial site was marked with a cedar post on which was inscribed his name and day of death. up the river, the expedition camped at a small river which they named Floyd's River. During the final week of August, Lewis and Clark reached the edge of the Great Plains, a place abounding with elk, deer, bison, and beavers.\n\nThe Lewis and Clark Expedition established relations with two dozen Indian nations, without whose help the expedition would have risked starvation during the harsh winters and/or become hopelessly lost in the vast ranges of the Rocky Mountains.\n\nThe Americans and the Lakota nation (whom the Americans called Sioux or \"Teton-wan Sioux\") had problems when they met, and there was a concern the two sides might fight. According to Harry W. Fritz, \"All earlier Missouri River travelers had warned of this powerful and aggressive tribe, determined to block free trade on the river. ... The Sioux were also expecting a retaliatory raid from the Omaha Indians, to the south. A recent Sioux raid had killed 75 Omaha men, burned 40 lodges, and taken four dozen prisoners.\"\n\nOne of their horses disappeared, and they believed the Sioux were responsible. Afterward, the two sides met and there was a disagreement, and the Sioux asked the men to stay or to give more gifts instead before being allowed to pass through their territory. They came close to fighting several times, and both sides finally backed down and the expedition continued on to Arikara territory. Clark wrote they were \"warlike\" and were the \"vilest miscreants of the savage race\".\n\nIn the winter of 180405, the party built Fort Mandan, near present-day Washburn, North Dakota. Just before departing on April 7, 1805, the expedition sent the keelboat back to St. Louis with a sample of specimens, some never seen before east of the Mississippi. One chief asked Lewis and Clark to provide a boat for passage through their national territory. As tensions increased, Lewis and Clark prepared to fight, but the two sides fell back in the end. The Americans quickly continued westward (upriver), and camped for the winter in the Mandan nation's territory.\n\nAfter the expedition had set up camp, nearby Indians came to visit in fair numbers, some staying all night. For several days, Lewis and Clark met in council with Mandan chiefs. Here they met a French-Canadian fur trapper named Toussaint Charbonneau, and his young Shoshone wife Sacagawea. Charbonneau at this time began to serve as the expedition's translator. Peace was established between the expedition and the Mandan chiefs with the sharing of a Mandan ceremonial pipe. By April 25, Captain Lewis wrote his progress report of the expedition's activities and observations of the Indian nations they have encountered to date: \"A Statistical view of the Indian nations inhabiting the Territory of Louisiana\", which outlined the names of various tribes, their locations, trading practices, and water routes used, among other things. President Jefferson would later present this report to Congress.\n\nThey followed the Missouri to its headwaters, and over the Continental Divide at Lemhi Pass. In canoes, they descended the mountains by the Clearwater River, the Snake River, and the Columbia River, past Celilo Falls, and past what is now Portland, Oregon, at the meeting of the Willamette and Columbia Rivers. Lewis and Clark used William Robert Broughton's 1792 notes and maps to orient themselves once they reached the lower Columbia River. The sighting of Mount Hood and other stratovolcanos confirmed that the expedition had almost reached the Pacific Ocean.\n\nThe expedition sighted the Pacific Ocean for the first time on November 7, 1805, arriving two weeks later. The expedition faced its second bitter winter camped on the north side of the Columbia River, in a storm-wracked area. Lack of food was a major factor. The elk, the party's main source of food, had retreated from their usual haunts into the mountains, and the party was now too poor to purchase enough food from neighboring tribes. On November 24, 1805, the party voted to move their camp to the south side of the Columbia River near modern Astoria, Oregon. Sacagawea, and Clark's slave York, were both allowed to participate in the vote, so this may have been the first time in American history where a woman and a slave were allowed to vote.\n\nOn the south side of the Columbia River, upstream on the west side of the Netul River (now Lewis and Clark River), they constructed Fort Clatsop. They did this not just for shelter and protection, but also to officially establish the American presence there, with the American flag flying over the fort. During the winter at Fort Clatsop, Lewis committed himself to writing. He filled many pages of his journals with valuable knowledge, mostly about botany, because of the abundant growth and forests that covered that part of the continent. The health of the men also became a problem, with many suffering from colds and influenza.\n\nLewis was determined to remain at the fort until April 1, but was still anxious to move out at the earliest opportunity. By March 22, the stormy weather had subsided and the following morning, on March 23, 1806, the journey home began. The Corps began their journey homeward using canoes to ascend the Columbia River, and later by trekking over land.\n\nThey made their way to Camp Chopunnish in Idaho, along the north bank of the Clearwater River, where the members of the expedition collected 65 horses in preparation to cross the Bitterroot Mountains, lying between modern-day Idaho and western Montana. However, the range was still covered in snow, which prevented the expedition from making the crossing. On April 11, while the Corps was waiting for the snow to diminish, Lewis's dog, Seaman, was stolen by Indians, but was retrieved shortly. Worried that other such acts might follow, Lewis warned the chief that any other wrongdoing or mischievous acts would result in instant death.\n\nOn July 3, before crossing the Continental Divide, the Corps split into two teams so Lewis could explore the Marias River. Lewis's group of four met some men from the Blackfeet nation. During the night, the Blackfeet tried to steal their weapons. In the struggle, the soldiers killed two Blackfeet men. Lewis, George Drouillard, and the Field brothers fled over in a day before they camped again.\n\nMeanwhile, Clark had entered the Crow tribe's territory. In the night, half of Clark's horses disappeared, but not a single Crow had been seen. Lewis and Clark stayed separated until they reached the Yellowstone and Missouri Rivers on August 11. As the groups reunited, one of Clark's hunters, Pierre Cruzatte, mistook Lewis for an elk and fired, injuring Lewis in the thigh. Once together, the Corps was able to return home quickly via the Missouri River. They reached St. Louis on September 23, 1806.\n\nIn March 1804, before the expedition began in May, the Spanish in New Mexico learned from General James Wilkinson that the Americans were encroaching on territory claimed by Spain. After the Lewis and Clark expedition set off in May, the Spanish sent four armed expeditions of 52 soldiers, mercenaries, and Indians on August 1, 1804 from Santa Fe, New Mexico northward under Pedro Vial and José Jarvet to intercept Lewis and Clark and imprison the entire expedition. They reached the Pawnee settlement on the Platte River in central Nebraska and learned that the expedition had been there many days before. The expedition was covering a day and Vial's attempt to intercept them was unsuccessful.\n\nThe Lewis and Clark Expedition gained an understanding of the geography of the Northwest and produced the first accurate maps of the area. During the journey, Lewis and Clark drew about 140 maps. Stephen Ambrose says the expedition \"filled in the main outlines\" of the area.\n\nThe expedition documented natural resources and plants that had been previously unknown to Euro-Americans, though not to the indigenous peoples. Lewis and Clark were the first Americans to cross the Continental Divide, and the first Americans to see Yellowstone, enter into Montana, and produce an official description of these different regions. Their visit to the Pacific Northwest, maps, and proclamations of sovereignty with medals and flags were legal steps needed to claim title to each indigenous nation's lands under the Doctrine of Discovery.\n\nThe expedition was sponsored by the American Philosophical Society (APS). Lewis and Clark received some instruction in astronomy, botany, climatology, ethnology, geography, meteorology, mineralogy, ornithology, and zoology. During the expedition, they made contact with over 70 Native American tribes and described more than 200 new plant and animal species.\n\nJefferson had the expedition declare \"sovereignty\" and demonstrate their military strength to ensure native tribes would be subordinate to the U.S., as European colonizers did elsewhere. After the expedition, the maps that were produced allowed the further discovery and settlement of this vast territory in the years that followed.\n\nIn 1807, Patrick Gass, a private in the U.S. Army, published an account of the journey. He was promoted to sergeant during the course of the expedition. Paul Allen edited a two-volume history of the Lewis and Clark expedition that was published in 1814, in Philadelphia, but without mention of the actual author, banker Nicholas Biddle. Even then, the complete report was not made public until more recently. The earliest authorized edition of the Lewis and Clark journals resides in the Maureen and Mike Mansfield Library at the University of Montana.\n\nOne of the primary objectives of the expedition as directed by President Jefferson was to observe and record the whereabouts, lives, activities, and cultures of the various American Indian tribes that inhabited the newly acquired territory and the northwest in general. The expedition encountered many different tribes along the way, many of whom offered their assistance, providing the expedition with their knowledge of the wilderness and with the acquisition of food. The expedition had blank leather-bound journals and ink for the purpose of recording such encounters, as well as for scientific and geological information. They were also provided with various gifts of medals, ribbons, needles, mirrors, and other articles which were intended to ease any tensions when negotiating their passage with the various Indian chiefs whom they would encounter along their way.\n\nMany of the tribes had friendly experiences with British and French fur traders in various isolated encounters along the Missouri and Columbia Rivers, and the expedition did not encounter any hostilities with the exception of the Teton-Sioux tribe under Black Buffalo and the Partisan tribe on September 25, 1804. Both of these tribes were rivals and hoped to use the expedition to their own advantage, and both demanded tribute from the expedition for their passage over the river. According to Harry W. Fritz, \"All earlier Missouri River travelers had warned of this powerful and aggressive tribe, determined to block free trade on the river. ... The Sioux were also expecting a retaliatory raid from the Omaha Indians, to the south. A recent Sioux raid had killed 75 Omaha men, burned 40 lodges, and taken four dozen prisoners.\" \n\nCaptain Lewis made his first mistake by offering the Sioux chief gifts first, which insulted and angered the Partisan chief. Communication was difficult, since the expedition's only Sioux interpreter was Pierre Dorion who had stayed behind with the other party and was also involved with diplomatic affairs with another tribe. Consequently, both chiefs were offered a few gifts, but neither was satisfied. At that point, some of the warriors from the Partisan tribe took hold of their boat and one of the oars. Lewis took a firm stand, ordering a display of force and presenting arms; Captain Clark brandished his sword and threatened violent reprisal. Just before the situation erupted into a violent confrontation, Black Buffalo ordered his warriors to back off.\n\nThe captains were able to negotiate their passage without further incident with the aid of better gifts and a bottle of whiskey. During the next two days, the expedition made camp not far from Black Buffalo's tribe. Similar incidents occurred when they tried to leave, but trouble was averted with gifts of tobacco.\n\nAs the expedition encountered the various American Indian tribes during the course of their journey, they observed and recorded information regarding their lifestyles, customs and the social codes they lived by, as directed by President Jefferson. By western standards, the Indian way of life seemed harsh and unforgiving as witnessed by members of the expedition. After many encounters and camping in close proximity to the Indian nations for extended periods of time during the winter months, they soon learned first hand of their customs and social orders.\n\nOne of the primary customs that distinguished Indian cultures from those of the West was that it was customary for the men to take on two or more wives if they were able to provide for them and often took on a wife or wives who were members of the immediate family circle. e.g. men in the \"Minnetaree\" and \"Mandan\" tribes would often take on a sister for a wife. Chastity among women was not held in high regard. Infant daughters were often sold by the father to men who were grown, usually for horses or mules.\n\nThey learned that women in \"Sioux\" nations were often bartered away for horses or other supplies, yet this was not practiced among the \"Shoshone\" nation who held their women in higher regard. They witnessed that many of the Indian nations were constantly at war with other tribes, especially the Sioux, who, while remaining generally friendly to the white fur traders, had proudly boasted and justified the almost complete destruction of the once great \"Cahokia\" nation, along with the \"Missouris\", \"Illinois\", \"Kaskaskia\", and \"Piorias\" tribes that lived about the countryside adjacent to the upper Mississippi and Missouri rivers.\n\nSacagawea, sometimes called Sakajawea or Sakagawea ( 1788December 20, 1812), was a Shoshone Indian woman who arrived with her husband Toussaint Charbonneau on the expedition to the Pacific Ocean.\n\nOn February 11, 1805, a few weeks after her first contact with the expedition, Sacagawea went into labor which was slow and painful, so the Frenchman Charbonneau suggested she be given a potion of rattlesnake's rattle to aid in her delivery. Lewis happened to have some snake's rattle with him. A short time after administering the potion, she delivered a healthy boy who was given the name Jean Baptiste Charbonneau.\n\nWhen the expedition reached Marias River, on June 16, 1805, Sacagawea became dangerously ill. She was able to find some relief by drinking mineral water from the sulphur spring that fed into the river.\n\nThough she has been discussed in literature frequently, much of the information is exaggeration or fiction. Scholars say she did notice some geographical features, but \"Sacagawea ... was not the guide for the Expedition, she was important to them as an interpreter and in other ways.\" The sight of a woman and her infant son would have been reassuring to some indigenous nations, and she played an important role in diplomatic relations by talking to chiefs, easing tensions, and giving the impression of a peaceful mission.\n\nIn his writings, Meriwether Lewis presented a somewhat negative view of her, though Clark had a higher regard for her, and provided some support for her children in subsequent years. In the journals, they used the terms \"squar\" and \"savages\" to refer to Sacagawea and other indigenous peoples.\n\nThe Corps met their objective of reaching the Pacific, mapping and establishing their presence for a legal claim to the land. They established diplomatic relations and trade with at least two dozen indigenous nations. They did not find a continuous waterway to the Pacific Ocean but located an Indian trail that led from the upper end of the Missouri River to the Columbia River which ran to the Pacific Ocean. They gained information about the natural habitat, flora and fauna, bringing back various plant, seed and mineral specimens. They mapped the topography of the land, designating the location of mountain ranges, rivers and the many Indian tribes during the course of their journey. They also learned and recorded much about the language and customs of the American Indian tribes they encountered, and brought back many of their artifacts, including bows, clothing and ceremonial robes.\n\nTwo months passed after the expedition's end before Jefferson made his first public statement to Congress and others, giving a one-sentence summary about the success of the expedition before getting into the justification for the expenses involved. In the course of their journey, they acquired a knowledge of numerous tribes of Indians hitherto unknown; they informed themselves of the trade which may be carried on with them, the best channels and positions for it, and they are enabled to give with accuracy the geography of the line they pursued. Back east, the botanical and zoological discoveries drew the intense interest of the American Philosophical Society who requested specimens, various artifacts traded with the Indians, and reports on plants and wildlife along with various seeds obtained. Jefferson used seeds from \"Missouri hominy corn\" along with a number of other unidentified seeds to plant at Monticello which he cultivated and studied. He later reported on the \"Indian corn\" he had grown as being an \"excellent\" food source. The expedition helped establish the U.S. presence in the newly acquired territory and beyond and opened the door to further exploration, trade and scientific discoveries.\n\nLewis and Clark returned from their expedition, bringing with them the Mandan Indian Chief Shehaka from the Upper Missouri to visit the \"Great Father\" at Washington City. After Chief Shehaka's visit, it required multiple attempts and multiple military expeditions to safely return Shehaka to his nation.\n\nSince the expedition, Lewis and Clark have been commemorated and honored over the years on various coins, currency, and commemorative postage stamps, as well as in a number of other capacities.\n\nIn 1682, René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle went down the Mississippi from the Great Lakes to the Gulf. The French then established a chain of posts along the Mississippi from New Orleans to the Great Lakes. There followed a number of French explorers including Pedro Vial and Pierre Antoine and Paul Mallet, among others. Vial may have preceded Lewis and Clark to Montana. In 1787, he gave a map of the upper Missouri River and locations of \"territories transited by Pedro Vial\" to Spanish authorities.\n\nEarly in 1792, the American explorer Robert Gray, sailing in the \"Columbia Rediviva\", discovered the yet to be named , named it after his ship and claimed it for the United States. Later in 1792, the Vancouver Expedition had learned of Gray's discovery and used his maps. Vancouver's expedition explored over up the Columbia, into the Columbia River Gorge. Lewis and Clark used the maps produced by these expeditions when they descended the lower Columbia to the Pacific coast.\n\nFrom 179293, Alexander Mackenzie had crossed North America from Quebec to the Pacific.\n\nBULLET::::- Lewis and Clark's Keelboat\nBULLET::::- The Red River Expedition (1806) and the Pike Expedition were also commissioned by Jefferson\nBULLET::::- Gateway Arch National Park\nBULLET::::- \"The Far Horizons\", a movie of the expedition\nBULLET::::- York (explorer) – the slave on the expedition\nBULLET::::- Lewis and Clark Pass (Montana) – the only non-motorized pass on the expedition's route\n\nBULLET::::- E'books, Full view\n\n\nBULLET::::- Full text of the Lewis and Clark journals online – edited by Gary E. Moulton, University of Nebraska–Lincoln\nBULLET::::- Lewis and Clark Expedition, a National Park Service \"Discover Our Shared Heritage\" Travel Itinerary\nBULLET::::- \"History of the Expedition Under the Command of Captains Lewis and Clark: To the Sources of the Missouri, thence Across the Rocky Mountains and down the River Columbia to the Pacific Ocean\" published in 1814; from the World Digital Library\nBULLET::::- Lewis & Clark Fort Mandan Foundation: Discovering Lewis & Clark\nBULLET::::- Corps of Discovery Online Atlas, created by Watzek Library, Lewis & Clark College\n"}
{"id": "17616", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17616", "title": "Latitude", "text": "Latitude\n\nIn geography, latitude is a geographic coordinate that specifies the north–south position of a point on the Earth's surface. Latitude is an angle (defined below) which ranges from 0° at the Equator to 90° (North or South) at the poles. Lines of constant latitude, or \"parallels\", run east–west as circles parallel to the equator. Latitude is used together with longitude to specify the precise location of features on the surface of the Earth. On its own, the term latitude should be taken to be the \"geodetic latitude\" as defined below. Briefly, geodetic latitude at a point is the angle formed by the vector perpendicular (or \"normal\") to the ellipsoidal surface from that point, and the equatorial plane. Also defined are six \"auxiliary latitudes\" which are used in special applications.\n\nTwo levels of abstraction are employed in the definition of latitude and longitude. In the first step the physical surface is modeled by the geoid, a surface which approximates the mean sea level over the oceans and its continuation under the land masses. The second step is to approximate the geoid by a mathematically simpler reference surface. The simplest choice for the reference surface is a sphere, but the geoid is more accurately modeled by an ellipsoid. The definitions of latitude and longitude on such reference surfaces are detailed in the following sections. Lines of constant latitude and longitude together constitute a graticule on the reference surface. The latitude of a point on the \"actual\" surface is that of the corresponding point on the reference surface, the correspondence being along the normal to the reference surface which passes through the point on the physical surface. Latitude and longitude together with some specification of height constitute a geographic coordinate system as defined in the specification of the ISO 19111 standard.\n\nSince there are many different reference ellipsoids, the precise latitude of a feature on the surface is not unique: this is stressed in the ISO standard which states that \"without the full specification of the coordinate reference system, coordinates (that is latitude and longitude) are ambiguous at best and meaningless at worst\". This is of great importance in accurate applications, such as a Global Positioning System (GPS), but in common usage, where high accuracy is not required, the reference ellipsoid is not usually stated.\n\nIn English texts the latitude angle, defined below, is usually denoted by the Greek lower-case letter phi ( or ). It is measured in degrees, minutes and seconds or decimal degrees, north or south of the equator.\nThe precise measurement of latitude requires an understanding of the gravitational field of the Earth, either to set up theodolites or to determine GPS satellite orbits. The study of the figure of the Earth together with its gravitational field is the science of geodesy.\nThis article relates to coordinate systems for the Earth: it may be extended to cover the Moon, planets and other celestial objects by a simple change of nomenclature.\n\nThe graticule is formed by the lines of constant latitude and constant longitude, which are constructed with reference to the rotation axis of the Earth. The primary reference points are the poles where the axis of rotation of the Earth intersects the reference surface. Planes which contain the rotation axis intersect the surface at the meridians; and the angle between any one meridian plane and that through Greenwich (the Prime Meridian) defines the longitude: meridians are lines of constant longitude. The plane through the centre of the Earth and perpendicular to the rotation axis intersects the surface at a great circle called the Equator. Planes parallel to the equatorial plane intersect the surface in circles of constant latitude; these are the parallels. The Equator has a latitude of 0°, the North Pole has a latitude of 90° North (written 90° N or +90°), and the South Pole has a latitude of 90° South (written 90° S or −90°). The latitude of an arbitrary point is the angle between the equatorial plane and the normal to the surface at that point: the normal to the surface of the sphere is along the radius vector.\n\nThe latitude, as defined in this way for the sphere, is often termed the spherical latitude, to avoid ambiguity with the geodetic latitude and the auxiliary latitudes defined in subsequent sections of this article.\n\nBesides the equator, four other parallels are of significance:\nThe plane of the Earth's orbit about the Sun is called the ecliptic, and the plane perpendicular to the rotation axis of the Earth is the equatorial plane. The angle between the ecliptic and the equatorial plane is called variously the axial tilt, the obliquity, or the inclination of the ecliptic, and it is conventionally denoted by . The latitude of the tropical circles is equal to and the latitude of the polar circles is its complement (90° - \"i\"). The axis of rotation varies slowly over time and the values given here are those for the current epoch. The time variation is discussed more fully in the article on axial tilt.\n\nThe figure shows the geometry of a cross-section of the plane perpendicular to the ecliptic and through the centres of the Earth and the Sun at the December solstice when the Sun is overhead at some point of the Tropic of Capricorn. The south polar latitudes below the Antarctic Circle are in daylight, whilst the north polar latitudes above the Arctic Circle are in night. The situation is reversed at the June solstice, when the Sun is overhead at the Tropic of Cancer. Only at latitudes in between the two tropics is it possible for the Sun to be directly overhead (at the zenith).\n\nOn map projections there is no universal rule as to how meridians and parallels should appear. The examples below show the named parallels (as red lines) on the commonly used Mercator projection and the Transverse Mercator projection. On the former the parallels are horizontal and the meridians are vertical, whereas on the latter there is no exact relationship of parallels and meridians with horizontal and vertical: both are complicated curves.\nvalign=top\n! width=\"1%\" \n! width=\"36%\"Normal Mercator\n! width=\"3%\"\n! width=\"36%\" Transverse Mercator\n! width=\"1%\" \nvalign=top\n\\\n\nOn the sphere the normal passes through the centre and the latitude () is\ntherefore equal to the angle subtended at the centre by the meridian arc from the equator to the point concerned. If the meridian distance is denoted by then\nwhere denotes the mean radius of the Earth. is equal to . No higher accuracy is appropriate for since higher-precision results necessitate an ellipsoid model. With this value for the meridian length of 1 degree of latitude on the sphere is (60.0 nautical miles). The length of 1 minute of latitude is (1.00 nautical miles), while the length of 1 second of latitude is (see nautical mile).\n\nIn 1687 Isaac Newton published the \"Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica\", in which he proved that a rotating self-gravitating fluid body in equilibrium takes the form of an oblate ellipsoid. (This article uses the term \"ellipsoid\" in preference to the older term \"spheroid\".) Newton's result was confirmed by geodetic measurements in the 18th century. (See Meridian arc.) An oblate ellipsoid is the three-dimensional surface generated by the rotation of an ellipse about its shorter axis (minor axis). \"Oblate ellipsoid of revolution\" is abbreviated to 'ellipsoid' in the remainder of this article. (Ellipsoids which do not have an axis of symmetry are termed triaxial.)\n\nMany different reference ellipsoids have been used in the history of geodesy. In pre-satellite days they were devised to give a good fit to the geoid over the limited area of a survey but, with the advent of GPS, it has become natural to use reference ellipsoids (such as WGS84) with centre at the centre of mass of the Earth and minor axis aligned to the rotation axis of the Earth. These geocentric ellipsoids are usually within of the geoid. Since latitude is defined with respect to an ellipsoid, the position of a given point is different on each ellipsoid: one cannot exactly specify the latitude and longitude of a geographical feature without specifying the ellipsoid used. Many maps maintained by national agencies are based on older ellipsoids, so one must know how the latitude and longitude values are transformed from one ellipsoid to another. GPS handsets include software to carry out datum transformations which link WGS84 to the local reference ellipsoid with its associated grid.\n\nThe shape of an ellipsoid of revolution is determined by the shape of the ellipse which is rotated about its minor (shorter) axis. Two parameters are required. One is invariably the equatorial radius, which is the semi-major axis, . The other parameter is usually (1) the polar radius or semi-minor axis, ; or (2) the (first) flattening, ; or (3) the eccentricity, . These parameters are not independent: they are related by\n\nMany other parameters (see ellipse, ellipsoid) appear in the study of geodesy, geophysics and map projections but they can all be expressed in terms of one or two members of the set , , and . Both and are small and often appear in series expansions in calculations; they are of the order and 0.08 respectively. Values for a number of ellipsoids are given in Figure of the Earth. Reference ellipsoids are usually defined by the semi-major axis and the \"inverse\" flattening, . For example, the defining values for the WGS84 ellipsoid, used by all GPS devices, are\nBULLET::::- (equatorial radius): exactly\nBULLET::::- (inverse flattening): exactly\nfrom which are derived\nBULLET::::- (polar radius):\nBULLET::::- (eccentricity squared):\nThe difference between the semi-major and semi-minor axes is about and as fraction of the semi-major axis it equals the flattening; on a computer monitor the ellipsoid could be sized as 300 by 299 pixels. This would barely be distinguishable from a 300-by-300-pixel sphere, so illustrations usually exaggerate the flattening.\n\nThe graticule on the ellipsoid is constructed in exactly the same way as on the sphere. The normal at a point on the surface of an ellipsoid does not pass through the centre, except for points on the equator or at the poles, but the definition of latitude remains unchanged as the angle between the normal and the equatorial plane. The terminology for latitude must be made more precise by distinguishing:\n\nBULLET::::- Geodetic latitude: the angle between the normal and the equatorial plane. The standard notation in English publications is . This is the definition assumed when the word latitude is used without qualification. The definition must be accompanied with a specification of the ellipsoid.\nBULLET::::- Geocentric latitude: the angle between the radius (from centre to the point on the surface) and the equatorial plane. (Figure below). There is no standard notation: examples from various texts include , , , , , . This article uses .\nBULLET::::- Spherical latitude: the angle between the normal to a spherical reference surface and the equatorial plane.\nBULLET::::- Geographic latitude must be used with care. Some authors use it as a synonym for geodetic latitude whilst others use it as an alternative to the astronomical latitude.\nBULLET::::- Latitude (unqualified) should normally refer to the geodetic latitude.\n\nThe importance of specifying the reference datum may be illustrated by a simple example. On the reference ellipsoid for WGS84, the centre of the Eiffel Tower has a geodetic latitude of 48° 51′ 29″ N, or 48.8583° N and longitude of 2° 17′ 40″ E or 2.2944°E. The same coordinates on the datum ED50 define a point on the ground which is distant from the tower. A web search may produce several different values for the latitude of the tower; the reference ellipsoid is rarely specified.\n\nIn Meridian arc and standard texts it is shown that the distance along a meridian from latitude to the equator is given by ( in radians)\n\nwhere is the meridional radius of curvature.\n\nThe distance from the equator to the pole is\n\nFor WGS84 this distance is .\n\nThe evaluation of the meridian distance integral is central to many studies in geodesy and map projection. It can be evaluated by expanding the integral by the binomial series and integrating term by term: see Meridian arc for details. The length of the meridian arc between two given latitudes is given by replacing the limits of the integral by the latitudes concerned. The length of a \"small\" meridian arc is given by\n\n!formula_6\n\nWhen the latitude difference is 1 degree, corresponding to radians, the arc distance is about\n\nThe distance in metres (correct to 0.01 metre) between latitudes formula_6 − 0.5 degrees and formula_6 + 0.5 degrees on the WGS84 spheroid is\n\nThe variation of this distance with latitude (on WGS84) is shown in the table along with the length of a degree of longitude (east-west distance):\n\nA calculator for any latitude is provided by the U.S. Government's National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA).\n\nThe following graph illustrates the variation of both a degree of latitude and a degree of longitude with latitude.\nHistorically a nautical mile was defined as the length of one minute of arc along a meridian of a spherical earth. An ellipsoid model leads to a variation of the nautical mile with latitude. This was resolved by defining the nautical mile to be exactly 1,852 metres. However for all practical purposes distances are measured from the latitude scale of charts. As the Royal Yachting Association says in its manual for day skippers: \"1 (minute) of Latitude = 1 sea mile\", followed by \"For most practical purposes distance is measured from the latitude scale, assuming that one minute of latitude equals one nautical mile\".\n\nThere are six auxiliary latitudes that have applications to special problems in geodesy, geophysics and the theory of map projections:\nBULLET::::- Geocentric latitude\nBULLET::::- Parametric (or reduced) latitude\nBULLET::::- Rectifying latitude\nBULLET::::- Authalic latitude\nBULLET::::- Conformal latitude\nBULLET::::- Isometric latitude\nThe definitions given in this section all relate to locations on the reference ellipsoid but the first two auxiliary latitudes, like the geodetic latitude, can be extended to define a three-dimensional geographic coordinate system as discussed below. The remaining latitudes are not used in this way; they are used \"only\" as intermediate constructs in map projections of the reference ellipsoid to the plane or in calculations of geodesics on the ellipsoid. Their numerical values are not of interest. For example, no one would need to calculate the authalic latitude of the Eiffel Tower.\n\nThe expressions below give the auxiliary latitudes in terms of the geodetic latitude, the semi-major axis, , and the eccentricity, . (For inverses see below.) The forms given are, apart from notational variants, those in the standard reference for map projections, namely \"Map projections: a working manual\" by J. P. Snyder. Derivations of these expressions may be found in Adams and online publications by Osborne and Rapp.\n\nThe geocentric latitude is the angle between the equatorial plane and the radius from the centre to a point on the surface. The relation between the geocentric latitude () and the geodetic latitude () is derived in the above references as\n\nThe geodetic and geocentric latitudes are equal at the equator and at the poles but at other latitudes they differ by a few minutes of arc. Taking the value of the squared eccentricity as 0.0067 (it depends on the choice of ellipsoid) the maximum difference of formula_13 may be shown to be about 11.5 minutes of arc at a geodetic latitude of approximately 45° 6′.\n\nThe parametric or reduced latitude, , is defined by the radius drawn from the centre of the ellipsoid to that point on the surrounding sphere (of radius ) which is the projection parallel to the Earth's axis of a point on the ellipsoid at latitude . It was introduced by Legendre and Bessel who solved problems for geodesics on the ellipsoid by transforming them to an equivalent problem for spherical geodesics by using this smaller latitude. Bessel's notation, , is also used in the current literature. The parametric latitude is related to the geodetic latitude by:\n\nThe alternative name arises from the parameterization of the equation of the ellipse describing a meridian section. In terms of Cartesian coordinates , the distance from the minor axis, and , the distance above the equatorial plane, the equation of the ellipse is:\n\nThe Cartesian coordinates of the point are parameterized by\n\nCayley suggested the term \"parametric latitude\" because of the form of these equations.\n\nThe parametric latitude is not used in the theory of map projections. Its most important application is in the theory of ellipsoid geodesics, (Vincenty, Karney).\n\nThe rectifying latitude, , is the meridian distance scaled so that its value at the poles is equal to 90 degrees or radians:\n\nwhere the meridian distance from the equator to a latitude is (see Meridian arc)\n\nand the length of the meridian quadrant from the equator to the pole (the polar distance) is\n\nUsing the rectifying latitude to define a latitude on a sphere of radius\n\ndefines a projection from the ellipsoid to the sphere such that all meridians have true length and uniform scale. The sphere may then be projected to the plane with an equirectangular projection to give a double projection from the ellipsoid to the plane such that all meridians have true length and uniform meridian scale. An example of the use of the rectifying latitude is the equidistant conic projection. (Snyder, Section 16). The rectifying latitude is also of great importance in the construction of the Transverse Mercator projection.\n\nThe authalic (Greek for same area) latitude, , gives an area-preserving transformation to a sphere.\n\nwhere\n\nand\n\nand the radius of the sphere is taken as\n\nAn example of the use of the authalic latitude is the Albers equal-area conic projection.\n\nThe conformal latitude, , gives an angle-preserving (conformal) transformation to the sphere.\n\nwhere is the Gudermannian function. (See also Mercator projection.)\n\nThe conformal latitude defines a transformation from the ellipsoid to a sphere of \"arbitrary\" radius such that the angle of intersection between any two lines on the ellipsoid is the same as the corresponding angle on the sphere (so that the shape of \"small\" elements is well preserved). A further conformal transformation from the sphere to the plane gives a conformal double projection from the ellipsoid to the plane. This is not the only way of generating such a conformal projection. For example, the 'exact' version of the Transverse Mercator projection on the ellipsoid is not a double projection. (It does, however, involve a generalisation of the conformal latitude to the complex plane).\n\nThe isometric latitude, , is used in the development of the ellipsoidal versions of the normal Mercator projection and the Transverse Mercator projection. The name \"isometric\" arises from the fact that at any point on the ellipsoid equal increments of and longitude give rise to equal distance displacements along the meridians and parallels respectively. The graticule defined by the lines of constant and constant , divides the surface of the ellipsoid into a mesh of squares (of varying size). The isometric latitude is zero at the equator but rapidly diverges from the geodetic latitude, tending to infinity at the poles. The conventional notation is given in Snyder (page 15):\n\nFor the \"normal\" Mercator projection (on the ellipsoid) this function defines the spacing of the parallels: if the length of the equator on the projection is (units of length or pixels) then the distance, , of a parallel of latitude from the equator is\n\nThe isometric latitude is closely related to the conformal latitude :\n\nThe formulae in the previous sections give the auxiliary latitude in terms of the geodetic latitude. The expressions for the geocentric and parametric latitudes may be inverted directly but this is impossible in the four remaining cases: the rectifying, authalic, conformal, and isometric latitudes. There are two methods of proceeding. The first is a numerical inversion of the defining equation for each and every particular value of the auxiliary latitude. The methods available are fixed-point iteration and Newton–Raphson root finding. The other, more useful, approach is to express the auxiliary latitude as a series in terms of the geodetic latitude and then invert the series by the method of Lagrange reversion. Such series are presented by Adams who uses Taylor series expansions and gives coefficients in terms of the eccentricity. Osborne derives series to arbitrary order by using the computer algebra package Maxima and expresses the coefficients in terms of both eccentricity and flattening. The series method is not applicable to the isometric latitude and one must use the conformal latitude in an intermediate step.\n\nThe plot to the right shows the difference between the geodetic latitude and the auxiliary latitudes other than the isometric latitude (which diverges to infinity at the poles) for the case of the WGS84 ellipsoid. The differences shown on the plot are in arc minutes. \nIn the Northern hemisphere (positive latitudes), \"θ\" ≤ \"χ\" ≤ \"μ\" ≤ \"ξ\" ≤ \"β\" ≤ \"φ\"; in the Southern hemisphere (negative latitudes), the inequalities are reversed, with equality at the equator and the poles. Although the graph appears symmetric about 45°, the minima of the curves actually lie between 45° 2′ and 45° 6′. Some representative data points are given in the table below. The conformal and geocentric latitudes are nearly indistinguishable, a fact that was exploited in the days of hand calculators to expedite the construction of map projections. \n\nTo first order in the flattening \"f\", the auxiliary latitudes can be expressed as\n\"ζ\" = \"φ\" − \"Cf\" sin 2\"φ\"\nwhere the constant \"C\" takes on the values\n[, , , 1, 1]\nfor\n\"ζ\" = [\"β\", \"ξ\", \"μ\", \"χ\", \"θ\"].\n+ Approximate difference from geodetic latitude ()\n! Parametric\n! Authalic\n! Rectifying\n! Conformal\n! Geocentric\n\nThe geodetic latitude, or any of the auxiliary latitudes defined on the reference ellipsoid, constitutes with longitude a two-dimensional coordinate system on that ellipsoid. To define the position of an arbitrary point it is necessary to extend such a coordinate system into three dimensions. Three latitudes are used in this way: the geodetic, geocentric and parametric latitudes are used in geodetic coordinates, spherical polar coordinates and ellipsoidal coordinates respectively.\n\nAt an arbitrary point consider the line which is normal to the reference ellipsoid. The geodetic coordinates are the latitude and longitude of the point on the ellipsoid and the distance . This height differs from the height above the geoid or a reference height such as that above mean sea level at a specified location. The direction of will also differ from the direction of a vertical plumb line. The relation of these different heights requires knowledge of the shape of the geoid and also the gravity field of the Earth.\n\nThe geocentric latitude is the complement of the polar angle in conventional spherical polar coordinates in which the coordinates of a point are where is the distance of from the centre , is the angle between the radius vector and the polar axis and is longitude. Since the normal at a general point on the ellipsoid does not pass through the centre it is clear that points on the normal, which all have the same geodetic latitude, will have differing geocentric latitudes. Spherical polar coordinate systems are used in the analysis of the gravity field.\n\nThe parametric latitude can also be extended to a three-dimensional coordinate system. For a point not on the reference ellipsoid (semi-axes and ) construct an auxiliary ellipsoid which is confocal (same foci , ) with the reference ellipsoid: the necessary condition is that the product of semi-major axis and eccentricity is the same for both ellipsoids. Let be the semi-minor axis () of the auxiliary ellipsoid. Further let be the parametric latitude of on the auxiliary ellipsoid. The set define the ellipsoid coordinates. These coordinates are the natural choice in models of the gravity field for a rotating ellipsoidal body.\n\nThe relations between the above coordinate systems, and also Cartesian coordinates are not presented here. The transformation between geodetic and Cartesian coordinates may be found in Geographic coordinate conversion. The relation of Cartesian and spherical polars is given in Spherical coordinate system. The relation of Cartesian and ellipsoidal coordinates is discussed in Torge.\n\nAstronomical latitude () is the angle between the equatorial plane and the true vertical at a point on the surface. The true vertical, the direction of a plumb line, is also the direction of the gravity acceleration, the resultant of the gravitational acceleration (mass-based) and the centrifugal acceleration at that latitude. Astronomic latitude is calculated from angles measured between the zenith and stars whose declination is accurately known.\n\nIn general the true vertical at a point on the surface does not exactly coincide with either the normal to the reference ellipsoid or the normal to the geoid. The angle between the astronomic and geodetic normals is usually a few seconds of arc but it is important in geodesy. The reason why it differs from the normal to the geoid is, because the geoid is an idealized, theoretical shape \"at mean sea level\". Points on the real surface of the earth are usually above or below this idealized geoid surface and here the true vertical can vary slightly. Also, the true vertical at a point at a specific time is influenced by tidal forces, which the theoretical geoid averages out.\n\nAstronomical latitude is not to be confused with declination, the coordinate astronomers use in a similar way to specify the angular position of stars north/south of the celestial equator (see equatorial coordinates), nor with ecliptic latitude, the coordinate that astronomers use to specify the angular position of stars north/south of the ecliptic (see ecliptic coordinates).\n\nBULLET::::- Altitude (mean sea level)\nBULLET::::- Bowditch's American Practical Navigator\nBULLET::::- Cardinal direction\nBULLET::::- Circle of latitude\nBULLET::::- Declination on celestial sphere\nBULLET::::- Degree Confluence Project\nBULLET::::- Geodesy\nBULLET::::- Geodetic datum\nBULLET::::- Geographic coordinate system\nBULLET::::- Geographical distance\nBULLET::::- Geotagging\nBULLET::::- Great-circle distance\nBULLET::::- History of latitude measurements\nBULLET::::- Horse latitudes\nBULLET::::- List of countries by latitude\nBULLET::::- Longitude\nBULLET::::- Natural Area Code\nBULLET::::- Navigation\nBULLET::::- Orders of magnitude (length)\nBULLET::::- World Geodetic System\n\nBULLET::::- GEONets Names Server, access to the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency's (NGA) database of foreign geographic feature names.\nBULLET::::- Resources for determining your latitude and longitude\nBULLET::::- Convert decimal degrees into degrees, minutes, seconds - Info about decimal to sexagesimal conversion\nBULLET::::- Convert decimal degrees into degrees, minutes, seconds\nBULLET::::- Distance calculation based on latitude and longitude - JavaScript version\nBULLET::::- 16th Century Latitude Survey\nBULLET::::- Determination of Latitude by Francis Drake on the Coast of California in 1579\nBULLET::::- Longitude and Latitude of Points of Interest\nBULLET::::- Online computation of all relevant quantities referring to an ellipsoidal latitude on a chosen reference ellipsoid\n"}
{"id": "17617", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17617", "title": "Longitude", "text": "Longitude\n\nLongitude (, ), is a geographic coordinate that specifies the east–west position of a point on the Earth's surface, or the surface of a celestial body. It is an angular measurement, usually expressed in degrees and denoted by the Greek letter lambda (λ). Meridians (lines running from pole to pole) connect points with the same longitude. By convention, one of these, the Prime Meridian, which passes through the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, England, was allocated the position of 0° longitude. The longitude of other places is measured as the angle east or west from the Prime Meridian, ranging from 0° at the Prime Meridian to +180° eastward and −180° westward. Specifically, it is the angle between a plane through the Prime Meridian and a plane through both poles and the location in question. (This forms a right-handed coordinate system with the -axis (right hand thumb) pointing from the Earth's center toward the North Pole and the -axis (right hand index finger) extending from the Earth's center through the Equator at the Prime Meridian.)\n\nA location's north–south position along a meridian is given by its latitude, which is approximately the angle between the local vertical and the equatorial plane.\n\nIf the Earth were perfectly spherical and radially homogeneous, then the longitude at a point would be equal to the angle between a vertical north–south plane through that point and the plane of the Greenwich meridian. Everywhere on Earth the vertical north–south plane would contain the Earth's axis. But the Earth is not radially homogeneous and has rugged terrain, which affect gravity and so can shift the vertical plane away from the Earth's axis. The vertical north–south plane still intersects the plane of the Greenwich meridian at some angle; that angle is the astronomical longitude, calculated from star observations. The longitude shown on maps and GPS devices is the angle between the Greenwich plane and a not-quite-vertical plane through the point; the not-quite-vertical plane is perpendicular to the surface of the spheroid chosen to approximate the Earth's sea-level surface, rather than perpendicular to the sea-level surface itself.\n\nThe measurement of longitude is important both to cartography and for ocean navigation. Mariners and explorers for most of history struggled to determine longitude. Finding a method of determining longitude took centuries, resulting in the history of longitude recording the effort of some of the greatest scientific minds.\n\nLatitude was calculated by observing with quadrant or astrolabe the altitude of the sun or of charted stars above the horizon, but longitude is harder.\n\nAmerigo Vespucci was perhaps the first European to proffer a solution, after devoting a great deal of time and energy studying the problem during his sojourns in the New World:\nAs to longitude, I declare that I found so much difficulty in determining it that I was put to great pains to ascertain the east-west distance I had covered. The final result of my labours was that I found nothing better to do than to watch for and take observations at night of the conjunction of one planet with another, and especially of the conjunction of the moon with the other planets, because the moon is swifter in her course than any other planet. I compared my observations with an almanac. After I had made experiments many nights, one night, the twenty-third of August 1499, there was a conjunction of the moon with Mars, which according to the almanac was to occur at midnight or a half hour before. I found that...at midnight Mars's position was three and a half degrees to the east.\nBy comparing the positions of the moon and Mars with their anticipated positions, Vespucci was able to crudely deduce his longitude. But this method had several limitations: First, it required the occurrence of a specific astronomical event (in this case, Mars passing through the same right ascension as the moon), and the observer needed to anticipate this event via an astronomical almanac. One needed also to know the precise time, which was difficult to ascertain in foreign lands. Finally, it required a stable viewing platform, rendering the technique useless on the rolling deck of a ship at sea. See Lunar distance (navigation).\n\nIn 1612 Galileo Galilei demonstrated that with sufficiently accurate knowledge of the orbits of the moons of Jupiter one could use their positions as a universal clock and this would make possible the determination of longitude, but the method he devised was impracticable for navigators on ships because of their instability. In 1714 the British government passed the Longitude Act which offered large financial rewards to the first person to demonstrate a practical method for determining the longitude of a ship at sea. These rewards motivated many to search for a solution.\n\nJohn Harrison, a self-educated English clockmaker, invented the marine chronometer, the key piece in solving the problem of accurately establishing longitude at sea, thus revolutionising and extending the possibility of safe long distance sea travel. A French expedition under Charles-François-César Le Tellier de Montmirail performed the first measurement of longitude aboard \"Aurore\" in 1767. Though the Board of Longitude rewarded John Harrison for his marine chronometer in 1773, chronometers remained very expensive and the lunar distance method continued to be used for decades. Finally, the combination of the availability of marine chronometers and wireless telegraph time signals put an end to the use of lunars in the 20th century.\n\nUnlike latitude, which has the equator as a natural starting position, there is no natural starting position for longitude. Therefore, a reference meridian had to be chosen. It was a popular practice to use a nation's capital as the starting point, but other locations were also used. While British cartographers had long used the Greenwich meridian in London, other references were used elsewhere, including El Hierro, Rome, Copenhagen, Jerusalem, Saint Petersburg, Pisa, Paris (see the article \"Paris meridian\"), Philadelphia, and Washington D.C. In 1884 the International Meridian Conference adopted the Greenwich meridian as the \"universal Prime Meridian\" or \"zero point of longitude\".\n\nLongitude is given as an angular measurement ranging from 0° at the Prime Meridian to +180° eastward and −180° westward. The Greek letter λ (lambda), is used to denote the location of a place on Earth east or west of the Prime Meridian.\n\nEach degree of longitude is sub-divided into 60 minutes, each of which is divided into 60 seconds. A longitude is thus specified in sexagesimal notation as 23° 27′ 30″ E. For higher precision, the seconds are specified with a decimal fraction. An alternative representation uses degrees and minutes, where parts of a minute are expressed in decimal notation with a fraction, thus: 23° 27.5′ E. Degrees may also be expressed as a decimal fraction: 23.45833° E. For calculations, the angular measure may be converted to radians, so longitude may also be expressed in this manner as a signed fraction of (pi), or an unsigned fraction of 2.\n\nFor calculations, the West/East suffix is replaced by a negative sign in the western hemisphere. The preferred convention—that East is positive—is consistent with a right-handed Cartesian coordinate system, with the North Pole up. A specific longitude may then be combined with a specific latitude (usually positive in the northern hemisphere) to give a precise position on the Earth's surface. Confusingly, the convention of negative for East is also sometimes seen, most commonly in the United States; the Earth System Research Laboratory notes that, while it differs from the international standard, it \"make(s) coordinate entry less awkward\" for applications confined to the Western Hemisphere.\n\nThere is no other physical principle determining longitude directly but with time. Longitude at a point may be determined by calculating the time difference between that at its location and Coordinated Universal Time (UTC). Since there are 24 hours in a day and 360 degrees in a circle, the sun moves across the sky at a rate of 15 degrees per hour (360° ÷ 24 hours = 15° per hour). So if the time zone a person is in is three hours ahead of UTC then that person is near 45° longitude (3 hours × 15° per hour = 45°). The word \"near\" is used because the point might not be at the center of the time zone; also the time zones are defined politically, so their centers and boundaries often do not lie on meridians at multiples of 15°. In order to perform this calculation, however, a person needs to have a chronometer (watch) set to UTC and needs to determine local time by solar or astronomical observation. The details are more complex than described here: see the articles on Universal Time and on the equation of time for more details.\n\nNote that the longitude is singular at the Poles and calculations that are sufficiently accurate for other positions may be inaccurate at or near the Poles. Also the discontinuity at the ±180° meridian must be handled with care in calculations. An example is a calculation of east displacement by subtracting two longitudes, which gives the wrong answer if the two positions are on either side of this meridian. To avoid these complexities, consider replacing latitude and longitude with another horizontal position representation in calculation.\n\nThe Earth's tectonic plates move relative to one another in different directions at speeds on the order of 50 to 100mm per year. So points on the Earth's surface on different plates are always in motion relative to one another. For example, the longitudinal difference between a point on the Equator in Uganda, on the African Plate, and a point on the Equator in Ecuador, on the South American Plate, is increasing by about 0.0014 arcseconds per year. These tectonic movements likewise affect latitude.\n\nIf a global reference frame (such as WGS84, for example) is used, the longitude of a place on the surface will change from year to year. To minimize this change, when dealing just with points on a single plate, a different reference frame can be used, whose coordinates are fixed to a particular plate, such as \"NAD83\" for North America or \"ETRS89\" for Europe.\n\nThe length of a degree of longitude (east-west distance) depends only on the radius of a circle of latitude. For a sphere of radius that radius at latitude is , and the length of a one-degree (or radian) arc along a circle of latitude is\n\nWhen the Earth is modelled by an ellipsoid this arc length becomes\nwhere , the eccentricity of the ellipsoid, is related to the major and minor axes (the equatorial and polar radii respectively) by\n\nAn alternative formula is\n\nCos decreases from 1 at the equator to 0 at the poles, which measures how circles of latitude shrink from the equator to a point at the pole, so the length of a degree of longitude decreases likewise. This contrasts with the small (1%) increase in the length of a degree of latitude (north-south distance), equator to pole. The table shows both for the WGS84 ellipsoid with = and = . Note that the distance between two points 1 degree apart on the same circle of latitude, measured along that circle of latitude, is slightly more than the shortest (geodesic) distance between those points (unless on the equator, where these are equal); the difference is less than .\n\nA geographical mile is defined to be the length of one minute of arc along the equator (one equatorial minute of longitude), therefore a degree of longitude along the equator is exactly 60 geographical miles or 111.3 kilometers, as there are 60 minutes in a degree. The length of 1 minute of longitude along the equator is 1 geographical mile or , while the length of 1 second of it is 0.016 geographical mile or .\n\nPlanetary co-ordinate systems are defined relative to their mean axis of rotation and various definitions of longitude depending on the body. The longitude systems of most of those bodies with observable rigid surfaces have been defined by references to a surface feature such as a crater. The north pole is that pole of rotation that lies on the north side of the invariable plane of the solar system (near the ecliptic). The location of the prime meridian as well as the position of the body's north pole on the celestial sphere may vary with time due to precession of the axis of rotation of the planet (or satellite). If the position angle of the body's prime meridian increases with time, the body has a direct (or prograde) rotation; otherwise the rotation is said to be retrograde.\n\nIn the absence of other information, the axis of rotation is assumed to be normal to the mean orbital plane; Mercury and most of the satellites are in this category. For many of the satellites, it is assumed that the rotation rate is equal to the mean orbital period. In the case of the giant planets, since their surface features are constantly changing and moving at various rates, the rotation of their magnetic fields is used as a reference instead. In the case of the Sun, even this criterion fails (because its magnetosphere is very complex and does not really rotate in a steady fashion), and an agreed-upon value for the rotation of its equator is used instead.\n\nFor \"planetographic longitude\", west longitudes (i.e., longitudes measured positively to the west) are used when the rotation is prograde, and east longitudes (i.e., longitudes measured positively to the east) when the rotation is retrograde. In simpler terms, imagine a distant, non-orbiting observer viewing a planet as it rotates. Also suppose that this observer is within the plane of the planet's equator. A point on the Equator that passes directly in front of this observer later in time has a higher planetographic longitude than a point that did so earlier in time.\n\nHowever, \"planetocentric longitude\" is always measured positively to the east, regardless of which way the planet rotates. \"East\" is defined as the counter-clockwise direction around the planet, as seen from above its north pole, and the north pole is whichever pole more closely aligns with the Earth's north pole. Longitudes traditionally have been written using \"E\" or \"W\" instead of \"+\" or \"−\" to indicate this polarity. For example, −91°, 91°W, +269° and 269°E all mean the same thing.\n\nThe reference surfaces for some planets (such as Earth and Mars) are ellipsoids of revolution for which the equatorial radius is larger than the polar radius, such that they are oblate spheroids. Smaller bodies (Io, Mimas, etc.) tend to be better approximated by triaxial ellipsoids; however, triaxial ellipsoids would render many computations more complicated, especially those related to map projections. Many projections would lose their elegant and popular properties. For this reason spherical reference surfaces are frequently used in mapping programs.\n\nThe modern standard for maps of Mars (since about 2002) is to use planetocentric coordinates. The meridian of Mars is located at Airy-0 crater. For Mercury, the only other planet with a solid surface visible from Earth, a thermocentric coordinate is used: the prime meridian runs through the point on the equator where the planet is hottest (due to the planet's rotation and orbit, the sun briefly retrogrades at noon at this point during perihelion, giving it more sun). By convention, this meridian is defined as exactly twenty degrees of longitude east of Hun Kal. \n\nTidally-locked bodies have a natural reference longitude passing through the point nearest to their parent body: 0° the center of the primary-facing hemisphere, 90° the center of the leading hemisphere, 180° the center of the anti-primary hemisphere, and 270° the center of the trailing hemisphere. However, libration due to non-circular orbits or axial tilts causes this point to move around any fixed point on the celestial body like an analemma.\n\nBULLET::::- American Practical Navigator\nBULLET::::- Cardinal direction\nBULLET::::- Ecliptic longitude\nBULLET::::- Geodesy\nBULLET::::- Geodetic system\nBULLET::::- Geographic coordinate system\nBULLET::::- Geographical distance\nBULLET::::- Geotagging\nBULLET::::- Great-circle distance\nBULLET::::- History of longitude\nBULLET::::- \"The Island of the Day Before\"\nBULLET::::- Latitude\nBULLET::::- Meridian arc\nBULLET::::- Natural Area Code\nBULLET::::- Navigation\nBULLET::::- Orders of magnitude\nBULLET::::- Right ascension on celestial sphere\nBULLET::::- World Geodetic System\n\nBULLET::::- Resources for determining your latitude and longitude\nBULLET::::- IAU/IAG Working Group On Cartographic Coordinates and Rotational Elements of the Planets and Satellites\nBULLET::::- \"Longitude forged\": an essay exposing a hoax solution to the problem of calculating longitude, undetected in Dava Sobel's Longitude, from TLS, November 12, 2008.\nBULLET::::- Board of Longitude Collection, Cambridge Digital Library – complete digital version of the Board's archive\nBULLET::::- Longitude And Latitude Of Points of Interest\nBULLET::::- Length Of A Degree Of Latitude And Longitude Calculator\n"}
{"id": "17618", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17618", "title": "Linus Torvalds", "text": "Linus Torvalds\n\nLinus Benedict Torvalds ( , ; born December 28, 1969) is a Finnish-American software engineer who is the creator and, historically, the principal developer of the Linux kernel, which is the kernel for Linux operating systems (distributions) and other operating systems such as Android and Chrome OS. He also created the distributed version control system Git and the scuba dive logging and planning software Subsurface.\n\nHe was honored, along with Shinya Yamanaka, with the 2012 Millennium Technology Prize by the Technology Academy Finland \"in recognition of his creation of a new open source operating system for computers leading to the widely used Linux kernel.\" He is also the recipient of the 2014 IEEE Computer Society Computer Pioneer Award and the 2018 IEEE Masaru Ibuka Consumer Electronics Award.\n\nTorvalds was born in Helsinki, Finland, on December 28, 1969. He is the son of journalists Anna and Nils Torvalds, and the grandson of statistician Leo Törnqvist and of poet Ole Torvalds. Both of his parents were campus radicals at the University of Helsinki in the 1960s. His family belongs to the Swedish-speaking minority. Torvalds was named after Linus Pauling, the Nobel Prize-winning American chemist, although in the book \"Rebel Code: Linux and the Open Source Revolution\", Torvalds is quoted as saying, \"I think I was named equally for Linus the Peanuts cartoon character\", noting that this makes him half \"Nobel Prize-winning chemist\" and half \"blanket-carrying cartoon character\".\n\nTorvalds attended the University of Helsinki between 1988 and 1996, graduating with a master's degree in computer science from the NODES research group. His academic career was interrupted after his first year of study when he joined the Finnish Army Uusimaa brigade, in the summer of 1989, selecting the 11-month officer training program to fulfill the mandatory military service of Finland. In the army he held the rank of Second Lieutenant, with the role of a ballistic calculation officer. Torvalds bought computer science professor Andrew Tanenbaum's book \"\", in which Tanenbaum describes MINIX, an educational stripped-down version of Unix. In 1990, he resumed his university studies, and was exposed to UNIX for the first time, in the form of a DEC MicroVAX running ULTRIX. His MSc thesis was titled \"Linux: A Portable Operating System\".\n\nHis interest in computers began with a Commodore VIC-20, at the age of 11 in 1981, initially programming in BASIC, but later by directly accessing the 6502 CPU in machine code. He did not make use of assembly language. After the VIC-20 he purchased a Sinclair QL, which he modified extensively, especially its operating system. \"Because it was so hard to get software for it in Finland, Linus wrote his own assembler and editor (in addition to Pac-Man graphics libraries)\" for the QL, as well as a few games. He wrote a \"Pac-Man\" clone named \"Cool Man\". On January 5, 1991 he purchased an Intel 80386-based clone of IBM PC before receiving his MINIX copy, which in turn enabled him to begin work on Linux.\n\nThe first prototypes of Linux were publicly released later that year (1991). Version 1.0 was released on March 14, 1994.\n\nTorvalds first encountered the GNU Project in 1991, after another Swedish-speaking computer science student, Lars Wirzenius, took him to the University of Technology to listen to free software guru Richard Stallman's speech. Torvalds used Stallman's GNU General Public License version 2 (GPLv2) for his Linux kernel.\n\nAfter a visit to Transmeta in late 1996, Torvalds accepted a position at the company in California, where he would work from February 1997 until June 2003. He then moved to the Open Source Development Labs, which has since merged with the Free Standards Group to become the Linux Foundation, under whose auspices he continues to work. In June 2004, Torvalds and his family moved to Dunthorpe, Oregon, to be closer to the OSDL's Beaverton, Oregon-based headquarters.\n\nFrom 1997 to 1999, he was involved in 86open helping to choose the standard binary format for Linux and Unix. In 1999, he was named by the \"MIT Technology Review\" TR100 as one of the world's top 100 innovators under age 35.\n\nIn 1999, Red Hat and VA Linux, both leading developers of Linux-based software, presented Torvalds with stock options in gratitude for his creation. That same year both companies went public and Torvalds's share value temporarily shot up to roughly US$20 million.\n\nHis personal mascot is a penguin nicknamed Tux, which has been widely adopted by the Linux community as the mascot of the Linux kernel.\n\nAlthough Torvalds believes \"open source is the only right way to do software\", he also has said that he uses the \"best tool for the job\", even if that includes proprietary software. He was criticized for his use and alleged advocacy of the proprietary BitKeeper software for version control in the Linux kernel. Torvalds subsequently wrote a free-software replacement for BitKeeper called Git.\n\nIn 2008, Torvalds stated that he used the Fedora distribution of Linux because it had fairly good support for the PowerPC processor architecture, which he had favored at the time. His usage of Fedora was confirmed in a later 2012 interview. He has also posted updates about his choice of desktop environment, often in response to perceived feature regressions.\n\nCurrently, the Linux Foundation sponsors Torvalds so he can work full-time on improving Linux.\n\nLinus Torvalds is known for disagreeing with other developers on the Linux kernel mailing list. Calling himself a \"really unpleasant person\", he later explained \"I'd like to be a nice person and curse less and encourage people to grow rather than telling them they are idiots. I'm sorry – I tried, it's just not in me.\" His attitude, which Torvalds considers necessary for making his point clear, has drawn criticism from Intel programmer Sage Sharp and systemd developer Lennart Poettering, among others.\n\nOn Sunday, September 16, 2018 the Linux Kernel \"Code of Conflict\" was suddenly replaced by a new \"Code of Conduct\" based on the Contributor Covenant. Shortly thereafter, in the release notes for Linux 4.19-rc4, Linus apologized for his behavior, calling the personal attacks of the past \"unprofessional and uncalled for\" and announced a period of \"time off\" to \"get some assistance on how to understand people's emotions and respond appropriately\". It soon transpired that these events followed \"The New Yorker\" approaching Linus with a series of questions critical of his conduct. Following the release of Linux 4.19 on October 22, Linus went back to maintaining the kernel.\n\nInitially, Torvalds wanted to call the kernel he developed \"Freax\" (a combination of \"free\", \"freak\", and the letter X to indicate that it is a Unix-like system), but his friend Ari Lemmke, who administered the FTP server where the kernel was first hosted for download, named Torvalds's directory \"linux\".\n\nAs of 2006, approximately two percent of the Linux kernel was written by Torvalds himself. Because thousands have contributed to the Linux kernel, this percentage is one of the largest contributions to it. However, he stated in 2012 that his own personal contribution is now mostly merging code written by others, with little programming. Torvalds retains the highest authority to decide which new code is incorporated into the standard Linux kernel.\n\nTorvalds holds the \"Linux\" trademark and monitors the use of it, chiefly through the Linux Mark Institute.\n\nLinus Torvalds is married to Tove Torvalds (née Monni)—a six-time Finnish national karate champion—whom he first met in late 1993. Linus was running introductory computer laboratory exercises for students and instructed the course attendees to send him an e-mail as a test, to which Tove responded with an e-mail asking for a date. Tove and Linus were later married and have three daughters, two of whom were born in the United States. The Linux kernel's \"reboot\" system call accepts their dates of birth (written in hexadecimal) as magic values.\n\nTorvalds has described himself as \"completely a-religious—atheist\", adding that \"I find that people seem to think religion brings morals and appreciation of nature. I actually think it detracts from both. It gives people the excuse to say, 'Oh, nature was just created,' and so the act of creation is seen to be something miraculous. I appreciate the fact that, 'Wow, it's incredible that something like this could have happened in the first place. He later added that while in Europe religion is mostly a personal issue, in the United States it has become very politicized. When discussing the issue of church and state separation, Torvalds also said, \"Yeah, it's kind of ironic that in many European countries, there is actually a kind of legal binding between the state and the state religion.\" However, in a story about the March LinuxWorld Conference titled \"Linus the Liberator\", Torvalds is quoted as saying \"There are like two golden rules in life. One is 'Do unto others as you would want them to do unto you.' For some reason, people associate this with Christianity. I'm not a Christian. I'm agnostic. The other rule is 'Be proud of what you do.\n\nIn 2010, Torvalds became a United States citizen and registered to vote in the United States. He is unaffiliated with any U.S. political party, saying, \"I have way too much personal pride to want to be associated with any of them, quite frankly.\"\n\nLinus developed an interest in scuba diving in the early 2000s and went on to achieve numerous certifications, which later led to him creating the Subsurface project.\n\n! colspan=\"3\" style=\"background: LightSteelBlue;\"  Awards and achievements\n! Year !! Award !! Notes\n2018\nIEEE Masaru Ibuka Consumer Electronics Award\nIEEE Masaru Ibuka Consumer Electronics Award is conferred by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers for outstanding contributions to consumer electronics technology has been named in honor the co-founder and honorary chairman of Sony Corporation, Masaru Ibuka. 2018 Ibuka award was conferred to Linus Torvalds \"For his leadership of the development and proliferation of Linux.\"\n2014\nIEEE Computer Pioneer Award\nOn April 23, 2014, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers named Torvalds as the 2014 recipient of the IEEE Computer Society's Computer Pioneer Award. The Computer Pioneer Award was established in 1981 by the IEEE Computer Society Board of Governors to recognize and honor the vision of those whose efforts resulted in the creation and continued vitality of the computer industry. The award is presented to outstanding individuals whose main contribution to the concepts and development of the computer field was made at least 15 years earlier.\n2012\nInternet Hall of Fame\nOn April 23, 2012, at Internet Society's Global INET conference in Geneva, Switzerland, Torvalds was one of the inaugural inductees into the Internet Hall of Fame, one of ten in the Innovators category and thirty-three overall inductees.\n2012\nMillennium Technology Prize\nOn April 20, 2012, Torvalds was declared one of two winners of that year's Millennium Technology Prize, along with Shinya Yamanaka. The honor is widely described as technology's equivalent of the Nobel Prize.\n2010\nC&C Prize\nHe was awarded the C&C Prize by the NEC Corporation in 2010 for \"contributions to the advancement of the information technology industry, education, research, and the improvement of our lives\".\n2008\nHall of Fellows\n2005\nVollum Award\nIn August 2005, Torvalds received the Vollum Award from Reed College.\n2003\nLinus (Moon)\nIn 2003, the naming of the asteroid moon Linus was motivated in part by the fact that the discoverer was an enthusiastic Linux user. Although the naming proposal referred to the mythological Linus, son of the muse Calliope and the inventor of melody and rhythm, the name was also meant to honor Linus Torvalds, and Linus van Pelt, a character in the Peanuts comic strip.\n2001\nTakeda Award\n2000\nLovelace Medal\nIn 2000, he was awarded the Lovelace Medal from the British Computer Society.\n1998\nEFF Pioneer Award\nIn 1998, Torvalds received an EFF Pioneer Award.\n1997\nAcademic Honors\nIn 1997, Torvalds received his master's degree (Laudatur Grade) from the Department of Computer Science at the University of Helsinki. Two years later he received honorary doctor status at Stockholm University, and in 2000, he received the same honor from his \"alma mater\".\nUniversity of Helsinki has named an auditorium after Torvalds and his computer is on display at the Department of Computer Science.\n1996\n9793 Torvalds (Asteroid)\nIn 1996, the asteroid 9793 Torvalds was named after him.\n1995\nRunning Linux on AlphaStation\nIn the period 1994–1999 Torvalds developed versions of Linux on early AlphaServer systems made available to him by the engineering department of Digital Equipment Corporation. Compaq software engineers developed special Linux kernel modules. Linux distributions that ran on AlphaServer systems were Red Hat 7.2. and Gentoo Linux.\n\n\"Time\" magazine has recognized Torvalds multiple times:\nBULLET::::- In 2000, he was 17th in their poll.\nBULLET::::- In 2004, he was named one of the most influential people in the world by \"Time\" magazine.\nBULLET::::- In 2006, the magazine's Europe edition named him one of the revolutionary heroes of the past 60 years.\n\n\"InfoWorld\" presented him with the 2000 Award for Industry Achievement. In 2005, Torvalds appeared as one of \"the best managers\" in a survey by \"BusinessWeek\". In 2006, \"Business 2.0\" magazine named him one of \"10 people who don't matter\" because the growth of Linux has shrunk Torvalds's individual impact.\n\nIn summer 2004, viewers of YLE (the Finnish Broadcasting Company) placed Torvalds 16th in the network's 100 Greatest Finns. In 2010, as part of a series called \"The Britannica Guide to the World's Most Influential People\", Torvalds was listed among \"The 100 Most Influential Inventors of All Time\" ().\n\nOn October 11, 2017, the Linux company SUSE made a song titled \"Linus Said\".\n\nBULLET::::- Moody, Glyn: Rebel Code. Engl. the beginning of work: Rebel Code. Eng. Riikka Toivanen and Heikki Karjalainen. In January 2001. .\nBULLET::::- Nikkanen, Tuula: The Linux story. Satku, 2000. .\n\nBULLET::::- Linus's law\nBULLET::::- Tanenbaum–Torvalds debate\nBULLET::::- Tux\nBULLET::::- List of computer pioneers\n\nBULLET::::- Linus' blog at Blogger (last post in 2011)\nBULLET::::- Linus Torvalds and His Five Entrepreneurial Lessons at AllBusiness.com\nBULLET::::- Ten years of NODES\nBULLET::::- Linus Torvalds: Linux succeeded thanks to selfishness and trust\nBULLET::::- Torvalds interview\n"}
{"id": "17626", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17626", "title": "Trade union", "text": "Trade union\n\nA trade union (or a labor union in the U.S.) is an association of workers forming a legal unit or legal personhood, usually called a \"bargaining unit\", which acts as bargaining agent and legal representative for a unit of employees in all matters of law or right arising from or in the administration of a collective agreement. Labour unions typically fund the formal organization, head office, and legal team functions of the labour union through regular fees or union dues. The delegate staff of the labour union representation in the workforce are made up of workplace volunteers who are appointed by members in democratic elections.\n\nToday, unions are usually formed for the purpose of securing improvement in pay, benefits, working conditions, or social and political status through collective bargaining by the increased bargaining power wielded by the banding of the workers. The trade union, through an elected leadership and bargaining committee, bargains with the employer on behalf of union members (rank and file members) and negotiates labour contracts (collective bargaining) with employers. The most common purpose of these associations or unions is \"maintaining or improving the conditions of their employment\". This may include the negotiation of wages, work rules, occupational health and safety standards, complaint procedures, rules governing status of employees including promotions, just cause conditions for termination, and employment benefits.\n\nUnions may organize a particular section of skilled workers (craft unionism), a cross-section of workers from various trades (general unionism), or attempt to organize all workers within a particular industry (industrial unionism). The agreements negotiated by a union are binding on the rank and file members and the employer and in some cases on other non-member workers. Trade unions traditionally have a constitution which details the governance of their bargaining unit and also have governance at various levels of government depending on the industry that binds them legally to their negotiations and functioning.\n\nOriginating in Great Britain, trade unions became popular in many countries during the Industrial Revolution. Trade unions may be composed of individual workers, professionals, past workers, students, apprentices or the unemployed. Trade union density, or the percentage of workers belonging to a trade union, is highest in the Nordic countries.\n\nSince the publication of the \"History of Trade Unionism\" (1894) by Sidney and Beatrice Webb, the predominant historical view is that a trade union \"is a continuous association on wage earners for the purpose of maintaining or improving the conditions of their employment.\" Karl Marx described trade unions thus: \"The value of labour-power constitutes the conscious and explicit foundation of the trade unions, whose importance for the […] working class can scarcely be overestimated. The trade unions aim at nothing less than to prevent the reduction of wages below the level that is traditionally maintained in the various branches of industry. That is to say, they wish to prevent the price of labour-power from falling below its value\" (\"Capital\" V1, 1867, p. 1069).\n\nA modern definition by the Australian Bureau of Statistics states that a trade union is \"an organization consisting predominantly of employees, the principal activities of which include the negotiation of rates of pay and conditions of employment for its members.\"\n\nYet historian R.A. Leeson, in \"United we Stand\" (1971), said:\nRecent historical research by Bob James in \"Craft, Trade or Mystery\" (2001) puts forward the view that trade unions are part of a broader movement of benefit societies, which includes medieval guilds, Freemasons, Oddfellows, friendly societies, and other fraternal organizations.\n\nThe 18th century economist Adam Smith noted the imbalance in the rights of workers in regards to owners (or \"masters\"). In \"The Wealth of Nations\", , Smith wrote:\n\nAs Smith noted, unions were illegal for many years in most countries, although Smith argued that it should remain illegal to fix wages or prices by employees or employers. There were severe penalties for attempting to organize unions, up to and including execution. Despite this, unions were formed and began to acquire political power, eventually resulting in a body of labour law that not only legalized organizing efforts, but codified the relationship between employers and those employees organized into unions.\n\nThe origins of trade unions can be traced back to 18th century Britain, where the rapid expansion of industrial society then taking place drew women, children, rural workers and immigrants into the work force in large numbers and in new roles. They encountered a large hostility in their early existence from employers and government groups; at the time, unions and unionists were regularly prosecuted under various restraint of trade and conspiracy statutes. This pool of unskilled and semi-skilled labour spontaneously organized in fits and starts throughout its beginnings, and would later be an important arena for the development of trade unions. Trade unions have sometimes been seen as successors to the guilds of medieval Europe, though the relationship between the two is disputed, as the masters of the guilds employed workers (apprentices and journeymen) who were not allowed to organize.\n\nTrade unions and collective bargaining were outlawed from no later than the middle of the 14th century, when the Ordinance of Labourers was enacted in the Kingdom of England, but their way of thinking was the one that endured down the centuries, inspiring evolutions and advances in thinking which eventually gave workers their necessary rights. As collective bargaining and early worker unions grew with the onset of the Industrial Revolution, the government began to clamp down on what it saw as the danger of popular unrest at the time of the Napoleonic Wars. In 1799, the Combination Act was passed, which banned trade unions and collective bargaining by British workers. Although the unions were subject to often severe repression until 1824, they were already widespread in cities such as London. Workplace militancy had also manifested itself as Luddism and had been prominent in struggles such as the 1820 Rising in Scotland, in which 60,000 workers went on a general strike, which was soon crushed. Sympathy for the plight of the workers brought repeal of the acts in 1824, although the Combination Act 1825 severely restricted their activity.\n\nBy the 1810s, the first labour organizations to bring together workers of divergent occupations were formed. Possibly the first such union was the General Union of Trades, also known as the Philanthropic Society, founded in 1818 in Manchester. The latter name was to hide the organization's real purpose in a time when trade unions were still illegal.\n\nThe first attempts at setting up a national general union were made in the 1820s and 30s. The National Association for the Protection of Labour was established in 1830 by John Doherty, after an apparently unsuccessful attempt to create a similar national presence with the National Union of Cotton-spinners. The Association quickly enrolled approximately 150 unions, consisting mostly of textile related unions, but also including mechanics, blacksmiths, and various others. Membership rose to between 10,000 and 20,000 individuals spread across the five counties of Lancashire, Cheshire, Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire and Leicestershire within a year. To establish awareness and legitimacy, the union started the weekly \"Voice of the People\" publication, having the declared intention \"to unite the productive classes of the community in one common bond of union.\"\n\nIn 1834, the Welsh socialist Robert Owen established the Grand National Consolidated Trades Union. The organization attracted a range of socialists from Owenites to revolutionaries and played a part in the protests after the Tolpuddle Martyrs' case, but soon collapsed.\n\nMore permanent trade unions were established from the 1850s, better resourced but often less radical. The London Trades Council was founded in 1860, and the Sheffield Outrages spurred the establishment of the Trades Union Congress in 1868, the first long-lived national trade union center. By this time, the existence and the demands of the trade unions were becoming accepted by liberal middle class opinion. In \"Principles of Political Economy\" (1871) John Stuart Mill wrote:\n\nIf it were possible for the working classes, by combining among themselves, to raise or keep up the general rate of wages, it needs hardly be said that this would be a thing not to be punished, but to be welcomed and rejoiced at. Unfortunately the effect is quite beyond attainment by such means. The multitudes who compose the working class are too numerous and too widely scattered to combine at all, much more to combine effectually. If they could do so, they might doubtless succeed in diminishing the hours of labour, and obtaining the same wages for less work. They would also have a limited power of obtaining, by combination, an increase of general wages at the expense of profits.\n\nTrade unions were finally legalized in 1872, after a \"Royal Commission on Trade Unions\" in 1867 agreed that the establishment of the organizations was to the advantage of both employers and employees.\n\nThis period also saw the growth of trade unions in other industrializing countries, especially the United States, Germany and France.\n\nIn the United States, the first effective nationwide labour organization was the Knights of Labor, in 1869, which began to grow after 1880. Legalization occurred slowly as a result of a series of court decisions. The Federation of Organized Trades and Labor Unions began in 1881 as a federation of different unions that did not directly enrol workers. In 1886, it became known as the American Federation of Labor or AFL.\n\nIn Germany the Free Association of German Trade Unions was formed in 1897 after the conservative Anti-Socialist Laws of Chancellor Otto von Bismarck were repealed.\n\nIn France, labour organization was illegal until 1884. The Bourse du Travail was founded in 1887 and merged with the Fédération nationale des syndicats (National Federation of Trade Unions) in 1895 to form the General Confederation of Labour (France).\n\nThe prevalence of unions in various countries can be measured by the concept of \"union density\", which is expressed as a percentage of the total number of workers in a given location who are trade union members. Trade union density around the world shows great variation.\n! Country !! Year !! Density (%)\nSource: ILO\n\nSupporters of unions, such as the ACTU or Australian Labor Party (ALP), often credit trade unions with leading the labour movement in the early 20th century. This generally sought to end child labour practices, improve worker safety, increase wages for both union workers and non-union workers, raise the entire society's standard of living, reduce the hours in a work week, provide public education for children, and bring other benefits to working class families.\n\nMelbourne Trades Hall was opened in 1859 with Trades and Labour Councils and Trades Halls opening in all cities and most regional towns in the next forty years. During the 1880s Trade unions developed among shearers, miners, and stevedores (wharf workers), but soon spread to cover almost all blue-collar jobs. Shortages of labour led to high wages for a prosperous skilled working class, whose unions demanded and got an eight-hour day and other benefits unheard of in Europe.\n\nAustralia gained a reputation as \"the working man's paradise.\" Some employers tried to undercut the unions by importing Chinese labour. This produced a reaction which led to all the colonies restricting Chinese and other Asian immigration. This was the foundation of the White Australia Policy. The \"Australian compact\", based around centralised industrial arbitration, a degree of government assistance particularly for primary industries, and White Australia, was to continue for many years before gradually dissolving in the second half of the 20th century.\n\nIn the 1870s and 1880s, the growing trade union movement began a series of protests against foreign labour. Their arguments were that Asians and Chinese took jobs away from white men, worked for \"substandard\" wages, lowered working conditions and refused unionisation.\n\nObjections to these arguments came largely from wealthy land owners in rural areas. It was argued that without Asiatics to work in the tropical areas of the Northern Territory and Queensland, the area would have to be abandoned. Despite these objections to restricting immigration, between 1875 and 1888 all Australian colonies enacted legislation which excluded all further Chinese immigration. Asian immigrants already residing in the Australian colonies were not expelled and retained the same rights as their Anglo and Southern compatriots.\n\nThe Barton Government which came to power after the first elections to the Commonwealth parliament in 1901 was formed by the Protectionist Party with the support of the Australian Labor Party. The support of the Labor Party was contingent upon restricting non-white immigration, reflecting the attitudes of the Australian Workers Union and other labour organisations at the time, upon whose support the Labor Party was founded.\n\nIn the Baltic states trade unions were the part of the Soviet Union trade union system and closely connected with the party in the state. Industrial actions were not a part of their activities. After 1990 trade unions in the Baltic states have experienced rapid loss of membership and economic power, while employers’ organisations increased both power and membership. Low financial and organisational capacity caused by declining membership adds to the problem of interest definition, aggregation and protection in negotiations with employers’ and state organisations. Even the difference exists in the way of organization trade union and density. Starting from 2008 the union density slightly decrease in Latvia and Lithuania. In case of Estonia this indicator is lower than in Latvia and Lithuania but stays stable average 7 percent from total number of employment. Historical legitimacy is one of the negative factors that determine low associational power.\n\nWith 65% of the workers belonging to a union Belgium is a country with one of the highest percentages of labour union membership. Only the Scandinavian countries have a higher labour union density. The biggest union with around 1.7 million members is the Christian democrat Confederation of Christian Trade Unions (ACV-CSC) which was founded in 1904. The origins of the union can be traced back to the \"Anti-Socialist Cotton Workers Union\" that was founded in 1886. The second biggest union is the socialist General Federation of Belgian Labour (ABVV-FGTB) which has a membership of more than 1.5 million. The ABVV-FGTB traces its origins to 1857, when the first Belgian union was founded in Ghent by a group of weavers. The socialist union, in its current form, was founded in 1898. The third 'big' union in Belgium is the liberal General Confederation of Liberal Trade Unions of Belgium (ACLVB-CGSLB) which is relatively small in comparison to the first two with a little under 290 thousand members. The ACLVB-CGSLB was founded in 1920 in an effort to unite the many small liberal unions. Back then the liberal union was known as the \"Nationale Centrale der Liberale Vakbonden van België\". In 1930, the ACLVB-CGSLB adopted its current name.\n\nBesides these \"big three\" there is a long list of smaller unions, some more influential than others. These smaller unions tend to specialize in one profession or economic sector. Next to these specialized unions there is also the that reject the pillarization that, according to them, the \"big three\" represent. There is also a small Flemish nationalist union that exists only in the Flemish-speaking part of Belgium, called the . The last Belgian union worth mentioning is the very small, but highly active anarchist union called the .\n\nCanada's first trade union, the Labourers' Benevolent Association (now International Longshoremen's Association Local 273), formed in Saint John, New Brunswick in 1849. The union was formed when Saint John's longshoremen banded together to lobby for regular pay and a shorter workday. Canadian unionism had early ties with Britain and Ireland. Tradesmen who came from Britain brought traditions of the British trade union movement, and many British unions had branches in Canada. Canadian unionism ties with the United States eventually replaced those with Britain.\n\nCollective bargaining was first recognized in 1945, after the strike by the United Auto Workers at the General Motors' plant in Oshawa, Ontario.\nJustice Ivan Rand issued a landmark legal decision after the strike in Windsor, Ontario, involving 17,000 Ford workers. He granted the union the compulsory check-off of union dues. Rand ruled that all workers in a bargaining unit benefit from a union-negotiated contract. Therefore, he reasoned they must pay union dues, although they do not have to join the union.\n\nThe post-World War II era also saw an increased pattern of unionization in the public service. Teachers, nurses, social workers, professors and cultural workers (those employed in museums, orchestras and art galleries) all sought private-sector collective bargaining rights. The Canadian Labour Congress was founded in 1956 as the national trade union center for Canada.\n\nIn the 1970s the federal government came under intense pressures to curtail labour cost and inflation. In 1975, the Liberal government of Pierre Trudeau introduced mandatory price and wage controls. Under the new law, wages increases were monitored and those ruled to be unacceptably high were rolled back by the government.\n\nPressures on unions continued into the 1980s and '90s. Private sector unions faced plant closures in many manufacturing industries and demands to reduce wages and increase productivity. Public sector unions came under attack by federal and provincial governments as they attempted to reduce spending, reduce taxes and balance budgets. Legislation was introduced in many jurisdictions reversing union collective bargaining rights, and many jobs were lost to contractors.\n\nProminent domestic unions in Canada include ACTRA, the Canadian Union of Postal Workers, the Canadian Union of Public Employees, the Public Service Alliance of Canada, the National Union of Public and General Employees, and Unifor. International unions active in Canada include the International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees, United Automobile Workers, United Food and Commercial Workers, and United Steelworkers.\n\nUntil around 1990 Colombian trade unions were among the strongest in Latin America. However, the 1980s expansion of paramilitarism in Colombia saw trade union leaders and members increasingly targeted for assassination, and as a result Colombia has been the most dangerous country in the world for trade unionists for several decades. Between 2000 and 2010 Colombia accounted for 63.12% of trade unionists murdered globally. According to the International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC) there were 2832 murders of trade unionists between 1 January 1986 and 30 April 2010, meaning that \"on average, men and women trade unionists in Colombia have been killed at the rate of one every three days over the last 23 years.\"\n\nIn Costa Rica, trade unions first appeared in the late 1800s to support workers in a variety of urban and industrial jobs, such as railroad builders and craft tradesmen. After facing violent repression, such as during the 1934 United Fruit Strike, unions gained more power after the 1948 Costa Rican Civil War. Today, Costa Rican unions are strongest in the public sector, including the fields of education and medicine, but also have a strong presence in the agricultural sector. In general, Costa Rican unions support government regulation of the banking, medical, and education fields, as well as improved wages and working conditions.\n\nTrade unions in Germany have a history reaching back to the German revolution in 1848, and still play an important role in the German economy and society. In 1875 the SPD, the Social Democratic Party of Germany, which is one of the biggest political parties in Germany, supported the forming of unions in Germany. The most important labour organisation is the German Confederation of Trade Unions \"(Deutscher Gewerkschaftsbund – DGB)\", which represents more than 6 million people (31 December 2011) and is the umbrella association of several single trade unions for special economic sectors. The DBG is not the only Union Organization that represents the working trade. There are smaller organizations, such as the CGB, which is a Christian-based confederation, that represent over 1.5 million people.\n\nIn India, the Trade Union movement is generally divided on political lines. According to provisional statistics from the Ministry of Labour, trade unions had a combined membership of 24,601,589 in 2002. As of 2008, there are 11 Central Trade Union Organisations (CTUO) recognized by the Ministry of Labour. The forming of these unions was a big deal in India. It led to a big push for more regulatory laws which gave workers a lot more power.\n\nA trade union with nearly 2,000,000 members is the Self Employed Women's Association (SEWA) which protects the rights of Indian women working in the informal economy. In addition to the protection of rights, SEWA educates, mobilizes, finances, and exalts their members' trades. Multiple other organizations represent workers. These organizations are formed upon different political groups. These different groups allow different groups of people with different political views to join a Union.\n\nLabour unions emerged in Japan in the second half of the Meiji period as the country underwent a period of rapid industrialization. Until 1945, however, the labour movement remained weak, impeded by lack of legal rights, anti-union legislation, management-organised factory councils, and political divisions between “cooperative” and radical unionists. In the immediate aftermath of the Second World War, the US Occupation authorities initially encouraged the formation of independent unions. Legislation was passed that enshrined the right to organise, and membership rapidly rose to 5 million by February 1947. The organisation rate, however, peaked at 55.8% in 1949 and subsequently declined to 18.2% (2006). The labour movement went through a process of reorganisation from 1987 to 1991 from which emerged the present configuration of three major labour union federations, Rengo, Zenroren, and Zenrokyo, along with other smaller national union organisations.\n\nBefore the 1990s, unions in Mexico had been historically part of a state institutional system. From 1940 until the 1980s, during the worldwide spread of neoliberalism through the Washington Consensus, the Mexican unions did not operate independently, but instead as part of a state institutional system, largely controlled by the ruling party.\n\nDuring these 40 years, the primary aim of the labour unions was not to benefit the workers, but to carry out the state's economic policy under their cosy relationship with the ruling party. This economic policy, which peaked in the 1950s and 60s with the so-called \"Mexican Miracle\", saw rising incomes and improved standards of living but the primary beneficiaries were the wealthy.\n\nIn the 1980s, Mexico began adhering to Washington Consensus policies, selling off state industries such as railroad and telecommunications to private industries. The new owners had an antagonistic attitude towards unions, which, accustomed to comfortable relationships with the state, were not prepared to fight back. A movement of new unions began to emerge under a more independent model, while the former institutionalized unions had become very corrupt, violent, and led by gangsters. From the 1990s onwards, this new model of independent unions prevailed, a number of them represented by the National Union of Workers / Unión Nacional de Trabajadores.\n\nCurrent old institutions like the Oil Workers Union and the National Education Workers' Union (\"Sindicato Nacional de Trabajadores de la Educación\", or SNTE) are examples of how the use of government benefits are not being applied to improve the quality in the investigation of the use of oil or the basic education in Mexico as long as their leaders show publicly that they are living wealthily. With 1.4 million members, the teachers' union is Latin America's largest; half of Mexico's government employees are teachers. It controls school curriculums, and all teacher appointments. Until recently, retiring teachers routinely \"gave\" their lifelong appointment to a relative or \"sell\" it for anywhere in between $4,700 and $11,800.\n\nTrade unions (Danish/Norwegian: \"Fagforeninger\", Swedish: \"Fackföreningar\") have a long tradition in Scandinavian and Nordic society. Beginning in the mid-19th century, they today have a large impact on the nature of employment and workers' rights in many of the Nordic countries. One of the largest trade unions in Sweden is the Swedish Confederation of Trade Unions, (LO, \"Landsorganisationen\"), incorporating unions such as the Swedish Metal Workers' Union (\"IF Metall\" = \"Industrifacket Metall\"), the Swedish Electricians' Union (Svenska Elektrikerförbundet) and the Swedish Municipality Workers' Union (\"Svenska Kommunalarbetareförbundet\", abbreviated \"Kommunal\"). One of the aims of IF Metall is to transform jobs into \"good jobs\", also called \"developing jobs\". Swedish system is strongly based on the so-called Swedish model, which argues the importance of collective agreements between trade unions and employers.\n\nToday, the world's highest rates of union membership are in the Nordic countries. As of 2018 or latest year, the percentage of workers belonging to a union (labour union density) was 90.4% in Iceland, 67.2% in Denmark, 66.1% in Sweden, 64.4 in Finland and 52.5% in Norway, while it is unknown in Greenland, Faroe Islands and the Åland Islands. Excluding full-time students working part-time, Swedish union density was 67% in 2018. In all the Nordic countries with a Ghent system—Sweden, Denmark and Finland—union density is about 70%. The considerably raised membership fees of Swedish union unemployment funds implemented by the new center-right government in January 2007 caused large drops in membership in both unemployment funds and trade unions. From 2006 to 2008, union density declined by six percentage points: from 77% to 71%.\n\nModerate New Model Unions dominated the union movement from the mid-19th century and where trade unionism was stronger than the political labour movement until the formation and growth of the Labour Party in the early years of the 20th century.\n\nTrade unionism in the United Kingdom was a major factor in some of the economic crises during the 1960s and the 1970s, culminating in the \"Winter of Discontent\" of late 1978 and early 1979, when a significant percentage of the nation's public sector workers went on strike. By this stage, some 12,000,000 workers in the United Kingdom were trade union members. However, the election of the Conservative Party led by Margaret Thatcher at the general election in May 1979, at the expense of Labour's James Callaghan, saw substantial trade union reform which saw the level of strikes fall. The level of trade union membership also fell sharply in the 1980s, and continued falling for most of the 1990s. The long decline of most of the industries in which manual trade unions were strong – e.g. steel, coal, printing, the docks – was one of the causes of this loss of trade union members.\n\nIn 2011 there were 6,135,126 members in TUC-affiliated unions, down from a peak of 12,172,508 in 1980. Trade union density was 14.1% in the private sector and 56.5% in the public sector.\n\nLabour unions are legally recognized as representatives of workers in many industries in the United States. In the United States, trade unions were formed based on power with the people, not over the people like the government at the time. Their activity today centres on collective bargaining over wages, benefits and working conditions for their membership, and on representing their members in disputes with management over violations of contract provisions. Larger unions also typically engage in lobbying activities and supporting endorsed candidates at the state and federal level.\n\nMost unions in America are aligned with one of two larger umbrella organizations: the AFL-CIO created in 1955, and the Change to Win Federation which split from the AFL-CIO in 2005. Both advocate policies and legislation on behalf of workers in the United States and Canada, and take an active role in politics. The AFL-CIO is especially concerned with global trade issues.\nIn 2010, the percentage of workers belonging to a union in the United States (or total labour union \"density\") was 11.4%, compared to 18.3% in Japan, 27.5% in Canada and 70% in Finland. Union membership in the private sector has fallen under 7% – levels not seen since 1932. Unions allege that employer-incited opposition has contributed to this decline in membership.\n\nThe most prominent unions are among public sector employees such as teachers, police and other non-managerial or non-executive federal, state, county and municipal employees. Members of unions are disproportionately older, male and residents of the Northeast, the Midwest, and California.\n\nUnion workers in the private sector average 10-30% higher pay than non-union in America after controlling for individual, job, and labour market characteristics. Because of their inherently governmental function, public sector workers are paid the same regardless of union affiliation or non-affiliation after controlling for individual, job, and labour market characteristics.\n\nThe economist Joseph Stiglitz has asserted that, \"Strong unions have helped to reduce inequality, whereas weaker unions have made it easier for CEOs, sometimes working with market forces that they have helped shape, to increase it.\" The decline in unionization since the Second World War in the United States has been associated with a pronounced rise in income and wealth inequality and, since 1967, with loss of middle class income.\n\nThe Association of Vatican Lay Workers represents lay employees in the Vatican.\n\nUnions may organize a particular section of skilled workers (craft unionism, traditionally found in Australia, Canada, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the UK and the US), a cross-section of workers from various trades (general unionism, traditionally found in Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Netherlands, the UK and the US), or attempt to organize all workers within a particular industry (industrial unionism, found in Australia, Canada, Germany, Finland, Norway, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the UK and the US). These unions are often divided into \"locals\", and united in national federations. These federations themselves will affiliate with Internationals, such as the International Trade Union Confederation. However, in Japan, union organization is slightly different due to the presence of enterprise unions, i.e. unions that are specific to a plant or company. These enterprise unions, however, join industry-wide federations which in turn are members of Rengo, the Japanese national trade union confederation.\n\nIn Western Europe, professional associations often carry out the functions of a trade union. In these cases, they may be negotiating for white-collar or professional workers, such as physicians, engineers or teachers. Typically such trade unions refrain from politics or pursue a more liberal politics than their blue-collar counterparts.\n\nA union may acquire the status of a \"juristic person\" (an artificial legal entity), with a mandate to negotiate with employers for the workers it represents. In such cases, unions have certain legal rights, most importantly the right to engage in collective bargaining with the employer (or employers) over wages, working hours, and other terms and conditions of employment. The inability of the parties to reach an agreement may lead to industrial action, culminating in either strike action or management lockout, or binding arbitration. In extreme cases, violent or illegal activities may develop around these events.\nIn other circumstances, unions may not have the legal right to represent workers, or the right may be in question. This lack of status can range from non-recognition of a union to political or criminal prosecution of union activists and members, with many cases of violence and deaths having been recorded historically.\n\nUnions may also engage in broader political or social struggle. Social Unionism encompasses many unions that use their organizational strength to advocate for social policies and legislation favourable to their members or to workers in general. As well, unions in some countries are closely aligned with political parties.\n\nUnions are also delineated by the service model and the organizing model. The service model union focuses more on maintaining worker rights, providing services, and resolving disputes. Alternately, the organizing model typically involves full-time union organizers, who work by building up confidence, strong networks, and leaders within the workforce; and confrontational campaigns involving large numbers of union members. Many unions are a blend of these two philosophies, and the definitions of the models themselves are still debated.\n\nIn Britain, the perceived left-leaning nature of trade unions has resulted in the formation of a reactionary right-wing trade union called Solidarity which is supported by the far-right BNP. In Denmark, there are some newer apolitical \"discount\" unions who offer a very basic level of services, as opposed to the dominating Danish pattern of extensive services and organizing.\n\nIn contrast, in several European countries (e.g. Belgium, Denmark, the Netherlands and Switzerland), religious unions have existed for decades. These unions typically distanced themselves from some of the doctrines of orthodox Marxism, such as the preference of atheism and from rhetoric suggesting that employees' interests always are in conflict with those of employers. Some of these Christian unions have had some ties to centrist or conservative political movements and some do not regard strikes as acceptable political means for achieving employees' goals. In Poland, the biggest trade union Solidarity emerged as an anti-communist movement with religious nationalist overtones and today it supports the right-wing Law and Justice party.\n\nAlthough their political structure and autonomy varies widely, union leaderships are usually formed through democratic elections. Some research, such as that conducted by the Australian Centre for Industrial Relations Research and Training, argues that unionized workers enjoy better conditions and wages than those who are not unionized.\n\nCompanies that employ workers with a union generally operate on one of several models:\nBULLET::::- A closed shop (US) or a \"pre-entry closed shop\" (UK) employs only people who are already union members. The compulsory hiring hall is an example of a closed shop – in this case the employer must recruit directly from the union, as well as the employee working strictly for unionized employers.\nBULLET::::- A union shop (US) or a \"post-entry closed shop\" (UK) employs non-union workers as well, but sets a time limit within which new employees must join a union.\nBULLET::::- An agency shop requires non-union workers to pay a fee to the union for its services in negotiating their contract. This is sometimes called the Rand formula. In certain situations involving state public employees in the United States, such as California, \"fair share laws\" make it easy to require these sorts of payments.\nBULLET::::- An open shop does not require union membership in employing or keeping workers. Where a union is active, workers who do not contribute to a union may include those who approve of the union contract (free riders) and those who do not. In the United States, state level right-to-work laws mandate the open shop in some states. In Germany only open shops are legal; that is, all discrimination based on union membership is forbidden. This affects the function and services of the union.\n\nAn EU case concerning Italy stated that, \"The principle of trade union freedom in the Italian system implies recognition of the right of the individual not to belong to any trade union (\"negative\" freedom of association/trade union freedom), and the unlawfulness of discrimination liable to cause harm to non-unionized employees.\"\n\nIn Britain, previous to this EU jurisprudence, a series of laws introduced during the 1980s by Margaret Thatcher's government restricted closed and union shops. All agreements requiring a worker to join a union are now illegal. In the United States, the Taft-Hartley Act of 1947 outlawed the closed shop.\n\nIn 2006, the European Court of Human Rights found Danish closed-shop agreements to be in breach of Article 11 of the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. It was stressed that Denmark and Iceland were among a limited number of contracting states that continue to permit the conclusion of closed-shop agreements.\n\nUnion law varies from country to country, as does the function of unions. For example, German and Dutch unions have played a greater role in management decisions through participation in corporate boards and co-determination than have unions in the United States. Moreover, in the United States, collective bargaining is most commonly undertaken by unions directly with employers, whereas in Austria, Denmark, Germany or Sweden, unions most often negotiate with employers associations.\n\nConcerning labour market regulation in the EU, Gold (1993) and Hall (1994) have identified three distinct systems of labour market regulation, which also influence the role that unions play:\nBULLET::::- \"In the Continental European System of labour market regulation, the government plays an important role as there is a strong legislative core of employee rights, which provides the basis for agreements as well as a framework for discord between unions on one side and employers or employers' associations on the other. This model was said to be found in EU core countries such as Belgium, France, Germany, the Netherlands and Italy, and it is also mirrored and emulated to some extent in the institutions of the EU, due to the relative weight that these countries had in the EU until the EU expansion by the inclusion of 10 new Eastern European member states in 2004.\nBULLET::::- In the Anglo-Saxon System of labour market regulation, the government's legislative role is much more limited, which allows for more issues to be decided between employers and employees and any union or employers' associations which might represent these parties in the decision-making process. However, in these countries, collective agreements are not widespread; only a few businesses and a few sectors of the economy have a strong tradition of finding collective solutions in labour relations. Ireland and the UK belong to this category, and in contrast to the EU core countries above, these countries first joined the EU in 1973.\nBULLET::::- In the Nordic System of labour market regulation, the government's legislative role is limited in the same way as in the Anglo-Saxon system. However, in contrast to the countries in the Anglo-Saxon system category, this is a much more widespread network of collective agreements, which covers most industries and most firms. This model was said to encompass Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden. Here, Denmark joined the EU in 1973, whereas Finland and Sweden joined in 1995.\"\n\nThe United States takes a more laissez-faire approach, setting some minimum standards but leaving most workers' wages and benefits to collective bargaining and market forces. Thus, it comes closest to the above Anglo-Saxon model. Also, the Eastern European countries that have recently entered into the EU come closest to the Anglo-Saxon model.\n\nIn contrast, in Germany, the relation between individual employees and employers is considered to be asymmetrical. In consequence, many working conditions are not negotiable due to a strong legal protection of individuals. However, the German flavor or works legislation has as its main objective to create a balance of power between employees organized in unions and employers organized in employers associations. This allows much wider legal boundaries for collective bargaining, compared to the narrow boundaries for individual negotiations. As a condition to obtain the legal status of a trade union, employee associations need to prove that their leverage is strong enough to serve as a counterforce in negotiations with employers. If such an employees association is competing against another union, its leverage may be questioned by unions and then evaluated in a court trial. In Germany, only very few professional associations obtained the right to negotiate salaries and working conditions for their members, notably the medical doctors association Marburger Bund and the pilots association Vereinigung Cockpit. The engineers association Verein Deutscher Ingenieure does not strive to act as a union, as it also represents the interests of engineering businesses.\n\nBeyond the classification listed above, unions' relations with political parties vary. In many countries unions are tightly bonded, or even share leadership, with a political party intended to represent the interests of the working class. Typically this is a left-wing, socialist, or social democratic party, but many exceptions exist, including some of the aforementioned Christian unions. In the United States, trade unions are almost always aligned with the Democratic Party with a few exceptions. For example, the International Brotherhood of Teamsters has supported Republican Party candidates on a number of occasions and the Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization (PATCO) endorsed Ronald Reagan in 1980. In Britain trade union movement's relationship with the Labour Party frayed as party leadership embarked on privatization plans at odds with what unions see as the worker's interests. However, it has strengthened once more after the Labour party's election of Ed Miliband, who beat his brother David Miliband to become leader of the party after Ed secured the trade union votes. Additionally, in the past, there was a group known as the Conservative Trade Unionists, or CTU, formed of people who sympathized with right wing Tory policy but were Trade Unionists.\n\nHistorically, the Republic of Korea has regulated collective bargaining by requiring employers to participate, but collective bargaining has only been legal if held in sessions before the lunar new year.\n\nThe largest trade union federation in the world is the Brussels-based International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC), which has approximately 309 affiliated organizations in 156 countries and territories, with a combined membership of 166 million. The ITUC is a federation of national trade union centres, such as the AFL-CIO in the United States and the Trades Union Congress in the United Kingdom. Other global trade union organizations include the World Federation of Trade Unions.\n\nNational and regional trade unions organizing in specific industry sectors or occupational groups also form global union federations, such as Union Network International, the International Transport Workers Federation, the International Federation of Journalists, the International Arts and Entertainment Alliance or Public Services International.\n\nIn the United States, the outsourcing of labour to Asia, Latin America, and Africa has been partially driven by increasing costs of union partnership, which gives other countries a comparative advantage in labour, making it more profitable to purchase disorganized, low-wage labour from these regions. Milton Friedman, economist and advocate of laissez-faire capitalism, sought to show that unionization produces higher wages (for the union members) at the expense of fewer jobs, and that, if some industries are unionized while others are not, wages will tend to decline in non-unionized industries.\n\nOn the other hand, several studies have emphasized so-called revitalization strategies where trade unions attempt to better represent labour market outsiders, such as the unemployed and precarious workers. Thus, for instance, trade unions in both Nordic and southern European countries have devised collective bargaining agreements that improved the conditions of temporary agency workers.\n\nSeveral studies have found evidence that trade unions can reduce competitiveness due to a reduction of business profit, which can then lead to job losses as it makes the business unable to compete. Unions have also been criticized for prolonging recessions and depressions due to discouraging investment.\n\nSeveral sources of current news exist about the trade union movement in the world. These include LabourStart and the official website of the international trade union movement Global Unions. A source of international news about unions is RadioLabour which provides daily (Monday to Friday) news reports.\n\n\"Labor Notes\" is the largest circulation cross-union publication remaining in the United States. It reports news and analysis about union activity or problems facing the labour movement. Another source of union news is the \"Workers Independent News\", a news organization providing radio articles to independent and syndicated radio shows in the United States.\n\nBULLET::::- The 2010 British film \"Made in Dagenham\", starring Sally Hawkins, dramatizes the Ford sewing machinists strike of 1968 that aimed for equal pay for women.\nBULLET::::- Trade unions were often portrayed in the scripts of Jim Allen. Examples include \"The Big Flame\", \"The Rank and File\" and \"Days of Hope\". These films all depict union leaders as untrustworthy and prone to betraying the striking workers.\nBULLET::::- The British National Union of Mineworkers has been portrayed in numerous films such as \"Brassed Off\", \"Billy Elliot\" and \"Pride\".\nBULLET::::- \"Bastard Boys\", a 2007 dramatization of the 1998 Australian waterfront dispute.\nBULLET::::- The 2000 film \"Bread and Roses\" deals with the struggle of poorly paid janitorial workers in Los Angeles and their fight for better working conditions and the right to unionize.\nBULLET::::- \"Hoffa\", a 1992 American biographical film directed by Danny DeVito and based on the life of Teamsters Union leader Jimmy Hoffa.\nBULLET::::- Matewan is a 1987 American drama film written and directed by John Sayles that dramatizes the events of the Battle of Matewan, a coal miners' strike in 1920 in Matewan, a small town in the hills of West Virginia. Haskell Wexler was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Cinematography.\nBULLET::::- The 1985 documentary film \"Final Offer\" by Sturla Gunnarsson and Robert Collision shows the 1984 union contract negotiations with General Motors.\nBULLET::::- The 1979 film \"Norma Rae\", directed by Martin Ritt and starring Sally Field, is based on the true story of Crystal Lee Jordan's successful attempt to unionize her textile factory.\nBULLET::::- The 1978 film \"F.I.S.T.\", directed by Norman Jewison and starring Sylvester Stallone, is loosely based on the Teamsters Union and their former President Jimmy Hoffa.\nBULLET::::- The 1959 film \"I'm All Right Jack\", a comedy with Peter Sellers playing the shop steward Fred Kite.\nBULLET::::- The 1954 film \"On the Waterfront\", directed by Elia Kazan, concerns union violence among longshoremen.\nBULLET::::- Other documentaries: \"Made in L.A.\" (2007); \"American Standoff\" (2002); \"The Fight in the Fields\" (1997); \"\" (1979); \"Harlan County, USA\" (1976); \"The Inheritance\" (1964)\nBULLET::::- Other dramatizations: \"10,000 Black Men Named George\" (2002); \"Matewan\" (1987); \"American Playhouse\" – \"The Killing Floor\" (1985); \"Salt of the Earth\" (1954); \"The Grapes of Wrath\" (1940); \"Black Fury\" (1935); \"Metello\" (1970).\n\nBULLET::::- Labor federation competition in the United States\nBULLET::::- Labor Management Reporting and Disclosure Act\nBULLET::::- List of trade unions\nBULLET::::- New Unionism\nBULLET::::- Project Labor Agreement\nBULLET::::- Professional association\nBULLET::::- Salt (union organizing)\nBULLET::::- Textile and clothing trade unions\nBULLET::::- Union busting\n\nBULLET::::- Aldcroft, D. H. and Oliver, M. J., eds. \"Trade Unions and the Economy, 1870–2000.\" (2000).\nBULLET::::- Campbell, A., Fishman, N., and McIlroy, J. eds. \"British Trade Unions and Industrial Politics: The Post-War Compromise 1945–64\" (1999).\nBULLET::::- Clegg, H.A. et al. \"A History of British Trade Unions Since 1889\" (1964); \"A History of British Trade Unions Since 1889: vol. 2 1911-1933\". (1985); \"A History of British Trade Unionism Since 1889, vol. 3: 1934–51\" (1994), The major scholarly history; highly detailed.\nBULLET::::- Davies, A. J. \"To Build a New Jerusalem: Labour Movement from the 1890s to the 1990s \" (1996).\nBULLET::::- Laybourn, Keith. \"A history of British trade unionism c. 1770-1990\" (1992).\nBULLET::::- Minkin, Lewis. \"The Contentious Alliance: Trade Unions and the Labour Party\" (1991) 708 pp online\nBULLET::::- Pelling, Henry. \"A history of British trade unionism\" (1987).\nBULLET::::- Wrigley, Chris, ed. \"British Trade Unions, 1945-1995\" (Manchester University Press, 1997)\nBULLET::::- Zeitlin, Jonathan. \"From labour history to the history of industrial relations.\" \"Economic History Review\" 40.2 (1987): 159-184. Historiography\nBULLET::::- \"Directory of Employer's Associations, Trade unions, Joint Organisations\", published by HMSO (Her Majesty's Stationery Office) on 1986\n\nBULLET::::- Arnesen, Eric, ed. \"Encyclopedia of U.S. Labor and Working-Class History\" (2006), 3 vol; 2064pp; 650 articles by experts excerpt and text search\nBULLET::::- Beik, Millie, ed. \"Labor Relations: Major Issues in American History\" (2005) over 100 annotated primary documents excerpt and text search\nBULLET::::- Boris, Eileen, and Nelson Lichtenstein, eds. \"Major Problems In The History Of American Workers: Documents and Essays\" (2002)\nBULLET::::- Brody, David. \"In Labor's Cause: Main Themes on the History of the American Worker\" (1993) excerpt and text search\nBULLET::::- Dubofsky, Melvyn, and Foster Rhea Dulles. \"Labor in America: A History\" (2004), textbook, based on earlier textbooks by Dulles.\nBULLET::::- Taylor, Paul F. \" The ABC-CLIO Companion to the American Labor Movement\" (1993) 237pp; short encyclopedia\nBULLET::::- Zieger, Robert H., and Gilbert J. Gall, \"American Workers, American Unions: The Twentieth Century\"(3rd ed. 2002) excerpt and text search\n\nBULLET::::- Berghahn, Volker R., and Detlev Karsten. \"Industrial Relations in West Germany\" (Bloomsbury Academic, 1988).\nBULLET::::- European Commission, Directorate General for Employment, Social Affairs & Inclusion: \"Industrial Relations in Europe 2010.\"\nBULLET::::- Gumbrell-McCormick, Rebecca, and Richard Hyman. \"Trade unions in western Europe: Hard times, hard choices\" (Oxford UP, 2013).\nBULLET::::- Hodder, A. and L. Kretsos, eds. \" Young Workers and Trade Unions: A Global View\" (Palgrave-Macmillan, 2015). review\nBULLET::::- Kester, Gérard. \"Trade unions and workplace democracy in Africa\" (Routledge, 2016).\nBULLET::::- Kjellberg, Anders. \"The Decline in Swedish Union Density since 2007\", \"Nordic Journal of Working Life Studies\" (NJWLS) Vol. 1. No 1 (August 2011), pp. 67–93.\nBULLET::::- Kjellberg, Anders (2017) \"The Membership Development of Swedish Trade Unions and Union Confederations Since the End of the Nineteenth Century\" (Studies in Social Policy, Industrial Relations, Working Life and Mobility). Research Reports 2017:2. Lund: Department of Sociology, Lund University.\nBULLET::::- Lipton, Charles (1967). \"The Trade Union Movement of Canada: 1827–1959\". (3rd ed. Toronto, Ont.: New Canada Publications, 1973).\nBULLET::::- Markovits, Andrei. \"The Politics of West German Trade Unions: Strategies of Class and Interest Representation in Growth and Crisis\" (Routledge, 2016).\nBULLET::::- McGaughey, Ewan, 'Democracy or Oligarchy? Models of Union Governance in the UK, Germany and US' (2017) ssrn.com\nBULLET::::- Misner, Paul. \"Catholic Labor Movements in Europe. Social Thought and Action, 1914-1965\" (2015). online review\nBULLET::::- Mommsen, Wolfgang J., and Hans-Gerhard Husung, eds. \"The development of trade unionism in Great Britain and Germany, 1880-1914\" (Taylor & Francis, 1985).\nBULLET::::- Orr, Charles A. \"Trade Unionism in Colonial Africa\" \"Journal of Modern African Studies\", 4 (1966), pp. 65–81\nBULLET::::- Panitch, Leo & Swartz, Donald (2003). From consent to coercion: The assault on trade union freedoms, third edition. Ontario: Garamound Press.\nBULLET::::- Ribeiro, Ana Teresa. \"Recent Trends in Collective Bargaining in Europe.\" \"E-Journal of International and Comparative Labour Studies\" 5.1 (2016). online\nBULLET::::- Taylor, Andrew. \"Trade Unions and Politics: A Comparative Introduction\" (Macmillan, 1989).\nBULLET::::- Upchurch, Martin, and Graham Taylor. \"The Crisis of Social Democratic Trade Unionism in Western Europe: The Search for Alternatives\" (Routledge, 2016).\nBULLET::::- Visser, Jelle. \"Union membership statistics in 24 countries.\" \"Monthly Labor Review\". 129 (2006): 38+ online\nBULLET::::- Visser, Jelle. \"ICTWSS: Database on institutional characteristics of trade unions, wage setting, state intervention and social pacts in 34 countries between 1960 and 2007.\" Institute for Advanced Labour Studies, AIAS, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam (2011). online\n\nBULLET::::- LabourStart international trade union news service\nBULLET::::- RadioLabour\nBULLET::::- New Unionism Network\nBULLET::::- Younionize Global Union Directory\n\nBULLET::::- Australia\nBULLET::::- Australian Council of Trade Unions (ACTU) – Australian Council of Trade Unions\n\nBULLET::::- Europe\nBULLET::::- Trade union membership 1993–2003 – European Industrial Relations Observatory report on membership trends in 26 European countries\nBULLET::::- Trade union membership 2003–2008 – European Industrial Relations Observatory report on membership trends in 28 European countries\nBULLET::::- Trade Union Ancestors – Listing of 5,000 UK trade unions with histories of main organizations, trade union \"family trees\" and details of union membership and strikes since 1900.\nBULLET::::- TUC History online – History of the British union movement\nBULLET::::- Trade EU – European Trade Directory\nBULLET::::- Short history of the UGT in Catalonia\n\nBULLET::::- United States\nBULLET::::- Labor rights in the USA\nBULLET::::- \"Labor Notes\" magazine\n\nBULLET::::- Jewish Law (Halakhah)\nBenjamin Brown, \"Trade Unions, Strikes, and the Renewal of Halakhic Labor Law: Ideologies in the Rulings of Rabbis Kook, Uziel, and Feinstein\"\n"}
{"id": "17627", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17627", "title": "Liberal", "text": "Liberal\n\nLiberal may refer to: \n\nBULLET::::- A supporter of liberalism, a political philosophy founded on ideas of liberty and equality.\nBULLET::::- Classical liberalism, a political or social philosophy advocating the freedom of the individual, parliamentary systems of government, non-violent modification of political, social, or economic institutions, and governmental guarantees of individual rights and civil liberties.\nBULLET::::- Conservative liberalism, a variant of liberalism, combining liberal values and policies with conservative stances or, more simply, representing the right-wing of the liberal movement.\nBULLET::::- Economic liberalism, the ideological belief in organizing the economy on individualist lines, such that the greatest possible number of economic decisions are made by private individuals and not by collective institutions.\nBULLET::::- Social liberalism, the belief that liberalism should include social justice and that the legitimate role of the state includes addressing issues such as unemployment, health care, education, and the expansion of civil rights\nBULLET::::- Liberal, an adherent of a Liberal Party.\nBULLET::::- Liberal democracy, a form of government based on limited majority rule.\nBULLET::::- Liberal Democratic Party (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Liberalism (international relations), a theory of international relations based upon co-operation and mediation rather than power politics.\nBULLET::::- European liberalism\nBULLET::::- Liberals, a Swedish political party\nBULLET::::- In the U.S., the term \"liberalism\" can refer to either of the following:\nBULLET::::- Modern liberalism in the United States, the contemporary manifestation of the ideology, which dominates the Democratic Party.\nBULLET::::- Progressivism in the United States, referring to left-wing politics, movements and factions in the Democratic Party\nBULLET::::- \"See also:\" Liberalism by country\nBULLET::::- Laissez-faire, an economic environment in which the government limits itself to enforcing private property rights and transactions between private parties are free from tariffs, government subsidies, and enforced monopolies\nBULLET::::- Neoliberalism, a contemporary free-market political-economic philosophy\nBULLET::::- Ordoliberalism, a German variant of neoliberalism that emphasises the need for the state to ensure that the free market produces results close to its theoretical potential\n\nBULLET::::- Liberal, Indiana, an unincorporated community\nBULLET::::- Liberal, Kansas, a city\nBULLET::::- Liberal, Missouri, a city\nBULLET::::- Liberal, Oregon, an unincorporated community\n\nBULLET::::- \"El Liberal\", a daily newspaper published in Spain between 1879 and 1936\nBULLET::::- \"Liberalism\" (book), a 1927 book by Ludwig von Mises\nBULLET::::- \"Liberal\", a Band-Maid song from the album \"Conqueror\"\n\nBULLET::::- Liberal Christianity, a religious outlook\nBULLET::::- Liberal Islam, a religious outlook\nBULLET::::- Liberal Judaism (disambiguation), a religious outlook\nBULLET::::- Liberal religion, a religious tradition that embraces the theological diversity of a congregation rather than a single creed, authority, or writing\n\nBULLET::::- Liberal arts, those subjects that, in classical antiquity, were considered essential for a free citizen to study\n\n"}
{"id": "17628", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17628", "title": "Louisiana Purchase", "text": "Louisiana Purchase\n\nThe Louisiana Purchase ( 'Sale of Louisiana') was the acquisition of the territory of Louisiana by the United States from France in 1803. In return for fifteen million dollars, or approximately eighteen dollars per square mile, the United States nominally acquired a total of . However, France only controlled a small fraction of this area, with most of it settled by Native Americans; for the majority of the area, what the United States bought was the \"preemptive\" right to obtain Native American lands by treaty or by conquest, to the exclusion of other colonial powers. The total cost of all subsequent treaties and financial settlements over the land has been estimated to be around 2.6 billion dollars.\n\nThe Kingdom of France had controlled the Louisiana territory from 1699 until it was ceded to Spain in 1762. In 1800, Napoleon, then the First Consul of the French Republic, regained ownership of Louisiana as part of a broader project to re-establish a French colonial empire in North America. However, France's failure to put down a revolt in Saint-Domingue, coupled with the prospect of renewed warfare with the United Kingdom, prompted Napoleon to consider selling Louisiana to the United States. Acquisition of Louisiana was a long-term goal of President Thomas Jefferson, who was especially eager to gain control of the crucial Mississippi River port of New Orleans. Jefferson tasked James Monroe and Robert R. Livingston with purchasing New Orleans. Negotiating with French Treasury Minister François Barbé-Marbois (who was acting on behalf of Napoleon), the American representatives quickly agreed to purchase the entire territory of Louisiana after it was offered. Overcoming the opposition of the Federalist Party, Jefferson and Secretary of State James Madison convinced Congress to ratify and fund the Louisiana Purchase.\n\nThe Louisiana Purchase extended United States sovereignty across the Mississippi River, nearly doubling the nominal size of the country. The purchase included land from fifteen present U.S. states and two Canadian provinces, including the entirety of Arkansas, Missouri, Iowa, Oklahoma, Kansas, and Nebraska; large portions of North Dakota and South Dakota; the area of Montana, Wyoming, and Colorado east of the Continental Divide; the portion of Minnesota west of the Mississippi River; the northeastern section of New Mexico; northern portions of Texas; New Orleans and the portions of the present state of Louisiana west of the Mississippi River; and small portions of land within the present Canadian provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan. At the time of the purchase, the territory of Louisiana's non-native population was around 60,000 inhabitants, of whom half were African slaves. The western borders of the purchase were later settled by the 1819 Adams–Onís Treaty with Spain, while the northern borders of the purchase were adjusted by the Treaty of 1818 with Britain.\n\nThroughout the second half of the 18th century, Louisiana was a pawn on the chessboard of European politics. It was controlled by the French, who had a few small settlements along the Mississippi and other main rivers. France ceded the territory to Spain in the secret Treaty of Fontainebleau (1762). Following French defeat in the Seven Years' War, Spain gained control of the territory west of the Mississippi and the British the territory to the east of the river.\n\nFollowing the establishment of the United States, the Americans controlled the area east of the Mississippi and north of New Orleans. The main issue for the Americans was free transit of the Mississippi to the sea. As the lands were being gradually settled by a few American migrants, many Americans, including Jefferson, assumed that the territory would be acquired \"piece by piece.\" The risk of another power taking it from a weakened Spain made a \"profound reconsideration\" of this policy necessary. New Orleans was already important for shipping agricultural goods to and from the areas of the United States west of the Appalachian Mountains. Pinckney's Treaty, signed with Spain on October 27, 1795, gave American merchants \"right of deposit\" in New Orleans, granting them use of the port to store goods for export. Americans used this right to transport products such as flour, tobacco, pork, bacon, lard, feathers, cider, butter, and cheese. The treaty also recognized American rights to navigate the entire Mississippi, which had become vital to the growing trade of the western territories.\n\nIn 1798, Spain revoked the treaty allowing American use of New Orleans, greatly upsetting Americans. In 1801, Spanish Governor Don Juan Manuel de Salcedo took over from the Marquess of Casa Calvo, and restored the American right to deposit goods. However, in 1800 Spain had ceded the Louisiana territory back to France as part of Napoleon's secret Third Treaty of San Ildefonso. The territory nominally remained under Spanish control, until a transfer of power to France on November 30, 1803, just three weeks before the formal cession of the territory to the United States on December 20, 1803. A further ceremony was held in St. Louis, Upper Louisiana regarding the New Orleans formalities. The March 9–10, 1804 event is remembered as Three Flags Day.\n\nJames Monroe and Robert R. Livingston had traveled to Paris to negotiate the purchase of New Orleans in January 1803. Their instructions were to negotiate or purchase control of New Orleans and its environs; they did not anticipate the much larger acquisition which would follow.\n\nThe Louisiana Purchase was by far the largest territorial gain in U.S. history. Stretching from the Mississippi River to the Rocky Mountains, the purchase doubled the size of the United States. Before 1803, Louisiana had been under Spanish control for forty years. Although Spain aided the rebels in the American Revolutionary War, the Spanish didn't want the Americans to settle in their territory.\n\nAlthough the purchase was thought of by some as unjust and unconstitutional, Jefferson determined that his constitutional power to negotiate treaties allowed the purchase of what became fifteen states. In hindsight, the Louisiana Purchase could be considered one of his greatest contributions to the United States.\nOn April 18, 1802, Jefferson penned a letter to United States Ambassador to France Robert Livingston. It was an intentional exhortation to make this supposedly mild diplomat strongly warn the French of their perilous course. The letter began:\nJefferson's letter went on with the same heat to a much quoted passage about \"the day that France takes possession of New Orleans.\" Not only did he say that day would be a low point in France's history, for it would seal America's marriage with the British fleet and nation, but he added, astonishingly, that it would start a massive shipbuilding program.\n\nWhile the transfer of the territory by Spain back to France in 1800 went largely unnoticed, fear of an eventual French invasion spread nationwide when, in 1801, Napoleon sent a military force to secure New Orleans. Southerners feared that Napoleon would free all the slaves in Louisiana, which could trigger slave uprisings elsewhere. Though Jefferson urged moderation, Federalists sought to use this against Jefferson and called for hostilities against France. Undercutting them, Jefferson took up the banner and threatened an alliance with the United Kingdom, although relations were uneasy in that direction. In 1801 Jefferson supported France in its plan to take back Saint-Domingue (present-day Haiti), which was then under control of Toussaint Louverture after a slave rebellion.\n\nJefferson sent Livingston to Paris in 1801 after discovering the transfer of Louisiana from Spain to France under the Third Treaty of San Ildefonso. Livingston was authorized to purchase New Orleans.\n\nIn January 1802, France sent General Charles Leclerc on an expedition to Saint-Domingue to reassert French control over a colony that had become essentially autonomous under Toussaint Louverture. Louverture had fended off invasions by the Spanish and British empires, but had also begun to consolidate power for himself on the island. Before the Revolution, France had derived enormous wealth from St. Domingue at the cost of the lives and freedom of the slaves. Napoleon wanted its revenues and productivity for France restored. Alarmed over the French actions and its intention to re-establish an empire in North America, Jefferson declared neutrality in relation to the Caribbean, refusing credit and other assistance to the French, but allowing war contraband to get through to the rebels to prevent France from regaining a foothold.\n\nIn 1803, Pierre Samuel du Pont de Nemours, a French nobleman, began to help negotiate with France at the request of Jefferson. Du Pont was living in the United States at the time and had close ties to Jefferson as well as the prominent politicians in France. He engaged in back-channel diplomacy with Napoleon on Jefferson's behalf during a visit to France and originated the idea of the much larger Louisiana Purchase as a way to defuse potential conflict between the United States and Napoleon over North America.\n\nJefferson disliked the idea of purchasing Louisiana from France, as that could imply that France had a right to be in Louisiana. Jefferson had concerns that a U.S. president did not have the constitutional authority to make such a deal. He also thought that to do so would erode states' rights by increasing federal executive power. On the other hand, he was aware of the potential threat that France could be in that region and was prepared to go to war to prevent a strong French presence there.\n\nThroughout this time, Jefferson had up-to-date intelligence on Napoleon's military activities and intentions in North America. Part of his evolving strategy involved giving du Pont some information that was withheld from Livingston. He also gave intentionally conflicting instructions to the two. Desperate to avoid possible war with France, Jefferson sent James Monroe to Paris in 1803 to negotiate a settlement, with instructions to go to London to negotiate an alliance if the talks in Paris failed. Spain procrastinated until late 1802 in executing the treaty to transfer Louisiana to France, which allowed American hostility to build. Also, Spain's refusal to cede Florida to France meant that Louisiana would be indefensible. Monroe had been formally expelled from France on his last diplomatic mission, and the choice to send him again conveyed a sense of seriousness.\n\nNapoleon needed peace with the United Kingdom to implement the Treaty of San Ildefonso and take possession of Louisiana. Otherwise, Louisiana would be an easy prey for the UK or even for the United States. But in early 1803, continuing war between France and the UK seemed unavoidable. On March 11, 1803, Napoleon began preparing to invade the UK.\n\nIn Saint-Domingue, Leclerc's forces took Louverture prisoner, but their expedition soon faltered in the face of fierce resistance and disease. By early 1803, Napoleon decided to abandon his plans to rebuild France's New World empire. Without sufficient revenues from sugar colonies in the Caribbean, Louisiana had little value to him. Spain had not yet completed the transfer of Louisiana to France, and war between France and the UK was imminent. Out of anger towards Spain and the unique opportunity to sell something that was useless and not truly his yet, Napoleon decided to sell the entire territory.\n\nAlthough the foreign minister Talleyrand opposed the plan, on April 10, 1803, Napoleon told the Treasury Minister François Barbé-Marbois that he was considering selling the entire Louisiana Territory to the United States. On April 11, 1803, just days before Monroe's arrival, Barbé-Marbois offered Livingston all of Louisiana for $15 million, which averages to less than three cents per acre (7¢/ha). The total of $15 million is equivalent to about $305 million in 2017 dollars.\n\nThe American representatives were prepared to pay up to $10 million for New Orleans and its environs, but were dumbfounded when the vastly larger territory was offered for $15 million. Jefferson had authorized Livingston only to purchase New Orleans. However, Livingston was certain that the United States would accept the offer.\n\nThe Americans thought that Napoleon might withdraw the offer at any time, preventing the United States from acquiring New Orleans, so they agreed and signed the Louisiana Purchase Treaty on April 30, 1803. On July 4, 1803, the treaty was announced, but the documents did not arrive in Washington, D.C. until July 14. The Louisiana Territory was vast, stretching from the Gulf of Mexico in the south to Rupert's Land in the north, and from the Mississippi River in the east to the Rocky Mountains in the west. Acquiring the territory doubled the size of the United States, at a sum of less than 3 cents per acre.\n\nIn November 1803, France withdrew its 7,000 surviving troops from Saint-Domingue (more than two-thirds of its troops died there) and gave up its ambitions in the Western Hemisphere. In 1804 Haiti declared its independence; but, fearing a slave revolt at home, Jefferson and Congress refused to recognize the new republic, the second in the Western Hemisphere, and imposed a trade embargo against it. This, together with later claims by France to reconquer Haiti, encouraged by the United Kingdom, made it more difficult for Haiti to recover after over a decade of war.\n\nHenry Adams and other historians have argued that Jefferson acted hypocritically with the Louisiana Purchase, due to his position as a strict constructionist regarding the Constitution since he stretched the intent of that document to justify his purchase. This argument goes as follows:\n\nThe American purchase of the Louisiana territory was not accomplished without domestic opposition. Jefferson's philosophical consistency was in question because of his strict interpretation of the Constitution. Many people believed that he and others, including James Madison, were doing something they surely would have argued against with Alexander Hamilton. The Federalists strongly opposed the purchase, favoring close relations with Britain over closer ties to Napoleon, and were concerned that the United States had paid a large sum of money just to declare war on Spain.\n\nBoth Federalists and Jeffersonians were concerned over the purchase's constitutionality. Many members of the House of Representatives opposed the purchase. Majority Leader John Randolph led the opposition. The House called for a vote to deny the request for the purchase, but it failed by two votes, 59–57. The Federalists even tried to prove the land belonged to Spain, not France, but available records proved otherwise.\n\nThe Federalists also feared that the power of the Atlantic seaboard states would be threatened by the new citizens in the West, whose political and economic priorities were bound to conflict with those of the merchants and bankers of New England. There was also concern that an increase in the number of slave-holding states created out of the new territory would exacerbate divisions between North and South as well. A group of Northern Federalists led by Senator Timothy Pickering of Massachusetts went so far as to explore the idea of a separate northern confederacy.\n\nAnother concern was whether it was proper to grant citizenship to the French, Spanish, and free black people living in New Orleans, as the treaty would dictate. Critics in Congress worried whether these \"foreigners\", unacquainted with democracy, could or should become citizens. The U.S. Government had to use English Common Law to make them citizens to collect taxes.\n\nSpain protested the transfer on two grounds: First, France had previously promised in a note not to alienate Louisiana to a third party and second, France had not fulfilled the Third Treaty of San Ildefonso by having the King of Etruria recognized by all European powers. The French government replied that these objections were baseless since the promise not to alienate Louisiana was not in the treaty of San Ildefonso itself and therefore had no legal force, and the Spanish government had ordered Louisiana to be transferred in October 1802 despite knowing for months that Britain had not recognized the King of Etruria in the Treaty of Amiens.\n\nHenry Adams claimed \"The sale of Louisiana to the United States was trebly invalid; if it were French property, Bonaparte could not constitutionally alienate it without the consent of the French Chambers; if it were Spanish property, he could not alienate it at all; if Spain had a right of reclamation, his sale was worthless.\" The sale of course was not \"worthless\"—the U.S. actually did take possession. Furthermore, the Spanish prime minister had authorized the U.S. to negotiate with the French government \"the acquisition of territories which may suit their interests.\" Spain turned the territory over to France in a ceremony in New Orleans on November 30, a month before France turned it over to American officials.\n\nOther historians counter the above arguments regarding Jefferson's alleged hypocrisy by asserting that countries change their borders in two ways: (1) conquest, or (2) an agreement between nations, otherwise known as a treaty. The Louisiana Purchase was the latter, a treaty. The Constitution specifically grants the president the power to negotiate treaties (Art. II, Sec. 2), which is just what Jefferson did.\n\nJefferson's Secretary of State, James Madison (the \"Father of the Constitution\"), assured Jefferson that the Louisiana Purchase was well within even the strictest interpretation of the Constitution. Treasury Secretary Albert Gallatin added that since the power to negotiate treaties was specifically granted to the president, the only way extending the country's territory by treaty could \"not\" be a presidential power would be if it were specifically excluded by the Constitution (which it was not). Jefferson, as a strict constructionist, was right to be concerned about staying within the bounds of the Constitution, but felt the power of these arguments and was willing to \"acquiesce with satisfaction\" if the Congress approved the treaty.\n\nThe Senate quickly ratified the treaty, and the House, with equal alacrity, authorized the required funding, as the Constitution specifies.\n\nThe opposition of New England Federalists to the Louisiana Purchase was primarily economic self-interest, not any legitimate concern over constitutionality or whether France indeed owned Louisiana or was required to sell it back to Spain should it desire to dispose of the territory. The Northerners were not enthusiastic about Western farmers gaining another outlet for their crops that did not require the use of New England ports. Also, many Federalists were speculators in lands in upstate New York and New England and were hoping to sell these lands to farmers, who might go west instead, if the Louisiana Purchase went through. They also feared that this would lead to Western states being formed, which would likely be Republican, and dilute the political power of New England Federalists.\n\nWhen Spain later objected to the United States purchasing Louisiana from France, Madison responded that America had first approached Spain about purchasing the property, but had been told by Spain itself that America would have to treat with France for the territory.\n\nThe Louisiana Purchase Treaty was signed on April 30, 1803, by Robert Livingston, James Monroe, and François Barbé-Marbois at the Hôtel Tubeuf in Paris. Jefferson announced the treaty to the American people on July 4. After the signing Livingston made this famous statement, \"We have lived long, but this is the noblest work of our whole lives... From this day the United States take their place among the powers of the first rank.\"\n\nThe United States Senate advised and consented to ratification of the treaty with a vote of twenty-four to seven on October 20. The Senators who voted against the treaty were: Simeon Olcott and William Plumer of New Hampshire, William Wells and Samuel White of Delaware, James Hillhouse and Uriah Tracy of Connecticut, and Timothy Pickering of Massachusetts.\n\nOn the following day, October 21, 1803, the Senate authorized Jefferson to take possession of the territory and establish a temporary military government. In legislation enacted on October 31, Congress made temporary provisions for local civil government to continue as it had under French and Spanish rule and authorized the President to use military forces to maintain order. Plans were also set forth for several missions to explore and chart the territory, the most famous being the Lewis and Clark Expedition.\n\nA timeline of legislation can be found at the Library of Congress, in American Memory: The Louisiana Purchase Legislative Timeline—1803–1804.\n\nFrance turned over New Orleans, the historic colonial capital, on December 20, 1803, at the Cabildo, with a flag-raising ceremony in the Plaza de Armas, now Jackson Square. Just three weeks earlier, on November 30, 1803, Spanish officials had formally conveyed the colonial lands and their administration to France.\n\nOn March 9 and 10, 1804, another ceremony, commemorated as Three Flags Day, was conducted in St. Louis, to transfer ownership of Upper Louisiana from Spain to the French First Republic, and then from France to the United States. From March 10 to September 30, 1804, Upper Louisiana was supervised as a military district, under Commandant Amos Stoddard.\n\nEffective October 1, 1804, the purchased territory was organized into the Territory of Orleans (most of which would become the state of Louisiana) and the District of Louisiana, which was temporarily under control of the governor and judicial system of the Indiana Territory. The following year, the District of Louisiana was renamed the Territory of Louisiana, aka Louisiana Territory (1805–1812).\n\nNew Orleans was the administrative capital of the Orleans Territory, and St. Louis was the capital of the Louisiana Territory.\n\nThe American government used $3 million in gold as a down payment, and issued bonds for the balance to pay France for the purchase. Earlier that year, Francis Baring and Company of London had become the U.S. government's official banking agent in London. Because of this favored position, the U.S. asked the Baring firm to handle the transaction. Francis Baring's son Alexander was in Paris at the time and helped in the negotiations. Another Baring advantage was a close relationship with Hope and Company of Amsterdam. The two banking houses worked together to facilitate and underwrite the Purchase.\n\nBecause Napoleon wanted to receive his money as quickly as possible, the two firms received the American bonds and shipped the gold to France. Napoleon used the money to finance his planned invasion of England, which never took place.\n\nA dispute soon arose between Spain and the United States regarding the extent of Louisiana. The territory's boundaries had not been defined in the 1762 Treaty of Fontainebleau that ceded it from France to Spain, nor in the 1801 Third Treaty of San Ildefonso ceding it back to France, nor the 1803 Louisiana Purchase agreement ceding it to the United States.\n\nThe U.S. claimed Louisiana included the entire western portion of the Mississippi River drainage basin to the crest of the Rocky Mountains and land extending southeast to the Rio Grande and West Florida. Spain insisted that Louisiana comprised no more than the western bank of the Mississippi River and the cities of New Orleans and St. Louis. The dispute was ultimately resolved by the Adams–Onís Treaty of 1819, with the United States gaining most of what it had claimed in the west.\n\nThe relatively narrow Louisiana of New Spain had been a special province under the jurisdiction of the Captaincy General of Cuba while the vast region to the west was in 1803 still considered part of the Commandancy General of the Provincias Internas. Louisiana had never been considered one of New Spain's internal provinces.\n\nIf the territory included all the tributaries of the Mississippi on its western bank, the northern reaches of the Purchase extended into the equally ill-defined British possession—Rupert's Land of British North America, now part of Canada. The Purchase originally extended just beyond the 50th parallel. However, the territory north of the 49th parallel (including the Milk River and Poplar River watersheds) was ceded to the UK in exchange for parts of the Red River Basin south of 49th parallel in the Anglo-American Convention of 1818.\n\nThe eastern boundary of the Louisiana purchase was the Mississippi River, from its source to the 31st parallel, though the source of the Mississippi was, at the time, unknown. The eastern boundary below the 31st parallel was unclear. The U.S. claimed the land as far as the Perdido River, and Spain claimed that the border of its Florida Colony remained the Mississippi River. In early 1804, Congress passed the Mobile Act, which recognized West Florida as part of the United States. The Adams–Onís Treaty with Spain (1819) resolved the issue upon ratification in 1821. Today, the 31st parallel is the northern boundary of the western half of the Florida Panhandle, and the Perdido is the western boundary of Florida.\n\nBecause the western boundary was contested at the time of the Purchase, President Jefferson immediately began to organize three missions to explore and map the new territory. All three started from the Mississippi River. The Lewis and Clark Expedition (1804) traveled up the Missouri River; the Red River Expedition (1806) explored the Red River basin; the Pike Expedition (1806) also started up the Missouri, but turned south to explore the Arkansas River watershed. The maps and journals of the explorers helped to define the boundaries during the negotiations leading to the Adams–Onís Treaty, which set the western boundary as follows: north up the Sabine River from the Gulf of Mexico to its intersection with the 32nd parallel, due north to the Red River, up the Red River to the 100th meridian, north to the Arkansas River, up the Arkansas River to its headwaters, due north to the 42nd parallel and due west to its previous boundary.\n\nGoverning the Louisiana Territory was more difficult than acquiring it. Its European peoples, of ethnic French, Spanish and Mexican descent, were largely Catholic; in addition, there was a large population of enslaved Africans made up of a high proportion of recent arrivals, as Spain had continued the international slave trade. This was particularly true in the area of the present-day state of Louisiana, which also contained a large number of free people of color. Both present-day Arkansas and Missouri already had some slaveholders in the early 19th century.\n\nDuring this period, south Louisiana received an influx of French-speaking refugee planters, who were permitted to bring their slaves with them, and other refugees fleeing the large slave revolt in Saint-Domingue, today's Haiti. Many Southern slaveholders feared that acquisition of the new territory might inspire American-held slaves to follow the example of those in Saint-Domingue and revolt. They wanted the US government to establish laws allowing slavery in the newly acquired territory so they could be supported in taking their slaves there to undertake new agricultural enterprises, as well as to reduce the threat of future slave rebellions.\n\nThe Louisiana Territory was broken into smaller portions for administration, and the territories passed slavery laws similar to those in the southern states but incorporating provisions from the preceding French and Spanish rule (for instance, Spain had prohibited slavery of Native Americans in 1769, but some slaves of mixed African-Native American descent were still being held in St. Louis in Upper Louisiana when the U.S. took over). In a freedom suit that went from Missouri to the US Supreme Court, slavery of Native Americans was finally ended in 1836. The institutionalization of slavery under U.S. law in the Louisiana Territory contributed to the American Civil War a half century later. As states organized within the territory, the status of slavery in each state became a matter of contention in Congress, as southern states wanted slavery extended to the west, and northern states just as strongly opposed new states being admitted as \"slave states.\"\n\nThe Missouri Compromise of 1820 was a temporary solution.\n\nAfter the early explorations, the U.S. government sought to establish control of the region, since trade along the Mississippi and Missouri rivers was still dominated by British and French traders from Canada and allied Indians, especially the Sauk and Fox. The U.S. adapted the former Spanish facility at Fort Bellefontaine as a fur trading post near St. Louis in 1804 for business with the Sauk and Fox. In 1808 two military forts with trading factories were built, Fort Osage along the Missouri River in western present-day Missouri and Fort Madison along the Upper Mississippi River in eastern present-day Iowa. With tensions increasing with Great Britain, in 1809 Fort Bellefontaine was converted to a U.S. military fort, and was used for that purpose until 1826.\n\nDuring the War of 1812, Great Britain and allied Indians defeated U.S. forces in the Upper Mississippi; the U.S. abandoned Forts Osage and Madison, as well as several other U.S. forts built during the war, including Fort Johnson and Fort Shelby. After U.S. ownership of the region was confirmed in the Treaty of Ghent (1814), the U.S. built or expanded forts along the Mississippi and Missouri rivers, including adding to Fort Bellefontaine, and constructing Fort Armstrong (1816) and Fort Edwards (1816) in Illinois, Fort Crawford (1816) in Prairie du Chien Wisconsin, Fort Snelling (1819) in Minnesota, and Fort Atkinson (1819) in Nebraska.\n\nThe Louisiana Purchase was negotiated between France and the United States, without consulting the various Native American tribes who lived on the land and who had not ceded the land to any colonial power. It would cost the United States a further 2.6 billion dollars to buy this land from Native Americans, a much higher price than paid to France, but still far lower than the true value of the land. The four decades following the Louisiana Purchase was an era of court decisions removing many tribes from their lands east of the Mississippi, culminating in the Trail of Tears.\n\nBULLET::::- Alaska Purchase\nBULLET::::- Florida Purchase\nBULLET::::- Corps of Discovery\nBULLET::::- Foreign affairs of the Jefferson administration\nBULLET::::- Franco-American alliance\nBULLET::::- List of French possessions and colonies\nBULLET::::- New France\nBULLET::::- Historic regions of the United States\nBULLET::::- Louisiana Purchase Historic State Park\nBULLET::::- Territorial evolution of the United States\nBULLET::::- Territories of the United States on stamps\n\nNotes\nBibliography\n\nFurther reading\n\nBULLET::::- Text of the Louisiana Purchase Treaty\nBULLET::::- Library of Congress: Louisiana Purchase Treaty\nBULLET::::- Teaching about the Louisiana Purchase\nBULLET::::- Louisiana Purchase Bicentennial 1803–2003*Lewis and Clark Trail\nBULLET::::- Louisiana Purchase and Lewis & Clark student and teacher guide: dates, people, analysis, multimedia\nBULLET::::- New Orleans/Louisiana Purchase 1803\nBULLET::::- The Haitian Revolution and the Louisiana Purchase\nBULLET::::- Case and Controversies in U.S. History, Page 42 Senator Pickering explains his opposition to the Louisiana Purchase, 1803.\nBULLET::::- \"Booknotes\" interview with Jon Kukla on \"A Wilderness So Immense: The Louisiana Purchase and the Destiny of America\", July 6, 2003.\n"}
{"id": "17629", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17629", "title": "Labor theory of value", "text": "Labor theory of value\n\nThe labor theory of value (LTV) is a heterodox theory of value that argues that the economic value of a good or service is determined by the total amount of \"socially necessary labor\" required to produce it.\n\nLTV is usually associated with Marxian economics, though it also appears in the theories of earlier classical liberal economists such as Adam Smith and David Ricardo and later also in anarchist economics. Smith saw the price of a commodity in terms of the labor that the purchaser must expend to buy it, which embodies the concept of how much labor a commodity, a tool for example, can save the purchaser. The LTV is central to Marxist theory, which holds that the working class is exploited under capitalism, and dissociates price and value. Marx did not refer to his own theory of value as a \"labour theory of value\". Mainstream neoclassical economics tends to reject the need for a LTV, concentrating instead on a theory of price determined by supply and demand.\n\nWhen speaking in terms of a labor theory of value, \"value,\" without any qualifying adjective should theoretically refer to the amount of labor necessary to produce a marketable commodity, including the labor necessary to develop any real capital used in the production. Both David Ricardo and Karl Marx tried to quantify and embody all labor components in order to develop a theory of the real price, or natural price of a commodity. The labor theory of value as presented by Adam Smith did not require the quantification of past labor, nor did it deal with the labor needed to create the tools (capital) that might be used in producing a commodity. Smith's theory of value was very similar to the later utility theories in that Smith proclaimed that a commodity was worth whatever labor it would command in others (value in trade) or whatever labor it would \"save\" the self (value in use), or both. However, this \"value\" is subject to supply and demand at a particular time: The real price of every thing, what every thing really costs to the man who wants to acquire it, is the toil and trouble of acquiring it. What every thing is really worth to the man who has acquired it, and who wants to dispose of it or exchange it for something else, is the toil and trouble which it can save to himself, and which it can impose upon other people. (\"Wealth of Nations\" Book 1, chapter V)\n\nSmith's theory of price (which for many is the same as value) has nothing to do with the past labor spent in producing a commodity. It speaks only of the labor that can be \"commanded\" or \"saved\" at present. If there is no use for a buggy whip, then the item is economically worthless in trade or in use, regardless of all the labor spent in creating it.\n\nValue \"in use\" is the usefulness of this commodity, its utility. A classical paradox often comes up when considering this type of value. In the words of Adam Smith: The word value, it is to be observed, has two different meanings, and sometimes expresses the utility of some particular object, and sometimes the power of purchasing other goods which the possession of that object conveys. The one may be called \"value in use\"; the other, \"value in exchange.\" The things which have the greatest value in use have frequently little or no value in exchange; and, on the contrary, those which have the greatest value in exchange have frequently little or no value in use. Nothing is more useful than water: but it will purchase scarce anything; scarce anything can be had in exchange for it. A diamond, on the contrary, has scarce any value in use; but a very great quantity of other goods may frequently be had in exchange for it (\"Wealth of Nations\" Book 1, chapter IV).\n\nValue \"in exchange\" is the relative proportion with which this commodity exchanges for another commodity (in other words, its price in the case of money). It is relative to labor as explained by Adam Smith: The value of any commodity, [...] to the person who possesses it, and who means not to use or consume it himself, but to exchange it for other commodities, is equal to the quantity of labour which it enables him to purchase or command. Labour, therefore, is the real measure of the exchangeable value of all commodities (\"Wealth of Nations\" Book 1, chapter V).\n\nValue (without qualification) is the labor embodied in a commodity under a given structure of production. Marx defined the value of the commodity by the third definition. In his terms, value is the 'socially necessary abstract labor' embodied in a commodity. To David Ricardo and other classical economists, this definition serves as a measure of \"real cost\", \"absolute value\", or a \"measure of value\" invariable under changes in distribution and technology.\n\nRicardo, other classical economists and Marx began their expositions with the assumption that value in exchange was equal to or proportional to this labor value. They thought this was a good assumption from which to explore the dynamics of development in capitalist societies. Other supporters of the labor theory of value used the word \"value\" in the second sense to represent \"exchange value\".\n\nSince the term \"value\" is understood in the LTV as denoting something created by labor, and its \"magnitude\" as something proportional to the quantity of labor performed, it is important to explain how the labor process both preserves value and adds new value in the commodities it creates.\n\nThe value of a commodity increases in proportion to the duration and intensity of labor performed on average for its production. Part of what the LTV means by \"socially necessary\" is that the value only increases in proportion to this labor as it is performed with average skill and average productivity. So though workers may labor with greater skill or more productivity than others, these more skillful and more productive workers thus produce more value through the production of greater quantities of the finished commodity. Each unit still bears the same value as all the others of the same class of commodity. By working sloppily, unskilled workers may drag down the average skill of labor, thus increasing the average labor time necessary for the production of each unit commodity. But these unskillful workers cannot hope to sell the result of their labor process at a higher price (as opposed to value) simply because they have spent more time than other workers producing the same kind of commodities.\n\nHowever, production not only involves labor, but also certain means of labor: tools, materials, power plants and so on. These means of labor—also known as means of production—are often the product of another labor process as well. So the labor process inevitably involves these means of production that already enter the process with a certain amount of value. Labor also requires other means of production that are not produced with labor and therefore bear no value: such as sunlight, air, uncultivated land, unextracted minerals, etc. While useful, even crucial to the production process, these bring no value to that process. In terms of means of production resulting from another labor process, LTV treats the magnitude of value of these produced means of production as constant throughout the labor process. Due to the constancy of their value, these means of production are referred to, in this light, as constant capital.\n\nConsider for example workers who take coffee beans, use a roaster to roast them, and then use a brewer to brew and dispense a fresh cup of coffee. In performing this labor, these workers add value to the coffee beans and water that comprise the material ingredients of a cup of coffee. The worker also transfers the value of constant capital—the value of the beans; some specific depreciated value of the roaster and the brewer; and the value of the cup—to the value of the final cup of coffee. Again, on average the worker can transfer no more than the value of these means of labor previously possessed to the finished cup of coffee So the value of coffee produced in a day equals the sum of both the value of the means of labor—this constant capital—and the value newly added by the worker in proportion to the duration and intensity of their work.\n\nOften this is expressed mathematically as: \nNote: if the product resulting from the labor process is homogeneous (all similar in quality and traits, for example, all cups of coffee) then the value of the period's product can be divided by the total number of items (use-values or formula_6) produced to derive the unit value of each item. formula_7 where formula_8 is the total items produced.\n\nThe LTV further divides the value added during the period of production, formula_3, into two parts. The first part is the portion of the process when the workers add value equivalent to the wages they are paid. For example, if the period in question is one week and these workers collectively are paid $1,000, then the time necessary to add $1,000 to—while preserving the value of—constant capital is considered the necessary labor portion of the period (or week): denoted formula_10. The remaining period is considered the surplus labor portion of the week: or formula_11. The value used to purchase labor-power, for example the $1,000 paid in wages to these workers for the week, is called variable capital (formula_12). This is because in contrast to the constant capital expended on means of production, variable capital can add value in the labor process. The amount it adds depends on the duration, intensity, productivity and skill of the labor-power purchased: in this sense the buyer of labor-power has purchased a commodity of variable use. Finally, the value added during the portion of the period when surplus labor is performed is called surplus value (formula_13). From the variables defined above, we find two other common expressions for the value produced during a given period:\n\nThe first form of the equation expresses the value resulting from production, focusing on the costs formula_16 and the surplus value appropriated in the process of production, formula_13. The second form of the equation focuses on the value of production in terms of the values added by the labor performed during the process formula_18.\n\nOne issue facing the LTV is the relationship between value quantities on one hand and prices on the other. If a commodity's value is not the same as its price, and therefore the magnitudes of each likely differ, then what is the relation between the two, if any? Various LTV schools of thought provide different answers to this question. For example, some argue that value in the sense of the amount of labor embodied in a good acts as a center of gravity for price.\n\nHowever, most economists would say that cases where pricing is given as approximately equal to the value of the labour embodied, are in fact only special cases. In General Theory pricing most usually fluctuates. The standard formulation is that prices normally include a level of income for \"capital\" and \"land\". These incomes are known as \"profit\" and \"rent\" respectively. Yet Marx made the point that value cannot be placed upon labour as a commodity, because capital is a constant, whereas profit is a variable, not an income; thus explaining the importance of profit in relation to pricing variables.\n\nIn Book 1, chapter VI, Adam Smith writes: The real value of all the different component parts of price, it must be observed, is measured by the quantity of labour which they can, each of them, purchase or command. Labour measures the value not only of that part of price which resolves itself into labour, but of that which resolves itself into rent, and of that which resolves itself into profit.\n\nThe final sentence explains how Smith sees value of a product as relative to labor of buyer or consumer, as opposite to Marx who sees the value of a product being proportional to labor of laborer or producer. And we value things, price them, based on how much labor we can avoid or command, and we can command labor not only in a simple way but also by trading things for a profit.\n\nThe demonstration of the relation between commodities' unit values and their respective prices is known in Marxian terminology as the transformation problem or the transformation of values into prices of production. The transformation problem has probably generated the greatest bulk of debate about the LTV. The problem with transformation is to find an algorithm where the magnitude of value added by labor, in proportion to its duration and intensity, is sufficiently accounted for after this value is distributed through prices that reflect an equal rate of return on capital advanced. If there is an additional magnitude of value or a loss of value after transformation, then the relation between values (proportional to labor) and prices (proportional to total capital advanced) is incomplete. Various solutions and impossibility theorems have been offered for the transformation, but the debate has not reached any clear resolution.\n\nLTV does not deny the role of supply and demand influencing price, since the price of a commodity is something other than its value. In \"Value, Price and Profit\" (1865), Karl Marx quotes Adam Smith and sums up:\n\nThe LTV seeks to explain the level of this equilibrium. This could be explained by a \"cost of production\" argument—pointing out that all costs are ultimately labor costs, but this does not account for profit, and it is vulnerable to the charge of tautology in that it explains prices by prices. Marx later called this \"Smith's adding up theory of value\".\n\nSmith argues that labor values are the natural measure of exchange for direct producers like hunters and fishermen. Marx, on the other hand, uses a measurement analogy, arguing that for commodities to be comparable they must have a common element or substance by which to measure them, and that labor is a common substance of what Marx eventually calls \"commodity-values\".\n\nThe labor theory of value has developed over many centuries. It had no single originator, but rather many different thinkers arrived at the same conclusion independently. Aristotle is claimed to hold to this view. Some writers trace its origin to Thomas Aquinas. In his \"Summa Theologiae\" (1265–1274) he expresses the view that \"... value can, does and should increase in relation to the amount of labor which has been expended in the improvement of commodities.\" Scholars such as Joseph Schumpeter have cited Ibn Khaldun, who in his \"Muqaddimah\" (1377), described labor as the source of value, necessary for all earnings and capital accumulation. He argued that even if earning \"results from something other than a craft, the value of the resulting profit and acquired (capital) must (also) include the value of the labor by which it was obtained. Without labor, it would not have been acquired.\" Scholars have also pointed to Sir William Petty's \"Treatise of Taxes\" of 1662 and to John Locke's labor theory of property, set out in the \"Second Treatise on Government\" (1689), which sees labor as the ultimate source of economic value. Karl Marx himself credited Benjamin Franklin in his 1729 essay entitled \"A Modest Enquiry into the Nature and Necessity of a Paper Currency\" as being \"one of the first\" to advance the theory.\n\nAdam Smith accepted the theory for pre-capitalist societies but saw a flaw in its application to contemporary capitalism. He pointed out that if the \"labor embodied\" in a product equaled the \"labor commanded\" (i.e. the amount of labor that could be purchased by selling it), then profit was impossible. David Ricardo (seconded by Marx) responded to this paradox by arguing that Smith had confused labor with wages. \"Labor commanded\", he argued, would always be more than the labor needed to sustain itself (wages). The value of labor, in this view, covered not just the value of wages (what Marx called the value of labor power), but the value of the entire product created by labor.\n\nRicardo's theory was a predecessor of the modern theory that equilibrium prices are determined solely by production costs associated with Neo-Ricardianism.\n\nBased on the discrepancy between the wages of labor and the value of the product, the \"Ricardian socialists\"—Charles Hall, Thomas Hodgskin, John Gray, and John Francis Bray, and Percy Ravenstone—applied Ricardo's theory to develop theories of exploitation.\n\nMarx expanded on these ideas, arguing that workers work for a part of each day adding the value required to cover their wages, while the remainder of their labor is performed for the enrichment of the capitalist. The LTV and the accompanying theory of exploitation became central to his economic thought.\n\n19th century American individualist anarchists based their economics on the LTV, with their particular interpretation of it being called \"Cost the limit of price\". They, as well as contemporary individualist anarchists in that tradition, hold that it is unethical to charge a higher price for a commodity than the amount of labor required to produce it. Hence, they propose that trade should be facilitated by using notes backed by labor.\n\nAdam Smith held that, in a primitive society, the amount of labor put into producing a good determined its exchange value, with exchange value meaning in this case the amount of labor a good can purchase. However, according to Smith, in a more advanced society the market price is no longer proportional to labor cost since the value of the good now includes compensation for the owner of the means of production: \"The whole produce of labour does not always belong to the labourer. He must in most cases share it with the owner of the stock which employs him.\" \"Nevertheless, the 'real value' of such a commodity produced in advanced society is measured by the labor which that commodity will command in exchange. ... But [Smith] disowns what is naturally thought of as the genuine classical labor theory of value, that labor-cost regulates market-value. This theory was Ricardo's, and really his alone.\"\n\nClassical economist David Ricardo's labor theory of value holds that the value of a good (how much of another good or service it exchanges for in the market) is proportional to how much labor was required to produce it, including the labor required to produce the raw materials and machinery used in the process. David Ricardo stated it as, \"The value of a commodity, or the quantity of any other commodity for which it will exchange, depends on the relative quantity of labour which is necessary for its production, and not as the greater or less compensation which is paid for that labour.\" (Ricardo 1817) In this connection Ricardo seeks to differentiate the quantity of labour necessary to produce a commodity from the wages paid to the laborers for its production. However, Ricardo was troubled with some deviations in prices from proportionality with the labor required to produce them. For example, he said \"I cannot get over the difficulty of the wine, which is kept in the cellar for three or four years [i.e., while constantly increasing in exchange value], or that of the oak tree, which perhaps originally had not 2 s. expended on it in the way of labour, and yet comes to be worth £100.\" (Quoted in Whitaker) Of course, a capitalist economy stabilizes this discrepancy until the value added to aged wine is equal to the cost of storage. If anyone can hold onto a bottle for four years and become rich, that would make it hard to find freshly corked wine. There is also the theory that adding to the price of a luxury product increases its exchange-value by mere prestige.\n\nThe labor theory as an explanation for value contrasts with the subjective theory of value, which says that value of a good is not determined by how much labor was put into it but by its usefulness in satisfying a want and its scarcity. Ricardo's labor theory of value is not a normative theory, as are some later forms of the labor theory, such as claims that it is \"immoral\" for an individual to be paid less for his labor than the total revenue that comes from the sales of all the goods he produces.\n\nIt is arguable to what extent these classical theorists held the labor theory of value as it is commonly defined. For instance, David Ricardo theorized that prices are determined by the amount of labor but found exceptions for which the labor theory could not account. In a letter, he wrote: \"I am not satisfied with the explanation I have given of the principles which regulate value.\" Adam Smith theorized that the labor theory of value holds true only in the \"early and rude state of society\" but not in a modern economy where owners of capital are compensated by profit. As a result, \"Smith ends up making little use of a labor theory of value.\"\n\nPierre Joseph Proudhon's mutualism and American individualist anarchists such as Josiah Warren, Lysander Spooner and Benjamin Tucker adopted the liberal Labor Theory of Value of classical economics and used it to criticize capitalism while favoring a non-capitalist market system.\n\nWarren is widely regarded as the first American anarchist, and the four-page weekly paper he edited during 1833, \"The Peaceful Revolutionist\", was the first anarchist periodical published. Cost the limit of price was a maxim coined by Warren, indicating a (prescriptive) version of the labor theory of value. Warren maintained that the just compensation for labor (or for its product) could only be an equivalent amount of labor (or a product embodying an equivalent amount). Thus, profit, rent, and interest were considered unjust economic arrangements. In keeping with the tradition of Adam Smith's \"The Wealth of Nations\", the \"cost\" of labor is considered to be the subjective cost; i.e., the amount of suffering involved in it. He put his theories to the test by establishing an experimental \"labor for labor store\" called the Cincinnati Time Store at the corner of 5th and Elm Streets in what is now downtown Cincinnati, where trade was facilitated by notes backed by a promise to perform labor. \"All the goods offered for sale in Warren's store were offered at the same price the merchant himself had paid for them, plus a small surcharge, in the neighborhood of 4 to 7 percent, to cover store overhead.\" The store stayed open for three years; after it closed, Warren could pursue establishing colonies based on Mutualism. These included \"Utopia\" and \"Modern Times\". Warren said that Stephen Pearl Andrews' \"The Science of Society\", published in 1852, was the most lucid and complete exposition of Warren's own theories.\n\nMutualism is an economic theory and anarchist school of thought that advocates a society where each person might possess a means of production, either individually or collectively, with trade representing equivalent amounts of labor in the free market. Integral to the scheme was the establishment of a mutual-credit bank that would lend to producers at a minimal interest rate, just high enough to cover administration. Mutualism is based on a labor theory of value that holds that when labor or its product is sold, in exchange, it ought to receive goods or services embodying \"the amount of labor necessary to produce an article of exactly similar and equal utility\". Mutualism originated from the writings of philosopher Pierre-Joseph Proudhon.\n\nCollectivist anarchism as defended by Mikhail Bakunin defended a form of labor theory of value when it advocated a system where \"all necessaries for production are owned in common by the labour groups and the free communes ... based on the distribution of goods according to the labour contributed\".\n\nContrary to popular belief Marx never used the term \"Labor theory of value\" in any of his works but used the term Law of value, Marx opposed \"ascribing a supernatural creative power to labor\", arguing as such:\n\nHere, Marx was distinguishing between exchange value (the subject of the LTV) and use value. Marx used the concept of \"socially necessary labor time\" to introduce a social perspective distinct from his predecessors and neoclassical economics. Whereas most economists start with the individual's perspective, Marx started with the perspective of society \"as a whole\". \"Social production\" involves a complicated and interconnected division of labor of a wide variety of people who depend on each other for their survival and prosperity. \"Abstract\" labor refers to a characteristic of commodity-producing labor that is shared by all different kinds of heterogeneous (concrete) types of labor. That is, the concept abstracts from the \"particular\" characteristics of all of the labor and is akin to average labor.\n\n\"Socially necessary\" labor refers to the quantity required to produce a commodity \"in a given state of society, under certain social average conditions or production, with a given social average intensity, and average skill of the labor employed.\" That is, the value of a product is determined more by societal standards than by individual conditions. This explains why technological breakthroughs lower the price of commodities and put less advanced producers out of business. Finally, it is not labor per se that creates value, but labor power sold by free wage workers to capitalists. Another distinction is between productive and unproductive labor. Only wage workers of productive sectors of the economy produce value.\n\nThe Marxist labor theory of value has been criticised on several counts. Some argue that it predicts that profits will be higher in labor-intensive industries than in capital-intensive industries, which would be contradicted by measured empirical data inherent in quantitative analysis. This is sometimes referred to as the \"Great Contradiction\". In volume 3 of Capital, Marx explains why profits are not distributed according to which industries are the most labor-intensive and why this is consistent with his theory. Whether or not this is consistent with the labor theory of value as presented in volume 1 has been a topic of debate. According to Marx, surplus value is extracted by the capitalist class as a whole and then distributed according to the amount of total capital, not just the variable component. In the example given earlier, of making a cup of coffee, the constant capital involved in production is the coffee beans themselves, and the variable capital is the value added by the coffee maker. The value added by the coffee maker is dependent on its technological capabilities, and the coffee maker can only add so much total value to cups of coffee over its lifespan. The amount of value added to the product is thus the amortization of the value of the coffeemaker. We can also note that not all products have equal proportions of value added by amortized capital. Capital intensive industries such as finance may have a large contribution of capital, while labor-intensive industries like traditional agriculture would have a relatively small one.\n\nSteve Keen argues that Marx's idea that only labor can produce value rests on the idea that as capital depreciates over its use, then this is transferring its exchange-value to the product. Keen argues that it is not clear why the value of the machine should depreciate at the same rate it is lost. Keen uses an analogy with labor: If workers receive a subsistence wage and the working day exhausts the capacity to labor, it could be argued that the worker has \"depreciated\" by the amount equivalent to the subsistence wage. However this depreciation is not the limit of value a worker can add in a day (indeed this is critical to Marx's idea that labor is fundamentally exploited). If it were, then the production of a surplus would be impossible. According to Keen, a machine could have a use-value greater than its exchange-value, meaning it could, along with labor, be a source of surplus. Keen claims that Marx almost reached such a conclusion in the Grundrisse but never developed it any further. Keen further observes that while Marx insisted that the contribution of machines to production is solely their use-value and not their exchange-value, he routinely treated the use-value and exchange-value of a machine as identical, despite the fact that this would contradict his claim that the two were unrelated. Marxists respond by arguing that use-value and exchange-value are incommensurable magnitudes; to claim that a machine can add \"more use-value\" than it is worth in value-terms is a category error. According to Marx, a machine by definition cannot be a source of \"human\" labor. Keen responds by arguing that the labor theory of value only works if the use-value and exchange-value of a machine are identical, as Marx argued that machines cannot create surplus value since as their use-value depreciates along with their exchange-value - they simply transfer it to the new product but create no new value in the process. \n\nIn their work \"Capital as Power\", Shimshon Bichler and Jonathan Nitzan argue that while Marxists have claimed to produce empirical evidence of the labor theory of value via numerous studies which show consistent correlations between values and prices, these studies do not actually provide evidence for it and are inadequate. According to the authors, these studies attempt to prove the LTV by showing that there is a positive correlation between market prices and labor values. However, the authors argue that these studies measure prices by looking at the price of total output (the unit price of a commodity multiplied by its total quantity) and do these for several sectors of the economy, estimate their total price and value from official statistics and measured for several years. However, Bichler and Nitzan argue that this method has statistical implications as correlations measured this way also reflect the co-variations of the associated quantities of unit values and prices. This means that the unit price and unit value of each sector are multiplied by the same value, which means that the greater the variability out output across different sectors, the tighter the correlation. This means that the overall correlation substantially larger than the underlying correlation between unit values and unit prices; when sectors are controlled for their size, the correlations often drop to insignificant levels. Furthermore, the authors argue that the studies do not seem to actually attempt to measure the correlation between value and price. The authors argue that, according to Marx, the value of a commodity indicates the abstract labor time required for its production; however Marxists have been unable to identify a way to measure a unit (elementary particle) of abstract labor (indeed the authors argue that most have given up and little progress has been made beyond Marx's original work) due to numerous difficulties. This means assumptions must be made and according to the authors, these involve circular reasoning: \n\nBichler and Nitzan argue that this amounts to converting prices into values and then determining if they correlate, which the authors argue proves nothing since the studies are simply correlating prices with themselves. Paul Cockshott disagreed with Bichler and Nitzan's arguments, arguing that it was possible to measure abstract labour time using wage bills and data on working hours, while also arguing Bichler and Nitzan's claims that the true value-price correlations should be much lower actually relied on poor statistical analysis itself. Most Marxists, however, reject Bichler and Nitzan's interpretation of Marx, arguing that their assertion that individual commodities can have values, rather than prices of production, misunderstands Marx's work. For example, Fred Moseley argues Marx understood \"value\" to be am \"macro-monetary\" variable (the total amount of labor added in a given year plus the depreciation of fixed capital in that year), which is then concretized at the level of individual prices of production, meaning that \"individual values\" of commodities do not exist. \n\nThe theory can also be sometimes found in non-Marxist traditions. For instance mutualist anarchist theorist Kevin Carson's \"Studies in Mutualist Political Economy\" opens with an attempt to integrate marginalist critiques into the labor theory of value.\n\nSome Post-Keynesian economists have been highly critical of the labor theory of value. Joan Robinson, who herself was considered an expert on the writings of Karl Marx, wrote that the labor theory of value was largely a tautology and \"a typical example of the way metaphysical ideas operate\".. The well-known Marxian economist Roman Rosdolsky replied to Robinson's claims at length, arguing that Robinson failed to understand key components of Marx's theory; for instance, Robinson argued that \"Marx's theory, as we have seen, rests on the assumption of a constant rate of exploitation\", but as Rosdolsky points out, there is a great deal of contrary evidence.\n\nOthers have argued that the labor theory of value, especially as it arises in the work of Karl Marx, is due to a failure to recognize the fundamentally dialectical nature of how human beings attribute value to objects. Pilkington writes that value is attributed to objects based on our desire for them and that this desire is always inter-subjective and socially determined; Marxists would reply that this argument fails since Marx says the opposite, and the logic of his theory would not require him to deny this anyway. Pilkington writes the following: [V]alue is attributed to objects due to our desire for them. This desire, in turn, is inter-subjective. We desire to gain [a] medal or to capture [an] enemy flag [in battle] because it will win recognition in the eyes of our peers. [A] medal [or an enemy] flag are not valued for their objective properties, nor are they valued for the amount of labour embodied in them, rather they are desired for the symbolic positions they occupy in the inter-subjective network of desires.\n\nPilkington insists that this is an entirely different conception of value than the one we find in the marginalist theory found in many economics textbooks, although Pilkington's theory, like that of the marginalists, concentrates solely on consumer preferences. He writes that \"actors in marginalist analysis have self-contained preferences; they do not have inter-subjective desires\".\n\nIn ecological economics, the labor theory of value has been criticized, where it is argued that labor is in fact energy over time. Such arguments generally fail to recognize that Marx is inquiring into social relations among human beings, which cannot be reduced to the expenditure of energy, just as democracy cannot be reduced to the expenditure of energy that a voter makes in getting to the polling place. However, echoing Joan Robinson, Alf Hornborg, an environmental historian, argues that both the reliance on \"energy theory of value\" and \"labor theory of value\" are problematic as they propose that use-values (or material wealth) are more \"real\" than exchange-values (or cultural wealth)--yet, use-values are culturally determined. For Hornborg, any Marxist argument that claims uneven wealth is due to the \"exploitation\" or \"underpayment\" of use-values is actually a tautological contradiction, since it must necessarily quantify \"underpayment\" in terms of exchange-value. The alternative would be to conceptualize unequal exchange as \"an asymmetric net transfer of material inputs in production (e.g., embodied labor, energy, land, and water), rather than in terms of an underpayment of material inputs or an asymmetric transfer of 'value'\". In other words, uneven exchange is characterised by incommensurability, namely: the unequal transfer of material inputs; competing value-judgements of the worth of labor, fuel, and raw materials; differing availability of industrial technologies; and the off-loading of environmental burdens on those with less resources.\n\nSome authors proposed to reconsider the role of production equipment (constant capital) in production of value, following hints in \"Das Kapital\", where Marx described the functional role of machinery in production processes in Chapter XV (Machinery and Modern Industry).\n\nBULLET::::- Abstract labor and concrete labor\nBULLET::::- Cost the limit of price\nBULLET::::- Division of labor\nBULLET::::- Labor notes (currency)\nBULLET::::- Law of value\nBULLET::::- Prices of production\nBULLET::::- Producerism\nBULLET::::- Productive and unproductive labor\nBULLET::::- Social division of labor\nBULLET::::- Surplus labor\nBULLET::::- Surplus product\nBULLET::::- Surplus value\nBULLET::::- Transformation problem\nBULLET::::- Value-form\nBULLET::::- Anarchy of Production\n\nBULLET::::- Competing theories\nBULLET::::- Anarcho-communism\nBULLET::::- Entitlement theory\nBULLET::::- Marginalism\nBULLET::::- Neo-Ricardianism\nBULLET::::- Subjective theory of value\n\nBULLET::::- Bhaduri, Amit. 1969. \"On the Significance of Recent Controversies on Capital Theory: A Marxian View.\" \"Economic Journal\". 79(315) September: 532–539.\nBULLET::::- von Böhm-Bawerk, Eugen \"Karl Marx and the Close of His System\" (Classic criticism of Marxist economic theory).\nBULLET::::- G.A. Cohen 'The Labour Theory of Value and the Concept of Exploitation', in his \"History Labour and Freedom\".\nBULLET::::- Duncan, Colin A.M. 1996. \"The Centrality of Agriculture: Between Humankind and The Rest of Nature.\" McGill–Queen's University Press, Montreal.\nBULLET::::- ——2000. The Centrality of Agriculture: History, Ecology and Feasible Socialism. Socialist Register, pp. 187–205.\nBULLET::::- ——2004. Adam Smith's green vision and the future of global socialism. In Albritton, R; Shannon Bell; John R. Bell; and R. Westra [Eds.] \"New Socialisms: Futures Beyond Globalization. \"New York/London, Routledge. pp. 90–104.\nBULLET::::- Eldred, Michael (1984). \"Critique of Competitive Freedom and the Bourgeois-Democratic State: Outline of a Form-analytic Extension of Marx's Uncompleted System\". With an Appendix 'Value-form Analytic Reconstruction of the Capital-Analysis' by Michael Eldred, Marnie Hanlon, Lucia Kleiber and Mike Roth, Kurasje, Copenhagen. Emended, digitized edition 2010 with a new Preface, lxxiii + 466 pp. .\nBULLET::::- Ellerman, David P. (1992) Property & Contract in Economics: The Case for Economic Democracy. Blackwell. Chapters 4,5, and 13 critiques of LTV in favor of the labor theory of property.\nBULLET::::- Engels, F. (1880). \"Socialism: Utopian and Scientific\".\nBULLET::::- Freeman, Alan: \"Price, value and profit – a continuous, general treatment\". In: Alan Freeman, Guglielmo Carchedi (editors): \"Marx and Non-equilibrium Economics\". Edward Elgar Publishing. Cheltenham, UK, Brookfield, US 1996. .\nBULLET::::- Hagendorf, Klaus: \"The Labour Theory of Value. A Historical-Logical Analysis\". Paris: EURODOS; 2008.\nBULLET::::- Hagendorf, Klaus: \"Labour Values and the Theory of the Firm. Part I: The Competitive Firm\". Paris: EURODOS; 2009.\nBULLET::::- Hansen, Bue Rübner. (2011). \"Review of \"Capital as Power\" by Jonathan Nitzan and Shimson Bichler\". \"Historical Materialism\" 19, no. 2: 144–159.\nBULLET::::- Henderson, James M.; Quandt, Richard E. 1971: Microeconomic Theory – A Mathematical Approach. Second Edition/International Student Edition. McGraw-Hill Kogakusha, Ltd.\nBULLET::::- Keen, Steven \"Use, Value, and Exchange: The Misinterpretation of Marx\".\nBULLET::::- ([Internet edition: 1999] [1887 English edition]).\nBULLET::::- Moseley, Fred. (2016). \"Money and Totality\" Leiden, Netherlands: Brill.\nBULLET::::- Murray, Patrick. (2016). \"The Mismeasure of Wealth : Essays on Marx and Social Form\" Leiden, Netherlands: Brill.\nBULLET::::- Ormazabal, Kepa M. (2004). \"Smith On Labour Value\" Bilbo, Biscay, Spain: University of the Basque Country Working Paper.\nBULLET::::- Parrington, Vernon Louis. \"The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin\".\nBULLET::::- Pokrovskii, Vladimir (2011). \"Econodynamics. The Theory of Social Production.\" Springer, Dordrecht-Heidelberg-London-New York.\nBULLET::::- Rubin, Isaak Illich (1928). \"Essays on Marx's Theory of Value\"\nBULLET::::- Shaikh, Anwar (1998). \"The Empirical Strength of the Labour Theory of Value\" in \"Conference Proceedings of Marxian Economics: A Centenary Appraisal\", Riccardo Bellofiore (ed.), Macmillan, London.\nBULLET::::- Vianello, F. (1987). \"Labour theory of value\", in: Eatwell, J. and Milgate, M. and Newman, P. (eds.): \"The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics\", Macmillan e Stockton, London e New York, .\nBULLET::::- Wolff, Jonathan (2003). \"Karl Marx\" in \"Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy\".\n"}
{"id": "17630", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17630", "title": "Lunar Society of Birmingham", "text": "Lunar Society of Birmingham\n\nThe Lunar Society of Birmingham was a dinner club and informal learned society of prominent figures in the Midlands Enlightenment, including industrialists, natural philosophers and intellectuals, who met regularly between 1765 and 1813 in Birmingham, England. At first called the Lunar Circle, \"Lunar Society\" became the formal name by 1775. The name arose because the society would meet during the full moon, as the extra light made the journey home easier and safer in the absence of street lighting. The members cheerfully referred to themselves as \"\"lunaticks\"\", a pun on lunatics. Venues included Erasmus Darwin's home in Lichfield, Matthew Boulton's home, Soho House, Bowbridge House in Derbyshire, and Great Barr Hall.\n\nThe Lunar Society evolved through various degrees of organisation over a period of up to fifty years, but was only ever an informal group. No constitution, minutes, publications or membership lists survive from any period, and evidence of its existence and activities is found only in the correspondence and notes of those associated with it. Historians therefore disagree on what qualifies as membership of the Lunar Society, who can be considered to have been members, and even when the society can be said to have existed. Josiah Wedgwood, for example, is described by some commentators as being one of five \"principal members\" of the society, while others consider that he \"cannot be recognized as [a] full member\" at all. Dates given for the establishment of the society range from \"sometime before 1760\" to 1775. Some historians argue that it had ceased to exist by 1791; others that it was still operating as late as 1813.\n\nDespite this uncertainty, fourteen individuals have been identified as having verifiably attended Lunar Society meetings regularly over a long period during its most productive eras: these are Matthew Boulton, Erasmus Darwin, Thomas Day, Richard Lovell Edgeworth, Samuel Galton, Jr., Robert Augustus Johnson, James Keir, Joseph Priestley, William Small, Jonathan Stokes, James Watt, Josiah Wedgwood, John Whitehurst and William Withering.\n\nWhile the society's meetings provided its name and social focus, however, they were relatively unimportant in its activities, and far more activity and communication took place outside the meetings themselves – members local to Birmingham were in almost daily contact, more distant ones in correspondence at least weekly. A more loosely defined group has therefore been identified over a wider geographical area and longer time period, who attended meetings occasionally and who corresponded or co-operated regularly with multiple other members on group activities. These include Richard Kirwan, John Smeaton, Henry Moyes, John Michell, Pieter Camper, R. E. Raspe, John Baskerville, Thomas Beddoes, John Wyatt, William Thomson, Cyril Jackson, Jean-André Deluc, John Wilkinson, John Ash, Samuel More, Robert Bage, James Brindley, Ralph Griffiths, John Roebuck, Thomas Percival, Joseph Black, James Hutton, Benjamin Franklin, Joseph Banks, William Herschel, Daniel Solander, John Warltire, George Fordyce, Alexander Blair, Samuel Parr, Louis Joseph d'Albert d'Ailly, William Emes, the seventh Duke of Chaulnes, Barthélemy Faujas de Saint-Fond, Grossart de Virly, Johann Gottling. and Joseph Wright\n\nThis lack of a defined membership has led some historians to criticise a Lunar Society \"legend\", leading people to \"confuse it and its efforts with the general growth of intellectual and economic activities in the provinces of eighteenth century Britain\". Others have seen this both as real and as one of the society's main strengths: a paper read at the Science Museum in London in 1963 claimed that \"of all the provincial philosophical societies it was the most important, perhaps because it was not merely provincial. All the world came to Soho to meet Boulton, Watt or Small, who were acquainted with the leading men of Science throughout Europe and America. Its essential sociability meant that any might be invited to attend its meetings.\"\n\nThe origins of the Lunar Society lie in a pattern of friendships that emerged in the late 1750s. Matthew Boulton and Erasmus Darwin met some time between 1757 and 1758, possibly through family connections, as Boulton's mother's family were patients of Darwin; or possibly though shared friendships, as both were admirers of the printer John Baskerville and friends of the astronomer and geologist John Michell, a regular visitor to Darwin's house in Lichfield. Darwin was a physician and poet who had studied at Cambridge and Edinburgh; Boulton had left school at fourteen and started work in his father's business making metal goods in Birmingham at the age of 21. Despite their different backgrounds they shared a common interest in experiment and invention, and their activities would show Darwin's theoretical understanding and Boulton's practical experience to be complementary. Soon they were visiting each other regularly and conducting investigations into scientific subjects such as electricity, meteorology and geology.\n\nAround the same time the Derby-based clockmaker John Whitehurst became a friend, first of Boulton and subsequently of Darwin, through his business supplying clock movements to Boulton's ormolu manufacturing operation. Although older than both Boulton and Darwin, by 1758 Whitehurst was writing to Boulton telling excitedly of a pyrometer he had built, and looking forward to visiting Birmingham \"to spend one day with you in trying all necessary experiments\".\n\nBoulton, Darwin and Whitehurst were in turn introduced by Michell to Benjamin Franklin when he travelled to Birmingham in July 1758 \"to improve and increase Acquaintance among Persons of Influence\", and Franklin returned in 1760 to conduct experiments with Boulton on electricity and sound. Although Michell seems to have withdrawn slightly from the group when he moved to Thornhill (near Dewsbury) in 1767, Franklin was to remain a common link among many of the early members.\n\nThe nature of the group was to change significantly with the move to Birmingham in 1765 of the Scottish physician William Small, who had been Professor of Natural Philosophy at The College of William & Mary in Williamsburg, Virginia. There he had taught and been a major influence over Thomas Jefferson, and had formed the focus of a local group of intellectuals. His arrival with a letter of introduction to Matthew Boulton from Benjamin Franklin was to have a galvanising effect on the existing circle, which began to explicitly identify itself as a group and actively started to attract new members.\n\nThe first of these was Josiah Wedgwood, who became a close friend of Darwin in 1765 while campaigning for the building of the Trent and Mersey Canal and subsequently closely modelled his large new pottery factory at Etruria on Boulton's Soho Manufactory. Another new recruit, Richard Lovell Edgeworth, met Darwin, Small and Boulton in 1766 through a shared interest in carriage design, and he in turn introduced his friend and fellow Rousseau-admirer Thomas Day, with whom he had studied at Corpus Christi, Oxford. In 1767 James Keir visited Darwin in Lichfield, where he was introduced to Boulton, Small, Wedgwood and Whitehurst and subsequently decided to move to Birmingham.\n\nThe Lunar Circle also attracted more distant involvement. Joseph Priestley, then living in Leeds and a close friend of John Mitchell, became associated with the Society in 1767 when Darwin and Wedgwood became involved with his work on electricity. In the same year James Watt visited Birmingham on the recommendation of his business patron John Roebuck, being shown around the Soho Manufactory by Small and Darwin in Boulton's absence. Although neither Priestley nor Watt were to move to Birmingham for several years, both were to be in constant communication with the Birmingham members and central to the circle's activities from 1767.\n\nBy 1768 the core group of nine individuals who would form the nucleus of the Lunar Society had come together with Small at their heart. The group at this time is sometimes referred to as the \"Lunar circle\", though this is a later description used by historians, and the group themselves used a variety of less specific descriptions, including \"Birmingham Philosophers\" or simply \"fellow-schemers\".\n\nIf William Small's arrival in 1765 had been the catalyst to the development of the Lunar Circle as a cohesive group, his death – probably from malaria – in 1775 was to mark another change in its structure. Small had been the key link between the members, and in his absence those remaining moved to place the group on a more organised footing. Meetings were to be held on the Sunday nearest the full moon, lasting from two o'clock in the afternoon until eight o'clock in the evening. The first was probably that held on 31 December 1775, and the \"Lunar\" name is first recorded in 1776.\n\nThe era also saw significant changes in membership. William Withering – like Small a physician – was already an acquaintance of Darwin, Boulton and Wedgwood when he moved from Stafford to Birmingham and became a member of the Society in 1776. John Whitehurst's move to London in 1775 had a less dramatic effect: he kept in regular contact with other members of the society and remained an occasional attender of meetings.\n\nThe leading figure behind the establishment of the society as a more organised body during this early period seems to have been Matthew Boulton: his home at Soho House in Handsworth was the principal venue for meetings, and in 1776 he is recorded as planning \"to make many Motions to the Members respecting new Laws, and regulations, such as will tend to prevent the decline of a society which I hope will be lasting.\" This reliance on Boulton was also to prove a weakness, however, as the period coincided with the peak of his work building up his steam engine business and he was frequently absent. Although the 1770s was one of the society's richest eras in terms of its collaborative achievements, the society's meetings declined from regular occurrences in 1775 to infrequent ones by the end of the decade.\n\nIn late 1780 the nature of the society was to change again with the move to Birmingham of Joseph Priestley. Priestley had been closely associated with the group's activities for over a decade and was a strong advocate of the benefits of scientific societies. Shortly after his arrival Lunar meetings moved from Sunday afternoons to Mondays to accommodate Priestley's duties as a clergyman, while the society's dependence on Matthew Boulton was lessened by holding meetings at other members' houses in addition to Soho House. The result was to be the society's most productive era.\n\nSeveral other major new figures became associated with the society during this period. Samuel Galton, Jr., unusual as a Quaker who was also a gun-manufacturer, appears in the letters of other Lunar members as attending meetings from July 1781, and his daughter Mary Anne Schimmelpenninck was to provide one of the few first-hand accounts of the Lunar Society's activities. The botanist and physician Jonathan Stokes, who had known William Withering as a child, moved to Stourbridge and started attending Lunar Society meetings from 1783. His contribution to the society was significant but short-lived: after collaborating with Withering on his \"Botanical Arrangement of British Plants\" the two quarrelled bitterly and Stokes severed his relations with the main Lunar members by 1788.\n\nThe society also lost several major figures over the period: Richard Lovell Edgeworth ceased regular involvement in the society's activities when he returned to Ireland in 1782, John Whitehurst died in London in 1788, and Thomas Day died the following year. Most significantly, Erasmus Darwin moved to Derby in 1781, but although he complained of being \"cut off from the milk of science\", he continued to attend Lunar Society meetings at least until 1788.\n\nThe outbreak of the French Revolution in 1789 caused political strains between members of the society, but it was the Priestley riots of 1791 in Birmingham itself that saw a decisive falling off of the society's spirit and activities. Joseph Priestley himself was driven from the town, leaving England entirely for the United States in 1794, William Withering's house was invaded by rioters and Matthew Boulton and James Watt had to arm their employees to protect the Soho Manufactory. Lunar meetings were continued by the younger generation of the families of earlier Lunar members, including Gregory Watt, Matthew Robinson Boulton, Thomas Wedgwood and James Watt junior, and possibly Samuel Tertius Galton. Regular meetings are recorded into the nineteenth century – eight in 1800, five or six before August 1801 and at least one in 1802, while as late as 1809 Leonard Horner was describing \"the remnant of the Lunar Society\" as being \"very interesting\". While individual members continued to produce work of importance, however, the collaborative activity that marked the heyday of the society was noticeably absent.\n\nThe society had definitely collapsed by 1813, however: in August of that year Samuel Galton, Jr. is recorded as having won a ballot for possession of the scientific books from the society's library.\n\nAmong memorials to the Society and its members are the Moonstones; two statues of Watt and a statue of \"Boulton, Watt and Murdoch\" by William Bloye; and the museum at Soho House – all in Birmingham.\n\nIn more recent times a new Lunar Society was formed in Birmingham by a group led by Dame Rachel Waterhouse. Its aim is to play a leading part in the development of the city and the wider region. In Italy, the Lunar Society Italia was formed to communicate science and astronomy. In Australia, The Lunaticks Society of Newcastle was formed by leading digital entrepreneurs, software developers, educators, film producers, creatives, investors to encourage creative thinking and new ideas in a digital age.\n\nIn the latter part of the 20th century, the University of Birmingham Lunar Society met every Thursday to debate and discuss all manner of topics in the Guild bar. In 2011, steps were undertaken to reform the discussion society as an alternative to the more regulated debate options available at the university. This was agreed by the University's Guild of Students in autumn 2012. The society now hosts symposiums every two weeks. Any member has always been welcome to suggest a topic for discussion. These meetings occur in a variety of environments from University rooms to local bars. In 2013 the society attempted to change the name of one of the rooms in the Guild of Students to 'The Lunar Room' in honour of the original Birmingham Lunar Society. Like the Oxford Union, the society has always traditionally put a huge emphasis on freedom of speech. The society has similar aims to The Speculative Society of Edinburgh University.\n\nToday, the Lunar Society is an informal academic association open to both undergraduate and graduate students, as well as professional academics, from the University of Birmingham. It has obtained a reputation for the variety of the topics discussed at its meetings. The Lunar Society puts itself forward as being committed to providing an open forum for academic discussion, which it does by hosting regular symposiums on a range of topics from current affairs to philosophy, science and art. The format for these symposiums is a round table style discussion. The society agrees to debate a series of topics in advance of the meeting, and every member is given an opportunity to participate in the discussion. To ensure the discussion retains order they are presided over by a chairperson. In keeping with the tradition of the society and to help with identification, the chairperson wears The Connor Clarke Academic Robe, donated to the society by a previous Lunar Society President.\n\nFreedom of speech has played an integral part of the society's history – the society was founded as a resistance to the more regulated debate societies on campus. To ensure this freedom of speech the society follows the Chatham House Rule: those who attend are free to use the content discussed at meetings but must not identify the speaker.\n\nThe society is supported by a committee, who help coordinate topics, organise and publicise events, ensure a rotating chair and undertake fundraising. A number of noted University of Birmingham alumni have been involved with this societies committee. Former members of the society have gone on to senior positions in the media and business. Past presidents of the society have been published in academic journals, and featured on the University of Birmingham University Challenge team.\n\nBULLET::::- Scottish Enlightenment\nBULLET::::- Science and invention in Birmingham\nBULLET::::- Erasmus Darwin House\n\nBULLET::::- Erasmus Darwin House, Lichfield\nBULLET::::- Article in Science\nBULLET::::- The Lunar Men who shaped the future (from the Birmingham Stories website)\nBULLET::::- Soho House\nBULLET::::- The modern Lunar Society\nBULLET::::- Revolutionary Players website\nBULLET::::- BBC Radio 4 \"In Our Time\" discussion\nBULLET::::- The Lunar Society Italia\nBULLET::::- The Lunaticks Society of Newcastle\n"}
{"id": "17633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17633", "title": "Libya", "text": "Libya\n\nLibya (; ), officially the State of Libya, is a country in the Maghreb region in North Africa, bordered by the Mediterranean Sea to the north, Egypt to the east, Sudan to the southeast, Chad to the south, Niger to the southwest, Algeria to the west, and Tunisia to the northwest. The sovereign state is made of three historical regions: Tripolitania, Fezzan and Cyrenaica. With an area of almost , Libya is the fourth largest country in Africa, and is the 16th largest country in the world. Libya has the 10th-largest proven oil reserves of any country in the world. The largest city and capital, Tripoli, is located in western Libya and contains over one million of Libya's six million people. The second-largest city is Benghazi, which is located in eastern Libya. The Latin name \"Libya\" is based on the name the region west of the Nile used by the Ancient Greeks and Romans for all of North Africa, and was first adopted during the Italian colonization since 1911.\n\nLibya has been inhabited by Berbers since the late Bronze Age. The Phoenicians established trading posts in western Libya, and ancient Greek colonists established city-states in eastern Libya. Libya was variously ruled by Carthaginians, Persians, Egyptians and Greeks before becoming a part of the Roman Empire. Libya was an early centre of Christianity. After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the area of Libya was mostly occupied by the Vandals until the 7th century, when invasions brought Islam to the region. In the 16th century, the Spanish Empire and the Knights of St John occupied Tripoli, until Ottoman rule began in 1551. Libya was involved in the Barbary Wars of the 18th and 19th centuries. Ottoman rule continued until the Italian occupation of Libya resulted in the establishment of two colonies, Italian Tripolitania and Italian Cyrenaica (1911-1934), until they were unified in the Italian Libya colony from 1934 to 1947. During the Second World War, Libya was an important area of warfare in the North African Campaign. The Italian population then went into decline.\n\nLibya became independent as a kingdom in 1951. A military coup in 1969 overthrew King Idris I. The \"bloodless\" coup leader Muammar Gaddafi ruled the country from 1969 and the Libyan Cultural Revolution in 1973 until he was overthrown and killed in the 2011 Libyan Civil War. Two authorities initially claimed to govern Libya: the Council of Deputies in Tobruk and the 2014 General National Congress (GNC) in Tripoli, which considered itself the continuation of the General National Congress, elected in 2012. After UN-led peace talks between the Tobruk and Tripoli governments, a unified interim UN-backed Government of National Accord was established in 2015, and the GNC disbanded to support it. Parts of Libya remain outside either government's control, with various Islamist, rebel and tribal militias administering some areas. As of July 2017, talks are still ongoing between the GNA and the Tobruk-based authorities to end the strife and unify the divided establishments of the state, including the Libyan National Army and the Central Bank of Libya.\n\nLibya is a member of the United Nations (since 1955), the Non-Aligned Movement, the Arab League, the OIC and OPEC. The country's official religion is Islam, with 96.6% of the Libyan population being Sunni Muslims.\n\nThe Latin name Libya (from Greek Λιβύη, Libyē) referred to the region west of the Nile generally corresponding to its central location in North Africa historically visited by many Mediterranean cultures which referred to its original inhabitants as the \"Libúē.\" The name \"Libya\" was introduced in 1934 for Italian Libya, reviving the historical name for Northwest Africa, from the ancient Greek (\"\"). It was intended to supplant terms applied to Ottoman Tripolitania, the coastal region of what is today Libya having been ruled by the Ottoman Empire from 1551 to 1911, as the Eyalet of Tripolitania. The name \"Libya\" was brought back into use in 1903 by Italian geographer Federico Minutilli.\n\nLibya gained independence in 1951 as the United Libyan Kingdom ( '), changing its name to the Kingdom of Libya ( ') literally \"Libyan Kingdom\" in 1963. Following a coup d'état led by Muammar Gaddafi in 1969, the name of the state was changed to the Libyan Arab Republic ( '). The official name was \"Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya\" from 1977 to 1986 (Arabic الجماهيرية العربية الليبية الشعبية الاشتراكية), and \"Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya\" ( ' ) from 1986 to 2011.\n\nThe National Transitional Council, established in 2011, referred to the state as simply \"Libya\". The UN formally recognized the country as \"Libya\" in September 2011, based on a request from the Permanent Mission of Libya citing the Libyan interim Constitutional Declaration of 3 August 2011. In November 2011, the ISO 3166-1 was altered to reflect the new country name \"Libya\" in English, \"Libye (la)\" in French.\n\nIn December 2017 the Permanent Mission of Libya to the United Nations informed the United Nations that the country's official name was henceforth the \"State of Libya\"; \"Libya\" remained the official short form, and the country continued to be listed under \"L\" in alphabetical lists.\n\nThe coastal plain of Libya was inhabited by Neolithic peoples from as early as 8000 BC. The Afroasiatic ancestors of the Berber people are assumed to have spread into the area by the Late Bronze Age. The earliest known name of such a tribe was the Garamantes, based in Germa. The Phoenicians were the first to establish trading posts in Libya. By the 5th century BC, the greatest of the Phoenician colonies, Carthage, had extended its hegemony across much of North Africa, where a distinctive civilization, known as Punic, came into being.\n\nIn 630 BC, the ancient Greeks colonized the area around Barca in Eastern Libya and founded the city of Cyrene. Within 200 years, four more important Greek cities were established in the area that became known as Cyrenaica.\n\nBULLET::::- Achaemenid Libya\n\nIn 525 BC the Persian army of Cambyses II overran Cyrenaica, which for the next two centuries remained under Persian or Egyptian rule. Alexander the Great was greeted by the Greeks when he entered Cyrenaica in 331 BC, and Eastern Libya again fell under the control of the Greeks, this time as part of the Ptolemaic Kingdom.\n\nAfter the fall of Carthage the Romans did not immediately occupy Tripolitania (the region around Tripoli), but left it instead under control of the kings of Numidia, until the coastal cities asked and obtained its protection. Ptolemy Apion, the last Greek ruler, bequeathed Cyrenaica to Rome, which formally annexed the region in 74 BC and joined it to Crete as a Roman province. As part of the Africa Nova province, Tripolitania was prosperous, and reached a golden age in the 2nd and 3rd centuries, when the city of Leptis Magna, home to the Severan dynasty, was at its height.\n\nOn the Eastern side, Cyrenaica's first Christian communities were established by the time of the Emperor Claudius. It was heavily devastated during the Kitos War and almost depopulated of Greeks and Jews alike. Although repopulated by Trajan with military colonies, from then started its decline. Libya was early to convert to Nicene Christianity and was the home of Pope Victor I; however, Libya was a hotbed for early heresies such as Arianism and Donatism.\nThe decline of the Roman Empire saw the classical cities fall into ruin, a process hastened by the Vandals' destructive sweep through North Africa in the 5th century. When the Empire returned (now as East Romans) as part of Justinian's reconquests of the 6th century, efforts were made to strengthen the old cities, but it was only a last gasp before they collapsed into disuse. Cyrenaica, which had remained an outpost of the Byzantine Empire during the Vandal period, also took on the characteristics of an armed camp. Unpopular Byzantine governors imposed burdensome taxation to meet military costs, while the towns and public services—including the water system—were left to decay. By the beginning of the 7th century, Byzantine control over the region was weak, Berber rebellions were becoming more frequent, and there was little to oppose Muslim invasion.\n\nUnder the command of 'Amr ibn al-'As, the Rashidun army conquered Cyrenaica. In 647 an army led by Abdullah ibn Saad took Tripoli from the Byzantines definitively. The Fezzan was conquered by Uqba ibn Nafi in 663. The Berber tribes of the hinterland accepted Islam, however they resisted Arab political rule.\n\nFor the next several decades, Libya was under the purview of the Umayyad Caliph of Damascus until the Abbasids overthrew the Umayyads in 750, and Libya came under the rule of Baghdad. When Caliph Harun al-Rashid appointed Ibrahim ibn al-Aghlab as his governor of Ifriqiya in 800, Libya enjoyed considerable local autonomy under the Aghlabid dynasty. By the 10th century, the Shiite Fatimids controlled Western Libya, and ruled the entire region in 972 and appointed Bologhine ibn Ziri as governor.\n\nIbn Ziri's Berber Zirid dynasty ultimately broke away from the Shiite Fatimids, and recognised the Sunni Abbasids of Baghdad as rightful Caliphs. In retaliation, the Fatimids brought about the migration of thousands from mainly two Arab Qaisi tribes, the Banu Sulaym and Banu Hilal to North Africa. This act drastically altered the fabric of the Libyan countryside, and cemented the cultural and linguistic Arabisation of the region.\n\nZirid rule in Tripolitania was short-lived though, and already in 1001 the Berbers of the Banu Khazrun broke away. Tripolitania remained under their control until 1146, when the region was overtaken by the Normans of Sicily. It was not until 1159 that the Moroccan Almohad leader Abd al-Mu'min reconquered Tripoli from European rule. For the next 50 years, Tripolitania was the scene of numerous battles among Ayyubids, the Almohad rulers and insurgents of the Banu Ghaniya. Later, a general of the Almohads, Muhammad ibn Abu Hafs, ruled Libya from 1207 to 1221 before the later establishment of a Tunisian Hafsid dynasty independent from the Almohads. The Hafsids ruled Tripolitania for nearly 300 years. By the 16th century the Hafsids became increasingly caught up in the power struggle between Spain and the Ottoman Empire.\n\nAfter weakening control of Abbasids, Cyrenaica was under Egypt based states such as Tulunids, Ikhshidids, Ayyubids and Mamluks before Ottoman conquest in 1517. Finally Fezzan acquired independence under Awlad Muhammad dynasty after Kanem rule. Ottomans finally conquered Fezzan between 1556 and 1577.\n\nAfter a successful invasion of Tripoli by Habsburg Spain in 1510, and its handover to the Knights of St. John, the Ottoman admiral Sinan Pasha took control of Libya in 1551. His successor Turgut Reis was named the Bey of Tripoli and later Pasha of Tripoli in 1556. By 1565, administrative authority as regent in Tripoli was vested in a \"pasha\" appointed directly by the \"sultan\" in Constantinople/Istanbul. In the 1580s, the rulers of Fezzan gave their allegiance to the sultan, and although Ottoman authority was absent in Cyrenaica, a \"bey\" was stationed in Benghazi late in the next century to act as agent of the government in Tripoli. European slaves and large numbers of enslaved Blacks transported from Sudan were also a feature of everyday life in Tripoli. In 1551, Turgut Reis enslaved almost the entire population of the Maltese island of Gozo, some 5,000 people, sending them to Libya.\n\nIn time, real power came to rest with the pasha's corps of janissaries. In 1611 the \"deys\" staged a coup against the pasha, and Dey Sulayman Safar was appointed as head of government. For the next hundred years, a series of \"deys\" effectively ruled Tripolitania. The two most important Deys were Mehmed Saqizli (r. 1631–49) and Osman Saqizli (r. 1649–72), both also Pasha, who ruled effectively the region. The latter conquered also Cyrenaica.\nLacking direction from the Ottoman government, Tripoli lapsed into a period of military anarchy during which coup followed coup and few deys survived in office more than a year. One such coup was led by Turkish officer Ahmed Karamanli. The Karamanlis ruled from 1711 until 1835 mainly in Tripolitania, and had influence in Cyrenaica and Fezzan as well by the mid-18th century. Ahmad's successors proved to be less capable than himself, however, the region's delicate balance of power allowed the Karamanli. The 1793–95 Tripolitanian civil war occurred in those years. In 1793, Turkish officer Ali Benghul deposed Hamet Karamanli and briefly restored Tripolitania to Ottoman rule. Hamet's brother Yusuf (r. 1795–1832) re-established Tripolitania's independence.\nIn the early 19th century war broke out between the United States and Tripolitania, and a series of battles ensued in what came to be known as the First Barbary War and the Second Barbary War. By 1819, the various treaties of the Napoleonic Wars had forced the Barbary states to give up piracy almost entirely, and Tripolitania's economy began to crumble. As Yusuf weakened, factions sprung up around his three sons. Civil war soon resulted.\n\nOttoman Sultan Mahmud II sent in troops ostensibly to restore order, marking the end of both the Karamanli dynasty and an independent Tripolitania. Order was not recovered easily, and the revolt of the Libyan under Abd-El-Gelil and Gûma ben Khalifa lasted until the death of the latter in 1858. The second period of direct Ottoman rule saw administrative changes, and greater order in the governance of the three provinces of Libya. Ottoman rule finally reasserted to Fezzan between 1850 and 1875 for earning income from Saharan commerce.\n\nAfter the Italo-Turkish War (1911–1912), Italy simultaneously turned the three regions into colonies. From 1912 to 1927, the territory of Libya was known as Italian North Africa. From 1927 to 1934, the territory was split into two colonies, Italian Cyrenaica and Italian Tripolitania, run by Italian governors. Some 150,000 Italians settled in Libya, constituting roughly 20% of the total population.\n\nIn 1934, Italy adopted the name \"Libya\" (used by the Ancient Greeks and Romans for all of North Africa, except Egypt) as the official name of the colony (made up of the three provinces of Cyrenaica, Tripolitania and Fezzan). Omar Mukhtar was the resistance leader against the Italian colonization and became a national hero despite his capture and execution on 16 September 1931. His face is currently printed on the Libyan ten dinar note in memory and recognition of his patriotism.\n\nIdris al-Mahdi as-Senussi (later King Idris I), Emir of Cyrenaica, led the Libyan resistance to Italian occupation between the two world wars. The pacification of Libya resulted in mass deaths of the indigenous people in Cyrenaica – one quarter of Cyrenaica's population of 225,000 people died. Ilan Pappé estimates that between 1928 and 1932 the Italian military \"killed half the Bedouin population (directly or through disease and starvation in Italian concentration camps in Libya).\" Italian historian Emilio Gentile estimates 50,000 deaths resulting from the suppression of resistance. \nIn 1934 the governor-general Balbo created the political entity called \"Libya\", with Tripoli as its capital. The Italians emphasized infrastructure improvements and public works. In particular, they hugely expanded Libyan railway and road networks from 1934 to 1940, building hundreds of kilometers of new roads and railways and encouraging the establishment of new industries and dozen of new agricultural villages.\n\nIn June 1940, Italy entered World War II. Libya became the setting for the hard-fought North African Campaign that ultimately ended in defeat for Italy and its German ally in 1943.\n\nFrom 1943 to 1951, Libya was under Allied occupation. The British military administered the two former Italian Libyan provinces of Tripolitana and Cyrenaïca, while the French administered the province of Fezzan. In 1944, Idris returned from exile in Cairo but declined to resume permanent residence in Cyrenaica until the removal of some aspects of foreign control in 1947. Under the terms of the 1947 peace treaty with the Allies, Italy relinquished all claims to Libya.\n\nOn 24 December 1951, Libya declared its independence as the United Kingdom of Libya, a constitutional and hereditary monarchy under King Idris, Libya's only monarch. The discovery of significant oil reserves in 1959 and the subsequent income from petroleum sales enabled one of the world's poorest nations to establish an extremely wealthy state. Although oil drastically improved the Libyan government's finances, resentment among some factions began to build over the increased concentration of the nation's wealth in the hands of King Idris.\n\nOn 1 September 1969, a group of rebel military officers led by Muammar Gaddafi launched a coup d'état against King Idris, which became known as the Al Fateh Revolution. Gaddafi was referred to as the \"Brother Leader and Guide of the Revolution\" in government statements and the official Libyan press. Moving to reduce Italian influence, in October 1970 all Italian-owned assets were expropriated and the 12,000-strong Italian community was expelled from Libya alongside the smaller community of Libyan Jews. The day became a national holiday known as \"Vengeance Day\". Libya's increase in prosperity was accompanied by increased internal political repression, and political dissent was made illegal under Law 75 of 1973. Widespread surveillance of the population was carried out through Gaddafi's Revolutionary Committees.\n\nGaddafi also wanted to combat the strict social restrictions that had been imposed on women by the previous regime, establishing the Revolutionary Women's Formation to encourage reform. In 1970, a law was introduced affirming equality of the sexes and insisting on wage parity. In 1971, Gaddafi sponsored the creation of a Libyan General Women's Federation. In 1972, a law was passed criminalizing the marriage of any females under the age of sixteen and ensuring that a woman's consent was a necessary prerequisite for a marriage.\n\nOn 25 October 1975, a coup attempt was launched by some 20 military officers, mostly from the city of Misrata. This resulted in the arrest and executions of the coup plotters. On 2 March 1977, Libya officially became the \"Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya\". Gaddafi officially passed power to the General People's Committees and henceforth claimed to be no more than a symbolic figurehead. The new \"jamahiriya\" (Arab for \"republic\") governance structure he established was officially referred to as \"direct democracy\".\n\nIn February 1977, Libya started delivering military supplies to Goukouni Oueddei and the People's Armed Forces in Chad. The Chadian–Libyan conflict began in earnest when Libya's support of rebel forces in northern Chad escalated into an invasion. Later that same year, Libya and Egypt fought a four-day border war that came to be known as the Libyan-Egyptian War, both nations agreed to a ceasefire under the mediation of the Algerian president Houari Boumediène. Hundreds of Libyans lost their lives in the country's support for Idi Amin's Uganda in its war against Tanzania. Gaddafi financed various other groups from anti-nuclear movements to Australian trade unions.\n\nFrom 1977 onward, per capita income in the country rose to more than US$11,000, the fifth-highest in Africa, while the Human Development Index became the highest in Africa and greater than that of Saudi Arabia. This was achieved without borrowing any foreign loans, keeping Libya debt-free. The Great Manmade River was also built to allow free access to fresh water across large parts of the country. In addition, financial support was provided for university scholarships and employment programs.\n\nMuch of Libya's income from oil, which soared in the 1970s, was spent on arms purchases and on sponsoring dozens of paramilitaries and terrorist groups around the world. An American airstrike intended to kill Gaddafi failed in 1986. Libya was finally put under sanctions by the United Nations after the bombing of a commercial flight killed 270 people.\n\nAfter the Arab Spring movements overturned the rulers of Tunisia and Egypt, Libya experienced a full-scale revolt beginning on 17 February 2011. Libya's authoritarian regime led by Muammar Gaddafi put up much more of a resistance compared to the regimes in Egypt and Tunisia. While overthrowing the regimes in Egypt and Tunisia was a relatively quick process, Gaddafi's campaign posed significant stalls on the uprisings in Libya. The first announcement of a competing political authority appeared online and declared the Interim Transitional National Council as an alternative government. One of Gaddafi's senior advisors responded by posting a tweet, wherein he resigned, defected, and advised Gaddafi to flee. By 20 February, the unrest had spread to Tripoli. On 27 February 2011, the National Transitional Council was established to administer the areas of Libya under rebel control. On 10 March 2011, France became the first state to officially recognise the council as the legitimate representative of the Libyan people.\n\nPro-Gaddaffi forces were able to respond militarily to rebel pushes in Western Libya and launched a counterattack along the coast toward Benghazi, the \"de facto\" centre of the uprising. The town of Zawiya, from Tripoli, was bombarded by air force planes and army tanks and seized by Jamahiriya troops, \"exercising a level of brutality not yet seen in the conflict.\"\nOrganizations of the United Nations, including United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon and the United Nations Human Rights Council, condemned the crackdown as violating international law, with the latter body expelling Libya outright in an unprecedented action urged by Libya's own delegation to the UN.\n\nOn 17 March 2011 the UN Security Council passed Resolution 1973, with a 10–0 vote and five abstentions including Russia, China, India, Brazil and Germany. The resolution sanctioned the establishment of a no-fly zone and the use of \"all means necessary\" to protect civilians within Libya. On 19 March, the first act of NATO allies to secure the no-fly zone began by destroying Libyan air defenses when French military jets entered Libyan airspace on a reconnaissance mission heralding attacks on enemy targets.\n\nIn the weeks that followed, American forces were in the forefront of NATO operations against Libya. More than 8,000 American personnel in warships and aircraft were deployed in the area. At least 3,000 targets were struck in 14,202 strike sorties, 716 of them in Tripoli and 492 in Brega. The American air offensive included flights of B-2 Stealth bombers, each bomber armed with sixteen 2000-pound bombs, flying out of and returning to their base in Missouri in the continental United States. The support provided by the NATO air forces contributed to the ultimate success of the revolution.\n\nBy 22 August 2011, rebel fighters had entered Tripoli and occupied Green Square, which they renamed Martyrs' Square in honour of those killed since 17 February 2011. On 20 October 2011, the last heavy fighting of the uprising came to an end in the city of Sirte. The Battle of Sirte was both the last decisive battle and the last one in general of the First Libyan Civil War where Gaddafi was captured and killed. The defeat of loyalist forces was celebrated on 23 October 2011, three days after the fall of Sirte.\n\nAt least 30,000 Libyans died in the civil war. In addition, the National Transitional Council estimated 50,000 wounded.\n\nSince the defeat of loyalist forces, Libya has been torn among numerous rival, armed militias affiliated with distinct regions, cities and tribes, while the central government has been weak and unable effectively to exert its authority over the country. Competing militias have pitted themselves against each other in a political struggle between Islamist politicians and their opponents. On 7 July 2012, Libyans held their first parliamentary elections since the end of the former regime. On 8 August 2012, the National Transitional Council officially handed power over to the wholly elected General National Congress, which was then tasked with the formation of an interim government and the drafting of a new Libyan Constitution to be approved in a general referendum.\n\nOn 25 August 2012, in what Reuters reported as \"the most blatant sectarian attack\" since the end of the civil war, unnamed organized assailants bulldozed a Sufi mosque with graves, in broad daylight in the center of the Libyan capital Tripoli. It was the second such razing of a Sufi site in two days. Numerous acts of vandalism and destruction of heritage were carried out by suspected Islamist militias, including the removal of the Nude Gazelle Statue and the destruction and desecration of World War II-era British grave sites near Benghazi. Many other cases of Heritage vandalism were carried out and were reported to be carried out by Islamist related radical militias and mobs that either destroyed, robbed, or looted a number of Historic sites which remain in danger at present.\n\nOn 11 September 2012, Islamist militants mounted a surprise attack on the American consulate in Benghazi, killing the U.S. ambassador to Libya, J. Christopher Stevens, and three others. The incident generated outrage in the United States and Libya.\n\nOn 7 October 2012, Libya's Prime Minister-elect Mustafa A.G. Abushagur was ousted after failing a second time to win parliamentary approval for a new cabinet. On 14 October 2012, the General National Congress elected former GNC member and human rights lawyer Ali Zeidan as prime minister-designate. Zeidan was sworn in after his cabinet was approved by the GNC. On 11 March 2014, after having been ousted by the GNC for his inability to halt a rogue oil shipment, Prime Minister Zeiden stepped down, and was replaced by Prime Minister Abdullah al-Thani. On 25 March 2014, in the face of mounting instability, al-Thani's government briefly explored the possibility of the restoration of the Libyan monarchy.\nIn June 2014, elections were held to the Council of Deputies, a new legislative body intended to take over from the General National Congress. The elections were marred by violence and low turnout, with voting stations closed in some areas. Secularists and liberals did well in the elections, to the consternation of Islamist lawmakers in the GNC, who reconvened and declared a continuing mandate for the GNC, refusing to recognise the new Council of Deputies. Armed supporters of the General National Congress occupied Tripoli, forcing the newly elected parliament to flee to Tobruk.\n\nLibya has been riven by conflict between the rival parliaments since mid-2014. Tribal militias and jihadist groups have taken advantage of the power vacuum. Most notably, radical Islamist fighters seized Derna in 2014 and Sirte in 2015 in the name of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant. In early 2015, neighbouring Egypt launched airstrikes against ISIL in support of the Tobruk government.\nIn January 2015, meetings were held with the aim to find a peaceful agreement between the rival parties in Libya. The so-called Geneva-Ghadames talks were supposed to bring the GNC and the Tobruk government together at one table to find a solution of the internal conflict. However, the GNC actually never participated, a sign that internal division not only affected the \"Tobruk Camp\", but also the \"Tripoli Camp\". Meanwhile, terrorism within Libya has steadily increased, affecting also neighbouring countries. The terrorist attack against the Bardo Museum on 18 March 2015, was reportedly carried on by two Libyan-trained militants.\n\nDuring 2015 an extended series of diplomatic meetings and peace negotiations were supported by the United Nations, as conducted by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General (SRSG), Spanish diplomat Bernardino Leon. UN support for the SRSG-led process of dialogue carried on in addition to the usual work of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).\n\nIn July 2015 SRSG Leon reported to the UN Security Council on the progress of the negotiations, which at that point had just achieved a political agreement on 11 July setting out \"a comprehensive framework…includ[ing] guiding principles…institutions and decision-making mechanisms to guide the transition until the adoption of a permanent constitution.\" The stated purpose of that process was \"…intended to culminate in the creation of a modern, democratic state based on the principle of inclusion, the rule of law, separation of powers and respect for human rights.\" The SRSG praised the participants for achieving agreement, stating that \"The Libyan people have unequivocally expressed themselves in favour of peace.\" The SRSG then informed the Security Council that \"Libya is at a critical stage\" and urging \"all parties in Libya to continue to engage constructively in the dialogue process\", stating that \"only through dialogue and political compromise, can a peaceful resolution of the conflict be achieved. A peaceful transition will only succeed in Libya through a significant and coordinated effort in supporting a future Government of National Accord…\".\nTalks, negotiations and dialogue continued on during mid-2015 at various international locations, culminating at Skhirat in Morocco in early September.\n\nAlso in 2015, as part of the ongoing support from the international community, the UN Human Rights Council requested a report about the Libyan situation and the High Commissioner for Human Rights, Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, established an investigative body (OIOL) to report on human rights and rebuilding the Libyan justice system.\n\nChaos-ridden Libya has emerged as a major transit point for people trying to reach Europe. More than 700,000 migrants have reached Italy by boat since 2013.\n\nIn May 2018 Libya's rival leaders agreed to hold parliamentary and presidential elections following a meeting in Paris.\n\nIn April 2019, Khalifa Haftar launched Operation Flood of Dignity, in an offensive by the Libyan National Army aimed to seize Western territories from the Government of National Accord (GNA).\n\nIn June 2019, forces allied to Libya's UN-recognized Government of National Accord successfully captured Gharyan, a strategic town where military commander Khalifa Haftar and his fighters were based. According to a spokesman for GNA forces, Mustafa al-Mejii, dozens of LNA fighters under Haftar were killed, while at least 18 were taken prisoner.\n\nLibya extends over , making it the 16th largest nation in the world by size. Libya is bound to the north by the Mediterranean Sea, the west by Tunisia and Algeria, the southwest by Niger, the south by Chad, the southeast by Sudan, and the east by Egypt. Libya lies between latitudes 19° and 34°N, and longitudes 9° and 26°E.\n\nAt , Libya's coastline is the longest of any African country bordering the Mediterranean. The portion of the Mediterranean Sea north of Libya is often called the Libyan Sea. The climate is mostly extremely dry and desertlike in nature. However, the northern regions enjoy a milder Mediterranean climate.\n\nNatural hazards come in the form of hot, dry, dust-laden sirocco (known in Libya as the \"gibli\"). This is a southern wind blowing from one to four days in spring and autumn. There are also dust storms and sandstorms. Oases can also be found scattered throughout Libya, the most important of which are Ghadames and Kufra. Libya is one of the sunniest and driest countries in the world due to prevailing presence of desert environment.\n\nThe Libyan Desert, which covers much of Libya, is one of the most arid and sun-baked places on earth. In places, decades may pass without seeing any rainfall at all, and even in the highlands rainfall seldom happens, once every 5–10 years. At Uweinat, the last recorded rainfall was in September 1998.\n\nLikewise, the temperature in the Libyan Desert can be extreme; on 13 September 1922, the town of 'Aziziya, which is located southwest of Tripoli, recorded an air temperature of , considered to be a world record. In September 2012, however, the world record figure of 58 °C was overturned by the World Meteorological Organization.\n\nThere are a few scattered uninhabited small oases, usually linked to the major depressions, where water can be found by digging to a few feet in depth. In the west there is a widely dispersed group of oases in unconnected shallow depressions, the Kufra group, consisting of Tazerbo, Rebianae and Kufra. Aside from the scarps, the general flatness is only interrupted by a series of plateaus and massifs near the centre of the Libyan Desert, around the convergence of the Egyptian-Sudanese-Libyan borders.\n\nSlightly further to the south are the massifs of Arkenu, Uweinat, and Kissu. These granite mountains are ancient, having formed long before the sandstones surrounding them. Arkenu and Western Uweinat are ring complexes very similar to those in the Aïr Mountains. Eastern Uweinat (the highest point in the Libyan Desert) is a raised sandstone plateau adjacent to the granite part further west.\n\nThe plain to the north of Uweinat is dotted with eroded volcanic features. With the discovery of oil in the 1950s also came the discovery of a massive aquifer underneath much of Libya. The water in this aquifer pre-dates the last ice ages and the Sahara Desert itself. This area also contains the Arkenu structures, which were once thought to be two impact craters.\n\nThe legislature of Libya is the unicameral Council of Deputies which meets in Tobruk.\n\nThe former legislature was the General National Congress, which had 200 seats. The General National Congress (2014), a largely unrecognised rival parliament based in the \"de jure\" capital of Tripoli, claims to be a legal continuation of the GNC.\n\nOn 7 July 2012, Libyans voted in parliamentary elections, the first free elections in almost 40 years. Around thirty women were elected to become members of parliament. Early results of the vote showed the National Forces Alliance, led by former interim Prime Minister Mahmoud Jibril, as front runner. The Justice and Construction Party, affiliated to the Muslim Brotherhood, has done less well than similar parties in Egypt and Tunisia. It won 17 out of 80 seats that were contested by parties, but about 60 independents have since joined its caucus.\n\nAs of January 2013, there was mounting public pressure on the National Congress to set up a drafting body to create a new constitution. Congress had not yet decided whether the members of the body would be elected or appointed.\nOn 30 March 2014 General National Congress voted to replace itself with new Council of Deputies. The new legislature allocates 30 seats for women, will have 200 seats overall (with individuals able to run as members of political parties) and allows Libyans of foreign nationalities to run for office.\n\nFollowing the 2012 elections, Freedom House improved Libya's rating from Not Free to Partly Free, and now considers the country to be an electoral democracy.\n\nGaddafi merged civil and sharia courts in 1973. Civil courts now employ sharia judges who sit in regular courts of appeal and specialise in sharia appellate cases. Laws regarding personal status are derived from Islamic law.\n\nAt a meeting of the European Parliament Committee on Foreign Affairs on 2 December 2014, UN Special Representative Bernardino León described Libya as a non-state.\n\nAn agreement to form a unified interim government was signed on 17 December 2015. Under the terms of the agreement, a nine-member Presidency Council and a seventeen-member interim Government of National Accord would be formed, with a view to holding new elections within two years. The House of Representatives would continue to exist as a legislature and an advisory body, to be known as the State Council, will be formed with members nominated by the General National Congress (2014).\n\nLibya's foreign policies have fluctuated since 1951. As a Kingdom, Libya maintained a definitively pro-Western stance, and was recognized as belonging to the conservative traditionalist bloc in the League of Arab States (the present-day Arab League), of which it became a member in 1953. The government was also friendly towards Western countries such as the United Kingdom, United States, France, Italy, Greece, and established full diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union in 1955.\n\nAlthough the government supported Arab causes, including the Moroccan and Algerian independence movements, it took little active part in the Arab-Israeli dispute or the tumultuous inter-Arab politics of the 1950s and early 1960s. The Kingdom was noted for its close association with the West, while it steered a conservative course at home.\nAfter the 1969 coup, Muammar Gaddafi closed American and British bases and partly nationalized foreign oil and commercial interests in Libya.\n\nGaddafi was known for backing a number of leaders viewed as anathema to Westernization and political liberalism, including Ugandan President Idi Amin, Central African Emperor Jean-Bédel Bokassa, Ethiopian strongman Haile Mariam Mengistu, Liberian President Charles Taylor, and Yugoslav President Slobodan Milošević.\n\nRelations with the West were strained by a series of incidents for most of Gaddafi's rule, including the killing of London policewoman Yvonne Fletcher, the bombing of a West Berlin nightclub frequented by U.S. servicemen, and the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103, which led to UN sanctions in the 1990s, though by the late 2000s, the United States and other Western powers had normalised relations with Libya.\n\nGaddafi's decision to abandon the pursuit of weapons of mass destruction after the Iraq War saw Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein overthrown and put on trial led to Libya being hailed as a success for Western soft power initiatives in the War on Terror. In October 2010, Gaddafi apologized to African leaders on behalf of Arab nations for their involvement in the African slave trade.\n\nLibya is included in the European Union's European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) which aims at bringing the EU and its neighbours closer. Libyan authorities rejected European Union's plans aimed at stopping migration from Libya. In 2017, Libya signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.\n\nLibya's previous national army was defeated in the Libyan Civil War and disbanded. The Tobruk based House of Representatives who claim to be the legitimate government of Libya have attempted to reestablish a military known as the Libyan National Army. Led by Khalifa Haftar, they control much of eastern Libya. In May 2012, an estimated 35,000 personnel had joined its ranks. The internationally recognised Government of National Accord established in 2015 has its own army that replaced the LNA, but it consists largely of undisciplined and disorganised militia groups.\n\nAs of November 2012, it was deemed to be still in the embryonic stage of development. President Mohammed el-Megarif promised that empowering the army and police force is the government's biggest priority. President el-Megarif also ordered that all of the country's militias must come under government authority or disband.\n\nMilitias have so far refused to be integrated into a central security force. Many of these militias are disciplined, but the most powerful of them answer only to the executive councils of various Libyan cities. These militias make up the so-called Libyan Shield, a parallel national force, which operates at the request, rather than at the order, of the defence ministry.\n\nHistorically, the area of Libya was considered three provinces (or states), Tripolitania in the northwest, Barka (Cyrenaica) in the east, and Fezzan in the southwest. It was the conquest by Italy in the Italo-Turkish War that united them in a single political unit.\n\nSince 2007, Libya has been divided into 22 districts (baladiyat):\n\nAccording to Human Rights Watch annual report 2016, journalists are still being targeted by the armed groups in Libya. The organization added that Libya has very low rank in the 2015 press freedom index as it occupied 154 out of 180 countries. Homosexuality is illegal in Libya.\n\nThe Libyan economy depends primarily upon revenues from the oil sector, which account for over half of GDP and 97% of exports. Libya holds the largest proven oil reserves in Africa and is an important contributor to the global supply of light, sweet crude. During 2010, when oil averaged at $80 a barrel, oil production accounted for 54% of GDP. Apart from petroleum, the other natural resources are natural gas and gypsum. The International Monetary Fund estimated Libya's real GDP growth at 122% in 2012 and 16.7% in 2013, after a 60% plunge in 2011.\n\nThe World Bank defines Libya as an 'Upper Middle Income Economy', along with only seven other African countries. Substantial revenues from the energy sector, coupled with a small population, give Libya one of the highest per capita GDPs in Africa. This allowed the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya state to provide an extensive level of social security, particularly in the fields of housing and education.\n\nLibya faces many structural problems including a lack of institutions, weak governance, and chronic structural unemployment. The economy displays a lack of economic diversification and significant reliance on immigrant labour. Libya has traditionally relied on unsustainably high levels of public sector hiring to create employment. In the mid-2000s, the government employed about 70% of all national employees.\n\nUnemployment has risen from 8% in 2008 to 21%, according to the latest census figures. According to an Arab League report, based on data from 2010, unemployment for women stands at 18% while for the figure for men is 21%, making Libya the only Arab country where there are more unemployed men than women. Libya has high levels of social inequality, high rates of youth unemployment and regional economic disparities. Water supply is also a problem, with some 28% of the population not having access to safe drinking water in 2000.\nLibya imports up to 90% of its cereal consumption requirements, and imports of wheat in 2012/13 was estimated at about 1 million tonnes. The 2012 wheat production was estimated at about 200,000 tonnes. The government hopes to increase food production to 800,000 tonnes of cereals by 2020. However, natural and environmental conditions limit Libya's agricultural production potential. Before 1958, agriculture was the country's main source of revenue, making up about 30% of GDP. With the discovery of oil in 1958, the size of the agriculture sector declined rapidly, comprising less than 5% GDP by 2005.\n\nThe country joined OPEC in 1962. Libya is not a WTO member, but negotiations for its accession started in 2004.\n\nIn the early 1980s, Libya was one of the wealthiest countries in the world; its GDP per capita was higher than some developed countries.\nIn the early 2000s officials of the Jamahiriya era carried out economic reforms to reintegrate Libya into the global economy. UN sanctions were lifted in September 2003, and Libya announced in December 2003 that it would abandon programs to build weapons of mass destruction. Other steps have included applying for membership of the World Trade Organization, reducing subsidies, and announcing plans for privatization.\n\nAuthorities privatized more than 100 government owned companies after 2003 in industries including oil refining, tourism and real estate, of which 29 were 100% foreign owned. Many international oil companies returned to the country, including oil giants Shell and ExxonMobil. After sanctions were lifted there was a gradual increase of air traffic, and by 2005 there were 1.5 million yearly air travellers. Libya had long been a notoriously difficult country for Western tourists to visit due to stringent visa requirements.\n\nIn 2007 Saif al-Islam Gaddafi, the second-eldest son of Muammar Gaddafi, was involved in a green development project called the Green Mountain Sustainable Development Area, which sought to bring tourism to Cyrene and to preserve Greek ruins in the area.\n\nIn August 2011 it was estimated that it would take at least 10 years to rebuild Libya's infrastructure. Even before the 2011 war, Libya's infrastructure was in a poor state due to \"utter neglect\" by Gaddafi's administration, according to the NTC. By October 2012, the economy had recovered from the 2011 conflict, with oil production returning to near normal levels. Oil production was more than 1.6 million barrels per day before the war. By October 2012, the average oil production has surpassed 1.4 million bpd. The resumption of production was made possible due to the quick return of major Western companies, like Total, Eni, Repsol, Wintershall and Occidental. In 2016, an announcement from the company said the company aims 900,000 barrel per day in the next year. Oil production has fallen from 1.6 million barrel per day to 900,000 in four years of war.\n\nLibya is a large country with a relatively small population, and the population is concentrated very narrowly along the coast. Population density is about 50 persons per km² (130/sq. mi.) in the two northern regions of Tripolitania and Cyrenaica, but falls to less than one person per km² (2.6/sq. mi.) elsewhere. Ninety percent of the people live in less than 10% of the area, primarily along the coast. About 88% of the population is urban, mostly concentrated in the three largest cities, Tripoli, Benghazi and Misrata. Libya has a population of about /1e6 round 1 million, 27.7% of whom are under the age of 15. In 1984 the population was 3.6 million, an increase from the 1.54 million reported in 1964.\n\nThe majority of the Libyan population is today identified as Arab, that is, Arabic-speaking and Arab-cultured. However, according to DNA studies, 90% of that Arab Libyan population consists in fact of Arabized Berbers, while Berber Libyans, those who retain Berber language and Berber culture, comprise a minority. There are about 140 tribes and clans in Libya.\n\nFamily life is important for Libyan families, the majority of which live in apartment blocks and other independent housing units, with precise modes of housing depending on their income and wealth. Although the Arab Libyans traditionally lived nomadic lifestyles in tents, they have now settled in various towns and cities. Because of this, their old ways of life are gradually fading out. An unknown small number of Libyans still live in the desert as their families have done for centuries. Most of the population has occupations in industry and services, and a small percentage is in agriculture.\n\nAccording to the UNHCR, there were around 8,000 registered refugees, 5,500 unregistered refugees, and 7,000 asylum seekers of various origins in Libya in January 2013. Additionally, 47,000 Libyan nationals were internally displaced and 46,570 were internally displaced returnees.\n\nThe original inhabitants of Libya belonged predominantly to various Berber ethnic groups; however, the long series of foreign invasions – particularly by Arabs and Turks – have had a profound and lasting linguistic, cultural, and identity influence on Libya's demographics.\n\nToday, the great majority of Libya's inhabitants are Arabic-speaking Muslims of mixed descent, with many also tracing their ancestry to the Banu Sulaym tribe, beside Turkish and purely Berber ethnicities. The Turkish minority are often called \"Kouloughlis\" and are concentrated in and around villages and towns. Additionally, there are some Libyan ethnic minorities, such as the purely Berber Tuareg and the Tebou.\n\nMost Italian settlers, at their height numbering over half a million, left after Italian Libya's independence in 1947. More repatriated in 1970 after the accession of Muammar Gaddafi, but a few hundred of them returned in the 2000s.\n\n, the UN estimates that around 12% of Libya's population (upwards of 740,000 people) was made up of foreign migrants. Prior to the 2011 revolution official and unofficial figures of migrant labour range from 25% to 40% of the population (between 1.5 and 2.4 million people). Historically, Libya has been a host state for millions of low- and high-skilled Egyptian migrants, in particular.\n\nIt is difficult to estimate the total number of immigrants in Libya as there are often differences between census figures, official counts and usually more accurate unofficial estimates. In the 2006 census, around 359,540 foreign nationals were resident in Libya out of a population of over 5.5 million (6.35% of the population). Almost half of these were Egyptians, followed by Sudanese and Palestinian immigrants.\nDuring the 2011 revolution, 768,362 immigrants fled Libya as calculated by the IOM, around 13% of the population at the time, although many more stayed on in the country.\n\nIf consular records prior to the revolution are used to estimate the immigrant population, as many as 2 million Egyptian migrants were recorded by the Egyptian embassy in Tripoli in 2009, followed by 87,200 Tunisians, and 68,200 Moroccans by their respective embassies. The number of Asian migrants before the revolution were roughly 100,000 (60,000 Bangladeshis, 18,000 Indians, 10,000 Pakistanis, 8000 Filipinos as well as Chinese, Korean, Vietnamese, Thai and other workers). This would put the immigrant population at almost 40% before the revolution and is a figure more consistent with government estimates in 2004 which put the regular and irregular migrant numbers at 1.35 to 1.8 million (25–33% of the population at the time).\n\nLibya's native population of Arabs-Berbers as well as Arab migrants of various nationalities collectively make up 97% of the population . The remaining 3% of residents include mostly Bangladeshies, Greeks, Indians, Italians, Maltese, Turks, and Ukrainians as well as other nationalities.\n\nAccording to the CIA, the official language of Libya is Arabic. The local Libyan Arabic variety is spoken alongside Modern Standard Arabic. Various Berber languages are also spoken, including Tamasheq, Ghadamis, Nafusi, Suknah and Awjilah. The Libyan Amazigh High Council (LAHC) has declared the Amazigh (Berber or Tamazight) language as an official language in the cities and districts inhabited by the Berbers in Libya.\nIn addition, Italian and English are widely understood in the major cities, with the former used in commerce and still spoken among the remaining Italian population.\n\nAbout 97% of the population in Libya are Muslims, most of whom belong to the Sunni branch. Small numbers of Ibadi Muslims and Ahmadis also live in the country.\n\nBefore the 1930s, the Senussi Sunni Sufi movement was the primary Islamic movement in Libya. This was a religious revival adapted to desert life. Its \"zawaaya\" (lodges) were found in Tripolitania and Fezzan, but Senussi influence was strongest in Cyrenaica. Rescuing the region from unrest and anarchy, the Senussi movement gave the Cyrenaican tribal people a religious attachment and feelings of unity and purpose. This Islamic movement, which was eventually destroyed by the Italian invasion. Gaddafi asserted that he was a devout Muslim, and his government was taking a role in supporting Islamic institutions and in worldwide proselytising on behalf of Islam.\n\nSince the fall of Gaddafi, ultra-conservative strains of Islam have reasserted themselves in places. Derna in eastern Libya, historically a hotbed of jihadist thought, came under the control of militants aligned with the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant in 2014. Jihadist elements have also spread to Sirte and Benghazi, among other areas, as a result of the Second Libyan Civil War.\n\nThere are small foreign communities of Christians. Coptic Orthodox Christianity, which is the Christian Church of Egypt, is the largest and most historical Christian denomination in Libya. There are about 60,000 Egyptian Copts in Libya. Copts in Libya are Egyptian. There are three Coptic Churches in Libya, one in Tripoli, one in Benghazi, and one in Misurata.\n\nThe Coptic Church has grown in recent years in Libya, due to the growing immigration of Egyptian Copts to Libya. There are an estimated 40,000 Roman Catholics in Libya who are served by two Bishops, one in Tripoli (serving the Italian community) and one in Benghazi (serving the Maltese community). There is also a small Anglican community, made up mostly of African immigrant workers in Tripoli; it is part of the Anglican Diocese of Egypt. People have been arrested on suspicion of being Christian missionaries, as proselytising is illegal. Christians have also faced the threat of violence from radical Islamists in some parts of the country, with a well-publicised video released by the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant in February 2015 depicting the mass beheading of Christian Copts.\n\nLibya was once the home of one of the oldest Jewish communities in the world, dating back to at least 300 BC. In 1942, the Italian Fascist authorities set up forced labor camps south of Tripoli for the Jews, including Giado (about 3,000 Jews), Gharyan, Jeren, and Tigrinna. In Giado some 500 Jews died of weakness, hunger, and disease. In 1942, Jews who were not in the concentration camps were heavily restricted in their economic activity and all men between 18 and 45 years were drafted for forced labor. In August 1942, Jews from Tripolitania were interned in a concentration camp at Sidi Azaz. In the three years after November 1945, more than 140 Jews were murdered, and hundreds more wounded, in a series of pogroms. By 1948, about 38,000 Jews remained in the country. Upon Libya's independence in 1951, most of the Jewish community emigrated.\n\nMany Arabic speaking Libyans consider themselves as part of a wider Arab community. This was strengthened by the spread of Pan-Arabism in the mid-20th century, and their reach to power in Libya where they instituted Arabic as the only official language of the state. Under their dictatorship the teaching and even use of indigenous Berber language was strictly forbidden. In addition to banning foreign languages previously taught in academic institutions, leaving entire generations of Libyans with limitations in their comprehension of the English language. Both the spoken Arabic dialects and Berber, still retain words from Italian, that were acquired before and during the \"Libia Italiana\" period.\n\nLibyans have a heritage in the traditions of the previously nomadic Bedouin Arabic speakers and sedentary Amazigh tribes. Most Libyans associate themselves with a particular family name originating from tribal or conquest based, typically from Ottoman forefathers, heritage..\n\nReflecting the \"nature of giving\" ( \"\", Berber languages: ⴰⵏⴰⴽⴽⴰⴼ Anakkaf ), amongst the Libyan people as well as the sense of hospitality, recently the state of Libya made it to the top 20 on the world giving index in 2013. According to CAF, in a typical month, almost three quarters (72%) of all Libyans helped somebody they did not know – the third highest level across all 135 countries surveyed.\n\nThere are few theaters or art galleries due to the decades of cultural repression under the Qaddafi regime and lack of infrastructure development under the regime of dictatorship. For many years there have been no public theaters, and only very few cinemas showing foreign films. The tradition of folk culture is still alive and well, with troupes performing music and dance at frequent festivals, both in Libya and abroad.\n\nA large number of Libyan television stations are devoted to political review, Islamic topics and cultural phenomena. A number of TV stations air various styles of traditional Libyan music. Tuareg music and dance are popular in Ghadames and the south. Libyan television broadcasts air programs mostly in Arabic though usually have time slots for English and French programs. A 1996 analysis by the Committee to Protect Journalists found Libya's media was the most tightly controlled in the Arab world during the country's dictatorship. hundreds of TV stations have begun to air due to the collapse of censorship from the old regime and the initiation of \"free media\".\nMany Libyans frequent the country's beach and they also visit Libya's archaeological sites—especially Leptis Magna, which is widely considered to be one of the best preserved Roman archaeological sites in the world. The most common form of public transport between cities is the bus, though many people travel by automobile. There are no railway services in Libya, but these are planned for construction in the near future (see rail transport in Libya).\n\nLibya's capital, Tripoli, has many museums and archives. These include the Government Library, the Ethnographic Museum, the Archaeological Museum, the National Archives, the Epigraphy Museum and the Islamic Museum. The Red Castle Museum located in the capital near the coast and right in the city center, built in consultation with UNESCO, may be the country's most famous.\n\nLibyan cuisine is a mixture of the different Italian, Bedouin and traditional Arab culinary influences. Pasta is the staple food in the Western side of Libya and there is a popular pasta dish called “Mbakbka”, whereas rice is generally the staple food in the east.\n\nCommon Libyan foods include several variations of red (tomato) sauce based pasta dishes (similar to the Italian Sugo all'arrabbiata dish); rice, usually served with lamb or chicken (typically stewed, fried, grilled, or boiled in-sauce); and couscous, which is steam cooked whilst held over boiling red (tomato) sauce and meat (sometimes also containing courgettes/zucchini and chickpeas), which is typically served along with cucumber slices, lettuce and olives.\n\nBazeen, a dish made from barley flour and served with red tomato sauce, is customarily eaten communally, with several people sharing the same dish, usually by hand. This dish is commonly served at traditional weddings or festivities. Asida is a sweet version of Bazeen, made from white flour and served with a mix of honey, ghee or butter. Another favorite way to serve Asida is with rub (fresh date syrup) and olive oil. Usban is animal tripe stitched and stuffed with rice and vegetables cooked in tomato based soup or steamed. Shurba is a red tomato sauce-based soup, usually served with small grains of pasta.\n\nA very common snack eaten by Libyans is known as \"khubs bi' tun\", literally meaning \"bread with tuna fish\", usually served as a baked baguette or pita bread stuffed with tuna fish that has been mixed with harissa (chili sauce) and olive oil. Many snack vendors prepare these sandwiches and they can be found all over Libya. Libyan restaurants may serve international cuisine, or may serve simpler fare such as lamb, chicken, vegetable stew, potatoes and macaroni. Due to severe lack of infrastructure, many under-developed areas and small towns do not have restaurants and instead food stores may be the only source to obtain food products. Alcohol consumption is illegal in the entire country.\n\nThere are four main ingredients of traditional Libyan food: olives (and olive oil), dates, grains and milk. Grains are roasted, ground, sieved and used for making bread, cakes, soups and bazeen. Dates are harvested, dried and can be eaten as they are, made into syrup or slightly fried and eaten with bsisa and milk. After eating, Libyans often drink black tea. This is normally repeated a second time (for the second glass of tea), and in the third round of tea, it is served with roasted peanuts or roasted almonds known as \"shay bi'l-luz\" (mixed with the tea in the same glass).\n\nLibya's population includes 1.7 million students, over 270,000 of whom study at the tertiary level. Basic education in Libya is free for all citizens, and is compulsory up to the secondary level. The adult literacy rate in 2010 was 89.2%.\n\nAfter Libya's independence in 1951, its first university – the University of Libya – was established in Benghazi by royal decree. In the 1975–76 academic year the number of university students was estimated to be 13,418. , this number has increased to more than 200,000, with an extra 70,000 enrolled in the higher technical and vocational sector. The rapid increase in the number of students in the higher education sector has been mirrored by an increase in the number of institutions of higher education.\n\nSince 1975 the number of universities has grown from two to nine and after their introduction in 1980, the number of higher technical and vocational institutes currently stands at 84 (with 12 public universities). Since 2007 some new private universities such as the Libyan International Medical University have been established. Although before 2011 a small number of private institutions were given accreditation, the majority of Libya's higher education has always been financed by the public budget. In 1998 the budget allocation for education represented 38.2% of Libya's total national budget.\n\nIn 2010, spending on healthcare accounted for 3.88% of the country's GDP. In 2009, there were 18.71 physicians and 66.95 nurses per 10,000 inhabitants. The life expectancy at birth was 74.95 years in 2011, or 72.44 years for males and 77.59 years for females.\n\nBULLET::::- Outline of Libya\nBULLET::::- Index of Libya-related articles\n\nBULLET::::- Libya profile from the BBC News.\n"}
{"id": "17634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17634", "title": "Letter game", "text": "Letter game\n\nA letter game involves the exchange of written letters, or e-mails, between two or more participants. The first player writes a letter in the voice of a newly created character; in this first letter, the writer should establish their own identity and that of their correspondent, should set the scene, and should explain why they and their correspondent must communicate in written fashion. In subsequent letters, plot and character can be developed, but the writers should not talk about plot outside of the letters and the characters should never meet. Letter games can be a writing exercise or a form of collaborative fiction.\n\nNovels written using or inspired by this type of letter game include \"Sorcery and Cecelia or The Enchanted Chocolate Pot\", \"The Grand Tour or The Purloined Coronation Regalia\", and \"The Mislaid Magician or Ten Years After\", all three by Patricia Wrede and Caroline Stevermer; \"Freedom and Necessity\", by Steven Brust and Emma Bull; and the children's books \"P.S. Longer Letter Later\" and \"Snail Mail No More\" by Paula Danziger and Ann M. Martin.\n\nBULLET::::- Constrained writing\nBULLET::::- Epistolary novel\nBULLET::::- Play-by-mail game\n"}
{"id": "17636", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17636", "title": "Law of noncontradiction", "text": "Law of noncontradiction\n\nIn logic, the law of non-contradiction (LNC) (also known as the law of contradiction, principle of non-contradiction (PNC), or the principle of contradiction) states that contradictory propositions cannot both be true in the same sense at the same time, e. g. the two propositions \"\"A is B\"\" and \"\"A is not B\"\" are mutually exclusive. Formally this is expressed as the tautology ¬(p ∧ ¬p).\n\nOne reason to have this law is the principle of explosion, which states that anything follows from a contradiction. The law is employed in a reductio ad absurdum proof.\n\nTo express the fact that the law is tenseless and to avoid equivocation, sometimes the law is amended to say \"contradictory propositions cannot both be true 'at the same time and in the same sense'\". \n\nIt is one of the so called three laws of thought, along with its complement, the law of excluded middle, and the law of identity. The law of noncontradiction is logically equivalent to the law of excluded middle by De Morgan's laws. However, no system of logic is built on just these laws, and none of these laws provide inference rules, such as modus ponens or De Morgan's laws.\n\nThe law of non contradiction and the law of excluded middle create a dichotomy in \"logical space\", wherein the two parts are \"mutually exclusive\" and \"jointly exhaustive\". The law of non-contradiction is merely an expression of the mutually exclusive aspect of that dichotomy, and the law of excluded middle, an expression of its jointly exhaustive aspect.\n\nOne difficulty in applying the law of non-contradiction is ambiguity in the propositions. For instance, if is not explicitly specified as part of the propositions A and B, then \"A\" may be \"B\" at one time, and not at another. A and B may in some cases be made to sound mutually exclusive linguistically even though \"A\" may be partly \"B\" and partly not \"B\" at the same time. However, it is impossible to predicate of the same thing, at the same time, and in the same sense, the absence and the presence of the same fixed quality.\n\nAccording to both Plato and Aristotle, Heraclitus was \"said\" to have denied the law of non-contradiction. This is quite likely if, as Plato pointed out, the law of non-contradiction does not hold for changing things in the world. If a philosophy of Becoming is not possible without change, then (the potential of) what is to become must already exist in the present object. In \"\"We step and do not step into the same rivers; we are and we are not\"\", both Heraclitus's and Plato's object simultaneously must, in some sense, be both what it now is and have the potential (dynamic) of what it might become.\n\nUnfortunately, so little remains of Heraclitus' aphorisms that not much about his philosophy can be said with certainty. He seems to have held that strife of opposites is universal both within and without, therefore \"both\" opposite existents or qualities must simultaneously exist, although in some instances in different respects. \"The \"road up and down are one and the same\"\" implies either the road leads both ways, or there can be no road at all. This is the logical complement of the law of non-contradiction. According to Heraclitus, change, and the constant conflict of opposites is the universal logos of nature.\n\nPersonal subjective perceptions or judgments can only be said to be true at the same time in the same respect, in which case, the law of non-contradiction must be applicable to personal judgments.\nThe most famous saying of Protagoras is: \"\"Man is the measure of all things: of things which are, that they are, and of things which are not, that they are not\"\". However, Protagoras was referring to things that are used by or in some way related to humans. This makes a great difference in the meaning of his aphorism. Properties, social entities, ideas, feelings, judgments, etc. originate in the human mind. However, Protagoras has never suggested that man must be the measure of stars or the motion of the stars.\n\nParmenides employed an ontological version of the law of non-contradiction to prove that being is and to deny the void, change, and motion. He also similarly disproved contrary propositions. In his poem On Nature, he said,\n\nThe nature of the ‘is’ or what-is in Parmenides is a highly contentious subject. Some have taken it to be whatever exists, some to be whatever is or can be the object of scientific inquiry.\n\nIn Plato's early dialogues, Socrates uses the elenctic method to investigate the nature or definition of ethical concepts such as justice or virtue. Elenctic refutation depends on a dichotomous thesis, one that may be divided into exactly two mutually exclusive parts, only one of which may be true. Then Socrates goes on to demonstrate the contrary of the commonly accepted part using the law of non-contradiction. According to Gregory Vlastos, the method has the following steps:\nBULLET::::1. Socrates' interlocutor asserts a thesis, for example, \"Courage is endurance of the soul\", which Socrates considers false and targets for refutation.\nBULLET::::2. Socrates secures his interlocutor's agreement to further premises, for example, \"Courage is a fine thing\" and \"Ignorant endurance is not a fine thing\".\nBULLET::::3. Socrates then argues, and the interlocutor agrees, that these further premises imply the contrary of the original thesis, in this case, it leads to: \"courage is not endurance of the soul\".\nBULLET::::4. Socrates then claims that he has shown that his interlocutor's thesis is false and that its negation is true.\n\nPlato's version of the law of non-contradiction states that \"\"The same thing clearly cannot act or be acted upon in the same part or in relation to the same thing at the same time, in contrary ways\"\" (The \"Republic\" (436b)). In this, Plato carefully phrases three axiomatic restrictions on \"action\" or reaction: 1) in the same part, 2) in the same relation, 3) at the same time. The effect is to momentarily create a frozen, timeless state, somewhat like figures frozen in action on the frieze of the Parthenon.\n\nThis way, he accomplishes two essential goals for his philosophy. First, he logically separates the Platonic world of constant change from the formally knowable world of momentarily fixed physical objects. Second, he provides the conditions for the dialectic method to be used in finding definitions, as for example in the \"Sophist\". So Plato's law of non-contradiction is the empirically derived necessary starting point for all else he has to say.\n\nIn contrast, Aristotle reverses Plato's order of derivation. Rather than starting with \"experience\", Aristotle begins \"a priori\" with the law of non-contradiction as the fundamental axiom of an analytic philosophical system. This axiom then necessitates the fixed, realist model. Now, he starts with much stronger logical foundations than Plato's non-contrariety of action in reaction to conflicting demands from the three parts of the soul.\n\nThe traditional source of the law of non-contradiction is Aristotle's \"Metaphysics\" where he gives three different versions.\nBULLET::::1. ontological: \"It is impossible that the same thing belong and not belong to the same thing at the same time and in the same respect.\" (1005b19-20)\nBULLET::::2. psychological: \"No one can believe that the same thing can (at the same time) be and not be.\" (1005b23-24)\nBULLET::::3. logical (aka the medieval Lex Contradictoriarum) : \"The most certain of all basic principles is that contradictory propositions are not true simultaneously.\" (1011b13-14)\n\nAristotle attempts several proofs of this law. He first argues that every expression has a single meaning (otherwise we could not communicate with one another). This rules out the possibility that by \"to be a man\", \"not to be a man\" is meant. But \"man\" means \"two-footed animal\" (for example), and so if anything is a man, it is necessary (by virtue of the meaning of \"man\") that it must be a two-footed animal, and so it is impossible at the same time for it \"not\" to be a two-footed animal. Thus \"it is not possible to say truly at the same time that the same thing is and is not a man\" (\"Metaphysics\" 1006b 35). Another argument is that anyone who believes something cannot believe its contradiction (1008b).\n\nAvicenna's commentary on the \"Metaphysics\" illustrates the common view that the law of non-contradiction \"and their like are among the things that do not require our elaboration.\" Avicenna’s words for \"the obdurate\" are quite facetious: \"he must be subjected to the conflagration of fire, since 'fire' and 'not fire' are one. Pain must be inflicted on him through beating, since 'pain' and 'no pain' are one. And he must be denied food and drink, since eating and drinking and the abstention from both are one [and the same].\"\n\nThe law of non-contradiction is found in ancient Indian logic as a meta-rule in the \"Shrauta Sutras\", the grammar of Pāṇini, and the \"Brahma Sutras\" attributed to Vyasa. It was later elaborated on by medieval commentators such as Madhvacharya.\n\nLeibniz and Kant both used the law of non contradiction to define the difference between analytic and synthetic propositions. For Leibniz, analytic statements follow from the law of non contradiction, and synthetic ones from the principle of sufficient reason.\n\nThe principle was stated as a theorem of propositional logic by Russell and Whitehead in \"Principia Mathematica\" as:\n\nGraham Priest advocates the view that \"under some conditions\", some statements can be both true and false simultaneously, or may be true and false at different times. Dialetheism arises from formal logical paradoxes, such as the Liar's paradox and Russell's paradox. See dialetheism.\n\nAs is true of all axioms of logic, the law of non-contradiction is alleged to be neither verifiable nor falsifiable, on the grounds that any proof or disproof must use the law itself prior to reaching the conclusion. In other words, in order to verify or falsify the laws of logic one must resort to logic as a weapon, an act which would essentially be self-defeating. Since the early 20th century, certain logicians have proposed logics that deny the validity of the law. \n\nLogics known as \"paraconsistent\" are inconsistency-tolerant logics in that there, from P together with ¬P, it doesn't imply that any proposition follows. Nevertheless, not all paraconsistent logics deny the law of non-contradition and some such logics even prove it. \n\nIn several axiomatic derivations of logic, this is effectively resolved by showing that (P ∨ ¬P) and its negation are constants, and simply defining TRUE as (P ∨ ¬P) and FALSE as ¬(P ∨ ¬P), without taking a position as to the principle of bivalence or the law of excluded middle.\n\nSome, such as David Lewis, have objected to paraconsistent logic on the ground that it is simply impossible for a statement and its negation to be jointly true. A related objection is that \"negation\" in paraconsistent logic is not really \"negation\"; it is merely a subcontrary-forming operator.\n\nThe \"Fargo\" episode \"The Law of Non-Contradiction\", which takes its name from the law, was noted for its several elements relating to the law of non-contradiction, as the episode's main character faces several paradoxes. For example, she is still the acting chief of police while having been demoted from the position, and tries to investigate a man that both was and was not named Ennis Stussy, and who both was and was not her stepfather. It also features the story of a robot who, after having spent million of years unable to help humanity, is told that he greatly helped mankind all along by observing history.\n\nBULLET::::- Contradiction\nBULLET::::- First principle\nBULLET::::- Peirce's law\nBULLET::::- Principle of bivalence\nBULLET::::- Principle of sufficient reason\nBULLET::::- Oxymoron\nBULLET::::- Trivialism\nBULLET::::- Béziau (2000).\nBULLET::::- Lewis (1982).\nBULLET::::- Slater (1995).\n\nBULLET::::- S. M. Cohen, \"Aristotle on the Principle of Non-Contradiction\", \"Canadian Journal of Philosophy\", Vol. 16, No. 3.\nBULLET::::- James Danaher (2004), \"The Laws of Thought\", \"The Philosopher\", Vol. LXXXXII No. 1.\nBULLET::::- Paula Gottlieb, \"Aristotle on Non-contradiction\" (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy).\nBULLET::::- Laurence Horn, \"Contradiction\" (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy).\nBULLET::::- Graham Priest and Francesco Berto, \"Dialetheism\" (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy).\nBULLET::::- Graham Priest and Koji Tanaka, \"Paraconsistent logic\" (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy).\nBULLET::::- Orestes J. Gonzalez, \"Actus Essendi\" and the Habit of the First Principle in Thomas Aquinas (New York: Einsiedler Press, 2019).\nBULLET::::- Peter Suber, \"Non-Contradiction and Excluded Middle\", Earlham College.\n"}
{"id": "17637", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17637", "title": "Law of excluded middle", "text": "Law of excluded middle\n\nIn logic, the law of excluded middle (or the principle of excluded middle) states that for any proposition, either that proposition is true or its negation is true. It is one of the so called three laws of thought, along with the law of noncontradiction, and the law of identity. The law of excluded middle is logically equivalent to the law of noncontradiction by De Morgan's laws. However, no system of logic is built on just these laws, and none of these laws provide inference rules, such as modus ponens or De Morgan's laws.\n\nThe law is also known as the law (or principle) of the excluded third, in Latin principium tertii exclusi. Another Latin designation for this law is tertium non datur: \"no third [possibility] is given\". It is a tautology.\n\nThe principle should not be confused with the semantical principle of bivalence, which states that every proposition is either true or false.\n\nSome systems of logic have different but analogous laws. For some finite \"n\"-valued logics, there is an analogous law called the \"law of excluded \"n\"+1th\". If negation is cyclic and \"∨\" is a \"max operator\", then the law can be expressed in the object language by (P ∨ ~P ∨ ~~P ∨ ... ∨ ~...~P), where \"~...~\" represents \"n\"−1 negation signs and \"∨ ... ∨\" \"n\"−1 disjunction signs. It is easy to check that the sentence must receive at least one of the \"n\" truth values (and not a value that is not one of the \"n\").\n\nOther systems reject the law entirely.\n\nFor example, if \"P\" is the proposition:\n\nthen the law of excluded middle holds that the logical disjunction:\n\nis true by virtue of its form alone. That is, the \"middle\" position, that Socrates is neither mortal nor not-mortal, is excluded by logic, and therefore either the first possibility (\"Socrates is mortal\") or its negation (\"it is not the case that Socrates is mortal\") must be true.\n\nAn example of an argument that depends on the law of excluded middle follows. We seek to prove that there exist two irrational numbers formula_1 and formula_2 such that\n\nIt is known that formula_4 is irrational (see proof). Consider the number\n\nClearly (excluded middle) this number is either rational or irrational. If it is rational, the proof is complete, and\n\nBut if formula_5 is irrational, then let\n\nThen\n\nand 2 is certainly rational. This concludes the proof.\n\nIn the above argument, the assertion \"this number is either rational or irrational\" invokes the law of excluded middle. An intuitionist, for example, would not accept this argument without further support for that statement. This might come in the form of a proof that the number in question is in fact irrational (or rational, as the case may be); or a finite algorithm that could determine whether the number is rational.\n\nThe above proof is an example of a \"non-constructive\" proof disallowed by intuitionists:\n</math> is irrational but there is no known easy proof of that fact.) (Davis 2000:220)}} (Constructive proofs of the specific example above are not hard to produce; for example formula_6 and formula_13 are both easily shown to be irrational, and formula_14; a proof allowed by intuitionists).\n\nBy \"non-constructive\" Davis means that \"a proof that there actually are mathematic entities satisfying certain conditions would not have to provide a method to exhibit explicitly the entities in question.\" (p. 85). Such proofs presume the existence of a totality that is complete, a notion disallowed by intuitionists when extended to the \"infinite\"—for them the infinite can never be completed:\n\nDavid Hilbert and Luitzen E. J. Brouwer both give examples of the law of excluded middle extended to the infinite. Hilbert's example: \"the assertion that either there are only finitely many prime numbers or there are infinitely many\" (quoted in Davis 2000:97); and Brouwer's: \"Every mathematical species is either finite or infinite.\" (Brouwer 1923 in van Heijenoort 1967:336).\n\nIn general, intuitionists allow the use of the law of excluded middle when it is confined to discourse over finite collections (sets), but not when it is used in discourse over infinite sets (e.g. the natural numbers). Thus intuitionists absolutely disallow the blanket assertion: \"For all propositions \"P\" concerning infinite sets \"D\": \"P\" or ~\"P\"\" (Kleene 1952:48).\n\nPutative counterexamples to the law of excluded middle include the liar paradox or Quine's paradox. Certain resolutions of these paradoxes, particularly Graham Priest's dialetheism as formalised in LP, have the law of excluded middle as a theorem, but resolve out the Liar as both true and false. In this way, the law of excluded middle is true, but because truth itself, and therefore disjunction, is not exclusive, it says next to nothing if one of the disjuncts is paradoxical, or both true and false.\n\nThe earliest known formulation is in Aristotle's discussion of the principle of non-contradiction, first proposed in \"On Interpretation,\" where he says that of two contradictory propositions (i.e. where one proposition is the negation of the other) one must be true, and the other false. He also states it as a principle in the \"Metaphysics\" book 3, saying that it is necessary in every case to affirm or deny, and that it is impossible that there should be anything between the two parts of a contradiction.\n\nAristotle wrote that ambiguity can arise from the use of ambiguous names, but cannot exist in the facts themselves:\n\nAristotle's assertion that \"...it will not be possible to be and not to be the same thing\", which would be written in propositional logic as ¬(\"P\" ∧ ¬\"P\"), is a statement modern logicians could call the law of excluded middle (\"P\" ∨ ¬\"P\"), as distribution of the negation of Aristotle's assertion makes them equivalent, regardless that the former claims that no statement is \"both\" true and false, while the latter requires that any statement is \"either\" true or false.\n\nHowever, Aristotle also writes, \"since it is impossible that contradictories should be at the same time true of the same thing, obviously contraries also cannot belong at the same time to the same thing\" (Book IV, CH 6, p. 531). He then proposes that \"there cannot be an intermediate between contradictories, but of one subject we must either affirm or deny any one predicate\" (Book IV, CH 7, p. 531). In the context of Aristotle's traditional logic, this is a remarkably precise statement of the law of excluded middle, \"P\" ∨ ¬\"P\".\n\nAlso in On Interpretation, Aristotle seemed to deny the law of excluded middle in the case of future contingents, in his discussion on the sea battle.\n\nThe principle was stated as a theorem of propositional logic by Russell and Whitehead in \"Principia Mathematica\" as:\n\nformula_15.\n\nSo just what is \"truth\" and \"falsehood\"? At the opening \"PM\" quickly announces some definitions:\n\nThis is not much help. But later, in a much deeper discussion, (\"Definition and systematic ambiguity of Truth and Falsehood\" Chapter II part III, p. 41 ff ) \"PM\" defines truth and falsehood in terms of a relationship between the \"a\" and the \"b\" and the \"percipient\". For example \"This 'a' is 'b'\" (e.g. \"This 'object a' is 'red'\") really means \"'object a' is a sense-datum\" and \"'red' is a sense-datum\", and they \"stand in relation\" to one another and in relation to \"I\". Thus what we really mean is: \"I perceive that 'This object a is red'\" and this is an undeniable-by-3rd-party \"truth\".\n\n\"PM\" further defines a distinction between a \"sense-datum\" and a \"sensation\":\nRussell reiterated his distinction between \"sense-datum\" and \"sensation\" in his book \"The Problems of Philosophy\" (1912) published at the same time as \"PM\" (1910–1913):\nRussell further described his reasoning behind his definitions of \"truth\" and \"falsehood\" in the same book (Chapter XII \"Truth and Falsehood\").\n\nFrom the law of excluded middle, formula ✸2.1 in \"Principia Mathematica,\" Whitehead and Russell derive some of the most powerful tools in the logician's argumentation toolkit. (In \"Principia Mathematica,\" formulas and propositions are identified by a leading asterisk and two numbers, such as \"✸2.1\".)\n\n✸2.1 ~\"p\" ∨ \"p\" \"This is the Law of excluded middle\" (\"PM\", p. 101).\n\nThe proof of ✸2.1 is roughly as follows: \"primitive idea\" 1.08 defines \"p\" → \"q\" = ~\"p\" ∨ \"q\". Substituting \"p\" for \"q\" in this rule yields \"p\" → \"p\" = ~\"p\" ∨ \"p\". Since \"p\" → \"p\" is true (this is Theorem 2.08, which is proved separately), then ~\"p\" ∨ \"p\" must be true.\n\n✸2.11 \"p\" ∨ ~\"p\" (Permutation of the assertions is allowed by axiom 1.4)<br>\n✸2.12 \"p\" → ~(~\"p\") (Principle of double negation, part 1: if \"this rose is red\" is true then it's not true that \"'this rose is not-red' is true\".)<br>\n✸2.13 \"p\" ∨ ~{~(~\"p\")} (Lemma together with 2.12 used to derive 2.14)<br>\n✸2.14 ~(~\"p\") → \"p\" (Principle of double negation, part 2)<br>\n✸2.15 (~\"p\" → \"q\") → (~\"q\" → \"p\") (One of the four \"Principles of transposition\". Similar to 1.03, 1.16 and 1.17. A very long demonstration was required here.)<br>\n✸2.16 (\"p\" → \"q\") → (~\"q\" → ~\"p\") (If it's true that \"If this rose is red then this pig flies\" then it's true that \"If this pig doesn't fly then this rose isn't red.\")<br>\n✸2.17 ( ~\"p\" → ~\"q\" ) → (\"q\" → \"p\") (Another of the \"Principles of transposition\".)<br>\n✸2.18 (~\"p\" → \"p\") → \"p\" (Called \"The complement of \"reductio ad absurdum\". It states that a proposition which follows from the hypothesis of its own falsehood is true\" (\"PM\", pp. 103–104).)\n\nMost of these theorems—in particular ✸2.1, ✸2.11, and ✸2.14—are rejected by intuitionism. These tools are recast into another form that Kolmogorov cites as \"Hilbert's four axioms of implication\" and \"Hilbert's two axioms of negation\" (Kolmogorov in van Heijenoort, p. 335).\n\nPropositions ✸2.12 and ✸2.14, \"double negation\":\nThe intuitionist writings of L. E. J. Brouwer refer to what he calls \"the \"principle of the reciprocity of the multiple species\", that is, the principle that for every system the correctness of a property follows from the impossibility of the impossibility of this property\" (Brouwer, ibid, p. 335).\n\nThis principle is commonly called \"the principle of double negation\" (\"PM\", pp. 101–102). From the law of excluded middle (✸2.1 and ✸2.11), \"PM\" derives principle ✸2.12 immediately. We substitute ~\"p\" for \"p\" in 2.11 to yield ~\"p\" ∨ ~(~\"p\"), and by the definition of implication (i.e. 1.01 p → q = ~p ∨ q) then ~p ∨ ~(~p)= p → ~(~p). QED (The derivation of 2.14 is a bit more involved.)\n\nIt is correct, at least for bivalent logic—i.e. it can be seen with a Karnaugh map—that this law removes \"the middle\" of the inclusive-or used in his law (3). And this is the point of Reichenbach's demonstration that some believe the \"exclusive\"-or should take the place of the \"inclusive\"-or.\n\nAbout this issue (in admittedly very technical terms) Reichenbach observes:\n\nIn line (30) the \"(x)\" means \"for all\" or \"for every\", a form used by Russell and Reichenbach; today the symbolism is usually formula_16 \"x\". Thus an example of the expression would look like this:\n\nBULLET::::- (\"pig\"): (\"Flies\"(\"pig\") ⊕ ~\"Flies\"(\"pig\"))\nBULLET::::- (For all instances of \"pig\" seen and unseen): (\"Pig does fly\" or \"Pig does not fly\" but not both simultaneously)\n\nIn late 1800s through the 1930s a bitter, persistent debate raged between Hilbert and his followers versus Hermann Weyl and L. E. J. Brouwer. Brouwer's philosophy, called intuitionism, started in earnest with Leopold Kronecker in the late 1800s.\n\nHilbert intensely disliked Kronecker's ideas:\n\nThe debate had a profound effect on Hilbert. Reid indicates that Hilbert's second problem (one of Hilbert's problems from the Second International Conference in Paris in 1900) evolved from this debate (italics in the original):\n\nThus Hilbert was saying: \"If \"p\" and ~\"p\" are both shown to be true, then \"p\" does not exist\" and he was thereby invoking the law of excluded middle cast into the form of the law of contradiction.\n\nThe rancorous debate continued through the early 1900s into the 1920s; in 1927 Brouwer complained about \"polemicizing against it [intuitionism] in sneering tones\" (Brouwer in van Heijenoort, p. 492). However, the debate had been fertile: it had resulted in \"Principia Mathematica\" (1910–1913), and that work gave a precise definition to the law of excluded middle, and all this provided an intellectual setting and the tools necessary for the mathematicians of the early twentieth century:\n\nBrouwer reduced the debate to the use of proofs designed from \"negative\" or \"non-existence\" versus \"constructive\" proof:\n\nIn his lecture in 1941 at Yale and the subsequent paper Gödel proposed a solution: \"...that the negation of a universal proposition was to be understood as asserting the existence ... of a counterexample\" (Dawson, p. 157))\n\nGödel's approach to the law of excluded middle was to assert that objections against \"the use of 'impredicative definitions'\" \"carried more weight\" than \"the law of excluded middle and related theorems of the propositional calculus\" (Dawson p. 156). He proposed his \"system Σ ... and he concluded by mentioning several applications of his interpretation. Among them were a proof of the consistency with intuitionistic logic of the principle ~ (∀A: (A ∨ ~A)) (despite the inconsistency of the assumption ∃ A: ~ (A ∨ ~A)...\" (Dawson, p. 157)\n\nThe debate seemed to weaken: mathematicians, logicians and engineers continue to use the law of excluded middle (and double negation) in their daily work.\n\nThe following highlights the deep mathematical and philosophic problem behind what it means to \"know\", and also helps elucidate what the \"law\" implies (i.e. what the law really means). Their difficulties with the law emerge: that they do not want to accept as true implications drawn from that which is unverifiable (untestable, unknowable) or from the impossible or the false. (All quotes are from van Heijenoort, italics added).\n\n\"Brouwer\" offers his definition of \"principle of excluded middle\"; we see here also the issue of \"testability\":\n\n\"Kolmogorov\"'s definition cites Hilbert's two axioms of negation\nwhere ∨ means \"or\". The equivalence of the two forms is easily proved... (p. 421)\n\nMany modern logic systems replace the law of excluded middle with the concept of negation as failure. Instead of a proposition's being either true or false, a proposition is either true or not able to be proved true. These two dichotomies only differ in logical systems that are not complete. The principle of negation as failure is used as a foundation for autoepistemic logic, and is widely used in logic programming. In these systems, the programmer is free to assert the law of excluded middle as a true fact, but it is not built-in \"a priori\" into these systems.\n\nMathematicians such as L. E. J. Brouwer and Arend Heyting have also contested the usefulness of the law of excluded middle in the context of modern mathematics.\n\nIn modern mathematical logic, the excluded middle has been shown to result in possible self-contradiction. It is possible in logic to make well-constructed propositions that can be neither true nor false; a common example of this is the \"Liar's paradox\", the statement \"this statement is false\", which can itself be neither true nor false. In set theory, such a self-referential paradox can be constructed by examining the set \"the set of all sets that do not contain themselves\". This set is unambiguously defined, but leads to a Russell's paradox: does the set contain, as one of its elements, itself? However, in the modern Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory, this type of contradiction is no longer admitted.\n\nBULLET::::- : an account on the formalist-intuitionist divide around the Law of the excluded middle\nBULLET::::- Law of excluded middle is untrue in s such as and\nBULLET::::- s: a graphical syntax for propositional logic\nBULLET::::- : another way of turning intuition classical\nBULLET::::- : the application excluded middle to propositions\nBULLET::::- Non-affirming negation in the school of Buddhism, another system in which the law of excluded middle is untrue\n\nBULLET::::- Aquinas, Thomas, \"Summa Theologica\", Fathers of the English Dominican Province (trans.), Daniel J. Sullivan (ed.), vols. 19–20 in Robert Maynard Hutchins (ed.), \"Great Books of the Western World\", Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., Chicago, IL, 1952. Cited as GB 19–20.\nBULLET::::- Aristotle, \"Metaphysics\", W.D. Ross (trans.), vol. 8 in Robert Maynard Hutchins (ed.), \"Great Books of the Western World\", Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., Chicago, IL, 1952. Cited as GB 8. 1st published, W.D. Ross (trans.), \"The Works of Aristotle\", Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.\nBULLET::::- Martin Davis 2000, \"Engines of Logic: Mathematicians and the Origin of the Computer\", W. W. Norton & Company, NY, pbk.\nBULLET::::- Dawson, J., \"Logical Dilemmas, The Life and Work of Kurt Gödel\", A.K. Peters, Wellesley, MA, 1997.\nBULLET::::- van Heijenoort, J., \"From Frege to Gödel, A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931\", Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1967. Reprinted with corrections, 1977.\nBULLET::::- Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer, 1923, \"On the significance of the principle of excluded middle in mathematics, especially in function theory\" [reprinted with commentary, p. 334, van Heijenoort]\nBULLET::::- Andrei Nikolaevich Kolmogorov, 1925, \"On the principle of excluded middle\", [reprinted with commentary, p. 414, van Heijenoort]\nBULLET::::- Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer, 1927, \"On the domains of definitions of functions\",[reprinted with commentary, p. 446, van Heijenoort] Although not directly germane, in his (1923) Brouwer uses certain words defined in this paper.\nBULLET::::- Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer, 1927(2), \"Intuitionistic reflections on formalism\",[reprinted with commentary, p. 490, van Heijenoort]\nBULLET::::- Stephen C. Kleene 1952 original printing, 1971 6th printing with corrections, 10th printing 1991, \"Introduction to Metamathematics\", North-Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam NY, .\nBULLET::::- Kneale, W. and Kneale, M., \"The Development of Logic\", Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 1962. Reprinted with corrections, 1975.\nBULLET::::- Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell, \"Principia Mathematica to *56\", Cambridge at the University Press 1962 (Second Edition of 1927, reprinted). Extremely difficult because of arcane symbolism, but a must-have for serious logicians.\nBULLET::::- Bertrand Russell, \"An Inquiry Into Meaning and Truth\". The William James Lectures for 1940 Delivered at Harvard University.\nBULLET::::- Bertrand Russell, \"The Problems of Philosophy, With a New Introduction by John Perry\", Oxford University Press, New York, 1997 edition (first published 1912). Very easy to read: Russell was a wonderful writer.\nBULLET::::- Bertrand Russell, \"The Art of Philosophizing and Other Essays\", Littlefield, Adams & Co., Totowa, NJ, 1974 edition (first published 1968). Includes a wonderful essay on \"The Art of drawing Inferences\".\nBULLET::::- Hans Reichenbach, \"Elements of Symbolic Logic\", Dover, New York, 1947, 1975.\nBULLET::::- Tom Mitchell, \"Machine Learning\", WCB McGraw-Hill, 1997.\nBULLET::::- Constance Reid, \"Hilbert\", Copernicus: Springer-Verlag New York, Inc. 1996, first published 1969. Contains a wealth of biographical information, much derived from interviews.\nBULLET::::- Bart Kosko, \"Fuzzy Thinking: The New Science of Fuzzy Logic\", Hyperion, New York, 1993. Fuzzy thinking at its finest. But a good introduction to the concepts.\nBULLET::::- David Hume, \"An Inquiry Concerning Human Understanding\", reprinted in Great Books of the Western World Encyclopædia Britannica, Volume 35, 1952, p. 449 ff. This work was published by Hume in 1758 as his rewrite of his \"juvenile\" \"Treatise of Human Nature: Being An attempt to introduce the experimental method of Reasoning into Moral Subjects Vol. I, Of The Understanding\" first published 1739, reprinted as: David Hume, \"A Treatise of Human Nature\", Penguin Classics, 1985. Also see: David Applebaum, \"The Vision of Hume\", Vega, London, 2001: a reprint of a portion of \"An Inquiry\" starts on p. 94 ff\n\nBULLET::::- \"Contradiction\" entry in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy\n"}
{"id": "17639", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17639", "title": "Lowball", "text": "Lowball\n\nLowball can refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- Low-ball, a persuasion technique\nBULLET::::- Lowball (poker), a variant of the card game poker, in which hand values are reversed so that the lowest-valued hand wins\nBULLET::::- Lowball glass, a short drinking glass typically used for serving liquor\n\nBULLET::::- Highball\n"}
{"id": "17640", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17640", "title": "Line of scrimmage", "text": "Line of scrimmage\n\nIn gridiron football, a line of scrimmage is an imaginary transverse line (across the width of the football field) beyond which a team cannot cross until the next play has begun. Its location is based on the spot where the ball is placed after the end of the most recent play and following the assessment of any penalty yards.\n\nA line of scrimmage is parallel to the goal lines and touches one edge of the ball where it sits on the ground prior to the snap. Under NCAA, and NFHS rules, there are two lines of scrimmage at the outset of each play: one that restricts the offense and one that restricts the defense. The area between the two lines (representing the length of the ball as extended to both sidelines) is called the \"neutral zone\". Only the offensive player who snaps the ball (usually the center or long snapper) is allowed to have any part of his body in the neutral zone. In order for there to be a legal beginning of a play, at least seven players on the offensive team, including two eligible receivers, must be at, on or within a few inches of their line of scrimmage. (Beginning in 2019, high school football will allow as few as five players on a line of scrimmage, but in practice the limits will remain the same, since teams will still be limited to four persons behind the line of scrimmage; the difference would only come into play if a team plays offense with fewer than 11 players.)\n\nIn American football, the set distance of the line of scrimmage between the offense and defense is , the length of the ball. In Canadian football, the set distance of the line of scrimmage is , almost three times as long as the American line.\n\nMany fans and commentators refer colloquially to the entire neutral zone as the \"line of scrimmage,\" although this is technically not correct. In the NFL rulebook, only the defensive-side restraining line is officially considered a line of scrimmage. Referees, when explaining a penalty, will refer to \"the previous spot\" instead of the \"line of scrimmage\" in order to avoid confusion.\n\nModern video techniques enable broadcasts of American football to display a visible line on the screen representing the line of scrimmage. The line is tapered according to camera angle and gets occluded by players and other objects as if the line were painted on the field. The line may represent the line of scrimmage or the minimum distance that the ball must be moved for the offensive team to achieve a first down.\n\nThe line of scrimmage first came into use in 1880. Developed by Walter Camp (who introduced many innovations that are part of the modern game of American football), it replaced a contested scrimmage that had descended from the game's rugby roots. This uncontested line of scrimmage would set into motion many more rules that led to the formation of the modern form of gridiron football (although the Canadian rules were developed independently of the American game, despite their similarities).\n\nBULLET::::- Scrummage\nBULLET::::- Glossary of American football\nBULLET::::- Walter Camp, formal creator of the line of scrimmage in 1880\nBULLET::::- Comparison of Canadian and American football\n"}
{"id": "17641", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17641", "title": "Lateral pass", "text": "Lateral pass\n\nIn gridiron football, a lateral pass or lateral (officially backward pass in American football and onside pass in Canadian football) occurs when the ball carrier throws the football to a teammate in a direction parallel to or away from the opponents' goal line. A lateral pass is distinguished from a forward pass, in which the ball is thrown forward, towards the opposition's end zone. In a lateral pass the ball is not advanced, but unlike a forward pass a lateral may be attempted from anywhere on the field by any player to any player at any time.\n\nWhile the forward pass is an invention of the North American games, the lateral and backward pass is also a part of rugby union and rugby league, where such passes are the norm. Compared to its use in rugby, laterals and backward passes are less common in North American football, due to a much greater focus on ball control in American football strategy; they are most commonly used by the quarterback, after taking the snap, to quickly transfer (\"pitch\") the ball a short distance to a nearby running back (or, rarely, wide receiver) on a rushing play. Laterals are also often seen as part of a last-minute desperation strategy or as part of a trick play. Examples of plays utilizing the lateral pass are the toss, flea flicker, hook and lateral, and buck-lateral.\n\nWhile a forward pass may only be thrown once per down by the team on offense from within or behind the neutral zone, there are no restrictions on the use of lateral passes; any player legally carrying the ball may throw a lateral pass from any position on the field at any time, any player may receive such a pass, and any number of lateral passes may be thrown on a single play. Additionally, a player receiving a lateral pass may throw a forward pass if he is still behind the neutral zone, subject to the forward pass rules. A lateral is the only type of pass that can be legally thrown following a change of possession during a play.\n\nUnlike a forward pass, if a backward pass hits the ground or an official, play continues and, as with a fumble, a backward pass that has hit the ground may be recovered and advanced by either team. Backward passes can also be intercepted. A lateral may be underhand or overhand as long as the ball is not advanced in the pass.\n\nA ball that is passed exactly sideways is considered a backwards pass. If it hits the ground, the person throwing or \"pitching\" the lateral pass will be subjected to the fumble designation in the statistics in the NFL, even if the ball is dropped or muffed by a teammate, although in college football this can be credited to whichever player the statistician feels is most responsible. If the ball hits the ground after travelling even slightly forward, however, it is then incomplete instead of a fumble.\n\nThe snap is legally considered to be a backward pass, although a blown snap is not scored as a fumble.\n\nThe \"forward lateral\" is used to describe an attempted \"lateral\" (backward pass) that actually goes forward. In most cases, it is illegal.\n\nA variant, the hook and lateral, where a forward pass is immediately passed backward to a second receiver to fool the defense, is used on occasion.\n\nThe lateral pass rule, or rather the lack of restrictions contained therein, has given rise to some of the most memorable and incredible plays in football history. Both collegiate and NFL football have certain examples of football lore which involve laterals.\n\nOne famous college play involving the backward passes is simply known as The Play. In the 1982 Big Game between Stanford and California, with four seconds left and trailing by one point, Cal ran the ball back on a kickoff all the way for the walk-off touchdown using five backward passes, eventually running through the Stanford Band, who had already taken the field (believing the game was over after Stanford players appeared to have tackled a Cal ball-carrier). The game remains controversial because of Stanford's contention that the Cal player's knee was down before he passed the ball during the third lateral and that the fifth lateral was an illegal forward pass.\n\nA well-known and controversial NFL lateral pass occurred during the Music City Miracle play at the end of the 2000 playoff game between the Tennessee Titans and the Buffalo Bills. The play was a true lateral (the ball did not move forward or backward in the pass), but the receiver was a step ahead of the passer and reached back to catch the ball, so it gave the appearance of an illegal forward pass.\n\nAnother well known backward pass in the NFL was the River City Relay in a game between the New Orleans Saints and the Jacksonville Jaguars on December 21, 2003. With time running out, the Saints threw backward passes and brought the ball down the length of the field for a touchdown. However, kicker John Carney missed the extra point, which would have tied the game, so the Saints lost by one point, 20–19.\n\nAnother well known play was executed in a college football game by Presbyterian against Wake Forest in 2010. In this trick play, three lateral pass rules were used in combination. First the quarterback passed the ball sideways while intentionally bouncing the ball on the ground (a so-called \"fake fumble pass\"). The pass-receiver faked the end of the play, suggesting that it was an incomplete pass, but then passed the ball forward to a wide-receiver, who successfully ran for a touchdown. Wake Forest coach Jim Grobe described the play \"as well executed as anything I’ve ever seen\". \nIn a Division III college football game on October 27, 2007, Trinity University was trailing by two points with two seconds left in a game against conference rival Millsaps College. Starting from their own 39-yard line, Trinity called a play for a short pass across the middle. The receiver pitched the ball backward, with a sequence of additional backward passes as players were in danger of being tackled. The \"Mississippi Miracle\" ultimately included 15 backward passes as it covered 61 yards for the walk-off touchdown.\n\nOn October 31, 2015, the Miami Hurricanes threw eight lateral passes over the course of 45 seconds to score a touchdown and upset the 22nd-ranked Duke Blue Devils 30–27. The play stirred controversy amid a number of missed calls by the Atlantic Coast Conference officiating crew.\n\nOn December 9, 2018, the Miami Dolphins pulled off the only walk-off touchdown to involve multiple lateral passes in NFL history, completing two laterals for a 69-yard touchdown to beat the New England Patriots 34–33.\n"}
{"id": "17643", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17643", "title": "Lavandula", "text": "Lavandula\n\nLavandula (common name lavender) is a genus of 47 known species of flowering plants in the mint family, Lamiaceae. It is native to the Old World and is found from Cape Verde and the Canary Islands, Europe across to northern and eastern Africa, the Mediterranean, southwest Asia to southeast India. Many members of the genus are cultivated extensively in temperate climates as ornamental plants for garden and landscape use, for use as culinary herbs, and also commercially for the extraction of essential oils. The most widely cultivated species, \"Lavandula angustifolia\", is often referred to as lavender, and there is a color named for the shade of the flowers of this species. Despite its use over centuries in traditional medicine and cosmetics, there is no high-quality clinical evidence that lavender has any effects on diseases or improves health.\n\nThe genus includes annual or short-lived herbaceous perennial plants, and shrub-like perennials, subshrubs or small shrubs.\n\nLeaf shape is diverse across the genus. They are simple in some commonly cultivated species; in other species they are pinnately toothed, or pinnate, sometimes multiple pinnate and dissected. In most species the leaves are covered in fine hairs or indumentum, which normally contain the essential oils.\n\nFlowers are borne in whorls, held on spikes rising above the foliage, the spikes being branched in some species. Some species produce coloured bracts at the apices. The flowers may be blue, violet or lilac in the wild species, occasionally blackish purple or yellowish. The calyx is tubular. The corolla is also tubular, usually with five lobes (the upper lip often cleft, and the lower lip has two clefts).\n\n\"Lavandula stoechas\", \"L. pedunculata\" and \"L. dentata\" were known in Roman times. From the Middle Ages onwards, the European species were considered two separate groups or genera, \"Stoechas\" (\"L. stoechas\", \"L. pedunculata\", \"L. dentata\") and \"Lavandula\" (\"L. spica\" and \"L. latifolia\"), until Linnaeus combined them. He only recognised five species in \"Species Plantarum\" (1753), \"L. multifida\" and \"L. dentata\" (Spain) and \"L. stoechas\" and \"L. spica\" from Southern Europe. \"L. pedunculata\" was included within \"L. stoechas.\"\n\nBy 1790, \"L. pinnata\" and \"L. carnosa\" were recognised. The latter was subsequently transferred to \"Anisochilus\". By 1826 Frédéric Charles Jean Gingins de la Sarraz listed 12 species in three sections, and by 1848 eighteen species were known.\n\nOne of the first modern major classifications was that of Dorothy Chaytor in 1937 at Kew. The six sections she proposed for 28 species still left many intermediates that could not easily be assigned. Her sections included \"Stoechas\", \"Spica\", \"Subnudae\", \"Pterostoechas\", \"Chaetostachys\" and \"Dentatae\". However all the major cultivated and commercial forms resided in the \"Stoechas\" and \"Spica\" sections. There were four species within \"Stoechas\" (\"Lavandula stoechas\", \"L. dentata, L. viridis\" and \"L. pedunculata\") while \"Spica\" had three (\"L. officinalis\" (now \"L. angustifolia\"), \"L. latifolia\" and \"L. lanata\"). She believed that the garden varieties were hybrids between true lavender \"L. angustifolia\" and spike lavender (\"L. latifolia\").\n\"Lavandula\" has three subgenera:\nBULLET::::- Subgenus \"Lavandula\" is mainly of woody shrubs with entire leaves. It contains the principal species grown as ornamental plants and for oils. They are found across the Mediterranean region to northeast Africa and western Arabia.\nBULLET::::- Subgenus \"Fabricia\" consists of shrubs and herbs, and it has a wide distribution from the Atlantic to India. It contains some ornamental plants.\nBULLET::::- Subgenus \"Sabaudia\" constitutes two species in the southwest Arabian peninsula and Eritrea, which are rather distinct from the other species, and are sometimes placed in their own genus \"Sabaudia\".\n\nIn addition, there are numerous hybrids and cultivars in commercial and horticultural usage.\n\nThe first major clade corresponds to subgenus \"Lavendula\", and the second Fabricia. The \"Sabaudia\" group is less clearly defined. Within the lavendula clade, the subclades correspond to the existing sections, but place \"Dentatae\" separately from \"Stoechas\", not within it. Within the Fabricia clade, the subclades correspond to \"Pterostoechas\", \"Subnudae\", and \"Chaetostachys\".\n\nThus the current classification includes 39 species distributed across 8 sections (the original 6 of Chaytor and the two new sections of Upson and Andrews), in three subgenera (see table below). However, since lavender cross-pollinates easily, there are countless variations that present difficulties in classification.\n\nThe English word lavender is generally thought to be derived from Old French \"lavandre\", ultimately from the Latin \"lavare\" (to wash), referring to the use of infusions of the plants. The botanic name \"Lavandula\" as used by Linnaeus is considered to be derived from this and other European vernacular names for the plants. However it is suggested that this explanation may be apocryphal, and that the name may actually be derived from Latin \"livere\", \"blueish\".\n\nThe names widely used for some of the species, \"English lavender\", \"French lavender\" and \"Spanish lavender\" are all imprecisely applied. \"English lavender\" is commonly used for \"L. angustifolia\", though some references say the proper term is \"Old English Lavender\". The name \"French lavender\" may be used to refer to either \"L. stoechas\" or to \"L. dentata\". \"Spanish lavender\" may be used to refer to \"L. stoechas\", \"L. lanata\" or \"L. dentata\".\n\nThe most common form in cultivation is the common or English lavender \"Lavandula angustifolia\" (formerly named \"L. officinalis\"). A wide range of cultivars can be found. Other commonly grown ornamental species are \"L. stoechas\", \"L. dentata\", and \"L. multifida\" (Egyptian lavender).\n\nBecause the cultivated forms are planted in gardens worldwide, they are occasionally found growing wild as garden escapes, well beyond their natural range. Such spontaneous growth is usually harmless, but in some cases \"Lavandula\" species have become invasive. For example, in Australia, \"Lavandula stoechas\" has become a cause for concern; it occurs widely throughout the continent, and has been declared a noxious weed in Victoria since 1920. It is regarded as a weed in parts of Spain.\n\nLavenders flourish best in dry, well-drained, sandy or gravelly soils in full sun. All types need little or no fertilizer and good air circulation. In areas of high humidity, root rot due to fungus infection can be a problem. Organic mulches can trap moisture around the plants' bases, encouraging root rot. Gravelly materials such as crushed rocks give better results. It grows best in soils with a pH between 6 and 8. Most lavender is hand-harvested, and harvest times vary depending on intended use.\n\nCommercially, the plant is grown mainly for the production of lavender essential oil of lavender. English lavender (\"Lavandula angustifolia\") yields an oil with sweet overtones, and can be used in balms, salves, perfumes, cosmetics, and topical applications. \"Lavandula \"×\" intermedia\", also known as lavandin or Dutch lavender, yields a similar essential oil, but with higher levels of terpenes including camphor, which add a sharper overtone to the fragrance.\n\nThe lavandins \"Lavandula \"×\" intermedia\" are a class of hybrids of \"L. angustifolia\" and \"L. latifolia\". The lavandins are widely cultivated for commercial use, since their flowers tend to be bigger than those of English lavender and the plants tend to be easier to harvest, but lavandin oil is regarded by some to be of a lower quality than that of English lavender, with a perfume less sweet.\n\nThe US Food and Drug Administration considers lavender as generally recognized as safe (GRAS) for human consumption. The essential oil was used in hospitals during World War I.\n\nSome 100 individual phytochemicals have been extracted from lavender oil, including major contents of linaloyl acetate (30-55%), linalool (20-35%), tannins (5-10%), and caryophyllene (8%), with lesser amounts of sesquiterpenoids, perillyl alcohols, esters, oxides, ketones, cineole, camphor, beta-ocimene, limonene, caproic acid, and caryophyllene oxide. The relative amounts of these compounds vary considerably among lavender species.\n\nCulinary lavender is usually English lavender, the most commonly used species in cooking (\"L. angustifolia\" 'Munstead'). As an aromatic, it has a sweet fragrance with a taste of lemon or citrus notes. It is used as a spice or condiment in pastas, salads and dressings, and desserts. Their buds and greens are used in teas, and their buds, processed by bees, are the essential ingredient of monofloral honey.\n\nFor most cooking applications the dried buds, which are also referred to as flowers, are used. Lavender greens have a more subtle flavour when compared to rosemary.\n\nThe potency of the lavender flowers increases with drying which necessitates more sparing use to avoid a heavy, soapy aftertaste. Chefs note to reduce by two-thirds the dry amount in recipes which call for fresh lavender buds.\n\nLavender buds can amplify both sweet and savory flavors in dishes, and are sometimes paired with sheep's-milk and goat's-milk cheeses. Lavender flowers are occasionally blended with black, green, or herbal teas. Lavender flavours baked goods and desserts, pairing especially well with chocolate. In the United States, both lavender syrup and dried lavender buds are used to make lavender scones and marshmallows.\n\nLavender buds are put into sugar for two weeks to allow the essential oils and fragrance to transfer; then the sugar itself is used in baking. Lavender can be used in breads where recipes call for rosemary. Lavender can be used decoratively in dishes or spirits, or as a decorative and aromatic in a glass of champagne. Lavender is used in savory dishes, giving stews and reduced sauces aromatic flair. It is also used to scent flans, custards, and sorbets.\n\nThe greens are used similarly to rosemary or combined with rosemary to flavour meat and vegetables in savory dishes. They can also be used to make a tea that is milder than teas made with the flowers.\n\nThe flowers yield abundant nectar, from which bees make a high-quality honey. Monofloral honey is produced primarily around the Mediterranean, and is marketed worldwide as a premium product. Flowers can be candied and are sometimes used as cake decorations. It is also used to make \"lavender sugar\".\n\nLavender was introduced into England in the 1600s. It is said that Queen Elizabeth prized a lavender conserve (jam) at her table, so lavender was produced as a jam at that time, as well as used in teas both medicinally and for its taste.\n\nLavender was not used in traditional southern French cooking at the turn of the 20th century. It does not appear at all in the best-known compendium of Provençal cooking, J.-B. Reboul's \"Cuisinière Provençale\". French lambs have been allowed to graze on lavender as it is alleged to make their meat more tender and fragrant.\n\nIn the 1970s, a blend of herbs called \"herbes de Provence\" was invented by spice wholesalers, where culinary lavender is added to the mixture in the North American version of the spice blend.\n\nToday, lavender recipes are in use in most parts of the world.\n\nDespite dozens of preliminary clinical studies on the potential for lavender oil or other lavender plant components to affect human diseases, there are no confirmed anti-disease or health effects as of 2018, mainly due to the poor quality of study design and conduct.\n\nLavender oil has been studied by preliminary research for its possible effect in alleviating anxiety and sleep disturbances, but no conclusions about the effects on anxiety were possible.\n\nThe German scientific committee on traditional medicine, Commission E, reported uses of lavender flower in practices of herbalism, including its use for restlessness or insomnia, Roehmheld's syndrome, intestinal discomfort, and cardiovascular diseases, among others.\n\nThe U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) states that lavender is considered likely safe in food amounts and possibly safe in medicinal amounts. NIH does not recommend the use of lavender while pregnant or breast-feeding because of lack of knowledge of its effects. It recommends caution if young boys use lavender oil because of possible hormonal effects leading to gynecomastia, and states that lavender oil may cause skin irritation and could be poisonous if consumed by mouth.\n\nA 2007 study examined the relationship between various fragrances and photosensitivity, stating that lavender is known \"to elicit cutaneous photo-toxic reactions\", but does not induce photohaemolysis.\n\nSome people experience contact dermatitis, allergic eczema, or facial dermatitis from topical use of lavender oil on skin.\n\nFlower spikes are used for dried flower arrangements. The fragrant, pale purple flowers and flower buds are used in potpourris. Lavender is also used as herbal filler inside sachets used to freshen linens. Dried and sealed in pouches, lavender flowers are placed among stored items of clothing to give a fresh fragrance and to deter moths. Dried lavender flowers may be used for wedding confetti. Lavender is also used in scented waters and sachets.\n\nThe ancient Greeks called the lavender herb \"nardus\", after the Syrian city of Naarda (possibly the modern town of Dohuk, Iraq). It was also commonly called \"nard\". The species originally grown was \"L. stoechas\".\n\nDuring Roman times, flowers were sold for 100 \"denarii\" per pound, which was about the same as a month's wages for a farm laborer, or fifty haircuts from the local barber. Its late Latin name was \"lavandārius\", from \"lavanda\" (things to be washed), from the verb \"lavāre\" (to wash).\n\nThis is based on the classification of Upson and Andrews, 2004.\n\nI. Subgenus \"Lavendula\" \n\nII. Subgenus \"Fabricia\" \n\nIII. Subgenus \"Sabaudia\" \n\nBULLET::::- Upson T, Andrews S. The Genus Lavandula. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew 2004\nBULLET::::- United States Department of Agriculture GRIN: Lavandula\n"}
{"id": "17644", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17644", "title": "Lemon balm", "text": "Lemon balm\n\nLemon balm (\"Melissa officinalis\"), balm, common balm, or balm mint, is a perennial herbaceous plant in the mint family Lamiaceae and native to south-central Europe, the Mediterranean Basin, Iran, and Central Asia, but now naturalized in the Americas and elsewhere.\n\nIt grows to a maximum height of . The leaves have a mild lemon scent similar to mint. During summer, small white flowers full of nectar appear. It is not to be confused with bee balm (genus \"Monarda\"), although the white flowers attract bees, hence the genus \"Melissa\" (Greek for \"honey bee\").\n\nThe leaves are used as a herb, in teas, and also as a flavouring. The plant is used to attract bees for honey production. It is grown as an ornamental plant and for its oil (to use in perfumery). The tea of lemon balm, the essential oil, and the extract are used in traditional and alternative medicine, including aromatherapy. The plant has been cultivated at least since the 16th century, but research is still being conducted to establish the safety and effects of lemon balm.\n\nSources date the medicinal use of lemon balm to over 2000 years ago through the Greeks and Romans. It is mentioned by Theophrastus in the \"Historia Plantarum\", dated to around 300 BC, as \"honey-leaf\" (μελισσόφυλλον). Lemon balm was formally introduced into Spain in the 7th century, from which its use and domestication spread throughout Europe. Its use in the Middle Ages is noted by herbalists, writers, philosophers, and scientists, with Swiss physician and alchemist, Paracelsus, deeming it the “elixir of life”. It was in the herbal garden of John Gerard, 1596. Lemon balm was introduced to North America with the arrival of early colonists, and is recorded to have been among the herbs cultivated in Thomas Jefferson's garden.\n\nThe plant is used to attract bees to make honey. It is also grown and sold as an ornamental plant. The essential oil is used as a perfume ingredient, but the plant has other culinary and medicinal uses. Lemon balm is used in some toothpastes.\n\nLemon balm is used as a flavouring in ice cream and herbal teas, both hot and iced, often in combination with other herbs such as spearmint. It is a common addition to peppermint tea, mostly because of its complementing flavor.\n\nLemon balm is also paired with fruit dishes or candies. Additionally, it can be used in fish dishes and is the main ingredient in \"lemon balm pesto\". Its flavour comes from citronellal (24%), geranial (16%), linalyl acetate (12%) and caryophyllene (12%).\n\nIt is also one of the ingredients in Spreewald gherkins.\n\nIn traditional Austrian medicine, \"M. officinalis\" leaves have been prescribed for internal use—as a tea—or external application—as an essential oil—for the treatment of disorders of the gastrointestinal tract, nervous system, liver, and bile. Lemon balm is the main ingredient of Carmelite water, which is still for sale in German pharmacies.\n\nIn alternative medicine it is used as a sleep aid and digestive aid.\n\nLemon balm essential oil is popular in aromatherapy. The essential oil is commonly co-distilled with lemon oil, citronella oil or other oils.\n\nNicholas Culpeper considered lemon balm to be ruled by Jupiter in Cancer, and suggested it to be used for weak stomachs, to cause the heart to become merry, to help digestion, to open obstructions of the brain, and to expel melancholy vapors from the heart and arteries.\n\nThe herbalist John Gerard considered it especially good for feeding and attracting honeybees. The alchemist Paracelsus believed that lemon balm had the power to restore health and vitality.\nTraditionally, an alchemical tincture of lemon balm was the first tincture an aspiring alchemist made.\n\n\"Melissa officinalis\" is native to Europe, central Asia and Iran, but is now naturalized around the world.\n\nLemon balm seeds require light and at least 20 °C (70 °F) to germinate. Lemon balm grows in clumps and spreads vegetatively, as well as by seed. In mild temperate zones, the stems of the plant die off at the start of the winter, but shoot up again in spring. Lemon balm grows vigorously; it should not be planted where it will spread into other plantings.\n\nAs of 1992, the major producing countries were Hungary, Egypt, and Italy for herb, and Ireland for essential oil.\n\nThe many cultivars of \"M. officinalis\" include:\nBULLET::::- \"M. officinalis\" 'Citronella'\nBULLET::::- \"M. officinalis\" 'Lemonella'\nBULLET::::- \"M. officinalis\" 'Quedlinburger'\nBULLET::::- \"M. officinalis\" 'Lime'\nBULLET::::- \"M. officinalis\" 'Variegata'\nBULLET::::- \"M. officinalis\" 'Aurea'\nBULLET::::- \"M. officinalis\" 'Quedlinburger Niederliegende' is an improved variety bred for high essential oil content\n\nLemon balm, including lemon balm extract, has been shown to improve sleep quality. Pediatric patients have displayed improvement in restlessness and dyssomnia with the ingestion of lemon balm extract. Further evidence has demonstrated a significant reduction in levels of insomnia.\n\nLemon balm is commonly associated with anti-stress and anti-anxiety. Studies have shown a significant increase in calmness in healthy patients exposed to lemon balm when compared to placebo. In addition, lemon balm ingestion is linked to improvement in mood and cognitive performance. Gender and administration length appear to have an impact on the effectiveness of lemon balm as a treatment for depression in rats.\n\nSeveral studies have demonstrated the lemon balm's antioxidant activity, obtained through high amounts of flavonoids, rosmaric acid, gallic acid and phenolic contents.\n\nLemon balm has also been shown to possess antimicrobial, antiviral, antispasmodic and antitumoral properties.\n\nThe composition and pharmacology and potential uses of lemon balm have been extensively studied, especially with regard to its traditional uses. Randomized, double-blinded clinical studies in people, however, have been limited and have had few subjects. Those studies cannot be used for generalized conclusions about the safety or efficacy of lemon balm and its components; what doses are safe and effective is especially not clear.\n\nLemon balm contains eugenol, tannins, and terpenes. It also contains (+)-citronellal, 1-octen-3-ol, 10-α-cadinol, 3-octanol, 3-octanone, α-cubebene, α-humulene, β-bourbonene, caffeic acid, caryophyllene, caryophyllene oxide, catechin, chlorogenic acid, \"cis\"-3-hexenol, \"cis\"-ocimene, citral A, citral B, copaene, δ-cadinene, eugenyl acetate, γ-cadinene, geranial, geraniol, geranyl acetate, germacrene D, isogeranial, linalool, luteolin-7-glucoside, methylheptenone, neral, nerol, octyl benzoate, oleanolic acid, pomolic acid ((1\"R\")-hydroxyursolic acid), protocatechuic acid, rhamnazin, rosmarinic acid, stachyose, succinic acid, thymol, \"trans\"-ocimene and ursolic acid. Lemon balm may contain traces of harmine.\n\nRosmarinic acid appears to be the most important active component, but the interaction of chemicals within lemon balm, and with chemicals in other herbs with which it has been commonly used in traditional medicines, is poorly understood. Lemon balm leaf contains roughly 36.5 ± 0.8 mg rosmarinic acid per gram.\n\nBULLET::::- A Modern Herbal, 1931, by Maud Grieve. , electronic version: Lemon Balm\nBULLET::::- University of Maryland Complementary and Alternative Medicine Guide: Lemon Balm. Last reviewed 1/2/2015 by Steven D. Ehrlich, NMD\n"}
{"id": "17646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17646", "title": "Liliales", "text": "Liliales\n\nLiliales (older name: Lilia) is an order of monocotyledonous flowering plants in the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group and Angiosperm Phylogeny Web system, within the lilioid monocots. This order of necessity includes the family Liliaceae. The APG III system (2009) places this order in the monocot clade. In APG III, the family Luzuriagaceae is combined with the family Alstroemeriaceae and the family Petermanniaceae is recognized. Both the order Lililiales and the family Liliaceae have had a widely disputed history, with the circumscription varying greatly from one taxonomist to another. Previous members of this order, which at one stage included most monocots with conspicuous tepals and lacking starch in the endosperm are now distributed over three orders, Liliales, Dioscoreales and Asparagales, using predominantly molecular phylogenetics. The newly delimited Liliales is monophyletic, with ten families. Well known plants from the order include \"Lilium\" (lily), tulip, the North American wildflower \"Trillium\", and greenbrier.\n\nThus circumscribed, this order consists mostly of herbaceous plants, but lianas and shrubs also occur. They are mostly perennial plants, with food storage organs such as corms or rhizomes. The family Corsiaceae is notable for being heterotrophic.\n\nThe order has worldwide distribution. The larger families (with more than 100 species) are roughly confined to the Northern Hemisphere, or are distributed worldwide, centering on the north. On the other hand, the smaller families (with up to 10 species) are confined to the Southern Hemisphere, or sometimes just to Australia or South America. The total number of species in the order is now about 1768.\n\nAs with any herbaceous group, the fossil record of the Liliales is rather scarce. There are several species from the Eocene, such as \"Petermanniopsis anglesaensis\" or \"Smilax\", but their identification is not definite. Another known fossil is \"Ripogonum scandens\" from the Miocene. Due to the scarcity of data, it seems impossible to determine precisely the age and the initial distribution of the order. It is assumed that the Liliales originate from the Lower Cretaceous, over 100 million years ago. Fossil aquatic plants from the Cretaceous of northeastern Brazil and a new terrestrial species placed in the new genus \"Cratosmilax\" suggest that the first species have appeared around 120 million years ago when the continents formed Pangea, before dispersing as Asia, Africa and America. The initial diversification to the current families took place between 82 and 48 million years ago. The order consists of 10 families, 67 genera and about 1,768 species.\n\nThe Liliales are characterised by (synapomorphies) the presence of nectaries at the base of the tepals or stamen filaments, together with extrorse (outward opening) anthers. This distinguishes them from the septal nectaries and introrse anthers that are the features of most other monocots. They are mainly geophytes with elliptical leaves showing fine reticulate venation. The tepals are usually large and pointed. The outer integument epidermis of the seed coat is cellular, and the phytomelanin pigment is lacking. The inner integument is also cellular and these features are plesiomorphic. The Liliales are predominantly perennial erect or twining herbaceous and climbing plants. They also include woody shrubs, which have fleshy stems and underground storage or perennating organs.\n\nThe stems contain fructans, the plants also contain Chelidonic acid, saponins, while some species contain Velamen. The epicuticular wax is of the Convallaria type, consisting of parallel orientated platelets.\n\nThe order includes taxa with some of the largest genomes among Angiosperms, particularly Melanthiaceae, Alstroemeriaceae and Liliaceae.\n\nEarlier names for this order include the Coronarieae of the Bentham & Hooker system. The Wettstein system, last revised in 1935, used names similar to those in the Engler system: the order was named Liliiflorae placed in the class Monocotyledones of the subdivision Angiospermae. In circumscription the order was fairly similar to that of Cronquist.\n\nIn the Engler system (1964 update) a similar order was named Liliiflorae, placed in the class Monocotyledoneae of the subdivision Angiospermae.\n\nThe Cronquist system (1981) placed the order in subclass Liliidae in the class Liliopsida [= monocotyledons] of division Magnoliophyta [= angiosperms]. It used a much wider circumscription (many of the plants here are assigned to Asparagales and Dioscoreales by APG II):\nBULLET::::- order Liliales\nBULLET::::- family Agavaceae\nBULLET::::- family Aloaceae\nBULLET::::- family Cyanastraceae\nBULLET::::- family Dioscoreaceae\nBULLET::::- family Haemodoraceae\nBULLET::::- family Hanguanaceae\nBULLET::::- family Iridaceae\nBULLET::::- family Liliaceae\nBULLET::::- family Philydraceae\nBULLET::::- family Pontederiaceae\nBULLET::::- family Smilacaceae\nBULLET::::- family Stemonaceae\nBULLET::::- family Taccaceae\nBULLET::::- family Velloziaceae\nBULLET::::- family Xanthorrhoeaceae\n\nThe Dahlgren system (1985) placed the order in superorder Lilianae in subclass Liliidae [= monocotyledons] of class Magnoliopsida [= angiosperms] and used this circumscription:\nBULLET::::- order Liliales\nBULLET::::- family Alstroemeriaceae\nBULLET::::- family Calochortaceae\nBULLET::::- family Colchicaceae\nBULLET::::- family Iridaceae\nBULLET::::- family Liliaceae\nBULLET::::- family Uvulariaceae\n\nThe Thorne system (1992) placed the order in superorder Lilianae in subclass Liliidae [= monocotyledons ] of class Magnoliopsida [= dicotyledons] and used this circumscription:\nBULLET::::- order Liliales\nBULLET::::- family Alstroemeriaceae\nBULLET::::- family Campynemataceae\nBULLET::::- family Colchicaceae\nBULLET::::- family Iridaceae\nBULLET::::- family Liliaceae\nBULLET::::- family Melanthiaceae\nBULLET::::- family Trilliaceae\n\nThe APG system (1998) also placed the order in the clade monocots, but with a slightly different circumscription (missing the family Corsiaceae):\nBULLET::::- order Liliales\nBULLET::::- family Alstroemeriaceae\nBULLET::::- family Campynemataceae\nBULLET::::- family Colchicaceae\nBULLET::::- family Liliaceae\nBULLET::::- family Luzuriagaceae\nBULLET::::- family Melanthiaceae\nBULLET::::- family Philesiaceae\nBULLET::::- family Ripogonaceae\nBULLET::::- family Smilacaceae\n\nThe APG II system (2003) places this order in the clade monocots and uses this circumscription: \nBULLET::::- order Liliales\nBULLET::::- family Alstroemeriaceae\nBULLET::::- family Campynemataceae\nBULLET::::- family Colchicaceae\nBULLET::::- family Corsiaceae\nBULLET::::- family Liliaceae\nBULLET::::- family Luzuriagaceae\nBULLET::::- family Melanthiaceae\nBULLET::::- family Philesiaceae\nBULLET::::- family Ripogonaceae\nBULLET::::- family Smilacaceae\n\nAPG III (2009) uses this circumscription: \nBULLET::::- order Liliales\nBULLET::::- family Alstroemeriaceae\nBULLET::::- family Campynemataceae\nBULLET::::- family Colchicaceae\nBULLET::::- family Corsiaceae\nBULLET::::- family Liliaceae\nBULLET::::- family Melanthiaceae\nBULLET::::- family Petermanniaceae\nBULLET::::- family Philesiaceae\nBULLET::::- family Ripogonaceae\nBULLET::::- family Smilacaceae\n\nAccording to the APWeb, the families of Liliales are related as follows:\n\nWidely distributed but most commonly found in subtropical and temperate regions, especially the\nNorthern Hemisphere. Since many species are cultivated they have been introduced in many regions and consequently worldwide, and a number have subsequently escaped and naturalised.\n\nLiliales form important sources of food and pharmaceuticals as well as playing a significant role in horticulture and floriculture.\n\nBULLET::::- Excerpts\n\nBULLET::::- , in\nBULLET::::- (Available online: )\n"}
{"id": "17647", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17647", "title": "Laurales", "text": "Laurales\n\nThe Laurales are an order of flowering plants. They are magnoliids, related to the Magnoliales.\n\nThe order includes about 2500-2800 species from 85-90 genera, which comprise seven families of trees and shrubs. Most of the species are tropical and subtropical, though a few genera reach the temperate zone. The best known species in this order are those of the Lauraceae (for example bay laurel, cinnamon, avocado, and \"Sassafras\"), and the ornamental shrub \"Calycanthus\" of the Calycanthaceae.\n\nThe earliest lauraceous fossils are from the early Cretaceous. It is possible that the ancient origin of this order is one of the reasons for its highly diverged morphology. Indeed, presently no single morphological property is known, which would unify all the members of Laurales. The presently accepted classification is based on molecular and genetic analysis.\n\nThe first botanist to think of the Laurales as a natural group was H. Hallier in 1905. He viewed them as being derived from the Magnoliales. During some or all of the 20th century, the Laurales generally included \"Amborella\" and the plants now classified in Austrobaileyales and Chloranthaceae. They were not removed until the advent of molecular data in the late 20th century; their previous inclusion made it harder to determine the relationships within the Laurales and between the Laurales and other groups.\n\nThe following families are included in the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group system (APG III):\n\nstyle=\"font-size:90%;\"\n\nUnder the older Cronquist system, the Laurales included a slightly different set of families (current placement, where different, in brackets):\n\nBULLET::::- Family Amborellaceae (Family Amborellaceae, unplaced)\nBULLET::::- Family Calycanthaceae\nBULLET::::- Family Gomortegaceae\nBULLET::::- Family Hernandiaceae\nBULLET::::- Family Idiospermaceae (= Calycanthaceae \"pro parte\")\nBULLET::::- Family Lauraceae\nBULLET::::- Family Monimiaceae (Cronquist included Atherospermataceae and Siparunaceae in Monimiaceae)\nBULLET::::- Family Trimeniaceae (Austrobaileyales)\n\nBULLET::::- K.J. Perleb (1826). \"Lehrbuch der Naturgeschichte des Pflanzenreichs\" p. 174. Magner, Freiburg im Breisgau, Deutschland.\nBULLET::::- Renner, Susanne S. (May 2001) Laurales. In: \"Nature Encyclopedia of Life Sciences\". London: Nature Publishing Group. , Full text (pdf).\n"}
{"id": "17648", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17648", "title": "Limerick (disambiguation)", "text": "Limerick (disambiguation)\n\nLimerick is a city in Ireland.\n\nLimerick may also refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- Limerick (poetry), a form of verse, often humorous and sometimes rude, in five-line, predominantly meter with a strict rhyme scheme of AABBA\nBULLET::::- Limerick (song), a traditional humorous drinking song with many obscene verses\n\nBULLET::::- County Limerick, Ireland, the county where the city Limerick is located\n\nBULLET::::- Limerick, Ontario\nBULLET::::- Limerick, Saskatchewan\n\nBULLET::::- Limerick, Georgia\nBULLET::::- Limerick, Louisville, Kentucky\nBULLET::::- Limerick, Maine\nBULLET::::- Camanche, California, formerly Limerick\nBULLET::::- Limerick Township, Pennsylvania\nBULLET::::- Limerick Nuclear Power Plant\nBULLET::::- New Limerick, Maine\nBULLET::::- San Ramon, California, formerly Limerick\n\nBULLET::::- Askeaton (Parliament of Ireland constituency)\nBULLET::::- Kilmallock (Parliament of Ireland constituency)\nBULLET::::- Limerick City (Parliament of Ireland constituency)\nBULLET::::- Limerick County (Parliament of Ireland constituency)\nBULLET::::- Limerick City (UK Parliament constituency)\nBULLET::::- County Limerick (UK Parliament constituency)\nBULLET::::- Limerick City (UK Parliament constituency)\nBULLET::::- East Limerick (UK Parliament constituency)\nBULLET::::- West Limerick (UK Parliament constituency)\nBULLET::::- Kerry–Limerick West (Dáil constituency)\nBULLET::::- Limerick City–Limerick East (Dáil constituency)\nBULLET::::- Limerick (Dáil constituency)\nBULLET::::- Limerick East (Dáil constituency)\nBULLET::::- Limerick West (Dáil constituency)\nBULLET::::- Limerick (Dáil constituency)\nBULLET::::- Limerick City (Dáil constituency)\nBULLET::::- Limerick County (Dáil constituency)\n\nBULLET::::- Earl of Limerick, a British noble title\nBULLET::::- Patricia Nelson Limerick, American historian\n\nBULLET::::- Limerick F.C., an Irish soccer team\nBULLET::::- Limerick (horse), a New Zealand Thoroughbred race horse\nBULLET::::- Limerick lace, a variety of needle lace\n"}
{"id": "17651", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17651", "title": "Lamiales", "text": "Lamiales\n\nThe Lamiales are an order in the asterid group of dicotyledonous flowering plants. It includes about 23,810 species, 1,059 genera, and is divided into about 24 families. Well-known or economically important members of this order include lavender, lilac, olive, jasmine, the ash tree, teak, snapdragon, sesame, psyllium, garden sage, and a number of table herbs such as mint, basil, and rosemary.\n\nAlthough exceptions often occur, species in this order typically have the following characteristics:\n\nBULLET::::- superior ovary composed of two fused carpels\nBULLET::::- five petals fused into a tube\nBULLET::::- bilaterally symmetrical, often bilabiate corollas\nBULLET::::- four (or fewer) fertile stamens\nBULLET::::- opposite leaves\n\nThe Lamiales previously had a restricted circumscription (e.g., by Arthur Cronquist) that included the major families Lamiaceae (Labiatae), Verbenaceae, and Boraginaceae, plus a few smaller families. In the classification system of Dahlgren the Lamiales were in the superorder Lamiiflorae (also called Lamianae). Recent phylogenetic work has shown the Lamiales are polyphyletic with respect to order Scrophulariales and the two groups are now usually combined in a single order that also includes the former orders Hippuridales and Plantaginales. Lamiales has become the preferred name for this much larger combined group. The placement of the Boraginaceae is unclear, but phylogenetic work shows this family does not belong in Lamiales.\n\nAlso, the circumscription of family Scrophulariaceae, formerly a paraphyletic group defined primarily by plesiomorphic characters and from within which numerous other families of the Lamiales were derived, has been radically altered to create a number of smaller, better-defined, and putatively monophyletic families.\n\nMuch research has been conducted in recent years regarding the dating the Lamiales lineage, although there still remains some ambiguity. A 2004 study, on the molecular phylogenetic dating of asterid flowering plants, estimated 106 million years (MY) for the stem lineage of Lamiales. A 2009 study on angiosperm diversification through time, concluded an inferred age of lower Eocene, ca. 50 MY, for Lamiales.\n\nBULLET::::- Lamiales\nBULLET::::- A parsimony analysis of the Asteridae sensu lato based on rbcL sequences\nBULLET::::- Disintegration of the Scrophulariaceae (deals with relationships throughout Lamiales)\nBULLET::::- L. Watson and M.J. Dallwitz (1992 onwards). The families of flowering plants: descriptions, illustrations, identification, information retrieval. http://delta-intkey.com\nBULLET::::- http://www.biologie.uni-hamburg.de/b-online/vascular/acanth.htm 2002-09-06\nBULLET::::- http://www.biologie.uni-hamburg.de/b-online/d52/52e.htm 2002-09-06\nBULLET::::- http://www.biologie.uni-hamburg.de/b-online/d52/52efam.htm 2002-09-06\nBULLET::::- http://www.science.siu.edu/parasitic-plants/Relation-Scroph.html\nBULLET::::- http://www.rbgkew.org.uk/web.dbs/genlist.html 2002-09-06\n"}
{"id": "17652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17652", "title": "Lee Harvey Oswald", "text": "Lee Harvey Oswald\n\nLee Harvey Oswald (October 18, 1939 – November 24, 1963) was an American Marxist and former U.S. Marine who assassinated United States President John F. Kennedy on November 22, 1963. Oswald was honorably released from active duty in the Marine Corps into the reserve and defected to the Soviet Union in October 1959. He lived in Minsk until June 1962, when he returned to the United States with his Russian wife, Marina, and eventually settled in Dallas. Five government investigations concluded that Oswald shot and killed Kennedy from the sixth floor of the Texas School Book Depository as the President traveled by motorcade through Dealey Plaza in Dallas.\n\nAbout 45 minutes after assassinating Kennedy, Oswald shot and killed Dallas police officer J. D. Tippit on a local street. He then slipped into a movie theater, where he was arrested for Tippit's murder. Oswald was eventually charged with the assassination of Kennedy; he denied the accusations and stated that he was a \"patsy.\" Two days later, Oswald was fatally shot by local nightclub owner Jack Ruby on live television in the basement of Dallas Police Headquarters.\n\nIn September 1964, the Warren Commission concluded that Oswald acted alone when he assassinated Kennedy by firing three shots from the Texas School Book Depository. This conclusion, though controversial, was supported by previous investigations from the FBI, the Secret Service, and the Dallas Police Department. Despite forensic, ballistic, and eyewitness evidence supporting the official findings, public opinion polls have shown that most Americans do not believe the official version of the events. The assassination has spawned numerous conspiracy theories.\n\nOswald was born at the old French Hospital in New Orleans, Louisiana, on October 18, 1939, to Robert Edward Lee Oswald, Sr. (1896–1939) and Marguerite Frances Claverie (1907–1981). Robert Oswald was a distant cousin of Confederate general Robert E. Lee and served in the Marines during World War I. Robert died of a heart attack two months before Lee was born. Lee's elder brother Robert, Jr. (1934–2017) was also a former Marine. Through Marguerite's first marriage to Edward John Pic, Jr., Lee and Robert Jr. were the half-brothers of Air Force veteran John Edward Pic (1932–2000).\n\nIn 1944, Marguerite moved the family from New Orleans to Dallas, Texas. Oswald entered the first grade in 1945 and over the next half-dozen years attended several different schools in the Dallas and Fort Worth areas through the sixth grade. Oswald took an IQ test in the fourth grade and scored 103; \"on achievement tests in [grades 4 to 6], he twice did best in reading and twice did worst in spelling.\"\n\nAs a child, Oswald was described as withdrawn and temperamental by several people who knew him. When Oswald was 12 in August 1952, his mother took him to New York City where they lived for a short time with Oswald's half-brother, John. Oswald and his mother were later asked to leave after an argument in which Oswald allegedly struck his mother and threatened John's wife with a pocket knife.\n\nOswald attended seventh grade in the Bronx, New York, but was often truant, which led to a psychiatric assessment at a juvenile reformatory. The reformatory psychiatrist, Dr. Renatus Hartogs, described Oswald as immersed in a \"vivid fantasy life, turning around the topics of omnipotence and power, through which [Oswald] tries to compensate for his present shortcomings and frustrations\". Dr. Hartogs detected a \"personality pattern disturbance with schizoid features and passive-aggressive tendencies\" and recommended continued treatment.\n\nIn January 1954, Marguerite returned to New Orleans and took Lee with her. At the time, there was a question pending before a New York judge as to whether Oswald should be removed from the care of his mother to finish his schooling,\nalthough Oswald's behavior appeared to improve during his last months in New York.\n\nOswald completed the eighth and ninth grades in New Orleans. He entered the 10th grade in 1955 but quit school after one month. After leaving school, Oswald worked for several months as an office clerk and messenger in New Orleans. In July 1956, Oswald's mother moved the family to Fort Worth, Texas, and Oswald re-enrolled in the 10th grade for the September session at Arlington Heights High School in Fort Worth. A few weeks later in October, Oswald quit school at age 17 to join the Marines (\"see below\"); he never earned a high school diploma. By this point, he had resided at 22 locations and attended 12 schools.\n\nThough Oswald had trouble spelling in his youth and may have had a \"reading-spelling disability\", he read voraciously. By age 15, he considered himself a Marxist according to his diary: \"I was looking for a key to my environment, and then I discovered socialist literature. I had to dig for my books in the back dusty shelves of libraries.\" At 16 he wrote to the Socialist Party of America for information on their Young People's Socialist League, saying he had been studying socialist principles for \"well over fifteen months\".\nHowever, Edward Voebel, \"whom the Warren Commission had established was Oswald's closest friend during his teenage years in New Orleans ... said that reports that Oswald was already 'studying Communism' were a 'lot of baloney.' \" Voebel said that \"Oswald commonly read 'paperback trash.'\"\n\nAs a teenager in 1955, Oswald attended Civil Air Patrol meetings in New Orleans. Fellow cadets recalled him attending C.A.P. meetings \"three or four\" times, or \"10 or 12 times\" over a one- or two-month period.\n\nOswald enlisted in the United States Marine Corps on October 24, 1956, just after his seventeenth birthday. He was underage and his brother Robert, Jr. was required to sign the forms as his legal guardian. Oswald also named his mother and his half-brother John as beneficiaries. Oswald idolized his older brother, Robert Jr., and wore his Marine Corps ring. John Pic (Oswald's half-brother) testified to the Warren Commission that Oswald's enlistment was motivated by wanting \"to get from out and under ... the yoke of oppression from my mother\".\n\nOswald's enlistment papers showed his vital statistics as in height, in weight, with hazel eyes and brown hair. His primary training was in radar operation, which was a position that required a security clearance. A May 1957 document stated that he was \"granted final clearance to handle classified matter up to and including confidential after careful check of local records had disclosed no derogatory data.\"\n\nAt Keesler Air Force Base in Mississippi, Oswald finished seventh in a class of thirty in the Aircraft Control and Warning Operator Course, which \"included instruction in aircraft surveillance and the use of radar\". He was given the military occupational specialty of Aviation Electronics Operator. On July 9, he reported to the Marine Corps Air Station El Toro in California then departed for Japan the following month, where he was assigned to Marine Air Control Squadron 1 at Naval Air Facility Atsugi near Tokyo.\n\nLike all marines, Oswald was trained and tested in shooting. In December 1956, he scored 212, which was slightly above the requirements for the designation of \"sharpshooter\". In May 1959 he scored 191, which reduced his rating to \"marksman\".\n\nOswald was court-martialed after he accidentally shot himself in the elbow with an unauthorized .22 caliber handgun. He was court-martialed a second time for fighting with a sergeant who he thought was responsible for his punishment in the shooting matter. He was demoted from private first class to private and briefly imprisoned in the brig. Oswald was later punished for a third incident: while he was on a night-time sentry duty in the Philippines, he inexplicably fired his rifle into the jungle.\n\nSlightly built, Oswald was nicknamed \"Ozzie Rabbit\" after the cartoon character; he was also called \"Oswaldskovich\" because he espoused pro-Soviet sentiments. In November 1958, Oswald transferred back to El Toro where his unit's function \"was to serveil for aircraft, but basically to train both enlisted men and officers for later assignment overseas\". An officer there said that Oswald was a \"very competent\" crew chief and was \"brighter than most people.\"\n\nWhile Oswald was in the Marines, he made an effort to teach himself rudimentary Russian. Although this was an unusual endeavor, on February 25, 1959, he was invited to take a Marine proficiency exam in written and spoken Russian. His level at the time was rated \"poor\" in understanding spoken Russian, though he fared rather reasonably for a Marine private at the time in reading and writing. On September 11, 1959, he received a hardship discharge from active service, claiming his mother needed care. He was placed on the United States Marine Corps Reserve.\n\nOswald traveled to the Soviet Union just before he turned 20 in October 1959; he had planned the trip well in advance by teaching himself Russian and saving $1,500 of his Marine Corps salary ().\nOswald spent two days with his mother in Fort Worth, then embarked by ship on September 20 from New Orleans to Le Havre, France, and immediately traveled to the United Kingdom. Arriving in Southampton on October 9, he told officials he had $700 and planned to stay for one week before proceeding to a school in Switzerland. However, on the same day, he flew to Helsinki, where he was issued a Soviet visa on October 14. Oswald left Helsinki by train on the following day, crossed the Soviet border at Vainikkala, and arrived in Moscow on October 16. His visa, valid only for a week, was due to expire on October 21.\n\nAlmost immediately after arriving, Oswald informed his Intourist guide of his desire to become a Soviet citizen. When asked why by the various Soviet officials he encountered — all of whom, by Oswald's account, found his wish incomprehensible — he said that he was a communist, and gave what he described in his diary as \"vauge [\"sic\"] answers about 'Great Soviet Union'\". On October 21, the day his visa was due to expire, he was told that his citizenship application had been refused, and that he had to leave the Soviet Union that evening. Distraught, Oswald inflicted a minor but bloody wound to his left wrist in his hotel room bathtub soon before his Intourist guide was due to arrive to escort him from the country, according to his diary because he wished to kill himself in a way that would shock her. Delaying Oswald's departure because of his self-inflicted injury, the Soviets kept him in a Moscow hospital under psychiatric observation until October 28, 1959.\n\nAccording to Oswald, he met with four more Soviet officials that same day, who asked if he wanted to return to the United States. Oswald replied by insisting that he wanted to live in the Soviet Union as a Soviet national. When pressed for identification papers, he provided his Marine Corps discharge papers.\n\nOn October 31, Oswald appeared at the United States embassy in Moscow and declared a desire to renounce his U.S. citizenship. \"I have made up my mind,\" he said; \"I'm through.\" He told the U.S. embassy interviewing officer, Richard Edward Snyder, that \"he had been a radar operator in the Marine Corps and that he had voluntarily stated to unnamed Soviet officials that as a Soviet citizen he would make known to them such information concerning the Marine Corps and his specialty as he possessed. He intimated that he might know something of special interest.\"\nThe Associated Press story of the defection of a former U.S. Marine to the Soviet Union was reported on the front pages of some newspapers in 1959.\n\nThough Oswald had wanted to attend Moscow State University, he was sent to Minsk to work as a lathe operator at the Gorizont Electronics Factory, which produced radios, televisions, and military and space electronics. Stanislau Shushkevich, who later became independent Belarus's first head of state, was also engaged by Gorizont at the time, and was assigned to teach Oswald Russian. Oswald received a government-subsidized, fully furnished studio apartment in a prestigious building and an additional supplement to his factory pay, which allowed him to have a comfortable standard of living by working-class Soviet standards, though he was kept under constant surveillance.\n\nFrom approximately June 1960 to February 1961, Oswald was in a personal relationship with Ella German, a co-worker at the factory. He proposed marriage to her at the beginning of 1961, but she refused with the explanation that she did not love him and was afraid to marry an American. Some researchers believe that German's rejection of Oswald's marriage proposal may have had much to do with his disillusionment with life in the Soviet Union and his decision to return to the United States.\n\nOswald wrote in his diary in January 1961: \"I am starting to reconsider my desire about staying. The work is drab, the money I get has nowhere to be spent. No nightclubs or bowling alleys, no places of recreation except the trade union dances. I have had enough.\" Shortly afterwards, Oswald (who had never formally renounced his U.S. citizenship) wrote to the Embassy of the United States, Moscow requesting return of his American passport, and proposing to return to the U.S. if any charges against him would be dropped.\n\nIn March 1961, Oswald met Marina Prusakova (b. 1941), a 19-year-old pharmacology student; they married less than six weeks later in April.\nThe Oswalds' first child, June, was born on February 15, 1962. On May 24, 1962, Oswald and Marina applied at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow for documents that enabled her to immigrate to the U.S. On June 1, the U.S. Embassy gave Oswald a repatriation loan of $435.71.\nOswald, Marina, and their infant daughter left for the United States, where they received less attention from the press than Oswald expected.\n\nThe Oswalds soon settled in the Dallas/Fort Worth area, where Lee's mother and brother lived. Lee began a manuscript on Soviet life, though he eventually gave up the project. The Oswalds also became acquainted with a number of anti-Communist Russian and East European émigrés in the area. In testimony to the Warren Commission, Alexander Kleinlerer said that the Russian émigrés sympathized with Marina, while merely tolerating Oswald, whom they regarded as rude and arrogant.\n\nAlthough the Russian émigrés eventually abandoned Marina when she made no sign of leaving her husband, Oswald found an unlikely friend in 51-year-old Russian émigré George de Mohrenschildt, a well-educated petroleum geologist with international business connections. A native of Russia, Mohrenschildt later was to tell the Warren Commission that Oswald had a \"remarkable fluency in Russian.\" Marina, meanwhile, befriended Ruth Paine, a Quaker who was trying to learn Russian, and her husband Michael Paine, who worked for Bell Helicopter.\n\nIn July 1962, Oswald was hired by the Leslie Welding Company in Dallas; he disliked the work and quit after three months. On October 12, he started working for the graphic-arts firm of Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall as a photoprint trainee. A fellow employee at Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall testified that Oswald's rudeness at his new job was such that fights threatened to break out, and that he once saw Oswald reading a Russian-language publication. Oswald was fired almost 6 months later, on the first week of April 1963.\n\nIn March 1963, Oswald used the alias \"A. Hidell\" to make a mail-order purchase of a secondhand 6.5 mm caliber Carcano rifle for $29.95. He also purchased a .38 Smith & Wesson Model 10 revolver by the same method. The Warren Commission concluded that Oswald attempted to kill retired U.S. Major General Edwin Walker on April 10, 1963, and that Oswald fired the Carcano rifle at Walker through a window from less than away as Walker sat at a desk in his Dallas home. The bullet struck the window-frame and Walker's only injuries were bullet fragments to the forearm. The United States House Select Committee on Assassinations stated that the \"evidence strongly suggested\" that Oswald carried out the shooting.\n\nGeneral Walker was an outspoken anti-communist, segregationist, and member of the John Birch Society. In 1961, Walker had been relieved of his command of the 24th Division of the U.S. Army in West Germany for distributing right-wing literature to his troops. Walker's later actions in opposition to racial integration at the University of Mississippi led to his arrest on insurrection, seditious conspiracy, and other charges. He was temporarily held in a mental institution on orders from President Kennedy's brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, but a grand jury refused to indict him.\n\nMarina Oswald testified that her husband told her that he traveled by bus to General Walker's house and shot at Walker with his rifle. She said that Oswald considered Walker to be the leader of a \"fascist organization.\" A note Oswald left for Marina on the night of the attempt, telling her what to do if he did not return, was not found until ten days after the Kennedy assassination.\n\nBefore the Kennedy assassination, Dallas police had no suspects in the Walker shooting, but Oswald's involvement was suspected within hours of his arrest following the assassination. The Walker bullet was too damaged to run conclusive ballistics studies on it, but neutron activation analysis later showed that it was \"extremely likely\" that it was made by the same manufacturer and for the same rifle make as the two bullets which later struck Kennedy.\n\nGeorge de Mohrenschildt testified that he \"knew that Oswald disliked General Walker.\" Regarding this, de Mohrenschildt and his wife Jeanne recalled an incident that occurred the weekend following the Walker assassination attempt. The de Mohrenschildts testified that on April 14, 1963, just before Easter Sunday, they were visiting the Oswalds at their new apartment and had brought them a toy Easter bunny to give to their child. As Oswald's wife Marina was showing Jeanne around the apartment, they discovered Oswald's rifle standing upright, leaning against the wall inside a closet. Jeanne told George that Oswald had a rifle, and George joked to Oswald, \"Were you the one who took a pot-shot at General Walker?\" When asked about Oswald's reaction to this question, George de Mohrenschildt told the Warren Commission that Oswald \"smiled at that.\" When George's wife Jeanne was asked about Oswald's reaction, she said, \"I didn't notice anything\"; she continued, \"we started laughing our heads off, big joke, big George's joke.\" Jeanne de Mohrenschildt testified that this was the last time she or her husband ever saw the Oswalds.\n\nOswald returned to New Orleans on April 24, 1963.{{sfnReport of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President John F. Kennedy, Chapter 71964p=403}} Marina's friend Ruth Paine drove her by car from Dallas to join Oswald in New Orleans the following month. On May 10, Oswald was hired by the Reily Coffee Company as a machinery greaser.{{sfnReport of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President John F. Kennedy, Chapter 71964pp=403–404}} He was fired in July \"because his work was not satisfactory and because he spent too much time loitering in Adrian Alba's garage next door, where he read rifle and hunting magazines\".\n\nOn May 26, Oswald wrote to the New York City headquarters of the pro-Castro Fair Play for Cuba Committee, proposing to rent \"a small office at my own expense for the purpose of forming a FPCC branch here in New Orleans\". Three days later, the FPCC responded to Oswald's letter advising against opening a New Orleans office \"at least not ... at the very beginning\". In a follow-up letter, Oswald replied, \"Against your advice, I have decided to take an office from the very beginning.\"\n\nA week later, on August 16, Oswald again passed out Fair Play for Cuba leaflets with two hired helpers, this time in front of the International Trade Mart. The incident was filmed by WDSU, a local TV station. The next day, Oswald was interviewed by WDSU radio commentator William Stuckey, who probed Oswald's background. A few days later, Oswald accepted Stuckey's invitation to take part in a radio debate with Carlos Bringuier and Bringuier's associate Edward Scannell Butler, head of the right-wing Information Council of the Americas (INCA).\n\nMarina's friend Ruth Paine transported Marina and her child by car from New Orleans to the Paine home in Irving, Texas, near Dallas, on September 23, 1963. Oswald stayed in New Orleans at least two more days to collect a $33 unemployment check. It is uncertain when he left New Orleans; he is next known to have boarded a bus in Houston on September 26 — bound for the Mexican border, rather than Dallas — and to have told other bus passengers that he planned to travel to Cuba via Mexico.{{sfnReport of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President John F. Kennedy, Appendix 131964p=732}} He arrived in Mexico City on September 27, where he applied for a transit visa at the Cuban Embassy, claiming he wanted to visit Cuba on his way to the Soviet Union. The Cuban embassy officials insisted Oswald would need Soviet approval, but he was unable to get prompt co-operation from the Soviet embassy. CIA document notes Oswald spoke \"terrible hardly recognizable Russian\" during his meetings with Cuban and Soviet officials.\n\nAfter five days of shuttling between consulates — and including a heated argument with an official at the Cuban consulate, impassioned pleas to KGB agents, and at least some CIA scrutiny — Oswald was told by a Cuban consular officer that he was disinclined to approve the visa, saying \"a person like [Oswald] in place of aiding the Cuban Revolution, was doing it harm.\"{{sfnReport of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President John F. Kennedy, Chapter 71964p=413}} Later, on October 18, the Cuban embassy approved the visa, but by this time Oswald was back in the United States and had given up on his plans to visit Cuba and the Soviet Union. Still later, eleven days before the assassination of President Kennedy, Oswald wrote to the Soviet embassy in Washington, D.C., saying, \"Had I been able to reach the Soviet Embassy in Havana, as planned, the embassy there would have had time to complete our business.\"\n\nWhile the Warren Commission concluded that Oswald had visited Mexico City and the Cuban and Soviet consulates, questions regarding whether someone posing as Oswald had appeared at the embassies were serious enough to be investigated by the House Select Committee on Assassinations. Later, the Committee agreed with the Warren Commission that Oswald had visited Mexico City and concluded that \"the majority of evidence tends to indicate\" that Oswald in fact visited the consulates, but the Committee could not rule out the possibility that someone else had used his name in visiting the consulates.\n\nAccording to a CIA document released in 2017, it is possible Oswald was trying to get the necessary documents from the embassies to make a quick escape to the Soviet Union after the assassination.\n\nOn October 2, 1963, Oswald left Mexico City by bus and arrived in Dallas the next day. Ruth Paine said that her neighbor told her, on October 14, that there was a job opening at the Texas School Book Depository, where her neighbor's brother, Wesley Frazier, worked. Mrs. Paine informed Oswald, who was interviewed at the depository and was hired there on October 16 as a $1.25 an hour minimum wage order filler. Oswald's supervisor, Roy S. Truly (1907–1985), said that Oswald \"did a good day's work\" and was an above-average employee. During the week, Oswald stayed in a Dallas rooming house under the name \"O. H. Lee\", but he spent his weekends with Marina at the Paine home in Irving. Oswald did not drive a car, but he commuted to and from Dallas on Mondays and Fridays with his co-worker Wesley Frazier. On October 20 (a month before the assassination), the Oswalds' second daughter, Audrey, was born.\n\nFBI agents twice visited the Paine home in early November, when Oswald was not present, and spoke to Mrs. Paine. Oswald visited the Dallas FBI office about 2 to 3 weeks before the assassination, asking to see Special Agent James P. Hosty. When he was told that Hosty was unavailable, Oswald left a note that, according to the receptionist, read: \"Let this be a warning. I will blow up the FBI and the Dallas Police Department if you don't stop bothering my wife\" [signed] \"Lee Harvey Oswald\". The note allegedly contained some sort of threat, but accounts vary as to whether Oswald threatened to \"blow up the FBI\" or merely \"report this to higher authorities\". According to Hosty, the note said, \"If you have anything you want to learn about me, come talk to me directly. If you don't cease bothering my wife, I will take the appropriate action and report this to the proper authorities.\" Agent Hosty said that he destroyed Oswald's note on orders from his superior, Gordon Shanklin, after Oswald was named the suspect in the Kennedy assassination.\n\nIn the days before Kennedy's arrival, several local newspapers published the route of the presidential motorcade, which passed the Texas School Book Depository. On Thursday, November 21, Oswald asked Frazier for an unusual mid-week lift back to Irving, saying he had to pick up some curtain rods. The next morning (the day of the assassination), he returned to Dallas with Frazier. He left behind $170 and his wedding ring, but took a large paper bag with him. Frazier reported that Oswald told him the bag contained curtain rods. The Warren Commission concluded that the package of \"curtain rods\" actually contained the rifle that Oswald was going to use for the assassination.\n\nOne of Oswald's co-workers, Charles Givens, testified to the Commission that he last saw Oswald on the 6th floor of the Texas School Book Depository (TSBD) at approximately 11:55 a.m., which was 35 minutes before the motorcade entered Dealey Plaza. The Commission report stated that Oswald was not seen again \"until after the shooting\". However, in an FBI report taken the day after the assassination, Givens said that the encounter took place at 11:30 a.m. and that he later saw Oswald reading a newspaper in the first floor domino room at 11:50 a.m, 20 minutes later. William Shelley, a foreman at the depository, also testified that he saw Oswald making a phone call on the first floor between 11:45 and 11:50 a.m. Janitor Eddie Piper also testified that he spoke to Oswald on the first floor at 12:00 p.m. Another co-worker, Bonnie Ray Williams, was eating his lunch on the sixth floor of the depository and was there until at least 12:10 p.m. He said that during that time, he did not see Oswald, or anyone else, on the sixth floor and thought that he was the only person up there. However, he also said that some boxes in the southeast corner may have prevented him from seeing deep into the \"sniper's nest\". Carolyn Arnold, the secretary to the Vice President of the TSBD, informed the FBI that as she left the building to watch the motorcade, she caught a glimpse of a man whom she believed to be Oswald standing in the first floor hallway of the building just prior to the assassination.\n\nAs Kennedy's motorcade passed through Dealey Plaza at about 12:30 p.m. on November 22, Oswald fired three rifle shots from the sixth-floor window of the book depository, killing the President and seriously wounding Texas Governor John Connally. One shot apparently missed the presidential limousine entirely, another struck both Kennedy and Connally, and a third bullet struck Kennedy in the head,{{sfnReport of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President John F. Kennedy, Chapter 11964p=19}} killing him. Bystander James Tague received a minor facial injury from a small piece of curbstone that had fragmented after it was struck by one of the bullets.\n\nWitness Howard Brennan was sitting across the street from the Texas School Book Depository and watching the motorcade go by. He notified police that he heard a shot come from above and looked up to see a man with a rifle fire another shot from the southeast corner window on the sixth floor. He said he had seen the same man minutes earlier looking through the window. Brennan gave a description of the shooter, and Dallas police subsequently broadcast descriptions at 12:45 p.m., 12:48 p.m., and 12:55 p.m. After the second shot was fired, Brennan recalled, \"This man I saw previous[ly] was aiming for his last shot ... and maybe paused for another second as though to assure himself that he had hit his mark.\"\n\nAccording to the investigations, Oswald hid and covered the rifle with boxes after the shooting and descended through the rear stairwell. About 90 seconds after the shots rang out, Oswald was encountered in the second-floor lunchroom by Dallas police officer Marrion L. Baker, who had his gun drawn. The patrolman was accompanied by Oswald's supervisor, Roy Truly. Baker made the mistake of letting Oswald pass after Truly identified him as an employee; Baker and Truly incorrectly assumed that Oswald was not a suspect because he was an employee of the building. According to Baker, Oswald did not appear to be \"nervous\" or \"out of breath\". Truly said that Oswald looked \"startled\" when Baker pointed his gun directly at him.{{sfnReport of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President John F. Kennedy, Chapter 41964p=152}} Mrs. Robert Reid, a clerical supervisor at the depository who returned to her office within two minutes after the shooting, said that she saw Oswald \"was very calm\" on the second floor with a can of Coca-Cola in his hands. As they walked past each other, Mrs. Reid said to Oswald, \"The President has been shot\" to which he mumbled something in response, but Reid did not understand him. Oswald was believed to have left the depository through the front entrance just before police sealed it off. Truly later pointed out to officers that Oswald was the only employee that he was certain was missing.\n\nAt about 12:40 p.m., 10 minutes after the shooting, Oswald boarded a city bus. Probably due to heavy traffic, he requested a transfer from the driver and got off two blocks later. Oswald then took a taxicab to his rooming house at 1026 North Beckley Avenue and entered through the front door at about 1:00 p.m. According to his housekeeper Earlene Roberts, Oswald immediately went to his room, \"walking pretty fast.\" Roberts said that Oswald left \"a very few minutes\" later, zipping up a jacket he was not wearing when he had entered earlier. As Oswald left, Roberts looked out of the window of her house and last saw him standing at the northbound Beckley Avenue bus stop in front of her house.\n\nNumerous witnesses heard the shots and saw Oswald flee the scene holding a revolver; nine positively identified him as the man who shot Tippit and fled.{{sfnReport of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President John F. Kennedy, Chapter 41964p=166}} Four cartridge cases found at the scene were identified by expert witnesses before the Warren Commission and the House Select Committee as having been fired from the revolver later found in Oswald's possession, to the exclusion of all other weapons. However, the bullets taken from Tippit's body could not be positively identified as having been fired from Oswald's revolver as the bullets were too extensively damaged to make conclusive assessments.\n\nShoe store manager Johnny Brewer testified that he saw Oswald \"ducking into\" the entrance alcove of his store. Suspicious of this activity, Brewer watched Oswald continue up the street and slip without paying into the nearby Texas Theatre, where the movie \"Cry of Battle\" was playing. He alerted the theater's ticket clerk, who telephoned police at about 1:40 p.m.\n\nAs police arrived, the house lights were brought up and Brewer pointed out Oswald sitting near the rear of the theater. Police Officer Nick McDonald testified that he was the first to reach Oswald and that Oswald seemed ready to surrender saying, \"Well, it is all over now.\" McDonald said that Oswald pulled out a pistol tucked into the front of his pants, then pointed the pistol at him, and pulled the trigger. McDonald stated that the pistol did not fire because the pistol's hammer came down on the webbing between the thumb and index finger of his hand as he grabbed for the pistol. McDonald also said that Oswald struck him, but that he struck back and Oswald was disarmed. As he was led from the theater, Oswald shouted he was a victim of police brutality.\n\nAt about 2 p.m., Oswald was taken to the Police Department building, where homicide detective Jim Leavelle questioned him about the shooting of Officer Tippit. When Captain J. W. Fritz heard Oswald's name, he recognized it as that of the book depository employee who was reported missing and was already a suspect in the assassination. Oswald was formally arraigned for the murder of Officer Tippit at 7:10 p.m., and by early the next morning (shortly after 1:30 a.m.) he had also been arraigned for the assassination of President Kennedy.\nSoon after his arrest, Oswald encountered reporters in a hallway. Oswald declared, \"I didn't shoot anybody\" and, \"They've taken me in because of the fact that I lived in the Soviet Union. I'm just a patsy!\" Later, at an arranged press meeting, a reporter asked, \"Did you kill the President?\" and Oswald — who by that time had been advised of the charge of murdering Tippit, but had not yet been arraigned in Kennedy's death — answered, \"No, I have not been charged with that. In fact, nobody has said that to me yet. The first thing I heard about it was when the newspaper reporters in the hall asked me that question.\" As he was led from the room the question was called out, \"What did you do in Russia?\" and, \"How did you hurt your eye?\"; Oswald answered, \"A policeman hit me.\"\n\nFBI Special Agent James P. Hosty and Dallas Police Captain Will Fritz (chief of homicide) conducted the first interrogation of Oswald on Friday, November 22. When Oswald was asked to account for himself at the time of the assassination, he replied that he was eating his lunch in the first-floor lounge (known as the \"domino room\"). He said that he then went to the second-floor lunchroom to buy a Coca-Cola from the soda machine there and was drinking it when he encountered Dallas motorcycle policeman Marrion L. Baker, who had entered the building with his gun drawn. Oswald said that while he was in the domino room, he saw two \"Negro employees\" walking by, one he recognized as \"Junior\" and a shorter man whose name he could not recall. Junior Jarman and Harold Norman confirmed to the Warren Commission that they had \"walked through\" the domino room around noon during their lunch break. When asked if anyone else was in the domino room, Norman testified that somebody else was there, but he could not remember who it was. Jarman testified that Oswald was not in the domino room when he was there. During his last interrogation on November 24, according to postal inspector Harry Holmes, Oswald was again asked where he was at the time of the shooting. Holmes (who attended the interrogation at the invitation of Captain Will Fritz) said that Oswald replied that he was working on an upper floor when the shooting occurred, then went downstairs where he encountered Dallas motorcycle policeman Marrion L. Baker.\n\nOswald asked for legal representation several times while being interrogated, and he also asked for assistance during encounters with reporters. When H. Louis Nichols, President of the Dallas Bar Association, met with him in his cell on Saturday, he declined their services, saying he wanted to be represented by John Abt, chief counsel to the Communist Party USA, or by lawyers associated with the American Civil Liberties Union. Both Oswald and Ruth Paine tried to reach Abt by telephone several times Saturday and Sunday, but Abt was away for the weekend. Oswald also declined his brother Robert's offer on Saturday to obtain a local attorney.\n\nDuring an interrogation with Captain Fritz, when asked, \"Are you a communist?\", he replied, \"No, I am not a communist. I am a Marxist.\"\n\nOn Sunday, November 24, detectives were escorting Oswald through the basement of Dallas Police Headquarters toward an armored car that was to take him from the city jail (located on the fourth floor of police headquarters) to the nearby county jail. At 11:21 a.m. CST, Dallas nightclub operator Jack Ruby approached Oswald from the side of the crowd and shot him once in the abdomen at close range. As the shot rang out, a police detective suddenly recognized Ruby and exclaimed: \"Jack, you son of a bitch!\" An unconscious Oswald was taken by ambulance to Parkland Memorial Hospital — the same hospital where Kennedy was pronounced dead two days earlier. Oswald died at 1:07 p.m; Dallas police chief Jesse Curry announced his death on a TV news broadcast.\n\nAt 2:45 p.m. the same day, an autopsy was performed on Oswald in the Office of the County Medical Examiner. Dallas County medical examiner Earl Rose announced the results of the gross autopsy: \"The two things that we could determine were, first, that he died from a hemorrhage from a gunshot wound, and that otherwise he was a physically healthy male.\" Rose's examination found that the bullet entered Oswald's left side in the front part of the abdomen and caused damage to his spleen, stomach, aorta, vena cava, kidney, liver, diaphragm, and eleventh rib before coming to rest on his right side.\n\nA network television pool camera was broadcasting live to cover the transfer; millions of people watching on NBC witnessed the shooting as it happened and on other networks within minutes afterward. In 1964, Robert H. Jackson of the \"Dallas Times Herald\" was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for Photography for his image of the murder of Lee Harvey Oswald by Jack Ruby.\n\nRuby later said he had been distraught over Kennedy's death and that his motive for killing Oswald was \"saving Mrs. Kennedy the discomfiture of coming back to trial\". Others have hypothesized that Ruby was part of a conspiracy. G. Robert Blakey, chief counsel \nfor the House Select Committee on Assassinations from 1977 to 1979, said: \"The most plausible explanation for the murder of Oswald by Jack Ruby was that Ruby had stalked him on behalf of organized crime, trying to reach him on at least three occasions in the forty-eight hours before he silenced him forever.\"\n\nOswald's body was buried on November 25 in Shannon Rose Hill Memorial Burial Park in Fort Worth. Reporters covering the burial were asked by officials to act as pallbearers. The original tombstone, which gave Oswald's full name as well as birth and death dates, was stolen; officials replaced it with a marker simply inscribed \"Oswald\". His mother's body was buried beside his in 1981.\n\nA claim that a look-alike Russian agent was buried in place of Oswald led to the body's exhumation on October 4, 1981. Dental records confirmed that it was Oswald's body in the grave and it was reburied in a new coffin due to water damage to the original.\n\nIn 2010, the Fort Worth funeral home that held Oswald's original coffin employed a Los Angeles auction house to sell it to an undisclosed bidder for $87,468. The sale was halted after Oswald's brother, Robert (1934–2017), learned of the transaction in a Texas newspaper and sued to reclaim the coffin. In January 2015, a district judge in Tarrant County, Texas ruled that the funeral home intentionally concealed the existence of the pine coffin from Robert Oswald, who had originally purchased it and believed that it had been discarded after the exhumation. The court ordered it returned to Oswald's brother, plus damages equal to the sale price. Robert Oswald's attorney stated that the coffin would likely be destroyed \"as soon as possible\".\n\nPresident Lyndon B. Johnson issued an executive order that created the Warren Commission to investigate the assassination. The commission concluded that Oswald acted alone in assassinating Kennedy, and the Warren Report could not ascribe any one motive or group of motives to Oswald's actions:\n\nThe proceedings of the commission were closed, though not secret. Approximately 3% of its files have yet to be released to the public, which has continued to provoke speculation among researchers.\n\nIn 1968, the Ramsey Clark Panel examined various photographs, X-ray films, documents, and other evidence. It concluded that Kennedy was struck by two bullets fired from above and behind him: one of which traversed the base of the neck on the right side without striking bone, and the other of which entered the skull from behind and destroyed its right side.\n\nIn 1979, after a review of the evidence and of prior investigations, the United States House Select Committee on Assassinations (HSCA) largely concurred with the Warren Commission and was preparing to issue a finding that Oswald had acted alone in killing Kennedy. However, late in the Committee's proceedings a dictabelt recording was introduced, purportedly recording sounds heard in Dealey Plaza before, during and after the shots. After an analysis by the firm Bolt, Beranek and Newman appeared to indicate more than three gunshots, the HSCA revised its findings to assert a \"high probability that two gunmen fired\" at Kennedy and that Kennedy \"was probably assassinated as the result of a conspiracy.\" Although the Committee was \"unable to identify the other gunman or the extent of the conspiracy,\" it made a number of further findings regarding the likelihood or unlikelihood that particular groups, named in the findings, were involved. Four of the twelve members of the HSCA dissented from this conclusion.\n\nThe acoustical evidence has since been discredited. Officer H.B. McLain, from whose motorcycle radio the HSCA acoustic experts said the Dictabelt evidence came, has repeatedly stated that he was not yet in Dealey Plaza at the time of the assassination. McLain asked the Committee, \"'If it was my radio on my motorcycle, why did it not record the revving up at high speed plus my siren when we immediately took off for Parkland Hospital?'\" \n\nIn 1982, a panel of twelve scientists appointed by the National Academy of Sciences, including Nobel laureates Norman Ramsey and Luis Alvarez, unanimously concluded that the acoustic evidence submitted to the HSCA was \"seriously flawed\", was recorded after the shots, and did not indicate additional gunshots. Their conclusions were published in the journal \"Science\".\n\nIn a 2001 article in the journal \"Science & Justice\", D.B. Thomas wrote that the NAS investigation was itself flawed. He concluded with a 96.3 percent certainty that there were at least two gunmen firing at President Kennedy and that at least one shot came from the grassy knoll. In 2005, Thomas's conclusions were rebutted in the same journal. Ralph Linsker and several members of the original NAS team reanalyzed the timings of the recordings and reaffirmed the earlier conclusion of the NAS report that the alleged shot sounds were recorded approximately one minute after the assassination. In 2010, D.B. Thomas challenged the 2005 \"Science & Justice\" article and restated his conclusion that there were at least two gunmen.\n\nAround March 31, 1963, Marina took pictures of Oswald as he posed with a Carcano rifle, a holstered pistol, and two Marxist newspapers — \"The Militant\" and \"The Worker\".{{sfnReport of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President John F. Kennedy, Chapter 41964p=125}} The pictures were shown to Oswald after his arrest, but he insisted that they were forgeries.{{sfnReport of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President John F. Kennedy, Chapter 41964p=181}} In 1964, Marina testified before the Warren Commission that she had taken the photographs at Oswald's request using his camera — testimony she reaffirmed repeatedly over the decades.\nThese photos were labelled CE 133-A and CE 133-B. CE 133-A shows the rifle in Oswald's left hand and newspapers in front of his chest in the other, while the rifle is held with the right hand in CE 133-B. The Carcano in the images had markings matching those on the rifle found in the Book Depository after the assassination. Oswald's mother testified that on the day after the assassination she and Marina destroyed another photograph with Oswald holding the rifle with both hands over his head, with \"To my daughter June\" written on it.\n\nThe HSCA obtained another first-generation print (from CE 133-A) on April 1, 1977, from the widow of George de Mohrenschildt. The words \"Hunter of fascists — ha ha ha!\" written in block Russian were on the back. Also in English were added in script: \"To my friend George, Lee Oswald, 5/IV/63 [April 5, 1963].\" Handwriting experts for the HSCA concluded the English inscription and signature were by Oswald. After two original photos, one negative and one first-generation copy had been found, the Senate Intelligence Committee located (in 1976) a third backyard photo (CE 133-C) showing Oswald with newspapers held away from his body in his right hand.\n\nThese photos, widely recognized as some of the most significant evidence against Oswald, have been subjected to rigorous analysis. Photographic experts consulted by the HSCA concluded they were genuine, answering twenty-one points raised by critics. Marina Oswald has always maintained she took the photos herself, and the 1963 de Mohrenschildt print bearing Oswald's signature clearly indicate they existed before the assassination. Nonetheless, some continue to contest their authenticity. In 2009, after digitally analyzing the photograph of Oswald holding the rifle and paper, computer scientist Hany Farid concluded that the photo \"almost certainly was not altered\".\n\nSome critics have not accepted the conclusions of the Warren Commission and have proposed several other theories, such as that Oswald conspired with others, or was not involved at all and was framed. A Gallup Poll taken in mid-November 2013, showed 61% believed that Kennedy was killed as a result of conspiracy, and only 30% thought Oswald acted alone.\n\nOswald was never prosecuted because he was murdered two days after the assassination. In March 1967, New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison arrested and charged New Orleans businessman Clay Shaw with conspiring to assassinate President Kennedy, with the help of Oswald, David Ferrie, and others. Garrison believed that the men were part of an arms smuggling ring supplying weapons to the anti-Castro Cubans in a conspiracy with elements of the CIA to kill Kennedy. The trial of Clay Shaw began in January 1969 in Orleans Parish Criminal Court. The jury acquitted Shaw.\n\nSeveral films have fictionalized a trial of Oswald, depicting what may have happened had Ruby not killed Oswald. \"The Trial of Lee Harvey Oswald\" (1964); \"The Trial of Lee Harvey Oswald\" (1977); and \"On Trial: Lee Harvey Oswald\" (1986) have imagined such a trial. In 1988, a 21-hour unscripted mock trial was held on television, argued by lawyers before a judge, with unscripted testimony from surviving witnesses to the events surrounding the assassination; the jury returned a verdict of guilty. In 1992 the American Bar Association conducted two mock Oswald trials. The first trial ended in a hung jury. In the second trial the jury acquitted Oswald.\n\nBULLET::::- Robert F. Kennedy assassination conspiracy theories\nBULLET::::- Sirhan Sirhan\n{{Portal barBiographyUnited StatesRussiaTexasCommunismSocialism}}\n\nBULLET::::- {{cite booklast=Bugliosifirst=Vincenttitle=Reclaiming History: The Assassination of President John F. Kennedypublisher=Nortonyear=2007ISBN=0-393-04525-0authorlink=Vincent Bugliosi}}.\nBULLET::::- {{cite booklast=Epsteinfirst=Edward Jaytitle=Legend: the Secret World of Lee Harvey Oswaldlocation=New Yorkpublisher=McGraw-Hill Book Companyyear=1978ISBN=0-07-019539-0}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite bookauthorlink=Gerald Fordlast=Fordfirst=Geraldtitle=Portrait of the Assassinlocation=New Yorkpublisher=Simon and Schusteryear=1965ISBN=0-684-82663-1}}\nBULLET::::- Gillon, Steven. \"Lee Harvey Oswald: 48 Hours to Live\" Sterling. 2013. {{ISBN1454912510}}\nBULLET::::- Mailer, Norman. \"Oswald's Tale: An American Mystery\". New York: Ballantine Books, (1995) {{ISBN0-345-40437-8}}.\nBULLET::::- McMillan, Priscilla Johnson. \"Marina and Lee\" New York: Harper & Row, 1977.\nBULLET::::- Melanson, Philip H. \"Spy Saga: Lee Harvey Oswald and U.S. Intelligence\". New York: Praeger Publishers, 1990, hardcover, {{ISBN0-275-93571-X}}\nBULLET::::- Nechiporenko, Oleg M. \"Passport to Assassination: The Never-Before Told Story of Lee Harvey Oswald by the KGB Colonel Who Knew Him\". New York: Carroll & Graf Publishers, 1993, {{ISBN1-55972-210-X}}.\nBULLET::::- {{citationlast=Posnerfirst=Geraldtitle=Case Closed: Lee Harvey Oswald and the Assassination of JFKpublisher=Random Houseyear=1993ISBN=0-679-41825-3authorlink=Gerald Posner}}\nBULLET::::- Roffman, Howard. \"Presumed Guilty\". South Brunswick and New York: A. S. Barnes and Company, 1976, hardcover, {{ISBN0-498-01933-0}}\nBULLET::::- {{cite booklast=Sauvagefirst=Leotitle=The Oswald Affairlocation=Cleveland and New Yorkpublisher=The World Publishing Companyyear=1966}}\nBULLET::::- {{citationauthorlink=Anthony Summerslast=Summersfirst=Anthonytitle=Not in Your Lifetimelocation=New Yorkpublisher=Marlowe & Companyyear=1998ISBN=1-56924-739-0}}\n\nBULLET::::- \"Frontline\": Who Was Lee Harvey Oswald?\nBULLET::::- \"American Experience\": Oswald's Ghost\nBULLET::::- Kennedy Assassination Home Page by John C. McAdams\nBULLET::::- Lee Harvey Oswald: Lone Assassin or Patsy by John C. McAdams\nBULLET::::- Lee Harvey Oswald Chronology by W. Tracy Parnell\nBULLET::::- {{cite journalpmc = 1806829year = 1967last1 = Abrahamsenfirst1 = D.title = A Study of Lee Harvey Oswald: Psychological Capability of Murderjournal = Bulletin of the New York Academy of Medicinevolume = 43issue = 10pages = 861–888pmid = 19312773}}\nBULLET::::- Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy, Appendix 13: Biography of Lee Harvey Oswald\nBULLET::::- {{IMDb name652640}}\n"}
